SCRIPTURE TRUTHS DEMONSTRATED, IN THIRTY-TWO SERMONS, OR DECLARATIONS OF
STEPHEN CRISP, Late of COLCHESTER, in ESSEX, deceased. CAREFULLY TAKEN IN
Characters or Shorthand, AS THEY VERE DELIVERED BY HIM AT THE PUBLIC
MEETING HOUSES OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS, In and about LONDON. FAITHFULLY
TRANSCRIBED AND PUBLISHED, TOGETHER WITH HIS PRAYERS AFTER SERMON.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH JAMES, IN CHESNUT-STREET, BETWEEN
FRONT AND SECOND-STREETS. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

TO THE READER.
THOUGH the Writer of these Sermons does out of Modesty decline to print his
Name, yet he does assure the Reader, that he has not in the least altered or
imposed upon, the Preacher's Sense, either in the taking or transcribing of
them: And he does further declare, that he neither is, nor ever was, one of the
People called Quakers, but always of another Persuasion: Yet being willing,
according to the Apostle's Rule, to try all Things, he has sometimes been
present at their Meetings; and having the Art of Short-Writing, he has taken
many of their Sermons and Prayers from the Mouths of diverse of their Preachers;
and among others, those of Stephen Crisp, deceased; which, upon Review,
appeared to him, as well as to eminent Persons of another Sect, to contain so
many Gospel Truths, delivered with such Plainness, Zeal and Demonstration, and
generally agreeable to the known Doctrines of Christianity, that it is hoped
the publishing of them may be useful to the World: And, that the Design and
Intent of them may be the more readily comprehended, there is a Title given to
every Sermon, agreeable to the Subject Matter chiefly treated of therein.

LONDON, March, 1694.
SERMON I. The GREAT MEDIATOR of the EVERLASTING COVENANT.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, APRIL 25, 1688.
My Friends,
HOW should we all admire the workings of the Holy Ghost! You may know from
your own experience, that all the operations of the Holy Spirit, from the
beginning, have been in order to the cleansing, and purifying, and preparing
you for the kingdom of God. This experience is given to a little remnant, to
know that the manner of his working, that the end, aim and design, of all the
operations of his power, is for our good, and in order to our eternal happiness.

Now, this is a great engagement upon the minds of the people of God,
diligently to wait upon him, that they may be opened more and more into the
mystery of life and salvation, that has been hid from ages and generations,
and is now revealed by his spirit.

And they that are thus exercised with the measure of grace given unto them,
they do grow and increase in holiness and righteousness, by the working
thereof; and they increase in knowledge in the great things of the law, and the
mysteries of the kingdom of grace: By the eye which God has opened, they
discern, that the working of his power in all ages, has been for the
extirpating, rooting out and destroying of that root of iniquity, that has
brought forth such a crop of sin and wickedness, which was not of his planting,
nor of his creating.

For, from the beginning of the creation of God, unto this day, God has had a
singular love and favor to the sons and daughters of men, as being (as I may
say) the masterpiece, or greatest piece of the creation, most nearly related
to himself, created in his own image, in righteousness and holiness; and in
that they now are not so, but marred, and spoiled from bearing the heavenly
image, is not the Lord's doing, but has been wrought by the enemy both to God
and man; yet the Lord continuing his love unto the work of his hands, has from
age to age revealed and made known his power, for the restoring and bringing
back again lost man, fallen man, sinful man, to be reconciled unto him; that he
may, as was intended, enjoy and possess the love and favor of his Maker; but
there was no possibility found for his reconciliation with the holy God, but by
making him holy: For as the making him unholy, separated him from his Maker; so
the making of him holy again, would unite him again unto his Maker: So that
there must be a way and means for the reducing of him to his primitive state,
before he could enjoy and obtain his primitive enjoyments; that is, the love
and favor of God: And there has been a general universal sense, upon the sons
and daughters of men, of this alienation, and estrangedness from God; and they
have put themselves upon diverse ways and methods to obtain reconciliation, and
to try if they could restore themselves; and they have found out ways, and
tried and proved the inventions and imaginations of their own minds, in their
fallen wisdom, what they might do to please God, and be reconciled to him.

We are sinners, and we will sacrifice, we will bring a sacrifice for our sins;
and when men have brought a sacrifice, it has not been accepted, because there
has not been a Mediator known, that might mediate for them with the Lord; so
that all the sacrifices they have offered, have never been accepted with him,
in order to an atonement and reconciliation. Now only those that have relation
to the Mediator by faith in him, does he intercede for, that he might present
them again to God; and this has been the difference between sacrificer and
sacrifice, from the days of Cain and Abel, unto this day. Some have had
relation to the Mediator in all their services and sacrifices, and some have
had relation only to the thing offered, and the service performed; but they
have not in all ages sped alike: They whose service and worship was performed
to God, with a relation to the Mediator, they have found acceptance; and they
whose worship and service was performed only with a relation to the thing
offered or done, that was but their own act, that was but their will worship,
and that was always turned back again upon them; for there is no name given
under Heaven, by which any can be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ;
that is the Mediator of the new covenant, for the old one was broken: And when
Aaron was set up to be an high priest to God, he was appointed to offer
sacrifices for the sins of the people, and he that committed a sin, was
appointed by the law to bring an he-goat of the flock unto the door of the
tabernacle, and to deliver it to the priest, and he was to make an offering for
the sin committed after such and such a manner, and it was to be an atonement
with God for him: So here was seemingly, a reconciliation by a sacrifice; and
some saw no further than the bringing of a goat, and a ram, and the performance
of the priest's office, and they counted all was well: And others saw farther,
long before the apostle spoke or wrote it, it was not the blood of bulls or
goats, nor the blood of a ram, that could purge away sin from their
consciences. And after the apostle had opened the mystery of Divinity, who had
a divine and spiritual skill, in unfolding the restoration of mankind, he
declared plainly, that when the offering was made by Aaron for sinners, even
then there remained still a conscience of sin; for it was not possible that the
blood of bulls and goats, should take away sin: So that their outward
performances, and their outward services, they did but point out the Mediator;
they had a pointing finger, as it were, to the real, true and everlasting
Mediator, Christ Jesus; who is made a Mediator betwixt God and man; that by and
through him, man might be again reconciled to God.

So that now in these gospel-days, wherein God is opening the mysteries of life
and salvation, to the intent and purpose, that the sons and daughters of men
might be restored again into their primitive enjoyment of the favor of God;
now in these days, it is the duty of all Christians, and of all that are
seeking the welfare of their immortal souls, to have their eyes and hearts unto
Jesus, as unto one that is able to reconcile them unto God; to him it is
committed, to him wisdom and power is committed, and to him authority is
committed, that he should be an everlasting high priest; and that all the
services, and all the worship and religious performances that people offer up
to God, should be in his name, that so by him they might be recommended to God:
For none will find acceptance with the Father, unless in all their performances
they have an eye unto him.

So that it comes plainly to pass, according to that short and confident
assertion of the author to the Hebrews, that without faith, it is impossible to
please God: But it is possible to offer sacrifices without faith, and possible
for people to perform religious services without faith, as woeful experience
has taught us in our days, that many have been exercised in a kind of
religious service, that never in their lives had faith enough to believe the
things that they pray for, and they are without faith. When people pray to God
to send his Holy Spirit into their hearts, that they may keep his commandments
to their lives end, and have not faith to believe it, and when they pray, Thy
will be done on earth, as it is in Heaven, it is a religious performance; but
if it be not done in faith, it is but an increasing in sin, and an addition to
sin. Where is the man that is exercised in praying to God, that believes that
ever such a thing is like to come to pass? Go where you will in this or the
other nation, and enquire of people about their faith; they believe there is no
possibility of extirpating and rooting out of sin, while they live upon the
earth; therefore all their prayers for it are vain, and their faith a vain
faith: And it is high time in such a day as this, when men are faithless and
unbelieving, to preach up the object of faith, the Lord Jesus Christ. People
are of diverse faiths, and of diverse beliefs; but we have found by experience,
that they do them no good, they do not bring a thing to pass, that of necessity
must be brought to pass, before they can be reconciled to God; their faith does
not cleanse the heart, nor extend so far as to believe that ever they shall be
cleansed; in all the worship and religion that they perform, they come not to
this faith, that they shall be made clean: All that is done is but in sin and
uncleanness; they cannot bring a clean sacrifice out of an unclean vessel: And
our Lord Jesus Christ says concerning this subject, an evil tree cannot bring
forth good fruit; but there must be good fruit brought sorth; how must we do
it? Make the tree good, and the fruit will be good. When men's vain janglings
about religion and religious fancies come to an end, then all this religion
will appear to be in vain, and will not answer the end for which it is
performed, till men believe that it will make the tree good, and cleanse the
heart, and transform men by renewing the spirit of their minds. So that
religion must begin within; and it is not our changing of forms of worship,
from one form to another, and taking up this and the other opinion, that does
change our hearts. Sad experience does teach us, that men may carry over their
old lusts into a new religion; we can carry over our old inclinations into our
new opinions: For though the form of worship be changed, the heart remaining
unchanged, and the lusts unmortified, their religion is in vain, let them be of
what persuasion they will.

Now the remedy of this great calamity, that has overspread all sorts of
people; for there is no sort of people, but there are those among them that are
under this great calamity, of holding the profession of godliness with an
ungodly mind, and the profession of truth with a false and treacherous spirit.

And for the remedying of this, there is but one way that all men be brought
off from having their eye unto their performances, and to the doctrines and
tenets that they hold, and do, as the apostle says, six their eye upon Christ,
and look upon Jesus. This is the first thing that must begin our religion; for
Christ must be the Alpha of our religion, as well as the Omega of it. If I
begin not there, let me begin where I will, I begin wrong; let me begin at the
most serious and sound doctrine, and at the most apostolical religion; if
Christ and his apostles were here upon the earth; if I walked among them; if I
believed all they said and did, I should begin wrong, if I did not fix mine eye
upon Jesus Christ, that is the taker away of sin, and is the sanctifier of the
soul by his Spirit. There must be the beginning, and there must be the
conclusion; he is the author, and the finisher of all true faith. There are
authors of other faiths: Men have their different faiths, and creeds, and
articles, and they have exposed and imposed them too; but this is the worst of
it, none of them are right; let them be exposed and imposed with ever so much
force and violence, none of these will cleanse the heart; but that faith which
is delivered over by Christ Jesus, that has the quality of cleansing and
purifying; that is the faith when all is done, that will do the work; that is
it that will save and sanctify, and do the business that all the world is
about. Every one would have a reconciler with God, and sin rooted out, and be
as God would have them be; this is the public profession of Christendom; at
least they would find out something by which it might be done: Although many are
willing enough to continue in sin and drunkenness, whoredom, lying and
hypocrisy; these are a sort of fools, that make a mock of sin, and that swim in
the stream of pleasure; and what care they, so long as they make a profession
of christianity?

But I am speaking of a people that are struggling under their corruptions;
that would mortify sin, and serve God in holiness and righteousness, and do
God's will on earth as it is done in Heaven; and do it not inform, but would
have power to do it; and they have tried several ways to do it, and it is not
done; and many have been at this work till gray hairs are upon their heads, and
it is not done. Now God has given Christ to make reconciliation; now how can
we, that have the love of God extended to us, but extend our good will to our
friends, and signify to them, that all the travel and pains they are at, and
all the prayers they make, will do nothing till they have their faith fixed
upon Jesus, that is able to save and deliver them, and save to the uttermost
all that come to God by him.

But here some will object and say, it is true what you say, but is it needful
to preach such doctrines to us? for we all believe in Christ, that is, the only
Mediator and Savior. We know that Christ Jesus is the only Mediator, and that
unless he commends us to God, we cannot be accepted of him. This is our general
doctrine, therefore what need it be urged and pressed upon us, that are come
into the faith already.

Let me search into the matter; it is of greater importance than to search into
a bargain of worldly things. Men would fain have others open and discover to
them wherein they may be cheated, to prevent their being imposed on in a
worldly bargain. I hope then they will hearken to know how, and wherein they
may be deceived by themselves, and deceived by others in matters of eternal
concernment. There are no Protestants, but the reject any Mediator but Jesus
Christ, and believe that no Mediator can reconcile them to God, but Christ
alone, and they say he is the object of their faith. I would ask them this
question, whether they believe in Christ at a distance, or as present, really
present with them? If their faith be historical and at a distance, that they
believe in Christ, as one born of the Virgin Mary, and was crucified and dead
before they were born, and arose again, and ascended into Heaven, and is set at
the right hand of God, if the reason of my belief be, that I have heard of this
relation of Christ, or whether the reason be, because by his Spirit, he has
visited me in this age; the one is, I believe, because good men have told me
so; but the other is, I believe, because, by this Spirit he has promised to
send, to lead me into all truth, he has visited me. Now let me examine whether
I am aware of such a spiritual visitation, by this quickening Spirit, which is
the Lord from Heaven, and not only the Lord in Heaven. Whether I am aware of
such a quickening power and virtue, which I have received upon my spirit, that
he is not only at the right hand of God on high in Heaven, but is now come to
knock at the door of my heart, and has raised in me a life, as opposite to
sin, as his was. Let me consider if I be aware of a secret touch of his
quickening virtue upon my soul, whereby he has begotten me into a life
opposite to sin; so that if sin remains, it remains as a burden, and
oppression upon me, so that I am a sufferer; for as much as I am quickened, and
made sensible of a better life, of a godly life, I would fain be at it, and
live in it, but iniquity, lust and corruption lie in the way. He that has
quickened me so far, as to bring me to a sense of the burden of sin, my faith
tells me, he will take the burden off, else my faith will do me no good, if
corruption still prevail upon me, if my faith tells me this, it will tell the
wickedest man in the world as much; but if my faith tells me I am a sinner, and
my sins consist of this and the other evil thing I do, and am inclined to do,
it tells me again, that he that has quickened me, and brought me to a sense of
sin, he can take the burden off from me.

Here now is a true faith, that begins in conviction, and ends in true
conversion; this is the word of faith, delivered to the saints, and which we
are to preach. They said of old, that the word of faith, they had to preach,
was that which was nigh in their mouth, that they might receive it, and do it.
I have something nigh that reproves me for sin; if I be obedient to it, then
faith gives me victory over that which is sinful, for which the world reproves
me; and as I see faith gives me victory over any corruption, which I have been
struggling under, I am encouraged to fix my faith upon him that has thus
quickened me: So that this is the difference between faith in Christ at a
distance, and faith that quickens me by God's Spirit; that Spirit that has
been so much slighted in our days, by the highest notionists in our age; they
supposed it to be a mere fiction; some have mocked and derided, and others have
been discouraged to speak of the Spirit of Christ, and his operation upon the
soul; some have declared both in the press and pulpit, that they have had no
experience of the touches of God's Spirit upon their souls. But our experience
has brought us to another degree of knowledge. We know, and you may know if
you please, and that before you sleep, that there is a way opened, God has made
way for his Spirit to reach the spirits of men, to signify immediately to their
spirits without means, herein thou do wrong, and herein thou may have
life, and seek after it. Now the Spirit that thus works, is the Spirit of
Christ, the Spirit that proceeds from the Father and the Son, that voice in men
that tells them they might believe and be saved. When he comes, says Christ,
he will lead you into all truth. How shall the world know this is he? He shall
convince them of sin. If there be any convincement that arises in man of this
and the other sin, it must be from the way the Holy Spirit has upon their
spirits; he has a way to speak to men, and every one that is a lover of his
own soul, is bound to hearken to that voice.

In the latter days, says the Lord, when I shall raise a prophet in the midst
of you, whosoever will not hear that prophet, shall it cut off. All
commentators agree on this text, that that prophet was no other than Christ
Jesus; it was not John the Baptist, nor Paul, nor Peter; but Christ that was
promised to be raised. There was such an absolute command went along with that
prophecy, that all should hear him, and it had a threatening at the end of it,
that all that will not hear him, shall be cut off. Are they not whoremongers,
and drunkards, and liars, that will not hear this prophet? They will not hear
him, because they love their sins. What becomes of them? They are cut off from
the enjoyment of the love and favor of God, and when they draw nigh to God in
prayer, and other religious exercises, it is with them, as it was with Cain,
sin lies at the door. When they come into a storm at sea, or are arrested with
sickness, and death looks them in the face, they would have peace, but there is
distress, and trouble in the room of it. What is the matter? Wast thou not
baptized in the Christian faith? Did not the minister tell thee, that thou art
a child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven? Alas! my sin lies at
my door; O! that I had time to live a better life! What ails thy life, man? My
life has been a life of deceit, lust, and vanity, corruption and hypocrisy.
Did not thy teacher teach thee, that a believer has no guilt upon him, but
that all his sins are pardoned from the day he became a believer? This doctrine
will not hold in a storm, though it will do in fair weather; when men are
swimming in their pleasures, it will serve them; but when they come to deal
with their Maker, no faith will serve them, but that which purifies the heart,
and that which makes a change from the earthly image to the heavenly.

It were better for you and I, and every one of us, to take these things into
consideration, while we have health and strength, and while some sand (as I may
so speak) is in our glasses, to consider what is my faith? What is the object
of it? Have I a dependency upon my duties, and alms, and good deeds? They will
fail me. But if my dependency be upon Christ as a Savior, and a Sanctifier,
and my sanctification is carried on gradually, he that has begun a good work
in me will perfect it. And if the reason of my going to meetings, and going
into my closet, and bowing myself before the Lord, is to keep close to him that
carries on the work of sanctification, he will work all my work in me and for
me. I cannot expect to live in the world, but I shall meet with temptations;
the Devil will tempt me, but my Savior will be nigh me, as nigh to me as the
Devil can be; if I will keep close to him, he will keep close to me. My Father,
says Christ, is greater than I, and none is able to pluck you out of your
Father's hands. I must expect to be tempted; for the adversary the Devil goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Alas! says one, though
I have made some progress in the work of sanctification, yet for all that, he
may one day betray me. Am I grown strong enough to resist his temptations? and
wise enough to foresee all his gins and traps, which he lays to ensnare me? But
I know who can see them, and defeat them. I have my faith fixed upon one that
can bind the strong man, and cast him out. The life that I now live, is not in
my own parts, and by my own understanding and sense: But the life that I now
live, in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. This is that faith
that gives me victory. The apostle had a battle for it; I have fought the good
fight; and henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, and not for
me only, but for all them that love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
that come to have familiarity with Christ, with his Spirit and truth, with his
grace and word, in their hearts: Though these are several expressions, they all
signify one immortal seed of life, by which men are united to God: It is a
leaven there, to leaven them into the Divine Nature.

Whenever such a one is tempted, he resists not the tempter in his own power,
but he waits to feel the arisings of that life, and power, and virtue that was
in Christ Jesus, and is in him still: He waits for that power, that in the name
of Christ he may say, get thee behind me Satan. Being fortified by Christ's
name, and armed with his power, what is it that a Christian cannot do? What
valiant, noble and wonderful things have they done, that have been shielded
with this faith? See the eleventh chapter of the epistle to the Hebrews. All
the repetitions of that chapter, from one end to the other; in all of them the
apostle ascribes all the valiantness and courageousness of those noble acts, to
the power of faith. They looked to Jesus, before ever the Virgin Mary brought
him forth out of her body. The prophets did earnestly seek to know those
things, which the Spirit of Christ that was in them, did signify unto them,
that there was to be this great Prophet, before ever the Virgin Mary was born:
So that Christ was always the object of a true believer's faith. Though under
the law they had an high priest, and he was placed at the altar, and they had
offerings burnt upon it, yet they had an eye unto Christ, they had an
undervaluing of all that their sacrifices could do for them. If thou would
have had burnt offerings, says David, I would have given them; I would not
have withheld them from thine altar; thou should have had enough of them. He
was bold to say, in respect of acceptance and reconciliation, burnt offerings
and sacrifices thou would not; a body have thou prepared me; for it is
written in the volume of the book, I come to do thy will, O God. He had an eye
unto Jesus that was to come, upon whom help was laid: There was a Redeemer,
that should come from Zion, and a lawgiver from Jerusalem. They had an eye
beyond sacrifices, unto Christ. In all ages the people of God have had the
answer of their souls, which is reconciliation, and the favor of God: They
that had this answer, never had it but by Christ. No man can be accepted with
God, can ever have the desire of his soul answered in peace and reconciliation
with God, until his faith be placed on Christ Jesus: Neither can any man have
faith in Christ at a distance, and thereby be reconciled unto God, but must
know his Spirit. I must have an experimental knowledge of his power and wisdom,
and this I cannot have without his Spirit: Let me believe ever so othordoxly,
except I have the Spirit of Christ, it will do me no good, it will be no
advantage to me.

This is the word, that was in my heart as a well-wisher to the souls of all
men: As God has done good to my soul, so I cannot but wish well to the souls
of others; that as he has found out a way for my redemption and salvation, so
likewise I wish the same for others that are bondmen and bond-women, and under
the power of their corruption. God's work has been to destroy the bondage and
the oppression, and to destroy the tyrant that reigns over the souls of people;
God having made them for his glory, and the Devil has stolen them away: That
they do not that which pleases God: But God's good pleasure is, that all may
be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: And God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life: And he is called, the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world. He can take away sin; if my sin do not
obstruct my faith and confidence in him, he will take it away; and if he takes
that away, then he makes the tree good. Nothing hinders us from the enjoyment
of God, but sin; and if Christ will take it away by the blood of his cross, no
matter for all the scorn, contempt, hardship, reproach and persecution of this
world; no matter, for he has not deceived us, but told us before hand, if we
will be followers of him, and be led by him; we must expect these things;
sufferings, reproaches, persecutions, disdain and envy. These things come not
uncertainly upon us; the world loves its own, and cannot love them that are not
of it; but they that are not of the world, may be brought to the terms of God,
and they may not be any longer in the world. Christ prays not that his
disciples may be taken out of the world, but kept from the evil: So that Christ
is a Mediator, and a propitiation for all men; and he is working by his Spirit
for the redemption of all men, that to as many as believe in him, to them he
gives power to become the Sons of God.

The sum of all this is, that we have an opportunity put into our hands; we
cannot deny it; you must all upon search, confess, that the grace of God does
often work in your hearts against any corruption, against any evil: Let not
this price be put into your hands in vain, as into the hands of fools. If I
knew that this and that was a sin, I would leave it; let us be of that mind,
and we shall soon know it; and then say, if I knew such a thing to be a sin,
and could get a thousand pounds by it, I would not do it, Why should thou
love sin for profit or pleasure? I am sure it is an ill bargain when it is
done. Whatsoever I am convinced is a sin, I will not do it.

Resolve upon this, and then the grace of God will be at work; we shall soon
see that we must leave off sinning. There is such a thing I must leave; God
has set up a judgment in my mind against it; though it bring profit and
pleasure, away it must go. Here is a step, a following step, to follow Christ.
He that will deny himself, will follow Christ: My Redeemer shows me this to be
an evil, I will not do it, but follow him, and imitate him. Here the soul is
led step by step, even by Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, till it is
gradually cleansed from sin, and reconciled unto God; and this can be done by
no other means; for prayers and alms will not do it; all that can be done by us
will not do it; none can do it but Christ alone, that God has laid help upon,
that you may all wait for the Divine operation of his grace in your hearts.
That is it which we labor and travel for, as knowing that God has wrought
wonderfully by it, for the redemption of all those that love him more than they
love their pleasures, more than they love their sins. It must be concluded,
that following of him, and leaving father and mother, husband and wife,
children, brethren, and sisters; all these things as they stand in competition
with him, and the obedience of his Spirit, must be looked upon as nothing to
him: Then above all things, I must not displease him: He can speak peace, and
none can take it away; and if he take it away, none can give it. If we follow
Christ, when this is done, then all is done according to the will of God; then
the blessing descends upon the whole creation; then every man will speak truth
to his neighbor, and every man will govern his family with discretion; so God
is glorified, and his name comes to be exalted; who is worthy to be beloved,
adored, and exalted above all blessings and praises. To him be glory, who is
God over all, blessed forever and ever. Amen.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST glorious God of life and power, and of everlasting kindness; a God of
long-suffering and patience, else we had not been here at this day.

Lord, we are monuments of thy mercy! thou have spared us long, and have called
unto us in a day when we turned away our ear from thee: Thou have stretched
forth thy hand all the day long, and thou have gathered a little remnant of the
lost sheep of the house of Israel to partake of thy postures of life; and now
all our souls have been greatly refreshed and comforted since we came to
understand and comprehend with the rest of thy saints, the height, and length,
and breadth, and depth of thy love, which in the Son of thy love, thou have
revealed to us.

And, blessed Father of Life! our souls do breathe and cry unto thee, on the
behalf of strangers, which are aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, that are
yet breathing and enquiring after thee, asking the way to Zion.

O Lord! remember them and hear their cry, and let their sighing and
complaining enter into thine ears; that all they, in whom thou have begun to
kindle holy desires after thee, may have them grow into a flame, to burn up all
enmity to thee; that so they may be purified by thy jugments, and receive of
thy heavenly grace. This is the way which thou have used with thy children;
thou have commanded them to worship thee in thy dewlling place; thou have taken
them into thy house, and fed them with thy finest wheat, refreshed them with
thy loving kindness, and filled them with thy Holy Spirit.

Dearest God of Love! this is the design and purpose of our meeting together,
that we may enjoy the presence, and feel the operation of thy word, and have
communion with thee, and thy Son Jesus Christ, through thy Holy Spirit; the way
into rest and life is with thee. Thou can open, and none can shut. Lord! open
the hearts of this people, to receive of thy goodness, and receive of thy
blessings; that so every one may be sensible, that thou art at least knocking
at the door of their hearts, that thou might have an entrance, and bow the
hearts and wills of all, to receive what thou give and have to offer; to
receive the word of life, by which thou art quickening them, and kindling holy
desires after thyself, that every one may recive the truth in the love of it:
That so blessed God of Life! thy glorious work of redemption may be carried on,
and we may all feel it carried on in our souls.

Hear thy poor people that are crying unto thee, the God of Gods in Zion! that
are sensible of their weakness and feebleness, and how unable they are to
overcome the enemies of their souls: Arise in thy power, O Lord! and these
enemies shall be scattered; let the souls of thy people be raised from the
dust, and delivered from their sin, that they may rejoice and praise thy name
for their deliverance.

Righteous God of life! our eyes are unto thee, to set forth thy glory, for
thou have made bare thine arm for the salvation of the poor and needy souls,
and thou have been stretching forth the cords of thy love to gather them that
were scattered; and have been bringing home to thee, those that were hurried
away in a dark and cloudy day.

Thou have made us sensible of thy operations; and have constrained thy
servants to labor in the word and doctrine, for the gathering of such home;
that so they and we may enter into thy holy covenant, and may sound forth thy
praises to the ages and generations to come: That so, Holy God of Life and
Love! thou that have saved us with a mavelous salvation, may receive for
all thy mercies, and blessings to thy children, praises, glory, honor, and
thanksgiving; for thou alone art worthy, who art God over all, blessed forever.
Amen.

SERMON II. HEART PREPARATION for receiving the GOSPEL.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, FEB. 12, 1687.
IT is in my heart at this time, to desire that every one's heart were prepared
to be made a partaker of the blessings of the gospel; for there is a certain
preparation that every one must witness in themselves, before they are capable
of receiving divine blessings; for in all ages of the world, the blessings of
the Lord have been manifold, and his arm has been always stretched out in all
ages, to the sons and daughters of men, that are sensible of the love he has
unto them; and where these tenders of the love of God have met with prepared
hearts, they have received it to their eternal welfare: But this has been the
lamentation that has been taken up upon the greatest part of mankind, that
they have not been prepared to receive the love of God; their hearts and minds
have been so filled with the love of visible things, and carnal objects, that
they have not been truly sensible of the riches of the grace, mercy, and love
of God unto them.

Now, it was said of old by the prophet, that the preparation of the heart is
of the Lord; and there is something that belongs to us on our part, that we may
attain this preparation, that we may be brought into this spiritual frame of
mind; and that is, by returning to the Lord, for people to think upon his name,
and have regard to his appearance: And although this is not the work of nature,
for by nature the minds of people are abroad, and they are crying out as the
Psalmist speaks, who will show us any good? Yet to help that defect, the Lord
has been pleased to send forth his grace and his truth, and to call unto the
sons and daughters of men, that they might seek after him, that they might seek
the Lord while he is to be found; and they that hearken to his voice, they will
readily confess, that there is nothing does so well satisfy an immortal soul,
as to be gathered into fellowship with its Maker; and that one time or other,
it is the desire of all men and women, that they might attain peace with the
Lord; and they know there is no peace to the wicked; they know wickedness will
remain until it is abolished and destroyed; and they know it is not in their
power to destroy it; and therefore of necessity there must be a waiting upon
the Lord, who is Almighty, that he may reveal his power in our weakness.

And they that are thus prepared in their minds, meet religiously together,
with expectation from God; that he, according to his promise, will appear, and
reveal his arm, and do in them, and for them, that which they cannot do for
themselves; this is a fit occasion for people to meet together, and to have
their expectation from God, and say, Lord, thou know my weakness, and thou
know the enemies I have to deal withal; thou know I am not able to
overcome them: Therefore we are now met together, in the presence of the Lord,
to wait to receive at his hands, that power, that life, that virtue, by which
we may be made more than conquerors. Such a religious meeting thus gathered
together, has a promise; I will be in the midst of them, says the Lord; and
therefore, having a promise, we may reasonably expect that we shall be made
partakers of the living virtue and power, by which we may do that, which of
ourselves we cannot do.

And, friends, it is my soul's desire, that you were all thus qualified, that
every one had an evidence in himself of this right preparedness; for where the
eye is abroad upon any visible thing, that it seeks satisfaction in any thing
below the Lord himself, it will wear away and wax old. All those objects that
people fix their mind upon, they will wax old; but they whose desires, and the
breathings of whose souls are, that they may grow into acquaintance with their
Maker, this will never wax old. When peoples minds are fixed, as the people of
the Lord of old were, when they made a comparison between the state of their
minds, and the minds of others, and signified it in these words, they are
saying; they are crying (that is, they that are of the world) who will show us
any good? But for our parts, our cry is, Lord lift up the light of thy
countenance upon us, and we will be more glad of that, than they can be with
all the increase of corn, and wine, and oil.

Now they that feel in themselves that the reason of their meeting together is
to enjoy the light of God's countenance, and to partake of the blessings of
God, they have their expectation from God, their minds are retired into God;
knowing right well, that if the tongues of men and angels are moved to declare
the heavenly and divine mysteries of the kingdom of God, they cannot be edified
or benefited by them without the divine help and assistance of God's Spirit;
for there is a seal upon them, and none can open that seal, but the Lion of the
tribe of Judah; he only is found worthy to unseal the mystery, and unseal the
divine blessings that are with the Lord: So that people must come to that
retiredness of spirit, to that resignation of soul, to be as a little child
waiting upon the Lord, crying out unto the Lord, that he will prepare them,
that he will make them hungry, and then feed them, that he will raise a thirst
in them, and then satisfy them with those divine springs of life, which through
the Lord Jesus Christ are opened to every one that believes. So far as your
minds are stayed and settled in waiting for the Lord, so far you will feel in
yourselves an openness and readiness, that if the Lord speaks, you are ready to
hear him, ready to submit to his word, ready to obey him; there will be such an
openness in the mind, not to the words of any man, but unto the word of God, to
receive that; for where the words of men are received, though never so
excellent, they convert not the soul, but the word of the Lord is pure,
converting the soul. And this word is that which is able to quicken those that
are dead in sins and trespasses, and bring them to be made partakers of life.
For it is not an increase of knowledge that will do the turn, but it is the
increase of life and virtue, the increase of godliness, and submitting our
wills unto him that made us: It is this that will do our turn, this will bring
peace to the soul, and bring us into the favor of God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now, that you may all feel that which prepares the heart for this
resignation, and quietness, and subjection, you must wait upon the Lord, that
you may be made partakers of the blessings of his everlasting gospel, and of
his divine presence: This is that which is most profitable, most advantageous:
And then the Lord will open to you the windows of Heaven, and rain down these
blessings upon you, whereby you will be comforted and refreshed, far beyond all
the works that we can do; for it is an inward work that must be done upon the
soul, to convert people that have been alienated and estranged from God, and
bring them to a reconciled state, through the Lord Jesus Christ, whereby they
may partake of the divine virtues, which sanctify and justify the soul in the
sight of God.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST glorious and powerful Father! thy arm of power is made bare in this our
day, to bring salvation to the poor.

O Lord! thou have lifted up the light of thy countenance upon a people that
have waited for thy glory and thy salvation; a little remnant whom the good of
this world could not satisfy; but O Lord! in an acceptable time, thou have
brought thy salvation near; and the light and brightness of the everlasting
gospel, thou have commanded to shine into the hearts and souls of the mourners
and bowed-down ones, who are seeking the living God, not among the outward
forms and ways of men.

But, O blessed Father of Life! thou have now brought us to the day of thy
power, and bowed our wills, and made us a willing people therein to serve thee,
and to do thy will on earth, as it is done in Heaven; and for that end, O Lord,
thou have put it into the hearts of thy people to wait upon thee, in whom all
our fresh springs are, that from thee we may receive the renewing of power from
day to day.

In all the hours of our temptations and trials, our eyes, O Lord, have been to
thee and to thy power; and we acknowledge, to the glory of thy power and
goodness, that thou have been a God nigh at hand, when we have been seeking
thee, and trusting in thee, so that we are a people sensible of thy power and
presence with us; for that eye which thou keep open to thy children it
brings thy glory to our view, and shows it breaking forth over the nations; and
we have great joy and satisfaction in beholding the progress of thy mighty
power in our day, how thou have broken down and confounded, and art still
breaking down and confounding, all the dark imaginations and devices of the
sons and daughters of men, that have conspired to hinder the breaking forth of
the glory of thy Son, Christ Jesus.

O powerful God of Life! arise more and more in the greatness of thy power and
love, and make known thy counsel, and thy will among the inhabitants of the
earth; and bow their minds, O Lord! and their wills, that none may dare to
withstand thy appearance, lest they be found fighters against God, and
destroyers of themselves.

O powerful Father! for this end, make bare thine arm unto the rulers and
governors of these nations, that they may know thy counsels, and bow to thy
heavenly will, and may promote thy law of righteousness in their own hearts,
and the hearts of others; that by thy power, a blessed reformation may be
wrought, and a stop put to iniquity; that it may not run down in a mighty
stream, as it has done in time past; but that truth and righteousness, and
sound judgment may be known in the earth: That they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, may have their souls desires satisfied; and so praise and
thanksgivings shall arise from their souls to thee.

O powerful Father of Life! preserve and keep thy children, whom thou have
gathered, and purged, and purified, and to whom thou have made known the way of
life, and made them a willing people in the day of thy power, to do thy will,
and to wait for the coming of that kingdom that thou have promised to establish
under Christ Jesus, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords; and that it may grow,
and increase, and be spread abroad upon the earth, and let every one desire to
be the subject thereof.

Powerful Father of Life! the arm of thy power and invisible strength has been
revealed, that nothing has been able to resist or stand against and prevail,
by which thou art planting Zion and building Jerusalem, and establishing it: By
the same power, let thy work be carried on, and let many be brought in to be
subject to Christ, for the good of their immortal souls: As thou have
multiplied thy blessings upon us, so from day to day thou have made us sensible
of thy love unto us, owning us to be thy children and peculiar people, by thy
presence in the midst of us, whenever we meet in thy name to wait upon thee,
that so, Living Father, all thine, both here and every where, may be encouraged
to attend upon thee, and to be faithful to thy power; that waiting for the
opening of thy counsels, and the enlightening their understandings, they may be
able to comprehend, with all saints, the height, and depth, and length, and
breadth of thy love in Christ Jesus; that in the sense of the freeness and
greatness thereof, all thy children here and every where, that in an
everlasting covenant of grace thou have gathered to thyself may have communion
with thee and thy Son and Spirit; and may return thee the honor, glory, and
praise of all thy love, and mercy, and grace; for thou alone art worthy, who
art God ever all, blessed forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON III. The FIRST and GREAT COMMANDMENT.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, May 27, 1688.
WHEN God gave forth his Law on Mount Sinai, which Israel was to hear and obey,
the first and great commandment was, thou shall have no other Gods before me.
Here is the sum and substance of all true religion that ever was upon earth to
this day. All the commandments, all the precepts, prophecies, and all the
dealings of God with his people, from that day to this, have all been contained
in this short precept, thou shall have no other Gods but me. And as long as
Israel stood in obedience to this command, their blessings were multiplied upon
them, their good things were increased from day to day; the Lord was with them,
as long as they were willing to be his people; he appeared as their God, and as
their defender wrought their deliverances, fought all their battles for them,
gave them dominion and strength, courage and wisdom; ministered out of his
treasury all good things unto them; for the great care of God Almighty was with
all his people, he had regard to them, and visited them at all times, to keep
them from idolatry; I am, says he, a jealous God, take notice of me to be so;
I am jealous of my name; if thou will be mine, thou shall have no other Gods
but me.

And all the precepts about offerings and sacrifices, and making atonement for
sinners, and the diverse services and worship, the various offices in the temple
and sanctuary, they were all outward means appointed of God, to keep this
outward church in an inward conformity to the command of God. This command was
written in tables of stone, and these tables were laid up in the ark of God,
and all this appertained to the first covenant, and typed and figured out the
dispensation of the new and everlasting covenant that God would make with his
people, not like unto the old: How not like it? Not like it in the outward
shadows, the types and shadows of things, but he would bring forth the
substance of all those shadows and types, and would alter the form and outward
appearance of things; for as God is unchangeable, so is his law unchangeable.

Moses says, the first and great commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods
but me. This was put into the stone tables. Christ Jesus says, the first and
great commandment is, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, Matt. xxii, 27. This is put into the tables of the heart. So
here is a difference between the first commandment by Moses, and the first
commandment by Christ; they both acknowledge the first and great command to be
the subjecting of the creature to him that made him, as his God, that he may
only serve him, and that he may love him with his whole heart: The Jew could
prove this by his stone tables, and Christ proves this by the fleshly tables of
the heart, for there he is bound to love the Lord with his whole heart, and to
serve him only; him only shall thou serve.

Now, here the Jews law is brought over to the Christians, in the greatest
point of religion that ever was preached; shuts out all idolatry, all
superstition, all variety of religions; all is shut out by this commandment,
and the Christian that has the law written in his heart, according to the new
covenant, he can go as readily to it and read it, as ever the Jew could go to
his stone table, and read the law there; you cannot deny, that if there be a
thing written and engraven in my heart, I can go at readily to it as I can go
to any book or table, though I have the keeping of it: But the Jews had not the
keeping of it, for generally it was laid up iij the ark of God.

Now, friends, that which lies upon my mind to speak to you at this time, and
that out of the great love that I have to all your precious and immortal souls,
as God has had love to mine, is, that you would all consider and weigh in the
fear of the Lord, whose presence is among us, which of you, and how many of you
are come to the obedience of this commandment: I do not doubt but the most of
you can say them all, but a happy people are you if you can do one: I dare
pronounce that soul a blessed soul, that can perform this one commandment, that
can or dare stand before his Maker, and say, O Lord! I love thee with all my
heart, with all my soul, and with all my might; my love is withdrawn from all
other things in comparison of thee; there is nothing in this whole world has a
place in my mind, but as it is in subjection to the love of thee.

Here is the first and great commandment, the unchangeable law, the law that
was good in Moses' days, and good in Christ's days, and it holds good in our
days; and indeed it is such a definitive law, that the breakers of it can
neither be good Jews, nor good Christians. There is an absolute necessity lies
upon us, of abstracting and drawing away our minds and souls from all other
gods, from all images and other dependencies and trusts that people are
naturally liable to trust to, and to have their whole confidence set upon the
Lord; but alas! with grief of heart I speak it, there are but very few that as
yet have known the right giving forth of the law, and there are fewer that are
subject to it. This law was not given forth at first without thunder and
lightening, and a terrible noise, and the mountain smoking (he that has an car
to hear, let him hear) insomuch as Moses himself said, he feared greatly, and
he quaked exceedingly, because of the thunder of the Almighty, and the mountain
that smoked and burnt with fire, so that Israel could not draw nigh.

Now I say, there are but a few that have come to the knowledge of the giving
forth of this law, that have certainly known those thunders, and that terrible
work that the Lord of the whole earth makes, when he comes to set up his law;
for a great many that have come nigh to it, and might have heard and received
the words of the law of God, they have gone backward, they have done like unto
the Jews of old, though they had suffered much, and gone through much, and had
seen the wonders of the Lord; how he had led them and delivered them; yet when
it came to this, that they must hear the voice of God, they said we cannot bear
it; we cannot endure it: We have devised for ourselves an easier way; for the
voice of thunder and dreadful noises, put them into terror and quaking, and
trembling, and great dread came upon them; but we have found an easier way, say
they; what is that? Go thou, said they to Moses, and hear thou what the Lord
says, and come thou and tell us, thou shall be a Mediator between us; let God
speak unto thee, and do thou speak the same to us, and we will hear thee.

Thus the Jews that were not come beyond the law of God written in tables of
stone, they would not come to receive it in their hearts, as the Christian
must; so Moses received the law from the mouth of God, and he was faithful as a
servant in the house of God, and he ministered forth the law of God, his
precepts, statutes and judgments, and testimonies; and he made them a book of
laws for all of them to walk by, from the highest to the lowest; how they
should act in criminal matters, and to do justice between man and man, and what
they should do in the worship of God, and what they should do toward the
priest, whose lips should preserve knowledge for them; and so he brought up a
form of religion; but his work was according to the precepts of God; and he
brought them into the form of national religion, and government, and national
laws. And so Moses and the priest ruled over them; and the priest offered
sacrifice for them, and made atonement for them, and Moses enquired of the
Lord, and asked council for them, and taught and instructed them; and what
became of all this at last? When this was done, the priest made atonement for
sin, but he could not pluck away the guilt of one sin; there remained the
conscience of sin after he had made his offering; and Moses taught them the
counsels of God, and the commands of God, but he could not bind their hearts to
the obedience of them; for he declared openly against them, that they were a
rebellious and stiff-necked people, notwithstanding they had a law without
them. Indeed, time would fail me to run through the manifold miscarriages of
the church of the Jews, in respect of their idolatry, in respect of their
contempt and rebellion, both to God and his servant Moses, who was to teach and
to guide them: I say, the time would fail me to mention the manifold
miscarriages that happened among this people, that had a law and religion
without them, and a teacher without them.

Now in the fullness of time it pleased God in sending his Son, Christ Jesus, to
raise up a prophet like unto Moses, in respect of faithfulness, though higher
in respect of dignity; for Moses was faithful in all his house as a servant,
but this man was faithful as a son in his own house, in the house that he was
heir of, that house wherein he was as King, even a priest, a prophet, and a
ruler in. When the Lord signified by the spirit of prophecy, the coming of the
Just One, he signified to the people that his ministry should not be as that of
Aaron; the people should not have their religion without them, and their laws
and precepts without them, and their priests without them, and their worship
and church without them; but that they should have it all within them. I will
write my law in their hearts, I will put it into their inward parts, then they
shall be my people, and I will be their God, and they shall not forsake me.
Your fathers brake my old covenant, but I will make a new covenant in the
latter days, a new covenant, not like that your fathers broke; they brake the
law without them, but I will write my law in their hearts; this prophet that is
like to Moses, he shall teach my people, he shall be a leader to them, and
guide them in the way they are to go, and shall be a captain for them, to lead
them to salvation; and it shall come to pass, in the day that I do this, if
there be any that will not hear him, he shall be cut off from among the people.
That is, the judgment that comes upon the contemners of the gospel, upon them
that will not hear Christ Jesus, they shall be cut off from the people; from
what people? From the people of God; they shall have no part of the privileges
that are enjoyed through Christ; they shall be cut off from the benefits that
others reap by their faith in Christ.

So that now we are to expect the operation and working of a ministry, that
leads a people to an inward religion, a heart religion, where the heart is
fixed entirely upon the true and living God, as the object of their dependence
and trust; and they have no other. This is a strange word to flesh and blood;
what, no other dependence than on the invisible God? Flesh and blood, and
sensuality, can never come to this; this is a religion that has been hid from
ages and generations, and will be hid to all ages that ever shall be in the
world, where sensuality prevails. What, will you have me to have my whole
dependence for the comfort of my life here, and of the life that is to come,
the other life, to have my dependence upon an invisible God, that invisible
power that made me, and created the world? How is it possible for me to
sequester myself, and draw myself off from all visible objects? I must trust to
this, and trust to that: Flesh and blood can never attain to this, with all the
wit and reason it has; it can never separate itself from idols; they are
little children; they are children of another birth, born of another seed, that
keep themselves from idols.

Friends, idolatry is a great deal more common, I find, than most are aware of.
Am I commanded to love the Lord with all my heart, and soul, and mind, and
might? What is left when the whole is taken away? If God has my whole heart,
what have I to bestow upon the world? What love, what affection, what
eagerness, what fervency can I bestow upon the world, or any object in the
world, when my whole heart, and soul, and mind, is gone before, is gone toward
the Lord?

This is the first and great commandment; and the second is like unto it, that
is, thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Here it is that the law and the
prophets, says, creeds, prayer, religion and worship, all that ever was in the
world, all are comprehended in this, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, soul and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself. So what need is
there for us to be disputing about religion; about this tenet, and the other
tenet; this text, and the other text? For my part, I should only desire you to
understand this text, and I should not doubt your going to Heaven. Here is the
sum; here is all at once; here is the quintessence of all religion, of all
types, shadows, figures, ceremonies and priesthood, and all that ever was or
could be named and practiced in the world; all brought to this, the heart given
up to God; our love set upon him.

What, is this sufficient, will some say? This will make you a good moral man;
but what is this to the Christian religion? You may be led into error, and
become a heretic for all this.

How can this be, that I should not be of a sound faith, but led into error and
heresy for all this? When people let in error, and heresy, and unsoundness of
faith, where do they let it in? Do they not let in the principles of error and
heresy into their hearts? I believe this, and that, and the other error, that
it comes into the heart, and has a seat in the heart; but how can we let it
into the heart, when the heart is given up to God? Cannot I keep out error and
heresy, if I give up my heart and soul to him? Cannot I trust him with all?

This kind of talk of error and heresy has come among men that have had the
keeping of their own souls: They have taken their own souls into their own
hands, and have ordered their religion themselves, or have had somebody to
order it for them; and a great many of them have met together to make creeds,
and catechisms, and confessions, and orthodox doctrines, that might certainly
be professed and subscribed. So afterward some have come and found fault with
them; then they must have a council to try them; then these go off and are laid
aside, and others are given in the room of them; so that these men have set up
for themselves. These would not be under the government and prescription of
God, as children under the government of a father; but they will set up
religions themselves, and say to the rest of the world, if you own any thing
contrary to our principles, you are a heretic; and being a heretic, you are to
be rooted out and cut off. Do not you read in the scripture, that whover hears
not the Prophet that was to come into the world, should be cut off? What, will
not you hear Christ speak in the church? Will not you hear Christ speak? The
church cannot speak without a head; if you will not hear the church, you must
be cut off. Then they have fallen to hanging, and burning, and killing, and
destroying people, and nations not a few: And this comes from their making
faiths, and creeds, and ordering religion themselves: All their barbarous and
inhuman cruelties, martyring and dungeoning people, comes from their making
faiths themselves; and of all things nothing is more desperately wicked, and
they did not know it. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? Men know not how proud and arrogant they themselves
are, and yet they would be ordering the hearts, and minds, and consciences of
others; and out of this has sprung all superstition and idolatry, because men
would not give up their hearts to God; thou shall have no other Gods but me.
This commandment is great in itself; strict in the terms; thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. Their neighbors
could not see with their eyes; therefore they would be hanging, and burning,
and destroying one another.

But, blessed be God, who is now bringing forth true Christianity upon its old
basis and foundation, whereon it was placed at first, for Christianity has
been justled off from its first foundation; for instead of loving God with all
their hearts, and loving their neighbors as themselves, they hated them: Now
this is the day, O friends! the weight of it is great; this I say is the day
wherein God is bringing Christianity upon its old foundation.

I would not have you think that I am here judging our forefathers, that are
fallen asleep, that, therefore, they are gone to Hell, because they saw not
this day, and lived not to see that benefit of it that we enjoy; I am far from
it: This was the thing that they believed and prayed to God for; they did not
see this day outwardly, but they saw it by faith. When I was a child, I
remember the people of God, when they met three or four together, they would
rejoice in the hopes of what they foresaw; they gave thanks to God for the
blessed days that he would bring forth, though they could not tell when; they
did say, and believe, that God would scatter the fogs, and mists, and bring
forth a happy day, wherein his people should have the gift of his Spirit: When
they saw the impositions and persecutions of those times, when they that did
not conform, and comply, were cast into prisons, dungeons and gaols; well, it
will not always be thus, say they, there is a day coming, wherein the Lord will
set his people free from all the yokes of oppression, and from the oppressor.

Indeed, my soul did rejoice in hearing the prophetical sayings of those good
men, and I thought I might live to see that day. Blessed be God that has
preserved my life to this day, and to this hour, to enjoy what they prayed for:
They prayed to God to scatter the mists and fogs, that they might no longer
cloud and darken men's minds, and hinder them from enjoying God's teaching.
Blessed be God, that we are now in the enjoyment of the prayers of the
faithful, that left the world before we were in it. Now the day is come that
they prayed for, and enquired after.

How strangely does the man talk, will some say, concerning the Christian
religion; the Christian religion is all England over; go to any meeting in
London, except one, and they will tell you they are Christians; I would to God
they were; that is the worst I wish them all. But what should we talk of the
Christian religion without the Christian life? except we find that amongst
them, what signifies the name and profession of it? And the Christian doctrine
is wanting in many places too. There is many in this city, urging this very
command, of loving God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as
themselves, as fervently as I can do, or any body else; and yet they will tell
you in the next breath, that no man in London, nor in the world, can do this;
no man can possibly love God with all his heart; never a man can be found that
can perform such an act, as to love his neighbor as himself: Not every
neighbor, it may be, but some one choice associate he may pick out, that he
can love, and bear with his infirmities and affronts, and love him as himself;
love thy neighbor, that is every body, that there may be a good will for all
people throughout the whole race of mankind, peace on earth, good will toward
men: This is the fruit of the gospel. Christian words will not make the
Christian religion, there must be a Christian life; but where shall we find
that, or seek it?

I know not, I have nothing to do to judge any body, but there is one that
judges who it is that lives the Christian life, and who does not? Who is
this? what one is this? The HEAD of the Christian church: Why, is he here? Yes,
the head of the Christian church is here, and he speaks and gives sentence; if
you have an ear you may hear him, and if you will turn your mind inward, for he
is an inward minister, every one of you, if you will turn your minds inward, he
will tell you whether you live a Christian life, and what life it is you live:
If there be a drunkard here, let him ask whether his life be a Christian life;
will a man go away ignorant from this place, and have no answer? If there be a
drunkard here, let him ask inwardly in his own bosom, Lord is my life a
Christian life? I dare affirm, on God's behalf, he will have an answer, no, thy
life is not a Christian life, but a shameful, beastly life, a brutish one.

Who told you that the Head of Christians, Christ Jesus, is present? Christ
Jesus, is he present? How came he here? He is ascended up into Heaven such a
day, say they, how came he here? Let him be ascended up into Heaven, yet he is
not so ascended into Heaven as not to be here also; how should he fulfill his
promise, if he be circumscribed in Heaven or earth? How should he make good his
promise, if when two or three are met together in his name, he is not in the
midst of them? Here now are many more than two or three met together in the
name of Christ, and that hope for acceptance with God, through the Mediator,
Christ Jesus; if you think that here are two or three met together in the name
of Christ, it follows that Christ is in the midst of them.

I know not what you may enjoy, some may possibly say, I do not find any such
presence of Christ; I hear of the presence of Christ in the sacrament, and I
have heard talk of the presence of Christ at a meeting, but I have been at many
a meeting, and I never found such a presence of Christ.

Can you read the scriptures? Yes, I can read the scriptures as well at you but
that cannot give me a sense of it; I do read the scriptures and believe them;
but what signifies my reading the scriptures concerning the presence of Christ,
if I have not a sense of it? I have been at many a meeting, but never had the
sense of such a Divine Presence as you talk of, nor it may be at the sacrament
neither: What is the reason thou have no sense of it? If thou will take my
counsel, and turn thy mind inward, and enquire whether the thing I speak of be
true, whether there be such a voice as I speak of, that will tell thee what thy
state is: If thou will be true to thyself, thou may know the Divine
Presence, and thou may hear Christ speak.

The soul has eyes, and ears, as well as the body. What eyes does the apostle
mean when he says, the God of this world has blinded the eyes of them that
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image
of God, should shine unto them? If the soul has eyes, and ears, as well as the
body, it can hear, and see as the body; as the bodily eye can see visible
things, so the eye of the soul can see things that are invisible, and heavenly;
you can hear my voice outwardly, and you may hear the voice of Christ inwardly.
I have known some that have been so afraid to hear ill of themselves, that they
would not enquire; some have been so guilty in their own consciences, that they
have been afraid of hearing ill, and would not enquire about themselves: So it
is inwardly; some have been so conscious that their life and conversation is
naught, that their life is a sinful life, that they dare not put it to the
question: It would certainly have been told them, thy life is not a Christian
life; thou must mend thy life, before ever thou come to have peace with God:
If this should be thy portion and mine, that upon search we should find our
condition bad, what harm is it?

I would put one question to thee, be serious in considering of it: We are all
children of wrath by nature, none of us differ about that, and that unless we
be born again, we cannot enter into the kingdom of God. The question is,
whether I am one of those or not? Suppose upon enquiry it be discovered to me
that I am not, that is bad enough; this is hard, but not so hard as it is true;
this is the thing which I would have you consider: Am not I in a better case to
know that I am in a natural state, than to go on and perish to eternity? As
long as there is life, there is hope; as long as a man is upon the earth, and
taking care for his soul, and enquiring about the state of his immortal soul,
if his soul is not in a good condition, is it not better for him to know it,
and to seek for a cure? For there is no greater infirmity and infelicity can be
upon man, than to have some occult and hidden disease, that he cannot be made
sensible of; for this wastes and spoils him, and he cannot be persuaded to look
out for a remedy: So it is inwardly; if a man be ignorant of his condition, and
go on to his dying day, and hour, and does not seek after a remedy, this men
perishes without all peradventure. When you are in this enquiry, be content to
be controlled, be willing to have the truth spoken, though it be against
yourselves. I might instance in diverse things that I have spoken of: If a man
be satisfied that his life is not a Christian life; I say, if the swearer or
liar, if the proud person, or the effeminate, as soon as they come to be
satisfied that their life is not a Christian life that they now live, what can
this man expect? What counsel should we give him, and what counsel should he
take? I will go on in the way that I am in: What, after thou know thy life
is not a Christian life? God forbid: Will thou go on and perpetrate sin upon
sin, and heap up wrath against the day of wrath; I am a sinner, my life is
unchristian, I make account to live in sin, and die in sin; is this good
policy? Consider another text which our Lord spoke, if ye die in your sins,
whither I go, ye cannot come.

O friends, lay these things to your hearts; what have I to do but to tell you
that the love I have in my soul for you all, makes me desire in my heart that
you might be saved? This is the will of God, that you might all be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the truth: Blessed are they that know the truth; the
truth as it is in Jesus. Truth in the inward parts, has a speaking voice; and
if thou hearken to it, it will tell thee that thy state is naught. Can thou
believe the truth when he tells thee so, that thy state is naught, and that
thou art like to go to eternal destruction, unless there be repentance and
regeneration to prevent it? Can thou believe this doctrine, when it sounds in
thy own heart? If thou can not believe it, unbelief will be thy ruin. The
spirit of truth is come to convince the world of sin, because they believe not
in Christ: He tells them their condition, and they will not believe him. The
Spirit of Christ convinces men of sin, and they believe him not. The spirit of
truth convinces thee of thy sin, but thou believe him not. If thou love
thy pleasure, and thy profit, and thine honor, then thou love not God with
all thine heart; and then thou art not a Christian, but out of covenant with
God. Art thou sensible that thy condition is bad, were it not best to get it
mended? After we are convinced of our own sinful state, is it not our best,
course to seek to have it mended? Who shall mend it? says one; I have done all
I can to mend my life, and I cannot mend it.

I have concluded so in my younger years; I have fasted, and prayed, and spent
time in hearing, reading, and meditation, and did all in my own power, and all
to mend my state, but I could not mend it; and as I grew up in years, sin and
corruption more prevailed, and there was no help; and I came so far as to
believe there was no help, and that if God did not help me, I was undone to all
eternity. I many times wished that I had never been born: I went to ministers
and meetings, and to all sorts of separate people, and to all manner of
ordinances, and to all manner of means, to mend this bad heart of mine, to see
if I could get a power that would give me victory over my corruptions; but my
arm was never so long as to reach thereunto; it was far out of my power and
reach.

Many have sought to get this power of reforming their hearts and lives; to
attain it by their own hands, by their own endeavors, but they could never do
it; they could never better their condition, nor bring forth fruit worthy of
amendment of life. I wish that every one was come to that pass, that they knew
not which way to turn them; that they were come at last to their wits end: They
will come to it sooner or later; the sooner the better. I have done all I can;
I can do no more; I am at my wits end, and I know not what to think, concerning
my eternal state; I know not what to judge of it; I strive against my lusts and
corruptions, but for all that they prevail against me: Temptations come before
me, but I cannot conquer them. O I am glad when people come to that pass, that
they know not what to do, but despair of their own arms, of their own strength,
and their own wit, and despair of all other help in the world; I am glad of
that.

I am not preaching up despair of God's grace and mercy; but let me tell you,
when men despair of their own doings, and of all outward means, and helps, then
they are fit objects for the mercy of God; and not till then: When the Lord
looked, and saw that there was none to save and deliver, then his own arm
brought salvation. God will not save till then; God will not reveal his power,
till men have done with their own power; they will never trust God, while they
think they can do something for themselves. All the forms of religion of the
several people of this nation, will do them little good without the power. What
is the meaning of that principle, to have such masses, and prayers, and
performances? What is the meaning of it? Let us search to the bottom. They say
we are sinners; when we pray to God for his blessing, and for salvation by
Christ, there is this at the bottom, they think these duties and performances
will be very helpful to their state; helpful toward the knowledge of it: To
speak plain English, these are their Gods. If I speak of profane and wicked
people, I would say their lusts are their Gods: But when I speak of righteous
people, that are mere formalists, then I say their duties, as they call them,
are their Gods. When they have done all, they can do nothing for them, and then
they have no Gods at all; then they are godless: And if God does not help them,
then they are undone to all eternity.

When poor creatures are cast out, as it were, into the open field, to the
loathing of their persons, not salted at all, nor swaddled at all, but lying in
the guilt of their blood: When I passed by thee, says the Lord, and saw thee
polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, yea,
when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto thee, live. When I passed by thee, and
looked upon thee, behold, thy time was a time of love, and I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness; yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into
covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. What, was it a
time of love, when I was such an object in mine own eyes, that I thought I was
the most miserable creature in the world; one that could not make a good
prayer, nor dispute for religion, nor perform any duty; a poor creature cast
out into the open field, to the loathing of my person; lost all that I gained;
my name was from among the living; my days were passed over in sorrow, and I
said there is nothing but darkness, and death, and misery for me: I used all
means, and tried all things, saving only a living trust in God alone, and that
flesh and blood cannot do. Flesh and blood cannot know him, therefore flesh and
blood cannot trust in him. Alas! said I, I cannot trust in the Lord, I cannot
cast my soul and all my concerns, my fame and reputation in the world, I cannot
cast all upon the care of the Almighty; I cannot know him, nor trust in him;
how can I do it? nobody can do it. They that know my name, says the Lord, they
will put their trust in me: Never a truer word was spoken; but how they should
know God, and trust in him, I know not.

When thou come once to this pass, to be at thy wits end, and not know which
way to turn thee, nor to whom to run for help, or to ask counsel for thy soul's
welfare, when thou art come to the end of all, and without hope, then God
reveals himself by his Son Jesus Christ; Christ the Son of God, is known by our
coming to him; but none can come unto Christ, except the Father which has sent
him, draw him: When thou have done with thy Gods, and thrown away thy idols to
the bats and moles, then thou will find the Lord; and thou will cry out, O!
that God would have mercy upon me, and lift up the light of his countenance
upon me; I am a poor, miserable creature. There are many that make such a
whining and complaining, that they take a pride in their very complaints, their
hypocrisy is so great. I have known some that have prided themselves in wording
their condition, and expressing their miserable case before the Lord; but
suppose thou can not speak at all, but feel thyself miserable, thou can
not express thy condition; at such a time as this, God was drawing thy soul to
Christ Jesus, the Mediator of it: I have heard of a Mediator, and that there is
Balm in Gilead for me; that there is a physician there; that there is one
physician, even Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the new covenant; thou have
sinned against him, and grieved him, yet he stands with open arms for thee,
ready to receive thee and embrace thee; where stands he? He stands as the door
and knocks; it is a small matter, one would think, to let him in: Rev. iii, 20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock; and if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Here is good
news for an hungry soul, if any such be here; Christ the Mediator, stands at
the door and knocks, he will come in and sup with thee, if thou open to him;
then we shall meet with the Lord's supper: This is the Lord, I will wait for
him; he will bring his bread with him, the bread of life, and the wine of his
kingdom, and the Lord's supper will be celebrated without cavilling and
jangling.

Now, because we will not pervert the scripture, I would have you that
understand books, read what commentators of this and former ages say upon this
text; whether they do not deliver in their opinions, that this knocking at the
door, is Christ calling the soul by his grace; and this door is the door of the
heart, and Christ's calling the soul by his grace and Spirit, to let him in by
faith: This is their judgment and sense, and their sense is mine; and I believe
the genuine sense of this text, that Christ would have people think he is near
to them, and would have them open their hearts, and receive him by faith, to be
a Savior to them.

No; that, says flesh and blood, I cannot bear, I cannot consent to have him
for my Savior, I will not let him in, for he is like Micaiah to Ahab, he never
spoke good concerning me: For if I have him for my Savior, I must part with my
lusts and pleasures; if there be any other Savior, I will try, and not meddle
with him; he will spoil all our mirth and good society; he will tell me that
every idle word that I shall speak, I must give an account thereof in the day
of judgment: What, do you think that I can like such a Savior? That I can live
with such a one as will call me to an account for every word I speak; and that
if I speak one idle word, judgment will come upon me? No, I will try one and
another, rather than accept of him on such terms; I am one that am joined to
such a church, and enjoy such and such ordinances, and such helps: I am in
covenant with God, and under the seals of that covenant; I am baptized, and do
partake of the Lord's supper, which is another seal of the covenant; I hope it
will go well with me. I will go something farther: Another says, he must have
a Mediator; I will go to the Virgin Mary, and offer something to her, and pray
to her: Says another, I will go to Saint James, and Saint John, and other
Saints to intercede with God for me. They must have some Mediator: This is the
twisting and twining of the sons and daughters of men, to keep out Christ, the
great Mediator, who came into the world for this purpose, to destroy the works
of the Devil. Alas! I have nothing left but my bare life and living in this
world; I have nothing left me but some little desire I had to please God, and
that he will never judge and condemn me for; but my false dealing, and buying
and selling with deceit, he will judge this, and condemn me; and my discoursing
of things without me; all my carnal friendship of the world, and my vain
fashions, all this is corrupt and defiled; these he came on purpose to destroy;
he came to destroy both the Devil and his works. What, can a man live in the
world, and never join with the Devil? never sin at all? never do any thing that
the Devil would have him to do? There is no perfection in this world; no living
without sin here; then I am sure there is no unity with Christ here; and if
there be no unity with Christ, then there is none with God the Father. What
will become of thee now? What will all the pleaders for that opinion say now?
There is something stands between God and me, and I shall never have peace; and
what is that? It is sin; I would have my sin taken away, else I had better
never been born. Can thou remove sin out of thy heart? I have tried, but I
cannot do it; I have heard of Christ the Mediator of the new covenant, he
says, he came into the world, and that for this purpose he was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Now sin in my heart is the
Devil's work, I will see if he will destroy that for me; I will trust and rely
upon him, and see if his great power can destroy it in me.

Here people come rightly to believe in him that God has sent, and trust in
him, and he will take them in; and, like a Surgeon, he will rip their
hearts, and let out their corruptions, though there has been ever so much
rottenness; and he will heal them, and purify them, and pardon them, though
they have been ever so wicked, if they come to him; when thy sins are set in
order before thee, then thou criest out, O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from this body of death? Is it God that has thought on me, and
waited to be gracious, has born my sins long? how wonderful is his patience
toward me! All these things working in the soul, tends to beget a love of God,
and fervent desires after being cleansed and purified from sin, and earnest
prayer to the Lord, to make the holy fire to kindle that would burn it up: The
more the soul trusts in Christ, the more does this heavenly fire burn up our
lusts, and then a man feels a great change in his mind: The things, says he,
that I delighted in, are now grievous to me; I hope I shall never be found in
those things again; my mind is now taken off them; who took it off? Did thou
not strive before to take it off? I did, but I could not do it. There are many,
I believe, in this assembly, before the Lord, that are my witnesses in this
matter, that when they came to Christ the Mediator, he changed their minds, and
he untied the Devil's fetters; they were tied to their sins and lusts, but he
has unloosed them; they are ashamed of those things that they formerly took
pleasure in. What fruit (says the apostle) had you in those things, whereof
you are now ashamed? So I say, what pleasure have you in sporting, and gaming,
and drinking, and company-keeping? What pleasure have you to think on your
wanton discourses? What pleasure in pride and vanity? What pleasure in wrath
and bitterness of mind? And what pleasure in malice and envy? What pleasure
have you in these things whereof you are now ashamed? So far as you are
convinced, you are ashamed to think of them; I am ashamed to think that the
Devil at such a time, by such a temptation, should prevail over me.

I would to God you were all come to this, to be ashamed that you might
remember your past evil ways and actions, with sorrow and shame: There is a
secret joy in this. Sure it is better to be ashamed, than to continue in
impudence. God has wrought this change at last; and who shall have the glory
of it? God shall have the glory of it; for his own works will praise him. What
men do, many times they do for their own praise; but when they are at their
wits end, and know not what to do, they cast themselves upon their Maker, to
see if he will have mercy upon them; if not, they must perish: Then for what he
does, he gets the glory and the praise of it.

There are some here, that are bound to praise God while they have a day to
live, for what he has done for them. They could never have loved God with all
their hearts; but they would have continued strangers to God, and the Devil
would have led them captive at his will. They would not have loved God with all
their hearts, had not God first shed abroad his love upon their hearts, and
constrained them to love him: It is he that has first loved them, and wrought
in them, both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure. Whatsoever we are,
we are by the grace of God; this grace is magnified in them that believe and
obey the gospel.

My friends, we know there is so much peace and pleasure in the ways of God; so
much soul-satisfaction in walking with God, and loving of him with all our
hearts, I should be glad if every one of you were of the same mind, and had
experience of it. We labor diligently for this purpose; and we would set
before you these two things:

First, how we may come to know our miserable stand by nature.

And what a blessed and happy state they are in, that have been converted and
changed; that have been translated out of the kingdom of darkness, into the
kingdom of God's dear Son.

Consider your state by nature is evil; we hope that many of you believe the
report's of the gospel, concerning the goodness of the Lord, his great love in
sending his Son into the world, to seek and to save you that were lost, and
that you believe in him. And we are persuaded, that by the foolishness of
preaching God will save some of you, that you may be his redeemed ones, and
trust to no other Savior: For there is not any other name under Heaven, but
the name of Jesus, by which we can be saved. He only can take away the sins of
the world; his spirit searches the heart, and tries the reins, which he
promised to send into the world when he was about leaving of it. Now I dare
proclaim that Holy Spirit to be the Spirit of the God of Heaven, that now sees
what resolution thou art of, and what thou art now proposing to do; whether to
go on in sin, or to return to God. This I can speak without blasphemy, it is
God's Spirit that searches the heart, and knows thy thoughts and purposes,
and convinces thee of thy sin: God has sent his Son Christ Jesus into the
world to enlighten you, that by his light you may see him; and that by his
grace you might receive him; and that by his grace you might be saved.

To him I commit you all, and these words that we have spoken in the evidence
and demonstration of the spirit, according as he has wrought in us.

I must tell you we were never called of God to study Sermons for you, nor to
preach things that are made ready to our hands; but as the Lord our God has
wrought in us, and as God has been pleased to make known his mind to us, and
by his Spirit given us utterance, so we speak, and so we preach. You that are
come to believe and receive the things of the Spirit, you will judge what I
say. I speak unto you that are spiritual; judge ye what I say, says the
apostle. So when I speak of divine and heavenly things, you that are spiritual,
judge what I say? And as you come to judge and determine in yourselves that
these things are true, you will feel the power of them in your own spirits, and
we shall all be of the same mind; and as we have one God, we shall serve him in
sincerity, and worship him with reverence. Then his name shall be exalted in
the midst of us, and we shall edify one another in love, and we shall instruct
one another, and call upon one another; come, let us go to the house of the God
of Jacob, he will teach us, and preserve us in his way, and do us good, and
keep us from all evil.

Turn your minds inward, and consider that God is a God at hand, ready to help
you; and he requires no more of you than of other people in former times, to
love the Lord with all your hearts, and to abstract and withdraw your mind from
all other things that do come in competition with him; and be sure to have no
trust or dependence but upon him; then see what God will do for you: No tongue
can express, nor pen write; neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive, the things that God has prepared for those that love him. That
wisdom and knowledge, that joy and peace, and consolation, that passes all
understanding, he will reveal and communicate by his spirit to them that love
him, and trust in him, and rely upon him, and receive teaching from him; he
will feed them with food in due season; he will bring the former and the latter
rain, and they shall be as trees planted by the rivers of water, and bring
forth fruit in due season; and their leaf shall not fade or wither.

This has been London's wonder, and England's wonder, how it comes to pass,
that such a people's leaf has not withered, nor faded, as many have done: Our
root was by a river; if we had stood in ourselves; if our dependence and
support had been upon doctrines, tenets, and commandments of men, then our leaf
would have been upon the ground as well as others; but because we have been
upon our root, Christ Jesus, that is always green, both in summer and winter,
therefore our leaf has not withered; to the praise of God, and to the honor
of his name, be it spoken: He has preserved us, for we have no power of
ourselves, no more than others; but we trust in God, and have received power
from God, to stand as witnesses for him; we have trusted in the Lord, and he
has stood by us, and delivered us, when we were compassed about with dangers
and distresses; if we continue to trust in him still, he will bring us through
all our trials and troubles, and he will be with us, and never leave us nor
forsake us; if we take him for our God, we shall never need any other.

We read that Senacherib, king of Assyria, sent Rabshekah to Jerusalem to
Hezekiah, with a great army, saying, what confidence is this wherein thou
trustest? And he spoke also to the people, and cried with a loud voice, hear
you the word of the great king of Assyria; let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he
shall not be able to deliver you; neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the
Lord, saying, the Lord will deliver us. Hezekiah went and prayed to the Lord,
saying, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, that dwell between the Cherubims,
thou art the God, the God alone of all the kingdoms of the earth; thou have
made Heaven and earth; incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O
Lord, and see and hear all the words of Senacherib, which he has sent to
reproach the living God, etc. And we read, that after he had presented his
supplication before the Lord, the angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the
camp of the Assyrians, one hundred four score and five thousand; and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpse.

Thus you see what came of it at last; and thus it has been in our day; they
that trust in the Lord, he will deliver them, and they shall never be ashamed
nor confounded; but as for all other Gods, they that trust in them, shall be
confounded and covered with shame, and they and their Gods will perish together.

And now, my friends, I beseech you all to have respect to this great duty of
putting your whole trust in the Lord, who is the living God, and he will be
always present with you, and work in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure; he will support and preserve you in all your trials and sufferings,
that you may be vessels of honor, to bear his name in the earth, and so sound
forth his praise to the following generations.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST glorious, infinite, Powerful Father! who have created us, and given us
life and breath, and lengthened out our time to this day, and have long waited
to be gracious to us, and art still waiting upon the sons and daughters of men,
holding forth the hand of thy love, and offering thy grace and tendering
salvation unto them, and have brought a day of visitation upon the inhabitants
of this city and nation.

Glory, praise and thanksgiving be to thee, O Lord! that by thy power, thou
have inclined the hearts and consciences of the sons and daughters of men, to
submit to thee, and bow their necks to the blessed and easy yoke of thy Son
Jesus Christ, that they may do thy will on earth, as it is done in Heaven. They
that are traveling, and distressed, and afflicted in their souls because of
their bondage, do thou arise, living Father, and reveal, and discover thy power
to them; show them the exceeding greatness of thy power, that they may trust
therein, and be safe; make bare thine arm for their salvation. Those that are
slumbering in their profession, let them be awakened; and bring to thine
heavenly kingdom, those that have passed through thy refining fire, and whom
thou have cleansed and sanctified.

Powerful Father of Life! carry on thy work among thy people every where:
Gather them that are scattered, and bring back to thyself, those that are
wandering and out of the way, and seeking the living among the dead. Lord,
teach them and let them hear a voice behind them, and guide them to the holy
mountain; that they may be brought to the path of life, and to the place which
thou have provided for thy little flock to meet and feed together, offering
unanimously the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, which thou have ordained
and appointed in thine house.

Blessed and powerful Father! all thy little ones be pleased to surround with
thine Almighty Power; and wherever they are, let them feel thy preserving hand,
delivering them from the evil of the world: We pray not that thou should
take them out of the world, but to preserve them from the defilements and
pollutions of it: That holy people may serve thee the holy God, and bear thy
holy name upon their hearts; that so it may be exalted and magnified above all,
and humble thanksgivings and praises may be given unto thee, through Jesus
Christ, for all thy love thou have manifested, and for thy abounding mercies,
and renewed favors which we have received at thy hands.

To thee, living Father, through Jesus Christ, thy well-beloved Son, in whom
thou art well pleased, be all honor, praise and dominion rendered by us, and
all the people, from henceforth, and forever. Amen.

SERMON IV. The STANDARD of TRUTH.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, May 29, 1692.
THERE is a universal standard of truth, that God has set up over all the sons
and daughters of men; he has given the knowledge of it in, and through Jesus
Christ; he has dealt it out to them, that they may be capable of joining and
adhering to the truth, and to be delivered from eternal condemnation. This
standard and measuring-rule is revealed and manifested in every man and woman,
by the light that shines in their hearts, by which they are able to discern,
and to give a sound and true judgment, (if they are but willing) upon all their
own ways. A man or woman may know in every word they speak, in every action
they do, whether they speak, and do, according to the truth, or whether they
are justified by the truth, in what they speak and do.

I tell you, my friends, this is no small mercy, that mankind has obtained at
the hand of his Maker, that he is brought into a capacity of not acting
blindfold, but that he may see his way, and his own inclinations, and pass
judgment upon them, whether they are good or evil? Whether they will stand
justified in the sight of his Maker, or whether they will be condemned.

I confess, the veil of ignorance, that is come over the sons and daughters of
men, through sin, transgression and rebellion, is very great. And I may say, as
the apostle said, sometime you were darkness: And what can darkness see? what
can darkness discover? The Lord our God, that made us, has not left us in that
state of darkness, blindness and ignorance; but through the riches of his mercy
and goodness, has found out a way, to command that light should shine out of
darkness, into people's hearts, for all that the Devil did to darken man, to
alienate and estrange him from his Maker.

The same Almighty Power, that said in the creation, let there be light, and it
was so; he has shined into our hearts; and the way by which he has done so,
is through the Mediator, through Jesus Christ the Redeemer, in whom the fullness
of the Godhead dwells. He has received power from his Father, not only to by
a light and salvation, but to impart and communicate of that divine light unto
them, even unto every one that comes into the world; that so by means thereof,
they may be delivered from their darkness, and ignorance of the mind of God,
that they were liable to in the fall, and might be restored, through the
Mediator, to a capacity of judging of their own actions, and of their own
words, and ways, and inclinations.

This is the standard which God has pitched in every one of our bosoms, for
the trial of ourselves, either for our justification, or condemnation, of every
word and action.

Now, to make every one sensible of the greatness of this blessing, consider,
it is not only given to augment and increase knowledge, but it is given on
purpose to allure and persuade men into a liking of truth, into a love of
truth: The apostle esteemed it a wonderful mercy that came by Christ; he has
sent him to bless us, in turning every one of us from the evil of his ways: So
that here is a capacity that the sons and daughters of men have, through the
Mediator, of being turned from the evil of their ways and doings, to that which
is well-pleasing to God.

The next work, after God has wrought thus mercifully for the sons and
daughters of men, is, that they would be good to themselves, and merciful to
themselves, and take pity of themselves, by a due improvement of the grace, and
mercy, and kindness of God, that he has bestowed freely upon them; and in
bringing all their deeds to that standard, all their words and actions to that
rule; that so whatsoever they may be, or how many soever, if they do not answer
that standard and rule, they may deny, withstand and resist them, that so they
may keep out of condemnation: For the apostle declares it plainly without
scruple, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus: If he had
said to them that profess Christ Jesus, there had been a large latitude,
especially for those nations; but the words are limited, and you will find them
so; that is, to them that are in Christ Jesus; and (as if he should say) that
you may know rightly what I mean; I mean, such as walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. They that are in Christ, walk after his Spirit; for, they
that walk not after the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; but they that are
his, walk after the spirit the spirit of truth, and there is no condemnation to
them.

It is not only the scriptures that ratify and confirm this doctrine, but you
yourselves are all living witnesses of the truth of this, that so far as you do
act and speak in obedience to the principle of truth, that God has planted in
you, you feel no condemnation upon you: Such a thing I did at such a time, and
I had no condemnation: Why so? because I did it in obedience, and subjection to
that measure of grace that God set up in me; and such a thing I did, for which
I was condemned: Why so? because I did it according to the inclinations of my
own corrupt mind, and in contradiction to the truth that opened in me.

My friends, I would have you in point of the doctrine of christianity, to be
the better for what you read and hear: It is possible for me to preach the
truth, and you may believe what I say, and you may read the Holy Scriptures,
and have the belief of what you read; but if you come to a sensible feeling of
the fulfilling of things you hear, you will give a greater seal to the truth of
the doctrine, than by all you have read and heard; and you will grow wise to
salvation, by trying and experiencing the effect of every thing you understand;
and not like the carnal men of this world, that have not faith, that mind only
their worldly profits and pleasures, such are earthly, sensual and devilish;
but I would judge of actions and words, according to truth, and according to
the effect I find in me. I did such a thing, and I had peace in the doing of
it; I feel no reproach, no condemnation upon me. Here is a way for people to
grow up in the life of christianity; to keep to the standard of truth; for
whether men will or no, they must do it at last, and may now, if they please,
make a trial of their words and actions.

As for the most part of you, you are got past Pilate: Pilate could make that
enquiry; what is truth? says he: And I confess, it is not long ago, it is
within the memory of man, that a more serious and better sort of people were so
confounded with the darkness and ignorance of those times, that they were ready
to cry out, what is truth? and where is truth? Their eyes were so blinded, and
things were so jumbled and confused by the disputations that men raised, that
made things so dark people could not see their way: But God who has commanded
the light to shine out of darkness, has brought a glorious day; has
dissipated, and scattered, and driven away a great deal of that fog and mist,
that did overspread men's minds. As many as have sincerely sought the truth in
the inward parts, they have found a divine principle of truth, that has a
self-evidencing quality in itself, to convince the minds and consciences of the
sons and daughters of men, that it is the truth: And to this the Lord has
brought most of you, to be sensible of something that is truth in itself. There
are many things that are true in the words of them; many true expressions; but
there is truth in itself, the essential truth of God, which, as it is in God,
is everlasting and eternal, and will stand over all error, and falsehood, and
deceit: The truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, is a standard and rule for men to
act by; he has given it to the sons and daughters of men; and as it appears in
them, it is either a Judge to condemn them, or a Savior to save them from
their sins, and to justify them.

Now, that which concerns us, is to find out the measure of truth, or
manifestation, or principle of truth, which it has pleased God to reveal in
ourselves: And whosoever will turn their minds a little while inward, into the
serious search and consideration, how the Lord has dealt with them, they will
find they are not quite destitute of truth. One that makes it his practice to
lie, cheat and cozen, is not utterly destitute of truth; for there is a
principle of truth in him, that does check and reprove him for his theft, lying
and falsehood, and he lives under condemnation himself. He cannot draw near to
the God of truth upon any occasion, but his lying and falsehood stand in his
way. Now, if so be, that this liar be made sensible of a principle of truth in
him, and do but bring his words and actions to the truth, so much of it as he
knows will make him leave lying and deceiving, and to practice truth to escape
condemnation; if he will but leave lying and falsehood, and live in the truth,
and speak the truth to his neighbor, he will find another state, condition and
frame in his soul, than there was before: He is now more at peace, And has a
clear and serene way, to come to God by prayer, and for pouring out his
supplication, which he had not before; for he had barred up his own way by his
sin, which lay continually at his door; if thou do not well, sin lies at thy
door, says God to Cain: So, when you do evil, you cannot but know it; when you
are drunk, or swear or tell a lie, and deceive your neighbor, and carry on the
design of sinful profit, thou know it, whether men know it or no, and God
that made thee knows it; and there thy sin lies at the door, and blocks and
bars thee out, that thou can not offer thy prayers to God with that
clearness, as if thou had spoken the truth: So that it highly concerns every
one of us, to be waiting upon God, for the discovery of his truth to us; and
then we must embrace, adhere and join to the truth, as our chiefest good.

But some will say, this adhering and joining to the truth, is a hard lesson:
It is pretty easy to find out a principle of truth, that stands against, and
opposes all manner of evil: Very few, now adays, will deny a settled
principle of truth in all men, that judges falsehood, and condemns deceit,
and witnesses against it in others, and in themselves: But this same joining,
and adhering to it, that cannot be done, without a cross to a carnal mind.

Now, if the cross of Christ be not taken up, there is no good Christianity
among us; where this is neglected, it spots and stains the profession of
Christianity, because it is so directly opposite to the doctrine of Christ; he
that will be my disciple, must; it is not, he may if he will; but, he must take
up the cross of Christ, and follow HIM. There were a sort of people, that were
never like to be made Christians, that would be exempt from taking up a daily
cross; therefore he presses it upon them to deny themselves, and take up his
cross and follow him. No man is like to live a Christian life, without taking
up a daily cross.

This I cannot do, says one; I know how to carry myself among Christians with
seriousness, sobriety and watchfulness, without shaming any profession; but I
cannot deny myself, I cannot contradict my own will: This is that which keeps a
man from leading a Christian life, when he cannot deny himself, and take up his
daily cross.

Now, it is come to this now adays, when a light is broken forth, and men have
a principle of truth in their own hearts, it comes to this; says one, I ought
to be holy in all manner of conversation, and to be watchful over my words, and
have my conversation honest and just without deceit: See what a deal I know,
yet I can never live this life, for all I know it so well; I cannot take up a
daily cross, which is so much against the contrary inclinations working in me;
then the question I put to myself is, shall I take up a cross or no?

Here it comes to the point with every man* or woman, after they come to the
knowledge of this standard of truth: If the world would but come to this rule
and standard, there would be no more cheating nor cozening, no more fraud,
deceit nor dissimulation, nor war and bloodshed; but if men would, in every
thing they doy answer the principle of truth in themselves, they would put the
question to themselves, shall I take up my daily cross, or no? Shall I deny
myself those pleasures that my conscience does condemn; and those ungodly gains
that I seek after by falsehood, by lying, prevaricating and departing from the
truth? Shall I do this, that I may be rich and great in the world, or shall I
not?

You know what I say, many of you, and have put this question to yourselves,
and some have made a good answer to it: I will take up my daily cross, by the
grace of God; this standard of truth shall be the rule of my words and actions,
to my dying-day.

They that have learned this lesson, and obtained peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, that have not only made a resolution, but performed it in
act and deed, by the power of Christ's cross, they are purified, and
sanctified, and washed from their old conversations, and have their
conversation in Heaven; that is, live after a heavenly manner, live a godly
life here upon earth, when they have come to this resolution, and also the
practice of it.

I would desire, and it is my labor, that you that hear me this day, who are
aware of what I am speaking, viz. The STANDARD of TRUTH, the principle of
Truth, that unerring Guide, which is placed in the conscience of every man, and
justifies, or condemns, his actions and words. You who are come to be aware
of this, that you may all come to this godly resolution in yourselves, I would
have this dispute carried on in every one's bosom. When the question is stated,
I would have you really answer it; shall I guide my actions and words according
to this unerring rule, or no? I cannot tell what to say, say some, there is
danger in it: What danger can there be to answer that which a man knows to be
truth? I will tell you what danger: The world is perverse, and most men live
out of truth, and the Devil is a cunning adversary, and he would have none live
in it: He abode not in the truth; and he would not have us live in it, nor
regulate our words and actions by the truth in our own souls: What if most men
in the world pervert the truth? What if so few walk in the narrow way, and so
few come to life eternal; is that an argument that I must not come there?
Should it not stir me up to greater diligence, that by any means I may be of
the number of that few that shall obtain salvation, and not go with a great
company in the way that leads to destruction? If we improve our times, and
seasons, and opportunities, and mercies, and blessings, that are vouchsafed to
us, we at last may obtain life eternal.

But some may say, I must sit down in despair, for I cannot come thither of
myself, though I do what I can to work out my own salvation. There is a decree
against me; what, though I should pray ever so much, and spend my nights in grief
and sorrow? If I be decreed to eternal damnation, there is no help for me, no
hope that I should escape. And if I be decreed to salvation, though I take my
liberty to sin, and be loose and wanton, as others, it cannot hinder me from
attaining salvation at last.

For this reason, many have laid aside the spiritual warfare against
corruption, and their spiritual travel, that they will do nothing in order to
their everlasting happiness; therefore they think they had as good take their
pleasure: But, my friends, the case is not now so with us; let every soul among
us praise the Lord for his mercy, in expelling that thick cloud of darkness,
which is vanished and gone: This I know, and I hope you do all believe, that
God does every where, and in every nation, call sinners to repentance, and that
he delights not in the death of him that dies, but rather that they would
turn and live; and in order thereunto, he has given his Son, Jesus Christ, to
be a Savior and a Mediator; and he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
our hearts, to give direction to us in our way: Now our duty is, to make
improvement of those visitations of mercy, that God has bestowed upon us, in
order to our salvation, and not live in rioting and drunkenness, chambering and
wantonness, strife and envying, and following the fashions of the world: But we
must work out our own salvation with fear and trembling.

But some will say, is not this done already? Is it not already wrought by our
Savior and Mediator? Christ has tasted death for every man, and laid down a
price for the soul of every man.

But yet there must be a change wrought in us; there must be a translation of
our souls, from one state to another. This is called in the scripture,
regeneration, and being born again; this is called a being baptized into
Christ, and described also by other expressions: But the matter is, to change
thy life; for there is a sinful source of wickedness, that is stirred up by the
motions of the powers of darkness, and our own concupiscence; but God is always
ready to bring us under the government of his Holy Spirit, that will lead us
into all truth; and this cannot be done without a Cross. But the question lies
here, shall I take up this Cross or no? If I do, it will crucify me to the
world. Let me see; how much do I love the world? A great deal: But do I love
the world better than my own soul? What will it profit me, to gain the whole
world, and lose my own soul? Or what shall I give in exchange for my soul? I
cannot get to Heaven without denying myself; let me take care of my immortal
soul: I am a poor creature; I will serve the Lord my Maker, and make it my
business to glorify and please him. He can snatch me away by death when he
pleases; therefore will I labor, that my thoughts, words, actions and
conversation, may answer to that rule that he has set before me, as a standard
of truth, to square and regulate my actions by. I will not live any longer in
vanity, as many do; I do not know but my breath may be stopped today, before
tomorrow; therefore today, while it is called today, I will hear God's
voice, and not harden my heart, but receive that counsel, that is offered to
me, for the benefit of my soul. I am bought with a price, I am none of my own;
I will live to him that died for me: I have more reason to live to Christ, and
serve him, that shed his precious blood for the redemption of my soul, and to
be subject to him, than to be subject to Christ's enemy, to the prince of the
power of the air, who rules in the children of disobedience. I will take up a
resolution to serve God, but I can do nothing of myself; but the grace of God
which brings salvation, will teach me to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live righteously, soberly and godly, in this present world. Take heed of
being deceived and beguiled, for there is no way will bring you to Heaven, but
a holy and undefiled way.

Therefore, come and take this, standard of truth in your hands, to guide you
in your way, that you may neither turn to the right hand, nor to the left: This
will show you the way you should walk in, and be like the cloud and pillar of
fire to the Israelites, in their journey to Canaan, which was a type of Heaven;
the cloud they could see by day, and the pillar of fire by night; so this
standard of truth will direct you in your travel to the heavenly Canaan. Let
this be the rule and measure of your thoughts, words and actions.

If a workman, that is a builder, has a rule to work by; if he goes on, and
never examines his work by his rule, but makes his eye his rule; if he does not
bring his rule to his work every little while, to see whether his Work be
right; if he works on, and never minds his rule, what sad work will he make.
But a prudent skilful workman will say, I will not trust mine eye too much, but
I will look to my rule, my rule will not fail me; if there be bad work, it will
discover it to me, that I may mend it before I go any further. Thus a discreet
workman will often bring his rule to his work, and use his line and plummet,
that he may make it workmanlike. He will say, if I let my rule alone, and not
make use of it, but work as I please, and trust to mine eye, no wonder if I
make bad work, and what I build fall down again, and tumble about mine ears.

You to whom God has given the standard of truth, as a rule and measure to
govern your thoughts, words and actions by, let every thing be tried with it,
before you die, and leave this world: If you do so, and make this your daily
practice, then ask yourselves, and you will be able to tell yourselves, and
tell me, and say, I have now obtained more hopes of God's favor, and a greater
sense of his love and goodness to me, than ever I had before. The apostle does
exhort us, to walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time. We have spent a great deal of time in vain, let us now be wise, and
improve our time, for our eternal advantage; let us walk circumspectly, that
is, look round about us, consider our ways, and try all our thoughts, words and
actions, by the standard of truth. Today (my friends) while it is called
today, hear the voice of God, and harden not your hearts, and receive that
heavenly counsel, that is tendered to you, that you may be partakers of the
inheritance, among the saints in light.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
BLESSED and eternal Father! thou have brought forth thy glorious name, and
revealed thy power and thy mighty arm; and thou have caused a remnant to bow
and worship at thy appearance: Thou art wonderful; thy majesty is great; they
that do behold thee, will, with reverence, worship before thee. Thy power is
gone forth, and has reached the hearts of thy people; thou have humbled them,
and subjected them to thy Divine, Almighty Power, that they might appear in the
earth, to the praise and glory of thy great name.

And, O Lord, as thou have begun a great work in the earth, so thou have
committed this work to thy servants and children, that bear thy name among the
sons of men, that they should show forth thy righteousness, among the
inhabitants of the earth; and our souls have said many a time, who is
sufficient for these things? All our fitness and sufficiency, our meetness and
preparation is from thee: Do thou reveal thy power, and make bare thy Almighty
arm. We have found thy presence from day to day, and thou have upheld them that
know thy love.

O glorious God of Life! herein we have encouragement to go on in the work
which thou have called us to; hereby we are enabled to worship before thee, and
to offer up living praises unto thy great name, for that refreshment and
consolation, which thou have ministered unto thy people.

And, O Living Father! we have never waited on thee in vain; whenever we have
met together in thy name, we have found thy Divine Presence, and the opening of
the treasures of thy love, of thy wisdom, and of thy favor to thy children: So
that from day to day, and even at this day, thou rememberest thy people, and
thou give them fresh occasion to draw nigh to thee, and receive their daily
nourishment and strength, from the operation of thy power.

O living God of Life! gather up the hearts of thy people more and more, and
draw them into a nearness to thyself, that their understandings may be more
and, more opened to discern thy will, and subject themselves to thy wisdom,
that every thought that is exalted against thy divine power, and living voice,
in their own consciences, may be brought down; that so all the nations of the
earth may bow before thee; that so thy truth may reign, and thy power may be
exalted, and the righteousness which thou have revealed, may shine forth more
and more, in the brightness and glory of it, and enlighten those that are afar
off, that they may be brought to seek after God.

And, Living God of Life! let those that are bowed down under the weigh of sin,
be supported and raised up; and those that are weary and heavy laden, let them
have rest to their souls.

Powerful God of Life! keep thy people in a fresh and living sense of thy love,
and of thy heavenly virtue, by which thou nourishest thy children, and
satisfiest them from day to day; not only when they are met together, but when
they are separated from one another. Let thy people be preserved from the evil
of the world, while they are in it, and let thy wisdom and power give them
victory over it, that thou may have the glory of all thy mercies and
blessings, vouchsafed to them. For thou alone art worthy, who art God over all,
blessed forever, and ever. Amen.

SERMON V. The GREAT DUTY of REMEMBERING our CREATOR.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, April 6, 1692.
THERE is only one living and true God, Creator of Heaven and earth, whom we
are obliged to serve and worship: I have so much charity as to believe, there
are none among us, but will own and acknowledge this: And my soul wishes, that
this obligation did always rest upon every one's mind, that they might remember
their Creator, that has given us all life and breath, and continued all our
blessings to us; that so every one might apply their hearts unto that universal
duty, that we are all convinced of.

And they that are thus employed and exercised, they are considering how, and
after what manner, they may quit and discharge their duty, and perform the
obligation that lies upon them, so that it may be accepted at the hands of God;
I speak now of those that are considerate, not of those that go on in a form of
religion, and matter not, nor regard whether they are accepted of God or no;
but all that are conscientious toward God, they are desirous to serve God, and
worship him, so as they may be acceptable to him, so to perform duties that
they may receive their reward, and that encouragement that God in all ages has
discovered, and made manifest to be in his purpose toward them that truly
serve him.

When people come to this consideration, how they may serve God aright, and
worship him acceptably, the Lord is high unto them, to instruct them, to teach
them, and guide them in that way that is everlasting: And, blessed be his holy
name! a great many in our days, have met with this divine teaching and
instruction; and are taught in this age, as in former ages, to understand the
worship of God that he requires; that is, in spirit and truth; and do find,
that the Father does seek such worshippers, and where he finds them, rewards
them, and they have an answer of peace in their bosoms, and they are encouraged
to go on in the worship and service of God, to the end of their days.

And it is a great mercy and benefit; a great blessing that God has bestowed
upon a remnant, to open their understandings, to let them see and know the way
of being near to God, that so they may know whom they worship; for you have
read, there have been worshippers, that do worship they know not what: As our
Savior said to the woman of Samaria, you worship you know not what; we know
what we worship: So all that are taught of God, do know which is the first
lesson of Christianity, as the apostle says; he that comes to God, must first
know and believe, that he is; that is, people must first be sensible, that
there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
before they can rightly worship him.

Now, for want of this knowledge, the world is scattered, and people are
divided into a great many sorts of worships, and fashions, and ways of
religions, for want of the knowledge of the true worship, of the true and
living God; so that though men are universally convinced, that there is a God,
and that a worship is due to him from every one of us; yet people are
confounded, scattered, and divided about the performance of their great duty;
and in the day that the Lord has visited his people, he has come to answer
this doubt, and question for them; it has been the great question of the
world, and is still of many thousands; I know we should worship God, but I know
not the way and manner wherein to find acceptance: The Lord has answered that
question in abundance; they that have ears to hear, let them hear what the
Spirit says; there is a short answer to it in all.

Let people profess what religion they will, there is no acceptance with God,
but through Christ: So that if people come to be of this, and that, and the
other profession, and change their religion ever so often, and go from one
religion to another, if they come not to Christ, they come not to him in whom
they may find acceptance; in him God is pleased with every one; but out of him
he is pleased with no one. The great mystery of religion lies in Christ; people
must come to God, by faith in him; for without faith, it is impossible to
please God. Let people perform ever so much service and duties, all must pass
through the hand of the Mediator, before ever their performance will reach unto
God, or before peace and comfort will reach to any man's soul. Therefore, it is
the wisest way for every one, that would have acceptance with God, to come to
him, in the name of the great Mediator. People would be glad to have acceptance
with God, and not to have their services turned back upon them, as Cain's was:
Now, every one that will have acceptance with God, must come this way; there is
but one way, it is not the way that men have invented; some by their works and
merits, some by their made-faiths, and made-beliefs, and by diverse articles and
principles, holding this principle, and the other principle; but our Lord and
Creator, he has sound out one way, in his infinite wisdom, and unspeakable
mercy to mankind, that was forever lost, and could never return to God, by all
his sacrifices, offerings and performances; he was never able to return into
unity with his Maker, if God had not sound out a way; and the way that God has
found out, is by his beloved Son Christ Jesus: God spared not: He spared not
what? He spared not his only begotten Son: Why, what did he do with him? He
gave him for the life of the world; in him that God gave, there is life. It
pleased the Lord that his Son should have life in him, as the Father had life
in himself; for Christ was with the Father before the world began; in him was
life, and the life was the light of men; John i. 4. It was no created life;
that life that is in his Son, is not a created life, but is an eternal life,
and it was given for the life of the world, and that life is the light of men:
This is the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world. So
that here is the dignity of that life which God has bestowed upon us; we are
endued with that life, which was with the Father through Jesus Christ, before
the world was. Let us consider the dignity of that light, that we are lighted
with.

The question is, whether we should obey this light, or no: It is the question
of every one; I am enlightened, says a man, shall I obey it, or no? If I obey,
I must take up a cross, and part with my beloved lust and corruption. No doubt
of that; we must persuade people to do that, before we can bring them to Heaven
and happiness, and fellowship with God; it must not be by that way they lost
it, but by the contrary way, by which God will bring men to happiness again.
They lost it by transgression, and sinning against God; by this way and means
men came out of the presence and favor of God; but what way shall they obtain
it again? Shall it be by committing iniquity, and breaking God's law? No; here
is the way that God has found out, to bring poor man back again to himself, by
the sufferings and obedience of his Son, Jesus Christ: He has given to him all
power in Heaven and Earth, that all should be subject to him; here is a dignity
which Christ has obtained.

It comes to the question with us, whether we are enlightened? now we know we
are enlightened; God has bestowed something upon us, that wars and fights
against sin and iniquity. How came we by it? Is it any faculty in nature? No;
nature is corrupted and defiled, because the carnal mind is enmity against God;
for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be; yet there is
something in me that answers the pure law of God, which makes me to hate things
that are reprovable; that is, light: How came I by it? It is not natural; for
then it would run parallel with the natural inclination that is in my soul, to
lead me further and further from God. These are set in opposition one against
another, the flesh and the spirit; the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh. Here is part of an inward war, that you may all
be sensible of. Now, these two warriors, the flesh and the spirit, make war one
against another, and one of them is overcome. It is true, there is such a
principle in me, that strives against sin and corruption: How came you by it?
If you believe the scriptures, I say, it is the life of the Son of God, that
lights every man that comes into the world. Now, many that have rejected and
despised the light, I believe they did not think, at the same time, to mock and
make a scorn of the life of Jesus, though it was really so: But if people come to
a true esteem and value of that light that God has planted in the soul, they
will give more reverence and respect to it. It is this that brings those that
preach Christ, to preach him in those terms, and under those denominations,that
he is nigh them.

We do not doubt of Christ's being born of a Virgin, in the land of Canaan, and
that he wrought miracles, and preached many godly sermons, and that he was
crucified, dead and buried, and rose again from the dead, for these things are
certainly true: But we would have him our Savior in this age, we would have a
nearer knowledge of him, and a sense and feeling of the virtue of that power,
by which he saved them that lived in former ages: He is not a Christ and a
Savior of one age only, but of all ages to this day; from Adam, to the last
man that shall live upon the earth. That age and generation that knows not
Christ, will not be saved by him, if there be any age wherein he is not known:
There is no other name under Heaven by which you can be saved. If you ask where
is this Savior? Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? that is,
to bring down Christ from above; or, who shall descend into the deep, that is
to bring up Christ again from the dead? The word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart; that is the word of faith, which we preach. He is nigh
thy soul, he is the Lord of life, and a quickening Spirit, if I know that
quickening Spirit, after this I know the Lord Christ; when he comes to work in
me by his power, changing my heart, and translating me from death to life, then
I know the true Christ: God has manifested, in all ages, that it is the duty
of people to come to the knowledge of the Son of God; for he has sent forth
his Spirit to teach us, and to lead us into all truth.

For when Christ was with, his disciples, he told them that he would pray the
Father, and he should send the Spirit, the comforter; and when he came, he
would be known by his divine and inward teachings and operations, guiding and
leading them into all truth; that was his work to them: But what shall other
folks do? He will be made known to others too: When he comes, he shall convince
the world of sin: So that his work to his disciples was, to lead them into all
truth; and his work to the world is, to convince the world of sin: Who will
deny, but that there is a Spirit in our age, as well as in other ages, that
will convince men of sin? Is this the Spirit of God, that convinces the world
of sin, or is it the spirit of the QUAKERS only? When people come to consider
really and truly, how they may serve God aright, they will find there is no
serving God aright, unless they come to Christ the Mediator, that in and by him
they may put up supplications to God; and through him, they may expect at the
hand of God, peace and comfort; and there is no other way, nor ever will be.

The Jews, they had another way, they had an outward way of serving God; this
stood in diverse offerings, sacrifices, washings and observations; this was a
way of worship of God's own institution to that people; but what came of it?
When the apostle came to grasp it, he said, the comers thereunto, were not made
perfect: What were the transgressors of it then? They that would sin on, and
continue in sin, and not bring a goat, or a ram, or other oblation; they that
did observe it, and came up to the point of the law, they did bring their
offering when they were convinced of their sin: If a man sinned, he was to
bring an he-goat, and to bring it to the door of the tabernacle; but when he
sinned, the conscience of sin, the guilt of sin remained upon him. For it was
impossible, says the apostle, that the blood of bulls and goats should take
away the sin: For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies, to the purifying of the flesh, how much
more shall the blood of Christ (who, through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God) purge your consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God.

When there is no hope of atonement and reconciliation with God, by all those
offerings under the law, he tells you of one offering of the Son of God
himself, through the eternal Spirit, by which he became a propitiation; for
this will do (...) if I believe that Christ offered an holy offering to the
Father for my sins, I believe he offered his body, and that through the eternal
Spirit, that he might be a propitiation for sin, and take away sin, and have
power over sin and death, and conquer death and darkness: The apostle drives
the matter further; you must come to the inward work of this outward offering,
this eternal offering, that was in due time offered to God; you must come to
know the operations of it, by the sprinkling of the heart from an evil
conscience: So that there was to be an applicatory faith for the offering of
that. The way to a Savior was not made by man, no more than the way of
salvation by Christ was found out by man; no more than the application of the
benefit is effected by man.

When it pleases God to call a people by his grace, he calls them by his
Son; not by this and the other form: No man comes to me, says Christ, except
the Father, which has sent me, draw him. The first thing that a man or woman
comes to be aware of, is the secret sense and feeling of the Lord's Divine
Power upon the heart, to feel Christ Jesus; as soon as they feel this, and
embrace it, this is a token of the love or God. I hope all this congregation
will acknowledge, that they have sometimes felt his drawings, and that they
have not embraced and closed with them so well as they ought.

When people are aware of these drawings inwardly to holiness and
righteousness, and are sensible that they should, with care and attention,
close with them, for the good of their poor souls; and that it concerns them to
be happy in the other world that is to come, and therefore resolve to be led by
these drawings of the Spirit of God, these are not weeds that grow in the
fields naturally; these are Sparks of Divine Fire, kindled in the hearts of men
by God himself: No man comes unto God, till God comes to him, and touches him,
and gives him sense and motion: These are the motions and stirrings of God's
Holy Power, in the hearts of many that are wicked and abominable; yet the Lord
does not despise the work of his own hand, but reaches to such.

When the Lord meets with those that despise not, but highly prize this
wonderful grace, and close with it, and are glad of it, such a one faith, I
feared that the Lord had forgotten me, and had passed by me, and had done with
me; but I see he visits me again, and he has visited my soul this day,
inclining me to walk more answerably to his love; he has doubled his power
upon me, and has kindled a holy fire in my heart, and caused me to seek after
him; he has touched my heart, and I will pour out my soul in supplication;
seeing he has touched me, he will take hold of me by his power, and he will
keep me from being any more drawn away: I will live in the sense of his power
and mercy, that keeps me night and day, that I may increase in it, and grow in
grace. When the Lord meets with such a one, he will draw him into the way that
he has appointed: None can come unto me, says Christ, except the Father,
which has sent me, draw him. If I am drawn, into what form shall I go now? and
what ordinance shall I take up now? This is all under feet; this is none of my
work; I will come to Christ the Mediator, and he will take the government and
rule of me: It is not my best way to study a form, and an outside religion; I
will wait upon that power that has thus touched my heart, that he may by
degrees bring me to the obedience of Christ.

But some are ready to say, who, and what is this Christ Jesus that you are
speaking of; that immediate Christ Jesus that is extant and present, that I am
to have to be the object of my faith; that I may believe in him, and come to an
acquaintance with him, that I may partake of the life of Jesus Christ, and have
it communicated to my soul?

We have not a thought, or a word to speak, that may derogate from the
wonderful grace of Christ, who died in his person on earth for the salvation of
our souls: Yet we must know, that the Lord Jesus Christ may be spiritually
present with us, and take the government of us, and we are to be subject to
him: How shall this be? I am speaking of one that has felt the Father's
drawings, when he draws them to his Son, and draws them to something that is
holy and pure: This God the Father has begotten: We read in scripture, that
God has begotten Christ, who is the only begotten of the Father. It is
strange, you will say, to speak of begetting Christ again, God begets Christ
again, that is, spiritually; he being the first born in many brethren, in every
true believer, and there is a travel of soul that Christ may be formed in him.
See what travel of soul the apostle Paul falls into the second time, for the
Galatians. They were a brave people, they worshipped God in Spirit, and believed
in Christ Jesus, and afterward they came to be seduced by false prophets, and
false teachers, that set them about their works, and told them they could not
be justified and saved without their own works: These false teachers that came
among them, were as bad as Popish priests and friars. It is not your obedience
to Christ, and the Spirit, that will save you, you must be doing: So these poor
people were deluded and bewitched; and to give you the apostle's own words,
they were infatuated, and drawn away from the simplicity of the gospel, and
they thought by the works of the law to obtain salvation: The apostle writes a
letter to them, and tells them that he traveled in birth again, till Christ
was formed in them. If this was not scripture, it would look like a strange
work; there must be a forming of Christ, a birth there must be, and a
begetting: Who must beget in this and that moment, but the same that begat from
the beginning? the same is the Father, he begets Christ in all that believe and
obey the gospel. He is begetting something in me that is holy, though I be
unholy; the Father, by the operation of his divine hand, begets something in me
that is holy. This I find, though I am not so good as I should be; I have that
given me, that will tell me, that the more I adhere and join myself in my
desires and affections to this good principle, the more I shall partake of the
quality of it; this good principle, though it be like a little grain of
mustard seed, I cannot tell what to compare it to for littleness, in comparison
of the great lump and mass of sin, corruption and filthiness, that wars against
it; yet this will overspread all that is bad, and make me holy, as that is
holy; pure as that is pure, and to have a love for him, from whom it came, even
to Christ and God; it will gather the affections from corruptible things, and
place them upon things above.

This faith tells people that it is the substance of things hope for, and the
evidence of things not seen; such a one live by faith, such a one that comes to
be joined to that, that is begotten of the father, he lives by the faith of the
Son of God, and can do nothing of himself, but through Christ that strengthens
him; he says unto God, I perceive I can do nothing without thee; I cannot pray
unto thee, nor serve thee; of myself I can do nothing acceptably, but through
Christ the Mediator; such a one becomes like a little child, and he must be
led; and who must lead him, but the Spirit of Christ?

You cannot preach, says one to him, unless you be moved by the Spirit: You
cannot pray until you be moved by the Spirit: How should I? No, without him I
can do nothing, I cannot preach, nor pray, nor do any thing acceptable to God
the Father, but by Christ; and he has revealed him in me.

This is no new doctrine, we see the new and living way; it was an old way to
old Christians, and a new way to the new; and so a thousand years hence, if the
world lasts so long, men will see that they cannot do any thing pleasing to
God, but as they are gathered into Christ; they will see their own
righteousness, works and doings, will avail them nothing at all. This is all
laid at the feet of Jesus, whom God has exalted to be a Prince and a Savior,
to be Lord and King.

Now, my friends, we are engaged in this age, abundantly engaged, to offer
thanks to God, through Jesus Christ, that he has provided and opened a way for
the sending forth the Spirit of his Son: And that God has gathered a people,
and has made known to them the way of life, that they might walk in it; but
there is no walking in it, but through a daily cross, and self-denial. It is
not likely that a man should be brought back to God the same way that he went
out from God; and the prophets and apostles do allude to this turning to God;
when thou turnest aside to the right hand or to the left, thou shall hear a
voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it. There is a voice, that
calls to people in our days, to look behind them, for they are out of the way.
This prophecy is fulfilled in our day; we cannot turn away from the good ways
of God, but we may hear a voice behind us, saying, thou art sinning against
God, and breaking the holy law of God, Now, if people return, it must be by the
cross: I will not return to God, says one; I have pleasure, profit, and
honor, and whatsoever my heart can desire, in this evil way that I am walking
in; if I return, I shall have nothing but shame and reproach; I shall be undone
and ruined, and I shall lose the favor and friendship of my friends and
relations; I cannot return to God, but through a daily cross, and self-denial:
What then? It is likelier to be the right way, by this bearing the cross.
Christ tells us, if any will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. This voice of Christ calls me to repent and turn from
sin, and gives me a strong argument, that it is true; that it is the same way
that will bring me back to God, by the Mediator. It brings its own evidence
with it; we need no argument to prove that it is a right way; it is a right
way, because it is the narrow way; it is the right gate, because it is the
strait gate. Every body can walk in the broad way with ease, with out any cross.

When people are come thus far, that they are convinced of their duty, when
they are called to amend their lives and conversations, to forsake their lives
and turn to the Lord, this is the great question, have I power to do this? This
question has stumbled a great many, when they have some beginning thoughts of
turning to the Lord; and at last they have settled themselves in a belief that
they cannot do it; it is true, and nothing truer, that men, convinced of their
sins, have not power to leave their sins of themselves; this is true, but not
all the truth; to men that God convinces of sin, he gives them power to be
made willing to forsake their sins. He has given power to all that are in
Christ Jesus, to believe and become the sons of God; then they have denied
ungodliness and worldly lusts, if they be the sons of God, and live
righteously, soberly and godly, in the world.

But what shall they do that are sensible they have not power to forsake their
sin, till God is pleased to give them power? Such have nothing to do but to
wait upon the Lord, for the giving of this power; and there is a duty incumbent
on them then to answer this power. The apostle, upon this subject, tells us
what people are to do for their own conversion. He ascribes the power of
conversion to Christ Jesus: The prophets and apostles, they tell us, there is
something for man to do, that is, if he has not power, he is to be willing to
receive it. The apostle has a notable expression to this purpose; he puts them
in mind, how they used to do by the devil, when they were the devil's servants;
they did obey his commands, and yielded their members servants to
unrighteousness: How did they yield? They did it heartily, with pleasure and
delight. Thus you did when you did not know the power of God; but now you are
come to the knowledge of the power of God, yield not your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield yourselves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
righteousness unto God: Romans vi. 13. Let your minds, and wills, and affections,
be joined to that power which God visited you with; in love to God, give up
your members as servants unto righteousness.

Here is something for man to do in the day of God's visitation; thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power; when they come to that, and
experience that, this shows that they are the people of God: But they that are
not a willing people, are none of God's people, God's people are so; and I pray
God make you all so, to be a people willing to be God's people, when he gives
you power, and it will not be long before he gives you power to forsake your
sins, to forsake this, and the other foolish, proud and vain action and
fashion; he has made Christ Jesus to be Lord and King, and he shall reign over
death; he has made all things by Christ, and he is become the Savior of all
men, but especially of them that believe; so that I would have a special
salvation, and thou would have it too: Christ has made a way, and opened a
door for us to be saved, that we might have an abundant entrance into his
everlasting kingdom: But I would have a special salvation, that would invest me
with the love of God in my heart, before I die; it is to be had through Christ,
therefore to him will I come, to him must every one come, and every knee bow to
his name, and every one must wait for his appearing in the Spirit. When Christ
appears, truth stirs. Now, if a holy, divine life is in thee, it is he; if a
principle of truth stir in thee, it is he: The same Jesus, only in a smaller
manifestation: He that is faithful in a little, he will make him ruler over
much: This is he that God has ordained to be the Captain of our Salvation;
this is that which we preach in his name, and testify and declare to all
people, that there is no other salvation, no deliverance from death and hell,
but by and through him; in him there is a reconciliation, and that peace which
passes all understanding, and power over all those things which have
captivated us, and made us disobey our great Lord and Maker: Let us wait for
the coming of Christ; he is our King, our Lord and Lawgiver, and he will save
us: This was the cry of his people of old, for the glorious and great salvation
he has given, and the work he has wrought. Let the prayers and supplications
of all people, that desire salvation, be put up more and more, that he will
visit the earth, and give power from above, and bring us into that new and
living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say,
his flesh; to whom be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST blessed and glorious Father, and Fountain of Life, and of all living
Blessings! whose glorious day dawneth; by thy power thou have brought the
children of men out of darkness, that they might walk in the light thereof:
Great joy, and strong consolation, have then brought unto thine Israel, unto
the people that thou have gathered by thy arm of power; thou have made them, O
Lord, to take great delight in thy ways; for thou have caused the light of thy
countenance to be lifted up upon us, and thy holy and divine presence has gone
along with us, from time to time, through all those states and conditions, and
through all those trials and exercises that we have met with, and that thou
have led us through.

The right hand of thy power, O Lord! has been with us, and therefore we have
not failed; and thy heavenly blessings have been rained down upon us, that have
made thy heritage to grow and become fruitful, to the honor of thy great name,
and the eternal consolation of our souls.

And, therefore, O heavenly Father! in the consideration and feeling of the
great things thou have wrought for us, and for the continuance of thy love to
us, our souls are always engaged to offer high praises, and humble
thanksgivings to thy great name; and the supplications of our souls, whom thou
have quickened and brought to life, are daily poured forth upon thine altar,
that as thou have hitherto helped us, thy holy and divine presence and power
may still accompany us to the end of our days; and that in all the exercises,
and trials, which thou art pleased we should meet withal, we may find thy
presence with us, that thy eternal, heavenly power may surround us, that so we
may be more than conquerors, through Christ, that has loved us.

And O powerful God of Life! our souls rejoice, and our hearts are made glad to
behold the progress of thy power in our day, how thou have brought down the
mighty from their seats, and have exalted those that are of low degree; how
thou have laid the mountains low, and exalted the inhabitants of the valleys.

O blessed Father of Life and Power! praises, praises wait for thee in Zion;
and dear Father! by the operation of thy wonderful power, preserve and keep thy
children, whom thou have gathered into a living sense of thy presence, that
they may bow before thee, and be exercised in a daily, holy, divine worship
unto thee; that so, powerful God of Life! thou may daily pour down thy
blessings upon us, and delight to manifest thyself to be our God; and let us
live as becomes a people that are gathered unto thee.

O Lord God Eternal! carry on thy great work in the earth, and make known thy
power more and more; there are many breathing-ones, and many that cry to thee
daily. Living Father! it is the operation of thy Spirit that has raised these
breathings, and kindled these desires in them, and it is thou alone who art
able to answer them; therefore, living God and Father, they are committed to
thee; the mourners, the bowed-down, and those that are laden with sin and
iniquity, and that groan under the pressure and burden of it, let their burdens
be taken off, and the yoke of Christ, that easy yoke, be put on, and let none
of thy commandments be grievous to them, that they may be made meet to enter
into thy kingdom; let them be brought through the labor and travel of
regeneration, and let none be exalted into the airy vision and sight of things,
but by thy living power, be rising to eternal life in their souls.

And Lord, we pray thee, fit and prepare all thy people for the work and
service which thou have been pleased to call them to, that so thy name may be
exalted over all, and thy truth spread more and more; and let all error and
darkness be expelled, and let the power and influence of thy name be great in
the earth, that all thy scattered people may be brought home, to reside in thy
house, that there may be unity and concord amongst them, and they may all with
one heart and mind, return, and ascribe praises and honor, and glory to thy
holy name, for all thy blessings, mercies and living refreshments, that we have
received at thy hands, for thou alone art worthy, and God over all, blessed
forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON VI. The DIVINE MONITOR; or, LIGHT from HEAVEN.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, June 19, 1692.
IT is a great privilege to the sons and daughters of men, that it has pleased
God Almighty to open a way, how they may come to the true knowledge of himself.
And O that there was a heart in every one of us, that could rightly prize this
privilege as we ought to do! for in the knowledge of the true God consists our
true happiness; and without this, the mind of no man or woman can be good.
There is nothing seasons the mind and soul of man, and prepares and fits it for
an everlasting well-being, but the divine knowledge of the living God that made
him. And there is a propensity in the soul of man, even since the fall, to
return again to God, and to have that acquaintance and communion with the Lord
that man had before he fell: And they that have regard to that inward spark of
divine love, that they find in their own souls toward God, they will
experience that the Lord is merciful and gracious, and propitious to that which
is of himself

For though the soul is lost, and man is lost through transgression, and a great
alienation has happened between him and his Maker, yet the mercy of the Lord
endures forever; and his kindness and favor to lost man is such, that he
stretches out his hand all the day long, and presents and offers to the
children of men a friendship and acquaintance, and a communion again with him.
And though by sin and transgression, there is a rebellious nature grown up in the
sons and daughters of men, yet the soul of man is not wholly so; there is
something that strives and labors in a contrary way, and persuades the soul to
turn again unto the Lord, and to wait for the knowledge of God; and whosoever
hearkens with care and diligence, to that divine Monitor, that is daily drawing
and persuading people to seek after God, they come to understand, that the Lord
is not so angry with mankind, but his love, and mercy, and good will, reaches
toward all the sons and daughters of men; and the bar that hinders their
communion* with God, and peace with God, it is not in the Lord, but it is in
themselves; and therefore the remedy must be wrought in themselves.

This is evident to every eye, that there is something gotten into mankind,
which the Holy God cannot own, and can never have fellowship with; that is,
another contrary spirit has wrought upon the souls of people, and has seduced
and drawn them out to that which is unholy and contrary to God, and the terms
of God's covenant to mankind, which is, that he should forsake that which the
contrary spirit has wrought. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. Why should he forsake his ways? Because the Lord
never led him into those ways. He that made him, never led him into them; but
the devil, the enemy of mankind, seduced him into those ways; therefore the
Creator cries out to him, let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous
man his thoughts; I cannot have union with him, as long as he walks in his evil
ways; I cannot dwell in his mind, so long as evil thoughts are in it: So may
the Lord complain of the works which the devil has wrought, that man is
carried away from God, by his evil thoughts, and the works of the devil.

Why does not God destroy those works, when he is Almighty, and able to do it?
Very true, God is so; but he has offered to mankind, through the son of his
love, a way and means, how man may come to be purged, and cleansed from the
evil that the devil has wrought in him, and how he may come to be reconciled
to God: God has not chosen the way of coercion and force, and to work
altogether by irresistible power, that man shall go to Heaven whether he will
or no: There was no force used for his going to hell and darkness, but it was
the choice of his will: The devil could not have forced him, and led him away
out of covenant with God, he could not compel him to break the holy command of
God; but the devil tempted him, and he yielded to the temptation, and now man
is driven out of the presence of God; yet God has found out a way for the sons
and daughters of men, to turn again to him: What by force and coercion, and
irresistible power? No, but the scripture says, He has offered life and
salvation to all men: He has freely given the Son of his love, out of his own
bosom, who making himself an offering for sin, has presented a way and meant
for man's returning again to God.

How does God present Christ to us? He presents him to the view of every one's
mind, to the understanding of every soul; he offers and presents him for
salvation to the ends of the earth. There is a damnation come in by man's being
subject to Satan, but salvation comes in by his being subject to Christ; as
damnation came in by his being defiled, so salvation came in by his being
cleansed: As the devil is the defiler, so Christ is the cleanser, and man is
the object upon which both do work; and they that have been defiled and
corrupted (as we all have) by the unclean Spirit, can any of us give a reason
they should not be cleansed by the holy Spirit? We have lost our right to
Heaven by sin and transgression, in the first Adam; and can any give a reason,
why we should not be restored, and redeemed, by Jesus Christ, the second Adam?
No reason can be given of our redemption, but that God is free in his love, and
Christ in his offering: He has offered himself a sacrifice for sin: Every
priest has something to offer; this man, the man Christ Jesus, offered
himself, through the eternal Spirit, a sacrifice for sin; and now the sacrifice
is offered, and a door is opened, and a new and living way consecrated through
the veil, that is to say, his flesh.

Now, who can be wise enough to find out a reason, why all men enter not in at
this door? For all men enter in at the other door, which the devil and Adam
opened, to run from God; all could run in at that door. What is the reason,
that all go not in at that door which Christ has opened, and God has
revealed, and which cost Christ so dear to work our way back again, for mankind
to return to God? If we go about to enquire into the reason, we shall find it
very little, for there is all the reason in the world we should serve God, and
seek our own happiness; there is all the reason in the world we should part
with sin and iniquity, and with the devil's work, which he wrought, if we knew
but how: Now this, I say, is a great privilege, that God has afforded to the
sons and daughters of men, that they may know; for here the terms of the gospel
and of salvation, are brought into a narrow compass, to a short sum, there need
no catalogue of them; they that will be ruled by the wicked one, must have
their part with him; and they that will be ruled and governed by the Holy One,
shall have their part with him, that where he is, there they may be also.

Is this in the power of man's will? No, there lies the mischief in the will of
man; for you cannot but know by experience, if a man may have his own will, he
will always run headlong to destruction, and run in the way of wickedness: And
if ever he comes to turn out of that way, into the way of righteousness, he
must do it in a way that is a cross to his own will. Some have said, because we
have spoken of the free grace of God, in a way that is universal, of his
kindness to mankind, through Jesus Christ, they have said, that we hold
free will, that men might be saved if they would; but alas, we have tried it,
and we have an universal knowledge, that is able to convince us, and all the
world, that it is far enough from our own will. Man is far enough from being
able to save himself, from being saved by his own will: He can run on to
damnation, there is a current goes with his affections, and with his corrupt
desires, they go with the current and stream; as long as a man goes on in sin,
he swims down the stream.

Now many, after they have long gone on in sin, and their evil ways, they think
or returning to God; for they think there is a better way, a surer and safer
way for their souls, than to go on in wickedness: So there is; if there be so,
says the sincere soul, O that I might walk in it: Why do thou not? I am
convinced that I see a more excellent way than my way is, a better walking and
conversation than my life is; but alas! it is too hard for me to walk in it:
Why? what is the matter, what makes it hard? because of my own will; I cannot
walk in it and have my will, I cannot walk in it, and enjoy my affections and
desires, and my interest in the world: This is no wonder that thou tellest me;
now thou art convinced of a better way, and would walk in it, and thou can
not walk in it, but thou must take up a daily cross; we might all of us tell
that, and read it before; I pray God you may come to read it within, what a
cross it is you are to take up, and what way it is you are required to walk in;
that is the way of God, the way that leads to Heaven, it is a narrow way; but
the way that the devil would have you to walk in, is a broad way, there is no
rub in it.

O would you but once come to experience how hard it is to walk in that way
that leads to life, you would find that you cannot do it without self-denial:
It comes to this point; I have read of it before, but now I find it so. Such a
man, or such a woman, will seriously apply themselves to live blameless,
harmless, and inoffensive toward God and men; they will set a bridle, and a
watch before their mouths, that they may not speak a vain word; they will take
care of the frame and temper of their minds, that they sin not in their
thoughts, that they sin not with their lips, nor with their hands. This is not
as I was wont to do; I was used to have my liberty; now I find myself yoked, I
dare not sin against God: Now I find, by experience, what I heard before, that
no man can follow Christ, without denying himself, and taking up a daily cross.

I would have you experienced in this work; wicked men think it a pleasant
life, to follow the devil's work, and to walk in the broad way; but the way of
self-denial is uneasy, there is much strife and opposition in that way; If I
have a mind to speak a vain word, I am limited; if I have a desire to wrong my
neighbor, and cheat and defraud him, I am limited, I am not to do it, that
belongs to the broad way: If a man will seek after the Lord, and walk in the
way of holiness and righteousness, the end whereof is peace, he will find it is
a narrow way, wherein he cannot enjoy his own will; such a one must be a David,
who said, I behaved myself as a weaned child; that is, as one that is afraid to
be beaten.

But thou will be ready to say, I am a man, and not a child; I am come now to
be a man, a man of parts; I have seen much, and read much, and would you have
me become a child? How great a man was David: If you speak of a man, he was a
man of dignity and honor, a man of valor and experience; yet when he speaks
with respect to the frame of his mind before the Lord, he says, he behaved
himself as a weaned child, as one that feared to be beaten, feared to commit an
offense; he feared the rod of his God upon him; he feared something of judgment
upon his conscience. David was an old testament man, but he had regard to that
which never waxes old, which is the same in all times, new and old, Alpha and
Omega. Christ Jesus was his leader, before he was born of the Virgin Mary; his
word was a light to his feet, and a lanthorn to his paths: David had
acquaintance with God, who did lift up the light of his countenance upon him.

And when Christ himself came to preach upon earth, he says himself, every one
that comes into the kingdom of God, must become as a little child. He must
become as a little child in simplicity and subjection; he must be under
government; he must become as a little child, or he must in no wise enter the
kingdom of Heaven; they must not think to enter into Christ's kingdom because
they are men; men of parts, men of courage, men of understanding, learned
doctors, masters of liberal arts and sciences: These may help to make them men,
but they must be children; all their wits, and parts, and manhood, courage and
valor, will do them no good; for little children, babes and sucklings, may
understand more than they of Divine Mysteries, and have greater communion and
intercourse between God and their souls than they; so that all who enter into
Christ's kingdom, must become like little children.

So that here is a way provided by Jesus Christ, for man to come again into the
favor of God, which is by Christ alone, not by any thing that a man can do;
Christ must be their leader and their counselor, he alone can give them the
true knowledge of God. No man can know the Father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son reveals him. Men can never attain to the saving knowledge of God by
study, and by disputation and reading books, and commentators, and observators
of matters of religion, Time would fail me to speak of the multitude of books
that have been written about the knowledge of God. You must come to Christ for
divine knowledge; theology, the knowledge of God, and divine and heavenly
things, are from Christ: He shall have this divine knowledge, be he ever so
simple, that comes unto Christ for it; he cannot have it any other way, for God
has ordained this way: Says God, he shall have it of my Son, who is the
Reconciles* the Mediator between God and man, he shall be beholden to Christ
for all. All men's own works and labors will not justify and save them, for
God has committed the whole work of salvation to Christ. One would think it
should be no great matter for men to lay aside their own works and duties, and
submit to Christ; but I tell you it is very hard, and I found it hard myself.

Men think by reading and learning, and hearing this and the other man's
notions and opinions, they may be edified and profited, and come to the true
knowledge of God; but while they are waiting upon God, in the way he has
appointed, they may receive knowledge from Christ, and be more certain and
infallible in what they do know, than by consulting all the wise men and
learned doctors in the world. For no man knows all at once; and no man knows
all things neither: It is not a thing necessary that man should know all things
in relation to God; for as he is in himself, he is incomprehensible: For no man
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him; yet that
which he knows of God, he may know it is certain and infallible.

Suppose a man know nothing of God, but that he is the searcher of the heart,
and trier of the reins. There are many that have tried this, and say they know
it, that yet doubt whether there be a God or no. But when God comes within
them, and convinces them of sin, and searches them, and brings judgment upon
them for what they have done, then they know infallibly, that God is the
searcher of hearts. This is not a man's work, this is the work of God; if I
find God does approach my spirit, I know it is God's work; I have now got some
knowledge of God, how came I by it? Who gave it me? No one but he that has all
knowledge; he that was with the Father from the beginning, and was glorified
with the Father before the world began, he gave me this knowledge; and now did
he give it thee? By his Spirit; for he has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into my heart; and that Spirit of Christ searches the hearts, and tries the
reins. He tells me this is evil that thou have done, this is that which God
that made thee has against thee; this thou must forsake, and this thou must
repent of; here I have an infallibility of what I know, but I cannot get rid of
my evil.

Now if I can believe in the power by which my heart is searched, and trust in
him that has begun to deal with me, then his work is not only to reveal his
light to convince me, but to put forth his power to convert me; so that by the
power of that truth by which my heart is searched, I come to be converted, and
turned from my sin, and break off from it; and when I am broken off from it, I
am sure, and have a certainty that it is so, that I am broken off from such a
sin, and that my heart is turned against it; I am sure that now I hate it, and
detest it, and that God has turned my inclinations another way: I am sure this
is God's work, I can witness this infallibly, that something is now done in
order to my redemption: But there is something yet remaining to be done: What
then? I will go step by step, by following my guide, I shall be sure to be
making some progress every day, to that state to which the Spirit of Christ
will lead me: These persons come to a certainty of knowledge by their own
experience.

Some will say, take heed of being deluded and deceived by the Quakers; so say
I too: Take heed of being deluded by any body; if any go about to persuade
thee, to believe that which thou know to be a lie, I am sure they are about
to delude thee; I would have every one to have an evidence in themselves of
what they believe.

Does a man believe that such a one is a drunkard, because the scriptures
declare judgment against the drunkards? the scripture says, woe to the
drunkards of Ephraim: There are judgments denounced against the drunkards in
the old testament; consider the scripture does not tell such and such by name,
that they are drunkards; but the Spirit of God, by a work and operation upon a
man's conscience, singles him out, and charges him with the guilt of
drunkenness.

There is a great condemnation pronounced against whoremongers in scripture,
but it does not tell us who they are by name; but their consciences tell them
so, and gives infallible judgment against them, and say, thou art the man, thou
art a person that God does judge and condemn; whoremongers and adulterers, God
will judge; but that does not concern thee, and affect thee, except thou be
one; I may read this an hundred times in the scripture, and not have a
reflection in my own conscience, except I be guilty: But when God meets with a
guilty person, and judges and condemns him, there will be an infallibility
in what such a one knows. If a whoremonger is reflected upon by his own
conscience, if his conscience tell him he is the man, if all the world should
flatter him, and say he is not guilty, he would certainly know that they tell
him a lie.

So that here is no dependence upon any man's judgment, but upon an invisible
judge in a man's own heart: Who shall delude and deceive this man, that has
this experimental knowledge? those persons will not deceive a man, that would
turn him from the evil of his ways; these do not go about to deceive him, that
will tell him he must hearken to that principle of truth and holiness in his
own heart; they would deceive him that tell him he is converted when he is not,
and leave him there: But when he is really converted and turned from sin to
God, some will tell him he is deluded and deceived; I pray God every one of us
may be so deceived: Says the apostle, we are deceivers, yet true: All that are
truly converted, though men cry out they are deceivers, though they are
deceivers, yet true; they are come to the savor of the knowledge of God,
through Christ; and so shall certainly come to be partakers of the inheritance
that is undefiled, and that fades not away.

Friends, you know that this has been the proposition of all the prophets, and
apostles, from the beginning to this day; the thing that they have proposed to
the sons and daughters of men, has been to enquire after the knowledge of the
true God: It has been wonderful to consider, what the devil has done to
present diverse doctrines that he has found out, and stirred up others to
invent a company of Gods, that other people have adored and worshipped. It is
hard to find any nation that do not worship some God; it is natural for man to
desire to come to some God, he thinks he must come to some God, and cannot be
happy if he come not to GOD: But the devil has invented many Gods, and set the
people a worshipping of idols, the work of men's hands, such Gods that are so
far from helping their worshippers, that they cannot help themselves, they
cannot wipe off the dust from their own faces; and if they fall down, they
cannot rise again.

But this is not our case, we have but one God preached among us, and but one
Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and man: Our condition is happy, in
having but one God, in comparison of theirs that have many Gods.

If the true God, that you worship, were but trusted in, you would be the
happiest people in the world: If you do but search, you will find that the
devil has in this nation, and in this age, stirred up people to worship as
many Gods, as he did in other nations in ancient times, among the Sidonians,
and Amorites, and others.

But you will say, we worship one God, and trust only in one God, and one
Christ, and one Holy Ghost, the only living and true God.

Do not tell me what God a man professes to worship* but what God he trusts
in, that gives it the name: Whatsoever a man trusts in, that he makes his
God, whether it be gold or silver, or the honors and pleasures of this world,
if he trusts in these things, he makes them his God. Let a man but search and
try himself, and he will find something has got a place in his heart, that he
cannot part with for Christ's sake. He will be ready to say, I cannot part with
my house and land, with my wife and children, and my goods and possessions,
because I have a confidence in them, and believe they will do me good, and be a
defense for me; I trust that in times of peril those things may do me good.
Here is a divine adoration, here is that trust, that confidence, that all true
Christians ought to have in the true God, and this is placed in these earthly
things. Now, wheresoever the trust and confidence is placed in transitory and
earthly perishing things, these men trust in transitory Gods.

Nothing so shows that a man makes the Lord his God, as when he casts all care
on him, and puts his whole trust in him, when he makes a profession and
acknowledgment of his dominion and greatness, and of all his other perfections,
that by his wisdom he can procure for them all that is good, and by his power,
keep off from them, and secure them from evil. When I make the Lord my trust
and refuge, and trust him for my God, I choose him before all the Gods of the
Heathen, and trust in him above all things under Heaven, upon the account of
the profundity of his wisdom, and the almightiness of his power: When a man
has this sense upon him, he will walk before the Lord with resignation of
mind, and be willing to be at God's disposal, and he will not only give up
himself to God, but he will hearken to him, and hear his voice when he speaks
to him.

God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past, unto the
fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son: But,
where is his Son, you will say? He is in Heaven; but though he is the high and
lofty one that inhabits eternity, yet he dwells with meek, humble and contrite
hearts, that tremble at his word. If I be one of the number of those that
tremble at God's word, I have that promise that he will come home to me, and
dwell with me. It is well for thee, if the overruling power of God has
prevailed upon thee, that thou can be willing to be at God's disposal, and
say, Lord, what would thou have me to do?

Therefore, friends, I would advise you all to love your own souls, that when
God desires your hearts, you would give them up to him, that there he might
delight to dwell, and have his habitation. Hearken to God's voice, and have
regard to his word, which is a more sure word than any man's in the world.
There is a more sure word of prophecy, says the apostle, unto which you will
do well to take heed. This will check you, and reprove you, when you do evil,
and show you wherein you have transgressed; and will encourage you, and be a
comfort to you, when you do that which is good. This will make you wise to
salvation, and thoroughly furnish you, and give you understanding for every
good work. This word will tell you, this you must not do, lest you offend God,
and wound your conscience, and grieve the Holy Spirit; this word will help you
so to speak, as to administer grace to the hearers; such a one as has regard
to this word, has a chaplain in his own bosom, that will direct and teach him
how to steer his course, and order his conversation among men, and how to serve
God acceptably. This High Priest's lips will preserve knowledge, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, who speaks to us in his word; we can do nothing but by
his direction: If you come to him to lead you into all truth, he will bring you
to the Father, and reconcile you to him, that so you may obtain his favor and
everlasting life. When one of Christ's disciples said, show us the Father, and
it suffices us, Jesus says unto him, he that has seen me, has seen the
Father, and how say thou then, show us the Father? If you subject yourselves
to Christ, and to the government of his Spirit, he will bring you to that life
and immortality, that fades not away.

This has been our labor and travel from time to time, to preach Christ among
you, and not to preach ourselves, and gather a church for ourselves, but to
gather a people unto Christ, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth. We would preach
Christ Jesus the Lord; we would not have you admire men's words and sayings,
and charge your memory with them; but we would have you remember the words and
sayings of Christ, who is the great Mediator, to reconcile man again to God,
that you may know him by his power, working effectually in your hearts; we
labor for nothing else, and we want nothing else. We are ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you, in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God: That you may so live, that whether you eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do, you may do it all to the glory of God, your great Creator,
that has given his Son to die for you, and redeem you from all iniquity, that
you might be a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Let God have all the honor and glory, for all his mercies and blessings; let
us render unto him hearty praises, and thanksgiving, for his wonderful love,
and acknowledge that it is a great privilege that we may obtain by Jesus
Christ, even to be brought again to have the knowledge of the living God, which
we lost by our transgression.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
GLORIOUS art thou in thy appearance, O Lord! and very wonderful is thy power,
and thy ways past finding out: And in this thy glorious day, thou art opening a
way for the sons and daughters of men, to turn to thee.

And, O Lord! those whose eyes thou have opened, rejoice and are glad, because
they have seen the way of thy salvation; and the breathings of their souls are,
that their feet may be kept therein, and that they may make strait steps in
their way to thy kingdom.

O Lord! we are sensible that our strength, and our power, and our ability is
only in thee; and therefore are the souls of thy children bowed and subjected
to thee, waiting for the renewing of thy power, that as our temptations are
renewed from day to day, thou would make known thy power in us, that we may
feel the stretching forth of thy hand to save thy little ones, out of the hands
of the destroyer.

And so, powerful God of Life! break forth more and more in thy glory, and make
known thy power in expelling the clouds of darkness and ignorance, and bring
the minds and understandings of thy people to know thee more and more, till
they come to the blessed inheritance, among the saints in light.

Holy and powerful Father! break in upon thy people by thy Almighty Power, and
scatter the dark clouds of temptation, and cause the light of life to shine
upon them; thou that have commanded the light to shine out of darkness, do thou
shine into the hearts of the sons and daughters of men; open their hearts, that
they may receive the truth, and make tender their hard hearts, that they may
live to thee that made them, and give it comfortable account to thee of their
thoughts, words, and actions, and let them turn to the Lord before it be too
late to repent of them.

Powerful God of Life! thy mercy and loving kindness does abound, to a little
remant that do believe in Christ, and do trust in thy name; thou have been with
them in their fiery trials and tribulations, and to this day thou have been the
glory of our assemblies, and the joy of our meetings. We are sensible of thy
holy power working in our souls, and of thy renewing thy love upon us: All that
desire a full sense thereof, that are seeking and crying after thee for it, O
let them be brought to a due sense of thee the living God! O arise for the help
and the comfort of the sorrowful, the sighing and the needy soul: Pour forth
the treasures of thy love upon them that follow hard after thee, and breathe
for deliverance; that so, powerful God of Life! praises may arise to thee for
all thy mercies, and abundant blessings, for thy goodness and loving kindness,
bestowed upon us from time to time.

Most powerful God of Life and Light! let the eye of thy favor be turned upon
this land of our nativity; spare the inhabitants of this city and nation, that
they may seek after thee; let them know the weight of thy hand upon them, to
bow them down to humility and brokenness of heart; give them repentance for
their sins.

Living God of Life! display thy power to all, from the highest to the lowest
among us, and advance the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom thou have
given a name above every name; and let his kingdom and glory be exalted over
all, and shine in the midst of us.

Blessed Father of Life! give wisdom to our counselors, that they may counsel
for thee; make known thy will, and send help from Heaven to all that stand in
need thereof, and that wait upon thee for it; give them thy Holy Spirit, that
they may be guided in thy way. Let thy Son Jesus Christ have the steering and
governing of all things, and let glory be rendered to thy great and worthy
name, and keep us in the love of God and in union with one another; let the
stroke of thy power remain upon the hearts of all whom thou have touched at
this time; let them be bowed down always in thy holy worship, and remain in a
belief of thy truth, and cease to do evil, and learn to do well, and walk
acceptably before thee, that so transgression may be finished, and sin and
iniquity may be put an end to; and that truth and righteousness may be set up,
and shine among us, and that our souls may rejoice in thee, that we may magnify
and praise thy power, and glorify thy name; for thou art worthy of all honor,
praise and glory, and humble thanksgiving, for the manifestation of thy love
and power. All which we desire to offer thee through Jesus Christ, who art God
over all, blessed forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON VII. The INWARD PREACHER; or, the OFFICE of CONSCIENCE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, June 21, 1692.
My Friends,
MANY have been sent among you, that from living experience have declared their
testimony for the truth, that you might all be brought to wait for the
testimony of truth in yourselves. This is that which will stand you in stead,
to know the testimony of truth in your own hearts to be for you; therefore you
are to wait, especially at such times as these, to hear the voice of truth in
your own souls: For whatsoever the preacher preaches, if the truth in thine
own heart does not speak peace, it is not well with thee. Whatsoever
testimonies are born of the truth itself; it is the truth that must bear
testimony of thee, that unerring word, that gives to every one an infallible
evidence of their peace with God, or against that which hinders them.

You know our labor has been to persuade all people to hearken to the truth
in themselves, and to make it their business, and travel, and endeavor, that
they might have unity with the truth in their own hearts, that their
consciences may not condemn them.

For such as you, in whom God has raised his witness, and has exalted the
truth for a judge, you are not ignorant, nor covered over with darkness, as
many others are; you do not remain in doubt, but you know the truth, and have
an answer of peace in well-doing, and a condemnation in evil-doing; not
administered to you only by preachers without, but by the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit of God in your own hearts. This is that standing
mystery which God has raised, which can never be put down again, but as each
one may put it down in themselves.

I grant that men may put it down: You have read, and had it plainly witnessed
to you, even killing the just, and crucifying the Lord of Glory; and of
spiritual Sodom, and Egypt. These things you have read of, and you that are
turned to the light, know the meaning of those sayings, by woeful experience;
for when ever you have turned aside, from a due subjection to the grace of God,
by which we are convinced, then there has been a piercing, and crucifying of
the Son of God afresh, and vexing and grieving the Holy Spirit, by which you
should be sealed to the day of redemption: Then there has been anguish and
tribulation upon your souls; and if this be minded, it will plant a fear upon
your minds, and make you afraid to do the like again; but where this
tribulation and anguish is neglected and put off, there a custom of sin takes
away the sense of sin. You know many have had more judgment at some time upon
them for a vain word, or a vain thought, than afterward they have come to have
for the most abominable wicked action. How came this to pass? Was sin ever the
better? Or has it changed its nature? No; but they are further off from the
sense of the evil of it. This is the word of truth, to which you must stand or
fall; this is the stone, that whosoever falls upon it, shall be broken and
tendered; but if they stay till the weight of truth fall upon them, it will
grind them to powder.

They will have a life of liberty, let the truth say what it will: I will have
my liberty, and use my tongue as I list, I will be wanton and proud, and
envious and malicious, though I know these things be naught, and the witness in
my conscience testifies that these things are wicked, and contrary to the will
of God, yet I will have them: Whosoever comes to this mind, the stone is near
falling upon them, and they will be ground to powder; they are like to barren
earth, which bears thorns and briers, and is rejected, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned.

Therefore, friends, I entreat you to hearken to the word of the Lord, it is a
holy word, and an old word; many have professed it: There are many preachers
that will cry, hearken to the word of the Lord in such a chapter, and such a
verse. My testimony this day is, hearken to the word of the Lord: But where
shall we find it, some will say? I tell you, it is written with the finger of
God in your own consciences; and it is either for you, or against you. Let your
profession among men be what it will, this Minister of the Covenant has no
respect of persons, or regard to profession; he will not excuse this or that
man, because he makes a greater profession of his name than others; this rather
is his judgment, and his condemnation shall be more swift and sharp upon him
that makes a profession of Christ's name. If judgment begin at the house of
God, what will the end of them be that obey not the gospel of God. Those that
take upon them a strict profession, they do greater dishonor to God, than
those that cry out there is no reforming; there can be no living without sin:
These profess what they do, and they do as they profess. But when people come
to profess holiness and righteousness, and profess a power also by which
righteousness is obtained, but live not strictly according to their profession;
these are they that cause the name of God to be blasphemed among the Heathen,
more than they that say there can be no living without sin.

Now this witness of God has no respect to profession, but has respect to the
state and frame of the mind of a man or woman, that they serve God with,
whether it be with sincerity and uprightness of mind, and with breathing
desires, that they may know the good and acceptable will of God, and what is
well-pleasing in his sight; and that they might perform that which is according
to his heavenly will. Where this sincerity is, where this cry of the soul is,
the Lord has regard to it; but where people's religion is only to bear up a
profession, and hold up an external fellowship and communion one with another;
when this sincerity is wanting, the Lord abhors their worship, it is an
abomination to God, and no benefit or advantage to themselves: It is not for
the glory of God, that they make a profession, but for some design to
themselves, and so they become abominable.

This was the state of Israel of old, and it is the state of a great many now,
that think they do great matters, if they conform so far to the truth, as that
outwardly they may not be charged with a lie, and that they are of such a
society. It is well if some would come so far as to maintain their society with
God's people, and their external profession; but if they have not regard to the
truth in their own consciences, what is their profession worth? What will all
thy unity with them signify? If there be a breach between God and thine own
soul, who can heal that breach? What will the profession signify and amount to
at last? But, go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels. And all the reason to be rendered for it, is this; depart from me,
ye are workers of iniquity: He did not say in that sentence, ye are liars, you
never prophesied in my name, and I never preached in your streets; but allowing
what they said to be truth, that they had made a profession, and held communion
with other Christians, allowing these things, yet notwithstanding it is, go ye
cursed; and the reason of the sentence is, you are workers of iniquity.

Let the dread of the God of Heaven rest upon you. My friends, it is another
thing to make a profession of the Lord God of Heaven and earth, than most are
aware of; let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity.
What is iniquity? It is all things that men or women do to gratify their own
wills contrary to the will of God; that is iniquity: Where had all men liberty?
Where had Adam and his sons their liberty to fulfill their own wills, and to
contradict the will of God? Yet nothing is more common in nations, countries
and families, than for people to assume a liberty to perform and fulfill their
own wills, and to bring about their own interest, designs and contrivances,
though at the same time they are convinced that it is contrary to the will of
God. Where this liberty is taken, there iniquity is wrought; that is iniquity
that is unjust, that which is committed against him upon whom we have all our
dependence every moment for life and breath, for food and raiment, and every
thing we enjoy; we have a dependence upon that God that made us, yet vain men
and women assume a liberty of gratifying their own wills, and setting up for
the flesh.

You may remember that passage of the good apostle, when he saw some libertine
professors of Christianity, grow loose and careless; they thought it was well
they did acknowledge God in their meetings and worship, but as to the affairs
of the world, they had forgotten that God was concerned in those things; tne
apostle takes notice of such libertine looseness, go to now, you that say,
today or tomorrow we will go into such a city, and continue there a year, and
buy and sell and get gain; whereas you know not what shall be on the morrow:
For what is your life? It is even a vapor, that appears for a little while,
and then vanishes away: For that you ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall
live and do this or that. You ought to live in subjection to him that made you,
you ought to have regard to God's honor in whatsoever you do: Whether you eat
or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God. Is not this
scripture? Is not this found amongst the apostle's writings? Do not we hold the
name of Christians which was given to them at Antioch? Yea, we are called
Christians, and these writings of the apostle are holy writings, and what then
is the matter that we take so little notice of them? That men do not apply
these wholesome exhortations to the particularities of their conversation, but
that they go from country to country, and from one place to another, and do
what they please, without having any regard to give their subjection to the
great God: This looseness has brought into the minds of some, such a liberty,
that they live without God in the world; when they go sometimes to religious
meetings, and when they hear the name of God mentioned, it may be there is a
little awe upon their minds, and they have some regard to that God that gave
them breath and being, for the present: But if there be not religion, if there
be not a tie (religion signifies a tie, a being bound to God) if men be not
bound and tied to God, by that which is made known to them, every one will
desire that which is good in their own eyes.

Therefore it is necessary for you, my friends, above all people, you that are
come to a measure of the ministration of the Spirit, to know and to mind what
it does speak. Such a thing I did this morning, and I am reproved for it; such
a thing I did well, and I am justified and warranted in the doing of it: Thus
it is when a thing is well or ill done. Sometimes some men act two or three
days together, and never bring their actions to the rule; that is, like a man
that is building and never minds his rule, so what he builds up, tumbles down
again upon his head. You know there is something in you that has a speaking
voice, an infallible voice, and gives judgment on your actions, and passes a
sentence, either of justification or condemnation upon you. If you would live
so as to answer God in what you do, you need not fear answering men. I do not
fear answering men in all I do or speak; if I do but answer mine own
conscience, I fear no man, though he be of another persuasion and judgment
opposite to me; if I keep peace in mine own conscience, I shall answer the
principle of truth in my adversaries consciences, though they hate me, and
despise me, and seek occasion against me; if my actions answer the truth of God
in mine own heart, they will answer the truth in any man's heart: This makes a
man as bold as a lion.

When the people of God obtain a reputation, to be true and just, and holy and
righteous, all men will expect holiness and righteousness at their hands. What
if I profess to be one of these people? If I have not the truth in my own
heart, though I put on this reputation as a cloak to hide my insincerity, the
want of that truth takes away my courage. It is truth that has a power in all
men in the world, and it is the power of holiness and righteousness that makes
wicked men afraid; and therefore the apostle argues upon that subject, the
magistrate is clothed with power. What power has he? The power of justice,
and the power of the sword. What sword has he? A sword of justice; and he is a
terror to evildoers, but a praise to them that do well. It is true, if I have
done evil, if I meet with a man that is but my equal; if in buying, and
selling, and commerce, I have wronged him, and deceived him, though he knows not
of it, yet I am afraid of him, I am fearful that he will discover me and find
me out: But if I speak the truth, and do that which is honest in the sight of
all men, I shall not fear any man: There is no nation under Heaven, but there
is a principle of truth to be found among them in the hearts of men. If I act
according to the principle of truth in mine own heart, there is the same
principle of truth in all men. If I walk up to the principle of truth in
myself, I shall likewise walk up to the principle of truth in all men's hearts;
if mine own heart does not condemn me, all the world cannot condemn me.

If professors were resolved to answer the principles of truth in their own
hearts, and go thorough-stitch in their profession, they might live
courageously: Truth will crown them with victory. But if they do not live
according to the rule and standard of truth, they are like salt that has lost
its savor, which is trodden under the feet of men. But where all are one in
truth, they are gathered into the truth, and they will live according to it, so
far as they are convinced of it. If you would give them a world, they will not
give away a hair's breadth of the truth which they have professed. When truth
thus comes to have dominion, then truth shall overspread the earth, and the
kingdoms of the world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ,
and righteousness shall rule, and the scepter of it be swayed over the nations,
and they that rebel against it, shall be broken by it, and they that are found
in it, shall have dominion, and they shall condemn hypocrites and dissemblers.
Now if you would grow up in this dominion, you have an opportunity for it,
because the truth is revealed in your own hearts.

They who undertake to walk in the truth, merely from what they hear the
ministers of truth preach, laying up in their minds a company of doctrines,
notions and tenets, they will stumble and fall; but they that will hearken to
the truth in their own hearts, and regard the voice of it in all their ways and
undertakings; these have a minister at home with them, they have a chaplain in
their own houses; if there be any thing they know not, and if they know not
what to do, they ask the minister of the sanctuary; others will ask their
ministers, but your minister is at home with you: Where has God appointed any
man to rule over your conscience? No, God has appointed Christ only to rule
and govern your conscience, to be the author of faith, and the finisher of it
too: You that are come to the dispensation of the Spirit of Christ, keep to the
testimony in your own hearts; then you have fellowship with one another in the
truth; and you have cause to bless God for it, that God has so opened the
hearts of one toward another, that the suffering of one, is the suffering of
all; and the consolation of one, the comfort and rejoicing of all: But alas!
who is in this fellowship? Only those that are in fellowship with the truth, in
their own hearts, and really so: If a man shall break fellowship with truth in
his own heart, he will make no bones of breaking fellowship with his brethren:
As soon as men break fellowship with truth, they are unruly, heady,
troublesome, and make no matter of splitting and tearing, and rending of
fellowship with others. How comes it to pass that thou have done this? Thou
did not thus while thou fearedst sinning against the witness of God in thine
own heart. But when men have once made light of the great minister of the
gospel in their own hearts, it is an easy matter to make light of the rest; if,
as Christ says, they have done so to the green tree, no wonder that they do so
to the dry tree: If they despise me (says Christ) do you think they will love
you?

It is most evident in a great many at this day, they dispute against truth,
they have taken a liberty to speak contrary to the truth in their own hearts,
and then they cry down the ministers of it: Do you think they do so that keep
their first tenderness? When they were convinced, the power of the Lord rested
upon them; when the power of the Lord first wrought upon you, and brought you
to yea and nay, and to plain simple language and habit, this was with joy and
delight for Christ's sake. They that keep up this tenderness and simplicity of
mind, there is no scattering, nor rending, or tearing among them, they keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and they are kept together in one.

Friends, you have an opportunity in your hands, see that you make use of it;
you may bear up, and not be deceived by men, or devils, if you keep faithful to
the principle of truth in your own hearts. Let what reproach and persecution
soever come, here is a standard, a foundation and a rule, for you to be
governed by, every hour of the day; search your hearts, and try your
consciences by it. As ye do this, and keep to the rule of the new creature, of
the regeneration, being changed from a carnal birth to an incorruptible birth.
If you be born of the incorruptible feed, the devil cannot corrupt you, evil
passions cannot corrupt you; if you keep up that foundation that is
incorruptible in itself, then nothing will corrupt you, nor your ways and
manners: If you will live according to the simplicity of the gospel, you will
serve God, and be examples to others in the life of holiness and righteousness,
and hereby God shall be glorified. This is that which will shine forth to the
whole nation, and give a good report to truth: But if any that profess the
truth, be found false to their profession, and be found unholy, and deceive and
overreach their neighbor, they lose by it, and the devil rejoiceth at it.

Thus we know the life of righteousness is brought forth through the Spirit of
truth, and out-shines all, and will reach God's witness in them that are afar
off, and bring them near; and happy and blessed are they that are found in this
divine work, conforming their lives and conversations according to the new
creature, peace be upon them, and upon the whole Israel of God. There is a
minister that abides with you, that goes home with you, it is his testimony
that you must stand or fall by: If any one should be a false professor, and be
cried up, it he be not sincere, he has not peace; though he flutter awhile,
and make a show, the worm of guilt gnaws and torments him; such as these have
not peace with God, nor fellowship with the church: Though they seem to be
alive, yet they are dead; as it was with the churches in Asia, they had a name
to live, yet they were dead; though they have an empty name, such a one is a
living man or woman, they are esteemed friends to the church; but though they
are commended and cried up, and have a name to live, yet they are dead; there
is a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments, they shall walk
with me in white, says Christ, for they are worthy. I know thy works, that
thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. See what Christ, the bright
Morning Star, could do: He could look into a meeting, and see whether few or
many had only a name to live, or were really alive; if they were dead as to
sincerity and truth, though they had been among the church, they would help to
break it down, but not to build it up.

You that have this divine life still stirring in you, and feel the operation
that first quickened you to God, prize this principle of the divine life above
all: What is there can rob you of it? Value not the friendship of the world:
Alas! what can it amount to? Count it as dung in comparison of Christ Jesus;
look upon all things with a sound eye: Peace with God is of that concernment,
that you cannot be happy here or hereafter, without it; the friendship of the
world I can be without, and the customs and fashions of the world I can be
without, I can spare these things; but the favor of God I cannot be without,
and growth in grace and the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and
a sincere profession of the gospel; I cannot be without these things.

My friends, though you do not make a show and flutter in the world, as some
others do, yet your glory is within; they that are living members of this
divine body, the glory, and beauty and brightness of such, appears in the sight
of God. If you grow in grace, you will be a comfort to one another; and as the
apostle speaks, you are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of
all men. The Lord preserve and keep you simple, keep you in all sincerity, in
that truth that has wrought in your own hearts, that you may have acquaintance
with your teacher, that he may not be driven into corners; for you may do it,
and stop his mouth, and silence him too. If you let your perverse will rule,
you may slay the just; but there will come a day of his rising, then down you
go. Whatsoever men may get by it at present, when truth rises, when the Just
One that was slain has a resurrection in them, then most certain down they go.
While you have an opportunity in your hands, and an interest in the covenant of
life, walk with God according to the counsel and dictates of his Holy Spirit,
that you may be brought to a heavenly fellowship, and to partake of the good
things that God has prepared for his children.

My friends, pray prize your seasons, let no day slip, for fear you miss a day
at last; wait upon the Lord, and let his fear and a holy awe be always upon
your hearts: Then peace will be upon you, and there will be acceptance of all
that you do. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace; when he can reflect upon his past life, and say, I have walked
before the Lord with a perfect heart, and done that which is good and well
pleasing in his sight, and have not turned aside to the right hand or to the
left, but the Standard of Truth has been the guide of all my spiritual and
temporal actions. If truth has been thy guide here, then truth shall be thy
portion hereafter. If truth guide thee in thy way, then thou shall rejoice with
the saints, and receive an inheritance with the people of God, and enjoy that
glory and felicity which God has prepared for them that love him.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
EVERLASTING, glorious, eternal God of Life! whose kingdom rules over all; thy
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom; a glorious, blessed day has dawned, wherein
thou art making thyself known to the sons and daughters of men; and thou have
opened an eye in a remnant (which the God of this world had blinded) to see the
glory of this day. For though we have lived without God in the world, yet thou
art near to us, and thou have called us to repentance, and inspired our souls
with a desire to thee, and to the remembrance of thy name: Praise and
everlasting thanksgivings belong unto thee, who art the author of our
salvation; who have reached out thy hand and laid hold upon us, and sought us
out when we sought thee not, and have made known thy power and love for our
redemption and salvation; and thou will make it known more and more to every
upright, sincere mind.

O powerful Father of Life! how has thy power and goodness been revealed on
our behalf for thine own name's sake? Thou have stood by us in all our trials
and exercises, and we have found thee a God nigh at hand, and thou have brought
a remnant to desire nothing so much as the enjoyment of thy presence; thou have
brought them to be sensible, that without thee they can do nothing; therefore,
in all our assemblies and meetings, we desire to be acquainted with thy power,
to hear thy word which speaks life to our souls, by which we may live.

And dear and powerful Father! the continuation of thy goodness among us, does
greatly engage the hearts of thy children, to offer up praises and
thanksgivings to thee. Thou have inclined the minds and hearts of thy people to
wait upon thee, and have opened their understandings to receive thy heavenly
truth, and those rich and heavenly treasures which thou offerest them, and have
provided a cup of salvation to refresh the poor and needy soul.

O Living God of Life! reach forth thy hand, to support and save those that are
breathing after thee, that are sensible of the want of thy presence, and are
frequenting the assemblies of thy people, with a hope and desire that they may
enjoy a blessing from thee.

Living God of Life! touch their hearts with the finger of thy power, let them
know that thou art ready to open the treasure of thy love, and life unto them,
through the Lord Jesus Christ, that their souls may be comforted, and they may
offer up sacrifices of thanksgiving. And let all thy children every where,
render to thy name, through Jesus Christ, blessing, and honor, and praise; who
art God over all, blessed forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON VIII. SAVING FAITH, the GIFT of GOD alone.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, March 8, 1687.
My Friends,
YOU that are made partakers of that precious faith, which has brought you to
an expectation of that redemption and deliverance that comes alone by Christ
Jesus, your minds should be continually exercised in that faith which God has
given you, for it is a great gift, a blessed gift that he has given to us to
believe. This never came of ourselves, never was there a true believer in
Christ Jesus, but he received his faith of God, it was the gift of God, it was
given to him to believe. Other sorts of believers there are in the world, that
can communicate their faith one to another; but they are true believers that
have their faith communicated to them by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, it is
given to them that believe; and because it is so excellent and so heavenly a
gift, and has such large privileges belonging to it, it is necessary that
every one that receives it, should have a continual exercise in it; that you
may know what it is, and what it does for you, and so come to be experienced
Christians. Now all that are partakers of it, they do believe, and know in whom
they have believed, and for what they have believed, even for the saving of
their souls.

The true faith, that is the gift of God, it is not at all short of a complete
saving of their souls; they that truly believe, their faith stands in one that
they know is able to save to the utmost; and so a true believer has a great
comfort in his faith above all other believers in the world; for he knows that
his faith reaches to a complete redemption, unto a complete sanctification,
unto a complete fitting of him for the kingdom of God.

Now there is no such faith that ever was made by men, there is no such faith
that all the wise and learned men upon the face of the earth, have either
preached or given forth to be received; for if you come to consider the diverse
forms of faith that men have ministered, they will fall short of saving their
souls, they fall short of redemption, they fall short of fitting and preparing
them for the kingdom of God, and so they have not that comfort, that
satisfaction, and that inward refreshment that belongs to the others, or that
accrues to their souls, that have the faith of God's elect.

And herein has been the privilege of the people of God in all ages, as well
as in our age; their faith has had a farther extent, it has reached farther
in order to the good of their souls, than the faith of all others has done:
What comfort can a serious Christian take in a faith that falls short of
righteousness and redemption? Would it not make a man or woman's heart ach, to
think I am a believer, but yet I have no faith that reaches to sanctification,
and holy living, and redemption from sin? All my faith leaves me a sinner all
my days; to my dying hour there is no mastery to be had, no getting victory
over sin, it will prevail over me as long as I live.

This is not that precious faith that God's elect have been made partakers of,
that works effectually in their souls; this is not that faith that can minister
real comfort to the poor soul that is laden with iniquity, and weary of sin;
the faith that falls short of sanctification, and redemption from sin, is such
a faith as God never gave his people; it came some other way into the world,
and it has captivated most of the sons and daughters of men, and they have
expelled the true faith (as much as in them lies) that saving faith that
purifies and cleanses men from sin, and gives them victory over the world, and
have got another faith in the room of it; and they live in their sins, and in
their lusts and concupiscence, and still remain in captivity.

But God was pleased to hear and answer the cry of the souls of a remnant (for
which many of us have cause to magnify the name of our God) when we had
traveled from mountain to hill, to seek where true comfort might be found,
where one should say to us that we should overcome. We know there is no eating
of the tree of life until we do overcome; nor entering into God's kingdom till
we be cleansed. Some laid an impossibility in our way, which made many a one to
mourn. What, must we never be cleansed? Must this crooked heart, and perverse
will, always remain? Must I be a sinner and a believer? A sinner, and call
myself a child of God? How can these things hang together? These have made many
to faint in their minds, and to say as David did in his distress, one day I
shall perish by the hand of Saul. One day this corruption will be my ruin; for
all my prayers, and hearing, and other duties and performances, this sin will
be my utter ruin at last.

After many have mourned, and been afflicted, by reason of the burden that was
upon them, it has pleased the Lord to visit a remnant, and to open their
hearts to make known the precious faith, the faith of God's elect, the faith
that was once delivered to the saints. Is this the faith that is worthy of an
earnest contending for, and preaching for, and suffering for? Who was ever so
mad, as to suffer for such a faith as will leave a man under the power of
satan, and his own lusts? No wonder that such have a faith that is not worth
contending and suffering for. Who will expose themselves for such a faith that
will never do them a kindness? Now that faith which belongs to a purified soul,
to one that is sanctified, that faith delivered to the saints, it is called a
shield; when once a Christian comes to make use of this faith as a shield, he
will find the power of it. A shield is that which is worn by persons that are
among enemies; it is for the defense and safeguard of one that is beset with
enemies; and a good Christian is so situated.

There is a sort of blind Christians, friends to the world, their christianity
is worldly, and their faith worldly; but all true Christians are in the midst
of their enemies, inward and outward; and if they had not the shield of faith
to defend them, they would certainly be wounded every day, they would be slain
and lose their lives: The faith that is called a shield, it is that by which a
Christian is to be defended and saved from harm designed against him every
hour; for the devil goes about like a roaring lion, continually seeking whom he
may devour. The apostle speaks more particularly to believers; the devil, your
adversary, he is an adversary in himself, but more especially your adversary
that are believers; that have believed to the saving of your souls. You that
believe that Christ is sent of God, endued with power sufficient to break his
head, and power to redeem you out of his service and bondage, the devil will be
your adversary: Let him be so, if I have but my shield. This is that which if a
man use, he will quench all the fiery darts of the devil.

If a man come once to receive the faith, the true faith, faith in the power of
God, this faith will remain victorious over temptation; but if thou do not
keep thy faith in a continual exercise, thou do not deserve the name of a
true believer: If a man receive the true faith, and grow careless in his
christian exercise, will not this adversary, the devil, be about his ears? Will
not he send forth his fiery darts at him; his temptations, and snares, and
gins, to entangle him, though he be a believer, if he does not keep in the
continual exercise of his faith? But a true Christian, that feels the power of
the grace of God, and is in the continual exercise of true faith, he is like a
watchman or sentinel, that has his armor on, and his shield ready, he knows
he is on the borders of his enemies quarters, and he keeps himself in perpetual
watchfulness, in daily expectation of the devil's fiery darts; he keeps his
shield in readiness; I see a temptation lies in such a thing, but I see the
Lord's power is able to keep me out of it. I see there is profit or pleasure in
the snare; it is a hook that is baited, but I see the hook through the bait,
blessed be God; and I have a confidence in his power, and that he is able to
keep me from that thing, for all the baits of profit, pleasure, or the
friendship of the world.

A believer keeps in the exercise of his faith, and considers that his
salvation is nearer than when he first believed; the people that believe, are
not presently saved, the work of salvation is to be wrought after they believe;
for without faith, it is impossible to please God, nevertheless the foundation
of God stands sure, it is founded upon the power of God; when a man
believes, the work is begun; though some foolish professors tell us, that the
work is done when the act is only in the mind; they will tell you what day of
the month, and such a day of the year their conversion was wrought; but they
know not what they say. A man may possibly know when it was brought about: A
man may know about the time when God communicated faith to him; but he must
know after he is a believer, then begins the work of salvation, the believer is
to be saved from this or the other enemy; he is not presently saved from all,
there must be a warfare, a fighting the good fight of faith, before these
enemies of his salvation are overcome; the devil will not give over because I
am a believer, and because Christ promised to break his head; the seed of the
woman shall break the serpent's head. I am now but putting on my armor; the
battle is not fought; I have not yet gone through the peril of the fight; I am
now buckling on my armor; when the fight comes, if I have not my shield and my
armor ready, I may be slain for all this; some have made shipwreck of faith,
they have not held it, nor kept the faith, but given it away: But says the
apostle, I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith, I have gotten the
victory.

So people, after they are believers, they must wait to have their faith
strengthened by renewed manifestations of the same power in which it first
stood: They must wait upon the Lord, and he will renew the strength of their
faith, zeal and courage; and as temptations are renewed, they have new courage,
and new strength and new ability, and all by this divine, spiritual and
Christian exercise; they every day come to see the work they believed, that
which their faith tended to, see the work in some measure wrought, they see
some enemy of their souls brought down and slain, and they see their souls come
up to a little more dominion than they had before; they see the devil's power
is weakened more than before, and that he has not so much power as he has had
over them. These things are some encouragement to raise up in a true Christian,
living praises to God; seeing, by believing, he has found thus much
encouragement by the working of the word, why should he not wait on the Lord
for the accomplishment of this work, that he may believe to the saving of his
soul, that he may come to receive the end of his hope and faith, the salvation
of his soul? Now, by thus keeping their faith in exercise, they know that their
salvation is nearer now, than when they first believed. It is not so with every
one, for many that have believed, their salvation is farthest off, because of
their negligence, professing one thing with their mouths, and doing another
thing in their practice; there are some things which they believe and profess,
and yet do the contrary; that puts their salvation further off, and draws them
secretly into desponding, and into a losing their courage and zeal for God; the
custom of sinning has at last taken away the sense of sinning. It is so with a
man when he first transgresses the rule, he is somewhat tender, and does it
with some regret; but after he is come to a custom of doing it, he is pretty
well at ease, and so by degrees he goes on toward the state of being past
feeling. At last such sinners come to dying; they were dead once before, and
were quickened through the operation of the Spirit of Christ Jesus; they were
quickened, and if they shall die again, if you die a second time, pray remember
it is a second time; you that are careless and ready to die, remember it is the
second death that you are going to; and consider that if you die the second
death, you shall have no part of the first resurrection: Better such had never
been born at all, than after they have lived in hope, to lose it again. This is
that which was upon my heart to commend unto you, that you may partake of this
precious faith, that has a tendency to the saving of the soul, and fitting you
for the kingdom of God. Has God given you to believe? And will you not believe
that you shall live without sin? If you come to obtain this precious faith, you
will believe that you shall come to live without sinning against God, and have
the light of his countenance shining upon you. He that truly believes, his
faith reaches to this, and he will say to himself, I am saved a little from
the liberty of my tongue, and from many sins of an evil practice: God has
redeemed me from my vanity, pride and passion, and other things that were
troublesome, the Lord has redeemed me from them; I see the work is going on,
and I am nearer to the kingdom of God than when I first believed; I have gotten
victory over many of my spiritual enemies, and I hope the Lord will carry me
on, and keep me by his power through faith unto salvation: Hitherto the Lord
has helped me, I have not fought in vain, I have not been beating the air, but
God has given me victory over the tempter inwardly and outwardly, so that he
could not prevail, whilst I kept the shield of faith over my head; but when I
have been careless, and not exercised my faith as a shield, I have been weak as
other men.

You are not called to weakness and feebleness, but to the power of God, that
you may be exercised in it, and by it be kept from the evil of the world: There
is a possibility of being kept, if you be faithful to him that has called you,
that is, Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation, if you follow him step by
step, and do not run headlong all at once; when you see a great deal of sin and
corruption before you, and seek to master it in your own strength, you will
lose the victory: The same word that shows us our sin, shows us our own
inability to overcome it, and that we can do nothing without divine assistance;
though we lie long struggling under the weight and burden of sin, we cannot of
ourselves get victory over it, we cannot bring judgment into victory, God must
have the glory of it. If you keep to Jesus, he will carry on the work; you did
believe in him, for he did work this faith in you, and he will carry on his own
work, and his own work shall praise him. All others that talk of faith, and
make an empty profession, they dishonor God; they talk of perfection, and
living without sin, but never experience it, and so bring dishonor to God: If
you wait to see this work carried on; if you believe and exercise your faith
for the overcoming of your sins, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God,
you will hereby bring glory to God, who alone is worthy of all praise; who is
God over all, blessed for ever more. Amen.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST blessed, holy, and unchangeable Lord God! thou have visited us by thy
dear Son and our Savior Jesus Christ, to gather us to be a people unto thee,
who once were not a people, and once not gathered.

Everlasting Father! thy mercy is great, and thy goodness is great, and to be
greatly prized by us all; thou had compassion on us to help us when we could
not help ourselves; and thou have laid help upon one that is mighty and able to
save to the uttermost all that come unto thee by him.

Blessed God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! we give thee thanks for thy
abundant mercy and goodness extended to us. Lord God Eternal! extend thy mercy
more and more; and visit the children of men in all nations with the knowledge
of thy truth.

Blessed Father of Life! we pray and cry to thee, that thy work may go on, and
that it may prosper and increase, and let the day of thy visitation be
extended, and reach forth thy Almighty Arm, that the children of men may be
gathered unto thee.

Blessed Father of Life! thou have shown mercy to our souls, and we have seen
the goings of God in his sanctuary; thou have, by an outstretched arm,
gathered us to be a people to thyself; thou have appeared for thy people in all
ages, and thou have saved them out of oppression, and stilled the fury of the
enemy. Thou have cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon, and made way for thy people
Israel, that they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land. Lord, do so for
thy people spiritually in our day, and make way for them, and open the door
that thy gospel may spread, and run, and be glorified, and have a free course
among us; and that thy worship may be set up, and pure incense may be offered
up to thee. O Lord! this is the cry of thy servants, and the voice of their
supplications to thee, that thy Spirit may be poured out abundantly and operate
upon them, that thy word may be profitable and welcome to their souls.

Blessed Father of mercy! thou have blessed thy children and people with
spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus. Thou have given us thy pleasure this day;
and blessed be thy name, thou have refreshed our souls at this season; let our
praises ascend as a sweet smelling savor, and acceptable service to thee: And
for all thy mercies and renewed favors and blessings to us, and to all thy
people, both here and every where, let thanksgiving and living praises be
rendered to thee; for thou alone art worthy of all blessing and praise, who art
God over all, blessed forever. Amen.

SERMON IX. TRUTH'S TESTIMONY AGAINST THE POWER of SIN and SATAN.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, June 3, 1688.
My Friends,
GOD has made you witnesses of the great work of this day; the Lord I say has
given you eyes to see, and ears to hear, and hearts to understand the great
work of the day; he has called you forth, that you may be faithful witnesses
every one in your measure of that which he has brought to pass in your sight,
for he has revealed his power, the eternal power by which the world was made,
he has revealed and manifested that power for the raising up of life, for the
subjecting and bringing under death, and the power of it; for a great while a
testimony that has been born in the nation has been unto death; he that has
the power of death, that is, the devil, he has had a great many to sound out
his power, to declare the continuance of it, that death must reign, and
darkness must continue, and that the kingdom of the man of sin will never be
brought down.

But now in our day, glory to God on high, here is another sound come forth,
the Lord Jehovah has uttered his voice, and who can but prophecy! The word of
prophecy is given of God, and many are raised up to publish it, and to sound
forth the name of the Lord in the extirpation, the ruin and destruction, that
is and shall be brought upon the kingdom of iniquity, upon the kingdom of the
man of sin, and to prophecy and declare in the name of the Lord, that
righteousness shall run down like a stream; this is the gospel, the glad
tidings that we receive from God, and minister unto you, that you might
believe, and that believing you might come to wait upon the Lord, and behold
the accomplishment of it.

For, my friends, herein has consisted all the labor, travel and exercise, of
the servants of the Lord; and for this cause have we suffered many things, and
gone through many trials, because we have steadfastly believed, and therefore
have we spoken it; that the Lord will, by his Almighty power, lay waste,
destroy and bring to an end, that power, that the wicked one, the devil, has
had upon the minds and spirits of the sons and daughters of men, and that he
will set up and establish, in the very same soul, a law of righteousness, and a
law of truth, and will cause the beauty of holiness to shine forth through
them, where iniquity has lodged, where the wicked one has ruled.

Now you that have believed this testimony, you have received it, as glad
tidings unto you, for you are weary of that old service, you are oppressed
under the power of that strange prince. There was a kind of spirit and power
that had ruled over you, that neither gave you life nor breath, nor had done
any good thing, and yet you were subject; and many there were, who through the
grace of God, came to see that a state and condition of sin and iniquity was
not a happy state; and by a secret kindling of the spark of God's love in your
souls ere you knew him, there was a cry raised to be delivered, if it be
possible. If there be any deliverance, O why may not I be delivered! If there
be any redemption, why may not I be redeemed! If there be a power that can set
me free from the service of this wicked one, why may not I be set free?

Ah, friends! remember the days and nights in which these living cries run
through you, then you were poor indeed; then you were humble and broken, and
the Lord beheld you in those days, he saw your state and condition, he saw how
helpless you were, and did not he arise to help you? Did not a power spring
forth in the day of your humility, in the day of tenderness, by which you
became able to make war against the lusts of your own hearts, and did not you
overcome and prevail in your war? Did not you make a progress by the power and
by the grace that first raised desires in you? And as you made this progress
and gained ground, as I may say, of your own corruptions, your faith came to be
strengthened, and you were confirmed in the belief and in the obedience of the
truth; and the more you trusted and relied upon him, the more did he manifest
his power in you; he made known his ability and his strength in your weakness,
so that you did become living witnesses, every one in your measure, that there
was such a power; and that that power was able not only to save from a little,
or from a few, but was able to save to the uttermost, to save out of all that
was polluted and defiled, and to cleanse and purify the conscience from all
dead works, and to enable you to serve the living God.

Now the Lord having thus established you, and confirmed you by his power, that
you were found in the faith, and firm in the believing of the truth, my
friends, all the labor, and travel and doctrine, and exercise of the preachers
of the gospel, to those who were converted and confirmed, became very
acceptable. So we preach, and so you believed; here was a unity in our faith,
here grew up a fellowship, a communion in the faith, and the Lord became
glorified in the assemblies not only of those that preached, but of those that
heard, because each one had a place in the body, and each one had a savor of
the word of life by which the body was nourished.

Now, my friends, that which lies particularly upon me to leave with you for my
testimony (and I pray God that it may be placed in the hearts of all you that
have believed) is, that you may all wait upon the Lord, to see all that brought
to pass which you have believed: For I take notice by the eye that God has
opened in me, by which he has made me to take care of his flock, and sometimes
put his word in my mouth, that I may speak a word in due season: I say, by this
eye, I take notice of many that have received this precious faith, and thereby
have believed the great and high state; their faith reached so far, they knew
that power to be able to bring them into a perfect dominion over their lusts,
and passions, and corruptions, and over the spirit of the world, over pride,
over anger, over all things that are opposite to the divine life; their faith
is as sound as we can preach it in respect of the extent of it, but their faith
has not reached thus far in its operation upon their hearts; they have not had
the power going on, to accomplish and fulfill that which remains.

Are there not some here and there that are settled in the belief of the truth,
but are got into an ease from the labor of the truth? But if I be sound in the
faith, my understanding is opened; I do not only believe this matter, but have
inward evidence and demonstration, that I am certain, past all doubt and
question of it, that the Lord reveals his power in them that believe, that
purifies them, and makes them every whit clean; and here I have a fellowship
and communion with them that preach, and them that believe.

But, my friends, all this will not give you communion with God; though there
is communion with the church of God, with respect to men, who are come into one
faith and doctrine, yet for fellowship with God, it stands in a life beyond all
doctrines, and beyond all words and expressions; therefore your business and
mine, and every one's, is what we undertook when our faces were first turned to
God, that we may be followers of Christ in the regeneration. For many may be
firm in point of doctrine, and yet may not follow Christ Jesus: Many hold the
truth, but do not hold it in righteousness, but unrighteousness.

Now, my friends, have a care, your religion and your souls eternal welfare are
concerned. This doctrine I leave you in charge in the name of the Lord God:
Flatter not yourselves any one of you, because of the soundness of your belief,
but look for soundness of heart, and for a right spirit to be created in you, a
spirit that can no way endure any thing that the light of Christ has made
manifest to be evil; if it be truth you own, then exercise faith upon it, and
whatsoever sin or temptation assaults you, say, I shall overcome in the name of
the Lord Jehovah; I shall bring thee under, be what lust, passion, or
corruption soever thou will, in the name of the Lord, I shall overcome thee,
and bring thee under.

Travel on in the faith committed to you, and you will be more than conquerors;
you will not only grow into external fellowship with the people of God in the
sight of men, but into fellowship with the church of the firstborn, whose
names are written in Heaven; and your communion will not be in words and
doctrines, and principles of faith; but your communion will be with God the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; and so in all your meetings together, the joy
of the Lord will be your strength, and the joy of his great salvation your
covering, and he will manifest his gracious presence with you; and that power
which has kept you to this day from your childhood, and preserved you in all
your battles and conflicts with the world, and strengthened and encouraged you
when you went sometimes sorrowing and mourning night and day, and fearing lest
you should not overcome your adversaries; that power that has kept you
hitherto, will do greater things for you than you have yet been witnesses of.

Therefore, dear friends, this I would leave with you, there is nothing will
keep you and me in that little time that remains to us here to spend on earth,
but that which will keep us in the exercise of faith toward God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, who is able to save us to the uttermost: Let us wait to see the
power of God for sanctification and holiness; that will reach as far as saving
us from our sins.

This has been the greatest reproach that ever our adversaries have thrown
upon us, that there are some amongst us that talk of believing in the power of
God, and talk of an ability to overcome their sins, and living a holy life, and
living without sin, while they themselves live in it. This is the greatest
reproach that ever our adversaries have thrown upon us: Whosoever have been the
cause of this reproach, God will require it of them, for the Lord is jealous of
his name and glory; and he will have the praise and honor that is due to his
great name, for working in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
says the apostle; though I know nothing of myself, yet am I not hereby
justified. When you come to that, that you cannot charge yourselves, then the
Lord will not charge you; but take heed that therein you place not your
justification, hereby you are not justified.

Therefore have an eye to Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith. He
begins the work of faith, and he will carry it on until he be the finisher of
it, and the justifier of it; he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, that alone
justifies the children of God. Depend not upon your own holiness and
righteousness for justification; keep your eyes to Jesus the author of your
faith, who will be also the finisher of it; keep your hearts with all
diligence, and walk humbly with God, watching lest your adversary that you have
overcome, prevail against you. By going from the power, there is no safety for
the flock, but only while they keep in the shepherd's fold; be faithful and
keep yourselves in the love of God, and he will be present with you, and keep
you to be his witnesses to the end of your days, and will raise up another
generation to be witnesses to his power, when he has taken you to himself.

To that mighty power of God I commit you, for preserving you in humility of
mind and soul; and my prayer for you shall be, that you may go on, and make a
progress in the good ways of the Lord, until his work be finished in you.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
HOLY and powerful God of Life! who art the Creator of us all; in whom we live,
and move, and have our being; thou have made us all for the purpose of thy
praise and glory, that we might serve thee in the land of the living, among the
sons and daughters of men; and not only so, but thou have given us thy Holy
Spirit, as thou did to the people of old.

O living God of Life! thou have ordained a remnant to give up themselves to be
led by it; thou regardest them, and art with them, and they enjoy from time to
time thy holy presence, which makes glad their souls; and they have fellowship
and communion with thee, and thy Son, through thy Spirit, by which they are
quickened to offer up pure and living praises upon thine altar.

O living God of Love and Life! thou have shed abroad thy love upon their
hearts, by which they are enabled to pray for enemies, that they may come to
enjoy salvation, and the pleasures which are at thy right hand, which are
infinitely better than all the pleasures of this vain world.

Holy and powerful Father! have respect to all our souls, and touch all our
hearts with a sense of thy divine love, that we may feel the cords of thy love
drawing our souls nearer to thyself, and assuring us that thou have a gracious
purpose to save us.

O powerful God of Life! show forth thy power, that our hearts may be touched
and quickened thereby, to come to fear thee, and reverence thy name, and be
acquainted with thy operation in our own hearts, that they may be humbled and
broken before thee, and bow down and worship in sincerity and uprightness: That
so holy God of Life! if it be thy pleasure, none may depart out of this
assembly without some sense of thy love, and feeling of the powerful drawings
of thy grace, and without being raised up to purity of heart, and convinced of
the evil of every thing that is contrary to thee, and serve thee in holiness
and righteousness, and pursue it with all their hearts, and minds, and soul,
and strength, that thou may have mercy upon them, and pardon their iniquity,
and love them freely, for so thou have ordained in thy Son Jesus Christ, that
we may receive remission of sins through the belief of thy everlasting truth.

And holy, powerful, God of Life! that all thy people may partake of holiness
and sobriety, to the praise of thy name, and that they may all come to obtain a
victory over all those spiritual enemies that war against their souls, that thy
holy work of redemption and regeneration may be carried on, to the praise of
thy grace, and the exaltation of thy holy name, to whom praise, honor, and
wisdom belong, and pure and humble thanksgivings; and unto thee, the living God
of Life, we desire to offer up our praises and adorations, for thou alone art
worthy; who art God over all, blessed forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON X. BEARING the CROSS of CHRIST, the true MARK of a CHRISTIAN.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, October 12, 1690.
HE that knows the day of the Lord, and the stretching forth of his arm, is
quickened to feel the power that is in Christ Jesus, the Head of the Church;
that so he may be enabled, through his power, to bring forth fruit unto God.
The eye of the Lord is upon you all, and he expects at the hand of every one,
that they bring forth fruit unto God, that according to the aboundings of his
mercy toward you, and of his patience and long-suffering concerning you, there
might at last be an answer in the soul of every one, unto the mercy and
goodness of God. They that do not know and experience this, that the
long-suffering and patience of God leads unto repentance, they know no part
of Christianity; let them make their profession ever so high, and proclaim
their notions ever so loud, they that know not the work of repentance in their
hearts, as yet, need to learn the first principle of the Christian religion.
You know it has been the custom of people to learn their children principles,
and they that have learned their principles, they go for Christians, whether
they repent or no; though they go on in sin and iniquity all their days, yet
they go under the reputation of Christians; and it is high time to examine and
find out (if you can) a reason for this, that a man shall be accounted a
Christian upon any other terms now in this age, than the Lord Christ did preach
and publish in the days of his flesh; for he did absolutely deny that any man
could be his disciple, without taking up a daily cross, and without
self-denial: Now how should a man at this day be a Christian, or a disciple of
Christ, without taking up a daily cross, and without self-denial?

It may be some will tell you, that they are baptized into the Christian faith,
and have been taught, and have made a profession of Christian principles, and
associated themselves among those that make profession of Christ; but here is
not a word of a daily cross in all this, nor of self-denial; so that they would
have you to understand in this, that the terms of Christianity are changed, and
that men may be Christians without the terms of Christ, or at least reputed so.

And this has been occasioned by the great apostasy that has been brought
into the church by a long night of darkness, and the revealing of Antichrist.
Antichrist has been discovered and revealed, and has set up, in despite of
Christianity, a false Christianity; and there came in the terms of a man's
being accepted, and being reputed a Christian upon Antichrist's terms: And if
you will conform to do thus, and say so, you shall be admitted into the
Christian Society. Now all these terms of Antichrist, have been such things as
an unregenerate man could conform to and comply with.

And the opening of this door, has let into the church abundance of hypocrites
and evildoers, who were in too unregenerate a state to conform to those things
that were required; for in the public society of Christians, it was not said,
you must be regenerate, and take up a daily cross, and deny yourselves, and
walk as becomes saints, and so behave yourselves that God may be glorified,
and the profession of Christianity honored by you. Those were the terms of
old; but there are other terms of being Christians, which are of a later date.

Now this apostasy has prevailed and spread over whole nations and countries,
not a sew, so that whole kingdoms have become Christians upon these latter
terms, and God is greatly dishonored among us, and Christ the Holy One most
horribly profaned. It is not so common among Heathens and infidels, to find
people wronging and deceiving one another, and killing and destroying one
another; and yet it is the practice of many that are called Christians: These
are the fruits and effects of those latter times of Christianity. Now seeing it
is thus, which no mortal man can deny, I have this question to ask, and I
desire that you would seriously weigh it in your hearts and souls, both while
you are together, and when you are separate one from another, whether it is not
high time for all of us to return again to the first terms of Christianity, and
to reckon no man a Christian, let him profess what he will, saving such a one
as does know and witness, that the long-suffering, and patience, and goodness
of God, does lead him to repentance; and saving such a one as has so much
faith toward God, that for love to God he will deny himself, and take up his
cross, and be a follower of Jesus in that way and life he lived in.

It is high time for all of us to return again to the terms of Christianity,
that were set up by a higher authority than ever Antichrist had, and before
Antichrist was revealed; for though it is true that Antichrist has obtained
power on earth, to establish his sort of Christianity, that is, without the
cross, and a sort of religion whereby they indulge themselves in whatsoever
pleases their carnal hearts, and corrupt minds; yet Antichrist has not all
power, he is not Almighty; I hope neither Antichrist, nor the beast, nor the
dragon, nor the false prophet, nor the whore, have all power on earth, though
they have a great deal, and by that power they have established laws, decrees,
canons, and innumerable things about religion; and some cry, this is the way
you must walk in; others cry, the way to Heaven lies here, and here you must
travel if you will come thither: Some cry, this is truth; others say, it is
error: So that the world is divided; Antichrist's government in the world is
divided; and when the house is divided against itself, there is hopes that it
will fall at last.

But there is one, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given and
committed; and his Christians are not divided among themselves, but they are of
one heart, and of one mind; and he that has all power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him, can crush and bruise that power that others have. Herod had
some, and Pilate had some* but says Christ, your power is limited, this is
your hour, and the power of darkness; and thou had not had power, says
Christ to Pilate, were it not given thee from above; here is power given to the
dragon, to the false prophet* and the beast, to speak great things; but this
power of Antichrist is going away; Christ Jesus was sent into the world in his
day, to bring people back again to God, and to primitive Christianity and
obedience, and to the (...) terms of society and communion, and to a fellowship
in Christ Jesus through the Holy Ghost.

Now if we had set up a way of religion, as other (...) have done, which is
contained in some canons, articles, doctrines, and such and such commandments
of men; and if men will confess these articles, and observe these canons, they
shall be of our society; then we should have done like the rest of the fallen
Christians; but we have declared from the beginning, that professing our
doctrine, and the principles of religion, does not give any man fellowship and
communion with us; but our communion is in the self-denying life, and a daily
cross, in opposition to sensual lust, vanity, pride and bitterness of spirit,
corruption, enmity and wrath; this has brought us to a holy fellowship and
communion in the Holy Ghost, and to (...) in unity from one head, which is
Jesus Christ; so that there is not this man's church, and the other man's
church among the people of God.

Do you read in the primitive times, that Paul had his church, and Peter his
church, and James his church, and Jude his church? Indeed they had their
meetings as we have now, in many cities and countries among the Jews and
Gentiles; but these holy apostles that were the first publishers of the
everlasting gospel, after their great Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, they never
did appropriate any church to themselves, that was not their business; but our
work and business, says the apostle, is to gather you to Christ, and present
you as a chaste virgin to Christ; our work is, to turn you from darkness to
light, that you may walk in it, and be the children of it; our work is, to
build you up as a spiritual house, to be presented to Christ the Mediator.

This is primitive Christianity that has its foundation in holiness and
righteousness, sincerity and truth, not in words, and terms, and articles, and
canons, and decrees, and other observances; this is not the foundation of true
Christianity, nor will it ever be, the devil's kingdom must be destroyed, it is
shaking, for he in whom we believe, has power from his Father to break the
devil's head, Antichrist and the dragon's head. Christ Jesus is signified by
diverse names, the second Adam, Lord from Heaven, the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, but he is the same Christ; so Antichrist is expressed by several terms
and names, but he is the same power of darkness, he has made the nations
drunk, to stagger and destroy, and devour one another.

This has been done in the fallen state of Christians, and the design which
the Lord Christ has in sending his ministers and workmen to labor among you,
is to restore men to the first Christianity, and to bring men to God; that
religion is not made up of doctrines, articles, canons and decrees of men, but
it has the word of God for its foundation; he that has an ear to hear, let
him hear: There is some spirit, and power, and visible work in a true
Christian, which the false Christian never had. The false Christians have taken
the name and profession of Christ, and their fruits have been dishonorable to
him; they might as well make profession of Antichrist and satan, they have a
form of godliness, they have some of the word, but they deny the power. What is
their religion and outward profession, when they want the internal life, and
the motions of the Holy Spirit; if they bring forth the cursed fruits of the
flesh, enmity, wrath, lust and corruption, which belong to the fallen nature
and unregenerate state?

The apostle takes notice of this deceit and hypocrisy in religion, which was
growing up before he died; men having a form of godliness, and denying the
power thereof, from such turn away. If there be any brethren that walk
disorderly, have no company or fellowship with them, if you would have the holy
name of Jesus free from scandal.

This has been the design of all the faithful ministers of Christ, to keep
their holy profession of the name of Christ free from reproach; that the
holiness of God's ways might be seen in the holy lives of the professors of
them. Till men come to know this, and take up their daily cross, and exercise
self-denial, their Christianity is good for nothing; I would not have you trust
in it; neither in articles, tenets, or observations; but see how with your
lives you answer your profession: Christ was holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners. And why should not Christians be so too? How can
Christians be followers of Christ, and not separate from sinners? Christ was
so. He went one way, and sinners went another; they followed their sins and
lusts, but he followed the work his heavenly father sent him (...). If thou art
a follower of Christ, thou art worthy of the name of a Christian. Do drunkards
and swearers follow Christ? Do the wanton and proud follow him? Do the unclean
and hypocrites follow him? you know they do not* why do you call them
Christians? This is a reproach and shame to the holy name of Jesus, and to true
Christianity, that any of these folks should be called Christians, but such as
are followers of Christ, who are holy, harmless and undefiled, and separate
from sinners.

This seems a strange kind of doctrine, yet if it had been preached in the
primitive time, there were people that would have received it as apostolical
doctrine, that a man should crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts:
For says the apostle, mortify your members which are on earth; if (...)
through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live; but if ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die. And to be carnally minded is death, but to
be spiritually minded is life and peace. This was sound doctrine then.

Now come and tell a man he shall certainly perish and come to damnation for
all his profession, if he does not mortify the deeds of the flesh; if he lives
in sin and dies in it, he is like to perish: How many have been hauled to gaols
and dungeons, only for preaching this doctrine, and when we were first sent to
preach, we durst not do otherwise? And God did not send us to preach till he
had washed us, and sanctified us, and fitted us for the work of the ministry.
Now when we saw in the holy scriptures, that God did work upon others by his
Spirit, before he sent them to preach the gospel, was not here sufficient
authority given to preach the downfall of sin, and destruction of it? One would
think that such a one, thus called and sent of God, had as good authority to
preach the everlasting gospel, as the laws enacted by all the princes of the
world could give him; a man sure that has an authority for preaching the
gospel, would not need to wait for orders and approbation; he would not stay
for an induction. The apostle Paul took it for a commission that was
creditable, when he tells you of his mission, it was not by man, but by the
will of God, that he was called to preach the gospel. If we should say we were
made preachers, if you ask by whom, not any man in the world can tell you; but
we were made preachers many years ago: Not by man, or by the authority of man,
but by the will of God. What was your commission? to turn men from darkness
(that darkness we had formerly lived in) to turn them from darkness unto light,
and from the power of Satan unto God. The apostle sums up his commission in a
few words; the Lord told me I must turn men from darkness to light. This is our
commission that we have received from God in this age, to turn men from
darkness.

But some will say, that we have not human learning and qualifications for the
work of the ministry: To this I answer, if I heard a man swear or tell a lie, I
could tell him that this was not of God, I have learning enough to know, and
tell men that, and say, whoring, drunkenness, and swearing, and lying, were
works of the flesh, and fruits of the devil's power; I would have you turn from
these works to the power of God. What is that power of God? I will tell you, it
is a manifestation of grace in your hearts, that will draw you away from the
love of all these things; the grace of God, is the power of God to salvation to
them that believe: To as many as received Christ, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God; to such as believed in his name. Such Christians will
show forth the power and life of religion in their conversations: So that here
is a sufficient authority, no want of authority.

I have been sometimes examined by what authority do you preach? By the highest
authority in Heaven and earth* by the authority of God that came by Christ, the
Redeemer. What do you preach? Truth in the inward parts, (...) and truth, and
against all filthiness of flesh and spirit.

As long as Antichrist has a rule, you must not preach down sin without
authority; you must have power, you must be ordained, and have an induction
before you undertake to preach the gospel, and preach down sin and wickedness:
The devil has got such power and rule, that some tell us, that no man can live
without sin; if it please God here and there to raise a man and bring him to a
holy and righteous life, this man wants a patent, a commission, an induction,
an ordinance to preach and cry down sin in other folks; what commission had the
Psalmist when he said, Come, all ye that fear the Lord, and I will tell you
what he has done for my soul.

Is it not high time for people that have evidences of the love of God shed
abroad upon their hearts by the Holy Ghost, to bear their testimony against sin
and wickedness? Is it not high time for every one's mouth to be open, to
testify against such a horrible mist of darkness that is (...) over men; to
testify against hypocrisy, uncleanness, and unrighteousness?

It was the great design of the primitive preachers of the gospel, to cry down
that which some ministers cry up, so that Christianity is not like what it was,
for then they told them that there was no happiness but by breaking off from
sin by repentance. No possibility of salvation without confessing and forsaking
sin, and trusting in the mercy of God through Christ for the pardon of it. Tell
them of the mercy of God, and the blood of Christ, they will tell you that they
cannot be cleansed from all sin, they cannot live without sin. How comes it to
pass that there are ministers that preach an impossibility of living without
sin, when we (...) assured in the holy scriptures, that without holiness no man
shall ever see the Lord? And that there shall in no wise (...) into the kingdom
of God, any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a lie? Rev. xx^ 27. How comes this, that ministers preach an
impossibility of living without sin? Will any of you, says he, be so
presumptuous as to say a man may live without sin? I will prove it from good
authority, both from scripture and the fathers, that no man in the world can do
it.

If any set themselves to it in their own strength, the devil will make fools
of them; some indeed have gone about it in their own power and will, and have
cloistered themselves up in monasteries, and shut themselves up between two
walls, that they might be separated from all society, and live without sin;
they would do it in their own power, and the devil is stronger than they.

Let me tell you, men of the greatest wisdom, courage and strength, of the most
excellent natural parts that any man can have, are not able to grapple with
their enemy the devil by their own power; there are seeds of sin, and lust, and
concupiscence sown in all their hearts; so far this is right and sound
doctrine, that no man can do any thing in his own power and strength. But here
is the mistake; a man has been a long time wrestling with his sins and lusts,
to get the victory over them; but by woeful experience he finds his weakness and
insufficiency; he is sunk in his harness, and so has given over the battle,
saying, I shall never overcome the devil and his temptations, my sins and lusts
are too hard for me, I despair of ever overcoming them in my own strength, by
all that I can do; that is true enough, but must thou needs perish because thou
can never overcome thy corruptions? If ever I be saved, it must be the free
grace of God, that must save me. How can thou come to lay hold of the free
grace of God? I am told I must lay hold on Christ by faith, who is the Mediator
between God and man, and is my only Redeemer; there is no salvation in any
other: This is very well; now thou art a believer, what do thou expect, what
do thou hope that Christ will give thee? He will not give me power over my
corruptions, so as to live without sin, that is more than I hope for; but I
expect that Christ will reveal his power in me, and give me so much strength
and power against my lusts and corruptions, that they may not have dominion
over me: Now if you tell me that you hope for strength and power from Christ
against sin, satan and corruption, do you now tell me that it is still
impossible? It was impossible before indeed to live without sin, when thou
did trust in thine own strength; but now, when thou come to have grace and
assistance from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, that gives thee ability to withstand temptation, and overcome thy
corruptions, and the lusts of thy own heart, is it impossible still to live
without sin? Then thou may say, the devil's slave I am and must be; for
there is no other power in Heaven or earth for thee to lay hold of, if thine
own power, nor Christ's power neither can do; then thou do say, that the
devil is Almighty. Thus they tell us, when Christ has revealed his power, it
is impossible still.

If I should call this antichristian doctrine, I could make it out. Blessed be
God, I do believe that Christ is able to preserve me from the devil's
temptations, and all his instruments, if I believe; though I could not do it in
mine own power, yet by Christ's power I may be preserved an hour without sin:
If so, then a day, and if one day, then a thousand days, if I live so long;
Christ has promised that he will bruise Satan, and tread him under feet, and
destroy his works, and judge you whether sin be not the devil's work; shall I
despond, or despair to have the devil's work destroyed in me?

Here is ground for you all to believe, he that has faith may lay hold of this
power which is offered of God; therefore lay hold of it, else your religion
will be good for nothing. This is the enjoyment of a true believer, that he
receives power from Christ to deny himself; therefore all their pretended
Christianity and professions at the day of judgment, will melt away like snow.
These canons, articles, forms, liturgies, these will melt away when the day of
the Lord comes to burn upon them; none but they that feel the redeeming virtues
of the blood of Christ, that have their souls filled with the love of God; and
they that will part with whatsoever they love in the world, for Christ's sake,
shall be accepted.

I am not for setting up this and the other sect or opinion; if it be among
those of my own profession, if they profess holiness, and bring forth
unrighteousness, it is all one; I shall not value their profession. There are
many in this city and nation, that have sheltered themselves under the
profession of truth, and talk of perfection, and have brought their lusts and
imperfections with them: Here Antichrist is trying another game to bring them
under a profession that will serve his turn; the devil will allow men
profession, if they will live according to their own hearts lusts, so that they
may save his head from the blow that God's power will bring upon it, so that
they may dishonor the holy name and religion they make profession of; thus
faith the apostle, I have told you often, and now tell you weeping; they were
Christians, so called, to whom he spoke, but they were enemies to the cross of
Christ, not to the profession of Christ; he did not say they were strangers to
the cross of Christ, but enemies to it; they let it fall, they kept the name,
word and doctrine up, but they let the cross fall; how much were these
Christians worth? sure but a little.

Nay, Antichrist has been so silly, that because the words are so put upon the
cross, no being disciples of Christ without the cross; the words of scripture
are so put upon it. Thinks Antichrist, I shall never persuade the people to be
at ease, unless I give them a cross; therefore he sets them a making crosses.
They must be baptized with the cross; they say we deny not the cross of Christ,
we hang it about our necks, we set it up in our meetings and academies, and
many princes, and wise men, and learned men, have been so bewitched and drunk
with delusions, that they have called this the Christ which they have made with
their own hands; they have made Christ's, and prayed to them; and all their
religion has been putting together crosses, crucifixes, forms and liturgies,
which they have made with their own hands.

Here is Christianity in an empty profession, but where is the soul of it? I
would enquire for the life of it, I would see Christianity living in love to
God above all, and loving our neighbors as ourselves. When this Christianity
comes, there will be no killing one another, nor persecuting one another, nor
fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, nor pleading for it neither.

Blessed be God, that our eyes have seen the witnesses raised, and life from
Heaven come into them; and now religion begins to have a life and soul, and
shows itself in a little remnant: There is a people raised by God that feel
life in their worship, in their families, in their conversations, and in their
behavior toward relations, they do what they do as to God. Many lads and
lasses, menservants and women-servants, they do their work and service, not
barely to please their master and mistress, but to please God. The life they
live is by the faith of the Son of God; they live as becomes the members of his
body. Husbands love their wives, not simply because they are their wives, as
the men of the world do, but they do it upon the account of inward religion,
and of the divine fellowship and communion they have in Christ Jesus. Husbands
should love their wives as Christ loved his church, and laid down his life for
it; so a man should love his wife, and be tender over her, and minister to her.

The life of Christianity has taught us to behave ourselves so as God may have
glory, and Christianity be restored to its ancient luster and beauty that it
had in former times.

But some will say, do as well as you can, men will never love you; if you have
the soul of Christianity, you shall be reviled and scandalized. Men will make
works against you, and strew papers against you, and set the magistrates
against you; live as well as you can, they will follow you and disturb you.

This is more than you know. If a man once comes to feel the life of
Christianity working in him, and the power of it keeping him from doing evil,
and wishing evil to his enemies, and disposing his mind to a frame of praying
for them, inclining him to pity them; if a man comes to this state, he is at
peace in himself, and enjoys tranquillity of mind; he looks up to the Mediator,
Christ Jesus, and feels an answer of peace in his own soul, and is come to rest
in himself.

Now concerning persecution, hatred and enmity, between the woman's seed and
the serpentine seed, and how long it will last. God whom we serve, did say to
the devil in Paradise, I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel. So that it is not to be expected, that the seed of the serpent (those
that are born of that seed) can love those that are born of the woman's seed.
It is possible, that those that are born of the seed of the serpent, should be
translated and brought out of that corrupt state; but it is impossible that
those that are born of the flesh, should love those that are born of the
spirit, while they continue in their unregenerate state, but persecute them. It
is like a natural instinct, as for water to run downward, and fire to fly
upward. Were not all men and women born children of wrath, and naturally
enemies in their minds to Christ Jesus? And did he not die and suffer for them
all? So that the very nature of the thing is the very reason why Christ died to
redeem those that were his enemies to be his friends.

Suppose I, or any other to be a member of Christ, and men do persecute me, and
revile me, and hate me, should I not love them, and do good unto them, when I
see one infinitely better than either you or I, do it for us? when we were
enemies, Christ has sent his Spirit into our hearts, that we might become
friends of him, and of him that sent him: This is the effect of the
righteousness of Christ, and of his innocence, that enemies may become friends;
thus have many been brought to a friendship of truth, that were enemies to it;
if we could not suffer for the testimony we have received of God, what were it
worth? But seeing God has not only given us to believe, but to suffer for his
name, many have been turned by this means from darkness to light, and many more
will; the light breaks forth apace, notwithstanding there has been so much ado
to stop it.

It has been the design of many learned men of this nation, how shall we stop
these men's mouths that preach the doctrine of truth in the inward parts, the
light within, and Christ within them? I will not repeat the many laws that have
been made against them that will not preach lies, but the power of Christ and
his truth; now what will you do? You cannot lay hand on them as you used to do;
no, but we will reproach them with the tongue, we will render them odious to
the government, as persons that will overturn turn church and state, and that
preach false doctrine; and when all is done, and they have said their worst,
people will still believe that sin and wickedness is hateful to God, that God
takes no delight in sin, and that the devil will lead us to sin; he that keeps
most from sin, keeps most out of the devil's clutches; and he that lives most
holy, is most like to God.

These things we will preach, and we will go on in this testimony, that the
best way that man can take, is to break off their sin by repentance, and turn
to God, their Maker, with their whole hearts, and they will look to their ways,
and search, and try and examine their hearts, and if they see evil, to keep out
of it; this is such a thing, as there is no withstanding of it, it will go
through this nation, and all the nations of the earth.

What if a company of people should combine together, and say, we will not have
the sun to shine upon the city of London; what course must we take? When the
sun is down, we will build a bank or high wall to intercept its light; but
notwithstanding all their endeavors, when the sun rises, it will get over
their high banks and wall; so all their designs, and all the contrivances
against the light of the gospel, and against Christ the Son of righteousness,
and against the Spirit of Christ, the light will ascend and get over the heads
of them all, and it will confound them, and break through all opposition.

I exhort you all, my friends, that laying aside all doctrines, and tenets, and
contrivances among Christians, as come to this simple thesis and position; it
is no matter what I profess of religion, if my life is not answerable to it, if
there be not a love to God, and my neighbor, and to mine own soul; there is no
life nor power in my profession of religion. I will rest satisfied in the
measure of knowledge that God has given me; I must not do to my neighbor what
I would not have my neighbor do to me; I must be upright and sincere toward
God; God will not accept of any worship from me, when I am unclean in body and
in mind too; we must see that we be purified, for God will not accept of an
offering from an unclean heart; you cannot bring a clean thing out of an
unclean, says our Lord Jesus Christ, the great preacher of truth and
righteousness; I must first make the tree good, before the fruit will be so;
you and I are these trees; till we have something good in ourselves, we cannot
bring forth good fruit.

Therefore you must have respect to the principle of sanctification in your own
hearts, and turn to what you may feel an experience of in yourselves, some
principle of grace and light in your hearts, that can distinguish between good
thoughts and evil thoughts. Is this good for me to do? I will go on in it with
faith and courage; but if it be evil, I will not touch it, though there be
profit and pleasure to allure and draw me to it; I will not touch it, though I
might gain the world by it.

Here is Christianity with life and soul in it; we have been scandalized as if
we preached up error for justification: We say there is no justification
without sanctification; so you that know the power, live in it; and you that
desire to know, turn your minds to the light and grace of God, and you will
feel the power that will oppose sin in its motion, and it will never trouble
you in its act and workings. If I would not do ill to my neighbor, and I judge
such a motion when it is suggested, it will never trouble my conscience,
because when the devil moved me to it, I rejected it, I would not follow him.
It is no sin to be tempted; for our Savior, that was perfectly holy, and free
from all sin, was yet tempted; he had motions in his mind, but he withstood
them, and resisted the devil in all his temptations; Christ was tempted that he
might be able to succor us when we are tempted; and he will do it for all
those that wait for him.

Therefore, friends, trust in the name of the Lord, and you shall feel the
stirrings of that power, that has called you out of darkness into the
mavelous light of the sun of righteousness wherein you live, and which will
shine to his immortal glory and praise, and the everlasting comfort of your
immortal souls.

SERMON XI. The SPIRIT of CHRIST the only true GUIDE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, October 10, 1690.
YOU that are met together in the name of the Lord, and have your expectation
from God, and are really waiting to receive a blessing from his bountiful hand;
you are they to whom the Lord will communicate the good things of his kingdom,
and instruct you in the divine knowledge which the wisdom of this world cannot
find out; you shall have your portion in the blessings prepared for you, and
laid up in Christ for you, to be handed forth to you from day to day for your
support. And hereby you have been preserved and kept alive unto this day. You
have received your nourishment, and divine and spiritual refreshment, always in
the presence of God; when you have been out of his presence you have met with
troubles, and darkness has gendered upon your minds, and veiled and clouded
your understandings, that you have been sometimes in danger to lose your way,
until you have returned again unto the great shepherd (...) overseer of your
souls, by whom you have had access (...) God. You that have had these
experiences, O let your hearts and souls be engaged to continue together in one
heart and one mind, serving the Lord and waiting upon him for something that
may do you good; that may strengthen and confirm you in the blessed truth.

For there are a great many that are convinced, that do yet want establishment:
There are a great many that know the truth, yet cannot be brought to abide in
it, but are sometimes drawn out of it, and then they meet with trouble in their
minds, and distress and anguish lay hold upon them, and they do not enjoy that
tranquillity and peace, and that inward joy which they believe others do enjoy
at the same time; and which they might have enjoyed if they had abode steadfast
in the truth. Now what is it that will establish such a one, but their waiting
upon God to receive power from him to resist the temptations, and the manifold
wiles and snares of their soul's enemy, whereby they are daily in danger to be
drawn away from God; drawn out of the way?

You know, friends, how the Lord brought us into this exercise of waiting upon
him, by making us sensible that there was none could help us but him. Teachers
we have always had, and men that have spoken of God, spoken of his power, and
spoken of his wisdom; but how to dwell in that power, and stand established in
it, so as at all times to resist the power of the wicked one, is what no man
can help us to; and upon this account it was, that the Lord's people were fain
to cleave close to him, and by faith to have their dependence upon him; and cry
in their souls, Lord, unless thou establish me, I shall never be established.

The confirming power that stays and settles their minds upon the Lord, it
comes from him, it is handed to us through the Lord Jesus Christ, whom we have
believed in; they that kept their faith in him have had longings and breathings
of soul, that they might receive some divine blessings by him, and through him.
So that they that meet together in this mind, they find a settlement in the
truth, as it is manifested and revealed in them, and goes down into the deep
where unity is known, where they are of one mind, and the soul is made capable
of putting forth strong cries to God, and living breathings and prayers to God,
that he will teach them how they shall profit, how they shall grow, how they
shall serve him, and honor him in their day; that he will reveal his power in
them, to expel any darkness or veil that has been gathered upon their minds,
that does hinder them from beholding so much glory and excellency in the truth,
and in the ways of God, as some they have beheld. And so these are travelers
that are traveling with the Lord in faith, to receive a blessing at his hands.
Their minds are not left to this, or that, or the other man, or to mere words
or visible things; but they feel the word of truth answering the truth in
themselves; and they receive a comfort and benefit, because they find a
blessing to arise in them. These words reach my soul; these administer help to
me, and I am comforted in them, because I find those works working in me, or
wrought in me.

For, alas! my friends, many of you know, that there are some who hear the
word, and the declarations in the word are but sounds unto those who have no
experience of the work that is signified by the word; many such people do hear
the lovely sound, and they are affected many times to hear talk of the work of
regeneration, and of the enjoyments of God's people, and how they are borne up
in all their trials by an inward and divine power, and how they are always kept
alive to God, and preserved in his living presence; but this does not bear them
up in a time of trial; but if a trial or an affliction comes, they sink under
it, and they are filled with anguish and perplexity; so that the word barely
heard spoken, and not rooted in the mind, does not minister to the work; the
words spoken do not carry that kind of operation upon them as to witness an
inward work wrought upon them.

But where there is an effectual work and operation in the soul, it continues
in its labor and travel from death to life. And as those heavenly things,
those divine operations of God's power are spoken of, there is an amen in your
souls, saying as far as you have traveled, thus has God dealt with me, he
has indeed by his power carried some beyond my state and condition, and my
faith is hereby strengthened, and my hope is confirmed. He that has begun a
good work so gloriously in my soul, will carry on his own work, and bring me to
higher seize, and further experiences that some of his servants bear
witness of.

So that now being exercised, the work goes on, and the pleasure of the Lord
prospers in Christians, that when they meet together in the name of the Lord,
they know for themselves that the Lord is present with them, they know what the
word of the Lord is unto them; if they hear the word preached to another state
and condition, yet they abide in and keep that which makes manifest to them in
their own state: And this suffers not the soul to be carried away with the
word, and sight and vision of a higher state than their faith can witness to;
and they keep low, and humble and tender, and have a care of their own souls;
as the apostle when he was come to glorious and high seize in the work of
the Lord, yet he would not glory of any thing, but what the grace of God
wrought in him: We do not boast of things that are not wrought in us.

It is possible for the creature to gather in, and comprehend the form of
things, that they have not the work of in them; and a great many have done so
to their great damage, and some, it is to be feared, to their utter ruin. They
have comprehended high things, and the notions of great seize; they have
heard them declared and spoken of thus, and so some have in their speculations
declared to others their conceptions about those things, yet those things were
never wrought in them; they could preach of humiliation, when the root of pride
was not removed; they could preach of regeneration, and the old man not put
off, and the new man created in righteousness not put on. All this kind of
preaching has been in the world, and is still too much in the world, but it
has not produced and brought forth any profit and advantage to the soul,
either to preacher or hearer; for it has not been accompanied with a divine
and heavenly blessing; but the true ministry ordained of God brings forth a
work of holiness and righteousness in the soul.

And therefore every one that God has thus reached, and has opened your
understandings, and has made you capable of comprehending and understanding
divine things, take heed lest by the subtlety of Satan, and the wiles of your
great enemy, you be at any time lifted up, and exalted in your minds, in the
notion of the things that you have not attained; not that you should not so
understand the things of God that God opens to you, as they are many times
opened to the creature, before the work of them is in the heart of the
creature: And why so? why are they opened to me? It is for thy encouragement,
that if thou do hold on, and be steadfast in waiting upon the Lord, these
things God has in store for thee.

Now the creature waits, and says, though I have not attained such things as I
have seen, yet the very sight of them encourages me to wait upon the Lord,
that I may experience the witness of them in myself: There are many that have
some taste of great joy, and apprehensions of heavenly things, which they have
not attained, but they know what they are waiting upon God for; not that they
may have a little joy, which passes through them, but come to have that joy
and tranquillity which will accompany them in all their doings, and their whole
conversation. God has opened many things to you, and you have seen the way of
righteousness which he has cast up for you; and many have taken strait steps
to themselves, till they have attained to say, now my salvation is nearer than
when I at first believed. Let such go on and follow that guide by which they
have been directed, and they shall at last attain to a further state, not only
to know that their salvation is now nearer than when they at first believed,
but that they may come through the Divine Spirit of grace that they followed,
and so closely cleaved to, as their blessed guide in their way, to have an
entrance administered to them abundantly into the salvation of God, whereby
they may sit down, in the kingdom of God, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
have a wall about them, which is the salvation of God.

Here is a great encouragement for sinners, and upright ones, to follow on to
know the Lord, and then they are sure they shall know him, for they shall
behold his glory, and their souls shall be satisfied, for nothing else will
satisfy them.

People may have great openings, and great discoveries of things, and may have
delight and joy in the opening of things, as it was with the disciples, when
Christ our Lord conversed with them in the flesh; he opened many things to
them, and they had great joy and comfort in those things which he opened to
them, yet there was something wanting to suffice them. Philip said unto Christ,
Lord show us the Father, and it suffices us: John xiv, 8. There was something
further to be discovered and revealed, so that they could not find their souls
to be satisfied and sufficed, till they had it. Christ gave them such an answer
as relates to that ministration that we are now under; he that has seen the
Son, has seen the Father. Now they had seen Christ daily, and conversed with
him, and had eat and drank with him in that fleshly and bodily appearance
wherein he conversed with them; but they had not a sight of the Eternal Son of
God in a spiritual manner, as he was the Son of God, and their Savior; they
had not seen him so. And he that has seen Christ in a spiritual manner, has
seen the Father also.

So it is with us in our day. We have, in our profession, the teaching of this
and that man. We have conversed with Christ, as it were, to his fleshly
appearance. We have read the history of his birth, and of his life and great
miracles, and of the great love he had to mankind, by which he laid down his
life for them. We have been conversing with Christ as to his fleshly
manifestation; but consider whether there does not, till now, remain an empty
place in our souls, something that is not sufficed and satisfied?

What would you have? Have you not scripture? Read you not there of the birth,
life, death, resurrection and ascension of Christ? I would still have something
more, for that will not suffice me; I would have pardon of sin, and my peace
with God, and the light of his countenance lifted up upon me, and further
manifestations of Christ to my soul. We can never see the glory of God, but in
the face of Jesus Christ. This is the discovery that Christ makes to the soul
that believes in him; this is that which gives satisfaction.

A Christian's work is to be conversing with him, and exercising his mind under
the gathering and teaching of him, that can lead him to the Father. None but
Christ can do that, lead them to the Father, and show them the Father; and he
has in our day revealed himself, and made himself manifest by his spirit, that
spirit, by which we come to know his holy teaching, reproof and instruction,
daily discovered in our souls. The spirit is our guide; that spirit we are led
by, and are to walk in. Let men go under what form and denomination they will,
they that have not the spirit of Christ, are none of his, until they come to be
guided by his spirit.

People are not led into sin by the spirit of Christ; they will tell you these
are the devil's temptations, and the frailty of our nature, and the corruption
of our hearts, by which we are led into sin; it is not the spirit of Christ. It
would be a horrid thing for men to say that the spirit of Christ led them into
sin; there are few or none so wicked as to say so. The business we are to do in
the world is, to obey the will of God: And where the understandings of men are
so illuminated, that they are satisfied in their minds, that God has been
pleased to give them a manifestation of the spirit to profit withal; all those
that have this spirit of Christ, are directed by it to do the will of God, and
to deny their own wills, and the will of others, that would draw them from
their duty that they owe to God in their generation.

It is an excellent state and condition for a man to be guided by the spirit,
and to be brought under the government of Christ, who is the way, the truth,
and the life. So that they that come under this government* are directed and
pointed out every day to do the will of God. This thou must do, and God will be
pleased with thee; and this thou may not do, for if thou do it, the Lord
will be angry with thee; it is sin against God. So that we have a heavenly
advantage of being taught of God by his spirit, to have the divine and heavenly
teaching of the spirit of God revealed in us; if we are at a loss, or make a
question, or dispute about a matter, the spirit will look us into all truth, if
we give up ourselves to his guidance and teaching.

This has been our desire and labor many years, not to draw people to observe
what we say; for who can direct another man in all things relating to the
service of God? If we were ever so certain ourselves, we could not convey
certainty and infallibility upon all occasions to another, if we should speak
ever so much, and be ever so conversant with them. Therefore our work is, that
all people, in all things relating to their souls, might have recourse
continually to the infallible teacher and guide, which God, through Jesus
Christ, has made known to them. If people be ruled by this, they cannot but
live in unity, and love one another; they will not fall into malice,
contention, and hatred one against another. It is impossible for nations to
make war, and destroy one another, if they would be guided by the unerring
spirit of Christ; for how should it contradict itself? For how can any thing
agree with the standard of truth, which Christ has set up, that acts in
contradiction to it? For nothing is truth but what concurs with it; therefore
it must needs agree with itself. If we be directed by the spirit, we shall call
that good which is really good; and that evil which is so. If there be
thousands directed by the spirit of Christ, which leads into all truth, that
which is good to one, is so to all; and that which is evil to one, is so to
all. We must first know what is good, and then receive power to do it. If we
come to be instructed by the unerring spirit, to know what is the good and
acceptable will of God, we shall receive daily power from him to do the will of
God; we shall all speak the same thing, and be of the same mind, and live in
love and unity. There is no evil wilfully done against God, where the spirit of
Christ, the gospel spirit, comes to prevail upon us; it will bring us to a
peaceableness of spirit, to live in love and unity. And the great work we have
in the world, will be to do the good and acceptable will of God, both with
respect to our solemn worship of God, and our duties toward our neighbors.
Then there will be tranquillity, peace and joy, and comfort to all the churches
of Christ that are under his government. And it is given to the sons and
daughters of men every where, when they come under the yoke of Christ, and take
up a daily cross, and live in self-denial; this will bring peace and concord
among them.

Many will come to our meetings, and spend a little time to hear what we say.
We exhort them to give up themselves to the peaceable government of the spirit
of Christ, that will finish transgression, and make an end of sin, and bring
into the soul (where sin reigned) everlasting righteousness. Where there is a
great deal of pride, malice and envy, the spirit of Christ will root it up; and
all that evil that the enemy has planted in men, he will pluck it up, and
bring in everlasting righteousness, and plant love in the same soul, and
establish and settle it. Such a one will have more joy, pleasure and delight,
under the government of the spirit of Christ in one day, than any one can have
that is governed by the evil spirit in a thousand days.

You say the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal; what profit shall we get? How does it appear, that the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to profit withal? Because there is that life and grace
stirring in the heart that makes it profitable, and truth does so prevail, that
it makes us do those things that are good and profitable, and to avoid those
things that are reprovable. If thou would hearken to the spirit, that is the
reprover, that convinces of sin, thou must turn away thy mind from that which
will lead into those things that are reproveable, otherwise thou will be under
condemnation in thine own bosom.

When the Spirit of God illuminates men to see sin, the evil of sin, he will
give them power against it; but when they come to receive power against it, and
stedfastness in the ways of God, what will be the effect of that? If I become
righteous, and live a holy life, and my companions be wicked, they will mock
me, and reproach me, what benefit shall I have by being righteous? I see
evidently I shall lose many advantages which I might otherwise reap, and reach
with mine own hand. I must forsake my profits and pleasure, and other delights
of this world.

The disciples said to Christ, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what
shall we have? People before they would forsake all would have something in the
room of it. Christ tells them, that he that has forsaken all, father and
mother, brother and sister, and house and land, for his name sake, shall have
in this life an hundred fold, and in the world to come, eternal life. What is
the meaning of that, they shall have in this life an hundred fold? Christ that
is truth itself, that cannot lie, has promised, that they that forsake all,
shall receive an hundred fold: Now people are ready to grasp at it; they think
it is something that will answer the loss of what they part withal; what thou
receivest in this promise, must not be of the same sort and kind with those
things thou did part withal; but when thou have parted with all for Christ's
sake, and the gospel, thou shall receive that which thou shall acknowledge is
an hundred fold better, and will make thee an hundred fold richer and happier,
and it will give thee an hundred fold more than all that thou have parted with
could give thee.

If we part with sin, we part with that which brings bondage and fear of death;
having parted with that, then thy fear and bondage is gone, and thou live
then the rest of thy lifetime at liberty: But this is not all, thou live in
the enjoyment of the favor of God, thou shall have the sense of his love, and
the comfort of his Holy Spirit, and you shall live in peace and righteousness,
and treasure up to yourselves glory, honor, immortality, and eternal life;
whereas before you did treasure up only wrath against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God; thou shall receive an hundred
fold, that which is an hundred fold better. Those that part with the things
that are reprovable, and do what Christ in his day performed, the good and
acceptable will of God, the enjoyments that he has in Christ, and the comfort,
peace and tranquillity he enjoys, is an hundred fold better and more delightful
than all the pleasures of sin, and the pleasures and delights of shows, and
sights and plays, and comedies, which vain men entertain themselves with in
their carnal state. A carnal man cannot understand and discern the things of
God, and the pleasures that are to be had in his holy ways; he only looks at
the things that are seen, which are temporal, and not at the things that are
not seen, which are eternal.

But, my friends, those things which are unseen, are not so unseen, but that
when a man has an eye opened within him of the same nature with those things,
he can see them: Blessed be God that we have an eye opened to see spiritual
things, to see the heavenly treasure, and enjoy it in these earthen vessels.

For all that have an ear to hear, it would be a profitable change to part with
all that is evil in the sight of God, and put themselves under the yoke of
Christ, and receive a principle of grace which he will communicate to them,
that they may do the good and acceptable will of God, and so may enjoy an
hundred fold, and have comfort, peace, and joy before they go hence, and are no
more seen.

You to whom God has so graciously and mercifully appeared, that have an
understanding, and a taste and feeling of those things which are divine and
spiritual, and which pertain to life and godliness; of all the people in the
world, you are an engaged people to serve the Lord; great obligations lie upon
you, that you should abide and continue in that which God has revealed and
discovered to you; I mean grace: For you will never grow, till you be under the
government of the grace of God, that grace that appeared to you before you came
to the knowledge of God and his ways, that has been with you in your travel
from death to life, and from darkness to light. Prize it as a heavenly jewel,
as that which contains in itself all those things that your soul stands in need
of. If you have any strength to resist temptation, it is from the grace of God
that you receive power to withstand temptations; if you have any living
openings in your hearts, it comes to you from that grace that is in Christ.
When this, and that, and the other prophecy of the prophets of old is opened to
you, prophesying and foretelling that state and condition which you are
traveling toward, how the Lord will subdue your enemies under you, you are
encouraged hereby to go on cheerfully in your way, to that rest which you are
traveling to.

There are many of those that believe the truth, who are not come to
establishment; and they will find the reason and cause in themselves. Do but
ask and enquire how it comes to pass, that such and such are established, and
not subject to fear, and horror, and perplexity, as I am? a little thing will
turn me over, and shake and unsettle my mind; this has been the cause, want of
keeping close to the grace of God in your conversation in the world. When you,
and your children, and servants are governed by the grace of God in all you
undertake, then the devil will endeavor to bring you into darkness, and bring
discomposure upon your spirits; for the purpose of Christ Jesus, our Savior,
is to settle you; and the purpose of the destroyer is, to discompose and
unsettle you, and to marry you to this and the other changing thing; if he can
fix your hearts upon this and that object, then there is instability upon the
soul; take away that thing, and it brings disturbance upon you. If thou have
any object that thy mind is set upon, thou will be much disturbed at the
parting with it; but whose fault is that? The truth manifested unto thee from
the beginning of thy conversion, did engage thee to separate thyself from all
visible, sensible things, that God might have thy heart and chief love. If he
had been thy God, nothing could disquiet thee, when separated from thee. If ye
will have other Gods besides him, you will lose your Gods; and when they are
taken from you, you will be like Micah, and say, ye have taken away my Gods,
and what have I more? Judge. viii, 24. The reason of your discomposure, and
anguish, and sorrow, was this; when you had some other Gods besides the Lord,
and your hearts did cleave to some temporary thing, and the trial came that you
had to part with it, you could not bear it.

If you would live a serene life, a life of tranquillity, set your minds upon
nothing but upon the Lord, let him be the object of your souls love; live in
the light of his countenance, and you may always rejoice: Consider, as for
temporals, you hold them of the Lord; God gives you this husband, that wife,
that child, that estate, God has entrusted you with it? but not so, but he
that has it must part with it, and be bereaved of it when God pleases. Now,
if you give up your hearts to God, here will be your establishment and
settlement, and you will have an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And would we seek to know and feel
wherein the communion of the saints stands; does it not stand in partaking
together of the bread of life, which our father gives us from Heaven? The
father spreads a table for us in the sight of our enemies, and we are
satisfied. They that come to partake of this table of the Lord, find strength
and refreshment; so do I, and also my brethren and sisters that sit at the same
table. We are daily confirmed and strengthened by what we receive from God, and
enjoy there; here is our heavenly fellowship and society; and where there is
this root of love, love cannot be wanting in the branches: There must be a
departing from the bread of life, before there can be any jarring and
contention among the members of the same body, for we receive life from the
same head, from which all the body, by joints and bands, having nourishment
ministered, are knit together, and increase with the increase of God, and are
built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly framed together,
grows unto a Holy Temple in the Lord.

Now that you may be all preserved in Christ, this is the end of our labor,
that so every one that has begun in the spirit, may go on in the spirit, and
never look for perfection in the flesh: That you that have begun in humility,
tenderness, and brokenness of heart, may in that meet together at times and
seasons, and have daily the presence of God among you, and have the bread of
life, which will nourish you to life everlasting, and that you may show forth
to the world, the glory, brightness, and excellency of that holy life, which in
Christ Jesus is manifested to you.

SERMON XII. PURE and SPIRITUAL WORSHIP.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, November 12, 1690.
THE worship of God, of the Great God, is pure; he is a holy God, of purer eyes
than to behold iniquity; and all they who will worship God, whose souls are
breathing to have a return of a testimony in his sight, must offer up pure
worship, and it must come from that which is pure: For that purpose, the
greatness of the love of God is made manifest in Christ Jesus; and there is a
diffusing of his grace and virtue in the hearts of the sons and daughters of
men, whereby he has laid a foundation for his own worship; because his worship
must be pure. Therefore he has freely given unto us, through his son, the
knowledge of that pure principle of life and grace, from whence, and out of
which, all true worship does spring, and all true honor to God arises; and
real obedience to his holy will springs forth out of that which is from himself.

And therefore all that will be worshippers of God aright, must first know and
be sensible wherein the ability and capacity stands, that may enable them to do
so great and so good a work. Some have conceived it to stand in their own will,
and according to the working of their own will, they have framed worships,
religions, and observations, thinking thereby to please God: But you know the
apostle in a few short words, lays down a positive Christian doctrine, without
faith it is impossible to please God.

Now this does declare and signify, that there must be something upon which
this faith must work, that must be the object and foundation of it: Faith as it
works in the creature, works upon something; it lays hold on something in
which there is a capacity of pleasing God. Now if we are all by nature children
of wrath, and that no one of himself can please God, then there must be
something that is supernatural, that must be the object of that faith by which
men alone can please God; and this must be made manifest to the creature for
its help, to be its director and supporter in that work that is too mighty for
himself, too great a work for a man or woman, too deep, too profound for any
man's abilities, power, wisdom, and acquirements, that he can attain to in this
world, to worship God aright. To worship God, that is to perform a pure worship
to a pure God; who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Now if we are all
obliged to bring a clean worship, a pure worship to a pure and holy God, who
has created us and all things, where shall we have it? Not out of an unclean
heart, not out of a defiled mind; there is no bringing it forth from thence,
for that is the state and condition that men are fallen into by sin, in which
their minds and consciences are defiled, their hearts are polluted, and their
affections depraved and set upon wrong objects; and in this state none can
serve God aright: That which is pure and holy must be first made known,
revealed, discovered, and believed, before people can perform a right worship
to God.

And therefore in vain is it, to go and drive people to this and that worship,
and force people to this and that service and conformity, upon the account of
the worship of God. This is vain worship; when they have done all, it is not
acceptable to God; the poor creature has no return from the Lord, for God
accepts no service or worship, but only through his Son. And if so be, men
cannot pray and preach in the spirit of his son, and cannot present their
complaints and supplication to God, but by the assistance and help of his
blessed Spirit, there is no reason in religion why people should expect a
return and answer from God of the prayers they make. For it is the general
doctrine of Christendom, that Christ Jesus is appointed of God for a Mediator
between God and man, and all the acceptance we have, or desire to have, must be
through him: And therefore if we pray without him, and perform this and the
other duty without him, it is contrary to the doctrine of Christianity, to
think that ever we should have acceptance in God's sight.

Therefore there is a necessity for every man and woman that desires to be
religious, that has a religious mind, and is willing to worship God, and serve
God aright, there is a necessity that they come to the knowledge of Christ, who
tells us that he is the way to the Father. They that go any other way, go a
wrong way; but they that go unto God by Christ, they do receive from him power
to draw near to God; and through him they receive from God all those blessings
that their souls stand in need of.

So here would be an end of all religions the world is full of; of all the
several worships that men have made. They have invented and found out several
ways for people to worship and serve God. This and the other ceremony; this and
the other observation and method of preaching and praying. If all this be
without the assistance and divine help of the Mediator, through whom alone we
can justly expect acceptance at God's hands, it is all good for nothing.
Therefore the first lesson of a Christian in point of worship, is, that he come
to the knowledge of Christ, by whom, and through whom, he may expect favor
with God.

Now some people say, we are already come to the knowledge of Christ; we have
read the relation in the gospel of his conception, birth, life and death,
resurrection and ascension. Now where this belief does give a man this kind of
Christian knowledge, it does open a door and way for him into the presence of
God. This is a question that ought seriously to be considered; for if we err in
this question, we err in all: This is like stumbling at the threshold, and
never coming into the house. If we mistake in laying hold of Christ, we mistake
in our worship, and in all matters that relate to life and salvation.

For if we must have another sort of knowledge of Christ, than we can have from
the reports of others; if I must have Christ revealed in me before I can have
the hope of glory; if I must have the spirit of Christ in me, to help me to put
up my requests and supplications, before he can present them to the Father,
then all literal knowledge and faith cannot stand men in any stead; this is
evident by the testimony of all the writers of the New Testament. Christ and
his apostles did concurrently signify, that the hope of a Christian, the power
and strength of a Christian, all lies in this, that they had known the
revelation of Christ, and the powerful operation of the spirit working in them;
this was that which was well pleasing to God. Many scriptures might be spoken
of, but you know the scriptures, and can read them, and see in them the
concurrent testimony of all holy men to this day, that the knowledge they had
of Christ was a divine knowledge, a spiritual knowledge; it was a knowing him
after the spirit; it was a revelation of Christ in them, that separated and
distinguished them from reprobates; even the knowledge of God through Jesus
Christ their Lord. Why should not we come to this knowledge as well as they?
The Lord is the same, and his power is the same, and his arm is not shortened.
We may see as much need of divine assistance, and divine love, as ever men did;
we can perform no duty, either of prayer or preaching, without divine
assistance; not so much as a sigh or groan, that may have acceptance with God,
without the help of his Spirit. The Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself makes
intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered: Romans viii, 26. If
we go about the duty of prayer without divine assistance, we see what sad work
we make of it; if we pray not in the spirit, and with the understanding, how
can we receive the thing we pray for? But if we pray in the spirit, and with
the understanding also, then the spirit helps our infirmities; the spirit that
came from God brings us the things we stand in need of.

So that a Christian has a foundation for his worship and Christian
performance; what is that foundation? Nothing that is corrupt, if it be, it is
good for nothing; for nothing that is corrupted and that defiles, can be
acceptable and pleasing to God; we are all polluted and defiled by nature; how
can carnal men worship a Spiritual God? Carnal men that are in death and
darkness, cannot worship that God that is light, and dwells in light, that is
inaccessible, that is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. Carnal men want a
foundation for their worship, and will until they come to that foundation that
God has laid.

Now, that I may speak intelligibly what the Lord has laid upon my heart, I
would say thus: There is an universal benefit and privilege distributed and
given freely of God, unto the sons and daughters of men, in their natural
state, through his Son, Jesus Christ, in that he has caused his light to
shine, and his grace to be extended to every man; for the grace of God, which
brings salvation (for it is not by works) has appeared unto all men, and
brings light, by which every man may see how to worship God; God has
enlightened every man, and this light comes by Christ the Mediator; this
Mediator is the way that men must walk in, if they will come back again to God;
for men are run out and departed from God; if men will draw near to God, and
take some footsteps towads the kingdom of God, from the kingdom of sin and
satan, they must mind the way, the way must be their director, they must not go
which way they list.

This is that which was prophesied of Christ; says God, by the prophet Isaiah,
I will give him for a leader. I would fain return to God, and go out of the
kingdom of sin and satan, to the kingdom of God: God has given Christ to lead
me; if knew what way he would lead me in, I would go that way. As soon as a man
takes hold of Christ, his grace, and spirit, and life, he will be ready to say,
I am corrupt; my senses are corrupt, my mind is depraved, my conscience defiled
and polluted; but I have found out something that God has bestowed upon me,
that is essential, holy and pure, that did never consent to my corruption, but
is a witness for God against it: Here now a Christian lays hold on Christ, the
leader; which way will he lead me? If thou layest hold of this guide, he will
lead thee out of evil, he will teach thee to cease to do evil, and speak evil:
This light will lead thee to nothing that will dishonor God, or defile thine
own soul: But this is not all, we must not only cease to do evil, but we must
be doing something; there must be a breaking off from pride, foolish jesting,
evil communication; but this is not all that he will lead me to; let us learn
that lesson, cease to do evil. This doctrine was preached before Christianity
was preached, as it is now preached; the prophets of old preathed this doctrine
to the Jews that were under an outward administration, cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, then I will plead with you, and discourse with you, says the
Lord: Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool.

This is the first lesson that a true Christian learns in his turning to God,
in his change and translation, to cease from that which is evil: Here is a
cessation of rebellion, and here is some hopes of being reconciled to God; a
man has been a rebel against his Maker, but he has now received help to
resist those temptations that prevail over him: But there is no worshipping
yet, there is a forward mind in men to do something that is pleasing to God;
but there are some that are not troubled at all for their evil ways, and dread
not God's anger, but make a mock at sin, that draw others to it, and make
themselves merry in it: And there is a sort so far touched with a divine sense
of God's love to them, that they have also a sense of his anger and
indignation, because of their sin; and they would be fain out of his anger; and
who can blame them? When a man feels the anger of God burning like a fire in
his bosom, who can blame that man if he desire peace with God? If he be under a
sense of the displeasure and indignation of the Almighty, he must not haste too
soon out of that condition he is brought into; for this is God's purpose, and
this is the fruit of all his troubles and afflictions, to take away sin: God
has no other end or design in the affliction that is upon him, than to take
away sin; when God has brought a people into a distressed and dejected state
for their sin, the fruit that God expects, is the taking away of their sin, and
he will hide pride from them, and humble them before him; if this be the
purpose of God, that he intends to purge and purify his people; then says the
poor creature, it God design to purify me from sin, then I will pray to God to
support me, and bear me up under his indignation: That is the cry of the soul
that he may not be brought too soon from under the judgment of God, but may be
supported and hid in the hollow of God's hand, until the time of remission and
refreshing comes, that he may behold the light of God's countenance.

Here is encouragement for every one that is acquainted with this divine
principle of grace, that will be led by it, and follow it so far as to be led
out of evil; then they will be fitted to do something in the work of God; every
sigh and groan that thou have the assistance of the spirit of God to help thee
in, is a part of worship: All thy brokenness of heart is part of worship;
hereby thou acknowledgest the great God, that he is able to help thee on in thy
way, and to pardon thy iniquity, and blot out thy transgression, and give thee
all those heavenly blessings that thy soul does stand in need of. Then thy soul
will how down to God in acts of holy worship, and say, with a humble confidence
and expectation, God will do all those things in me, and for me, that will
promote my salvation. It is nothing in religion for people to go from praying
and preaching to sinning; but God must have a holy sacrifice, and that must
come out of a pure heart. Now when a man is brought by the help of God, and by
the divine assistance of the Mediator. Jesus Christ, to break off from his sin,
then he stands fair to become a child of God, and to be a servant of God, and
to do something for God in his generation, and to offer to God praise and
thanksgiving, and to perform all other duties that God shall lead him into.

But some will say, what, must not we do any thing? I have deeply weighed that
question, what a poor man or woman must do, that is come out of bondage. There
is a propensity in people to be doing, they would fain do something, they would
be doing; they say, what shall I do? If I do something that pleases not God, I
had better let it alone; and I can do nothing acceptable to God without divine
assistance: Such a one that sees his own impotency and inability, will cast his
care upon God, and will say, the Lord is able to lead me and guide me: I am
ready to do thy will, O God! Make it clear to me that this is thy will, and
that this is that which thou requirest; I am ready to do it, though it be a
cross to mine own will: He is ready to go on in God's way, in the way of
Christianity; such a one that has the true knowledge of Christ, if he speaks,
the Spirit of Christ speaks in him; if he prays, it is through the assistance
of the Spirit of Christ, through whom God alone is appeased and reconciled, and
through whom they may receive a blessing from God's hands: But for men to run
on in their own wills, and to do a thing because they will do it, they had
better sit still; this doing in their own wills, has filled the world with a
sort of Christians that want acceptance with God, which is to be had alone
through the Lord Jesus Christ; and the want of the guidance of God's Holy
Spirit, is the misery and downfall of Christianity in our days.

Therefore it is our work and business to build upon that foundation which God
has laid; no worship is pleasing to God, but that which arises from that
spring that is pure and holy: If I cannot find that which will keep me from all
pollution and defilement, if I cannot find that, I must stay till I can; to
begin a worship and a religion without I know that it is acceptable to God, is
but lost labor, and time spent in vain.

Therefore, friends, let every one that desires to be religious, turn their
mind inward, wait for the gift of God, which is essentially pure, that never
did consent to evil, that never mixed with the corruption of nature, but bears
witness to the light, that will guide you and lead you, and conduct you first
out of sin; then it will lead you into that worship and religion, and the
performance of those things that are pleasing to God. They that are come thus
to worship, they do not only know what the Lord requires of them, and when he
requires it of them, but they are given up into the hands of God; they pray,
preach, exhort, and live according to the will of God.

It is hard for people in a carnal state to believe this; but you that are
believers, that are come to know the gift of God in yourselves, and the
necessity of being ruled by him, you will believe us, for none else will
believe us; let us preach to as many people and nations as we will, none will
receive us as true ministers, but those that have the truth in their own
hearts; if there be any that despises the grace of God in his own heart, he
hates that which chides and reproves him; if there be such a man, he will hate
me because I am a minister and a witness of the grace of God, and of that truth
in the inward parts, which is the ground and foundation that man has of
acceptance with God. A wicked, carnal wretch will say, I hate such a one, I
hate the light, that which checks me, and witnesses against me; thou art such
a one as bear witness against me, therefore I hate thee: It is very true, it
cannot be otherwise. Now our desire and labor is, that men may come to the
love of the truth in themselves.

You know there are a great many other ministers, whose labor is to persuade
people to believe what they say; to lay down a doctrine, and prove it by
scripture and reason, and set it home upon their minds by such testimony as the
scripture affords, and hereupon they prevail on the minds and judgments of
people, to believe what they lay down.

It is easy to lay down a position, and prove it, and convince people that it
must be according to scripture; but when a person is convinced of a principle
of truth, he is not regenerated thereby, and come to God; therefore, though he
cannot deny the doctrine of truth in words, yet he can deny it in works, and
does not rightly come to love it. If people would believe what we say, and
observe what argument we bring to prove a position, they may be convinced of
the doctrine of truth, and come to a profession of it, and yet be strangers to
it, till they come to love it in themselves: If it were not for this, we would
leave preaching, if God had not given a measure and manifestation of the spirit
to every man to profit withal. You have it in yourselves, we are but as
monitors to you, to put you in mind of it; you have so much business in the
world, that you have not had leisure to take notice of it.

A man may have a rich jewel, and be poor notwithstanding, till he come to know
the value of it.

A man has a rich and precious jewel; a pearl bestowed upon him, that would
make him rich in faith and love to God, and qualify him for the kingdom of God,
and make him an heir of it; but he knows not, nor understands the value of it,
and esteems it not; therefore God has raised up ministers to put you in mind
of it, that you may be happy forever, and live in blessedness to all eternity;
whosoever has an ear to hear, let him hear; and when they hear what we say,
let them take the benefit of it to their own souls. We bring not truth to you,
but God has bestowed it upon you; you will be rich indeed, if you do as a man
that bought a field where the precious pearl was, and dug till he found it.
Come to the foundation upon which you should build all your hopes of happiness,
and depend not upon your own works, or religious performances, for acceptance
with God; for there is no acceptance with God, but only through Christ, we are
only accepted of God through him. Those that will become Christians indeed, and
worship God as he has ordained and appointed himself to be worshipped, they
must come to the principle of light and grace in their own hearts, which they
have in, and through Christ, and they will find acceptance with God.

SERMON XIII. The DIVINE LIFE of CHRIST JESUS.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, March 16, 1691.
THE blessed life of Christ is not of this world; and it ought to be your care
in all your religious assemblies, that you be gathered into the inward, feeling
sense, of this divine life; that you may feel your fellowship and communion in
that life of Christ that is not of this world. And may all of you lay hold upon
it; for this is the nourishment and the heavenly bread, with which the children
of the kingdom are fed and nourished from day to day; there are many that feed
upon words, that are not the children of the kingdom of God; but the begotten
of God are come to know the virtue of the divine life, Christ Jesus; their
feeding and their nourishment is by every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of God, and they grow up to life eternal by that divine and heavenly gift, that
God the Father has bestowed upon them, through his Son Jesus Christ; and they
enjoy the communion of saints, through this divine Head of the Church, that
communicates of his life and virtue through every member, by which they are
sanctified, and every day more and more prepared for that living and eternal
inheritance laid up for the children of God.

And when there are a people that are thus gathered into the life of the Lord
Jesus Christ, they are able to draw nigh to God; they feel the power of
entrance, because their sin is removed that did formerly lie at the door; and
the way is opened and consecrated for them to draw nigh and partake of the
table of the Lord, by which they grow stronger and stronger in his might and
power, and are thereby enabled to perform the whole will of God, and that
divine worship and religious service, which God requires at their hands in
their day.

For it is very certain, and we have found it by experience, that the words of
our Lord to his disciples of old are true; without me (says he) ye can do
nothing. For though people may meet together, and may pretend and set up a form
of worship, and of religion in their own wills, yet it all amounts to nothing,
with respect to acceptance with the Lord; there is no return in their souls, no
addition of life, nor increase and growth of life; they are not nearer the
kingdom than when they first believed, but many times further off; by leaning
upon a formality, and not really entering into the work of God, nor traveling
out of death into life; for there must be a path, and a traveling in it; the
soul must have an exercise through the power and life of Jesus, for the
overcoming of death, that did separate from God, and a preparing for life, that
life that unites us to God again: And when people are in earnest in this
travel, they are resigned up to the government, direction and leading of him
that is gone before, that has made a way for us, and will further our progress
toward the kingdom of God.

And, therefore, my friends, you know the way, and know how the power has
reached to you, and has opened your understandings that you may be faithful to
that power in your own souls, and may have the use and true improvement of
this, and all other such meetings as this, for the gathering of your minds out
of all visible and changeable objects, unto that life which God has revealed,
that so in the exercise of it, you may hold your fellowship with God, and with
one another; here is the bond of perfection, here is that in which God has
created peace and rest, and joy for his people; so far as every one is partaker
of this innocent life, and feels himself changed into it, they are gathered
into the church, and they are gathered into fellowship with the head of it, and
are comforted in their membership, in their partaking together.

Though I be but a little one, yet I partake of the same virtue which the Lord
administered to the greatest saints, while I am a waiting upon him, and of the
same divine consolation, and operation, and power that weaneth more and more
from the world, and that which is corruptible, and raises up in me daily more
and more fervent desires after that bread that perishes not.

Now herein men and women have an evidence of that Christianity in themselves,
the Spirit of God bearing record and witness with their Spirits, which all the
loose professors of Christianity in the world are strangers to, their evidence
in themselves, being against them; they seek to have evidence without them, and
to gather up some kind of marks and tokens, and sayings, and sentenccs, from
without them, to make them believe that they are in covenant with God, and that
they are in a state of salvation by Christ; but he that truly believes, has
an evidence of his Christianity, and of his reconciliation with God; and he
has this evidence in himself, a divine, spiritual testimony that answers to
his own spirit, that witnesses to him, that he is one of the children of God.

And my friends, to this you are called, whether you are come to it or no; it
is this you are called to with a heavenly call, that you might no longer live
in the rudiments of the world, to be seeking and looking here and there, for a
ground of peace and of rest; a ground of hope, but may know and feel the same
thing, the same ground of eternal hope that the saints of old had; what is
that? what reason did they give and render of their hopes of eternal glory? The
apostle tells you plainly the ground or reason of their hope of being glorified
in the world to come, was Christ in them the hope of glory. They witnessed that
Christ gave his life for the world. Take the glorious testimony that the
apostle did bear in one of his epistles; says he, the life was manifested in
me; it was not covered up or hidden, that people could not find it; God was
pleased to bring it to light by the gospel; when a thing is brought to light,
you may see it. This he affirmed in his day, and the same is affirmed in our
day. The life is manifested; what life? Not the life of this world, but a life
not defiled, not polluted, but the life that is of God, a heavenly life that is
holy and pure; that life is manifested; we have seen it, and we exhort all to
lay hold of it, to lay hold of eternal life: Some had a sight of it, that had
not laid hold of it; they saw it in a vision, and they might say possibly, oh
that I could live such a life, that there were no sin in me, in my words, or
thoughts, or actions, what a gracious life would that be! They had seen that
life, they had tasted of it, but they did not lay hold of it, but let it go by
them: Take heed of that, when you have seen it with open eyes. Blessed are your
eyes, for they have seen, and your ears, for they have heard, says Christ to
his disciples: They saw that life that was holy, harmless and undefiled. Lay
hold on this life, especially when you are thus assembled together, in a solemn
manner in the presence of the Lord, waiting to behold it, and see it more and
more discovered to you, and labor to have that gathering power that will bring
you to it, that you may know the strength that comes by it to the soul.

There is none of you, but what will meet with temptations in this world, that
will draw you into death and darkness, to things that are carnal, and sensual,
and devilish sometimes. How shall I stand if I be not centered in that life
that was before the world began, and before the devil was? If I labor to feel
the influence of that divine power, that is able to keep me, my faith tells me
so: I know that power is able to keep me, if I keep in the exercise of it. The
trust of a true believer is, that whatsoever temptations and trials they are
exercised with, they know one already come, in whom they have trusted, who is
both able and willing to deliver them. So by this means he is kept harmless,
and innocent, and blameless in his life and conversation. Thus you might be
kept, if you would regard, and have respect to the life that is manifested in
you.

Whosover comes to know, and feel and witness in their souls the discovery and
revelation of the life of Jesus, they know there is in it a certain dominion
over that which is contrary to it; and you have many of you had experience of
the exercise of the power of God in your own hearts, that has enabled you to
reign over those things, that have formerly ruled over you: That you can now
subdue vain thoughts, and evil desires, that you can withstand temptations that
come from without, and from within. Now if you could do this, and if ever you
have done it, you did it by that power that God discovered and revealed in you
from Jesus Christ: You had not such hold of this once, before you believed, but
by believing, the word of God sent it unto you; it being fixed by faith in the
heart, that faith which is of the operation of God: You could then do that
which you could not do before, and forbear that which you was led away by.
These experiences which God has given you, should encourage you to hold on in
your labor and travel, and engage you to grow in the grace of God, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whatsoever is propounded by men in the
profession of religion, this ought to be our design and end, in the discovery
that is made to us of the life of Christ; that we may grow in it, and live in
it; (indeed there is great talking of it) but we should labor to show forth
the resurrection of that life in us.

They that come to be baptized for the dead, are baptized into the death of
Christ; the apostle tells you, in that he died, he died unto sin. There are
none baptized for the dead, and made partakers of the death of Christ, but
those that died unto sin, as he died. Though Christ had no sin, yet he died
unto sin: What use did he make of this, that Christ knew no sin, but yet did
take our sin upon him? He died unto sin, that they which did partake of his
death, might be partakers of his resurrection: He lives again, and after death
rises again.

Those that partake of this death unto sin, are crucified unto this world, and
have taken up Christ's cross, and are dead to all the pleasures and delights of
this world, which are withered away and come to nothing. What do they live to
now? To righteousness, holiness, chastity, temperance; these are pleasant to
them; these come to live to righteousness, through the power of him that loved
them. This shows the glory and the power of the grace of God. It is the grace
of God that works such a change in a man or woman. They that delight in sin
and wickedness, in that which is corrupt and ungodly, they have no delight in
this, no delight in sobriety, chastity, holiness, and purity of mind. In whom
has it wrought such a change? In all that are freely given up to it. Where any
one is given up to that life, the grace of God has the praise of it. This is
the exaltation and praise of the power of God; so that others may find by this,
that they may by it come to believe, and by beliving, to be saved.

Thus the gospel has gone forth, from one to many, and from these to many
more, and is increasing more and more; for (...), mercy and peace, are
multiplied, by which the heritage of God, and so every man and woman that
partake of this life, are gathered into fellowship.

So that your end in coming to these meetings, is not so much to hear what
this, and that, and the other friend faith; but what you have in yourselves to
witness to: The divine operations of the power of God in your souls, bringing
down something that is to be brought down, and raising up something that is to
be raised. Temptation to sin has more prevalency upon me, than it has upon
this, and that, and the other man. I am not come to their degree, yet it is
better with me than it was at my first convincement. If thou do say this and
deceive others, cry to God, and pray earnestly that all may be brought down
which is contrary to his grace. If thou say and professest this, to
strengthen that, which is known, by the light of Christ, to be against the
truth of God, if at the same time there is a deceitful heart, how will this
appear at the great day of God? The eye of God is upon thy hypocrisy; he that
never slumbers nor sleeps, he beholds thee, if there be any sin that thou
would keep and save alive. If thou make a profession, and notwithstanding
say, this sin I will keep, the Lord pardon me in this thing; like Naaman,
the servant of the king of Assyria, who said to the prophet, thy servant
henceforth will neither offer burnt offering, nor sacrifice to other Gods, but
unto the Lord. In this the Lord pardon thy servant, that when my master goes
into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand, and I bow
myself in the house of Rimmon; when I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, the
Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. He knew if he bowed not, the king would
take notice of the alteration of his gesture, therefore he would bow in the
house of Rimmon: That sin he would save alive under a profession: That
hypocrisy the Lord did abominate.

Be upright in the sight of God, and be faithful to your own souls; if it be
so, then every sin will be a burden, and you will long to be rid of it; if it
be so, you know whose hand it is that has brought you so far; if you be really
cordial, and give up yourselves to Jesus, that work which he has begun in you,
he will finish for you. He will finish it for you, stand out with him in
nothing; give up yourselves to him, and join not with his enemies; take heed of
hearkening to them; take heed of every sin that will at last be a burden and
oppression to your souls.

But if you live this heavenly life of Jesus, you will be set at liberty, to
have dominion over sin, and to stand without guilt before the throne of God.
Friends, let your hearts be deeply affected with the great mercies that God
has bestowed upon you, and for his gift to you of that divine life that is
acceptable in his sight.

Many things have been done upon the account of religion, and we could never be
satisfied whether they were acceptable to God; we could not be satisfied
whether we did any thing pleasing to God: We may say of them as the apostle
Paul did of the Jewish sacrifices, there remains a conscience of sin, an
accusing conscience, that tells us, that guilt is not removed, nor the sin
taken away, till the Lord opens this divine mystery to us, that our
justification must be by faith in Jesus; that nothing could reconcile us to God
but the life of Jesus, and the merit of his death.

This life of Jesus was a holy, blameless, harmless, and innocent life, which
life he gave for the world; which life is the light of men; and our souls being
turned to this life, we see the glory and the excellency of it, and desires are
kindled in our hearts after it. Many have pursued, and labored, and traveled,
that they might come to the enjoyment of it. The very discovery of this life
ought to be highly prized, and your souls affected with it; and when you have
obtained it, you will say, O! what a blessed condition am I come into! that
Christ has manifested his divine power in me, not only in reconciling me to
God, but taking away the conscience of sin; by that alone the accuser is cast
out, and I may now sing to God, songs of deliverance. Now you taste of the
mercies that God has bestowed upon you; this will affect your souls with a
child-like submission and subjection to him, that has begun to save and
deliver you, that so you may resign up yourselves to his will, and forsake the
world, and the things of it.

Now when these come to such a meeting as this, their minds may be retired, and
they may be sensible of the power of truth upon their hearts; but for want of
keeping their subjection to the divine power, that has opened their
understandings, when they come into the world again, they are ensnared and
entangled, and many times, for want of watchfulness, through a looseness of
mind, and unruliness of tongue, they run into anger and passion, and this
grieves the Holy Spirit of God. And how should you come to God through the
Mediator, when you grieve his Spirit, and quench the motions of it.

These things have been hurtful to many, that in their time might have been
pillars in the house of God. Take heed of this, and let the goodness of God
dwell upon your minds, that you may feel and experience the inward
administrations of it; there are many that are much affected with the outward
ministry, and are very desirous to hear the servants of God declare the things
that God has wrought for them, and in them, and the wonderful things that God
has opened to them; yet when you have heard all that man can say about it, if
the divine ministry of the word of God does not make powerful impressions upon
you, and sanctify and renew your souls, the outward ministry of the word will
do you no good.

Now that you may be established in the truth that you have been taught, this
testimony arises in me, to desire every one to heed and attend to the
manifestation of this life of Jesus in yourselves. Whatsoever God has bestowed
upon me or another, you may perish for all that, and I am not the better for
what God has bestowed upon you, but may perish notwithstanding; but that God
has manifested eternal life to my soul, let that be every ones center: This
will make you holy and blameless, and preserve you in every state, and in the
hour of temptation, and in the midst of snares; this will be a bulwark to you;
this will be as the walls of Zion, which is the salvation of the Lord. That so
you may be preserved sensible of the goodness of the Lord: That grace, mercy,
and peace may be multiplied in your bosoms; this will make you dear and
affectionate one to another.

Though there may be an external fellowship among those that preach and profess
the same doctrine, yet when they come off from that, when once men depart from
the power of truth, they grow stubborn and rebellious; but when men come to be
gathered into the inward fellowship that stands not in terms and words, but in
the revelation of Christ, and in the participation of his virtue and goodness;
the more you are united in this, the more you are knit one to another, and
become useful and helpful one to another.

The Lord vouchsafe to every one of you a taste of his goodness, and you will
prefer it above all that the devil has, and his instruments can present; and if
you retire more into this heavenly and divine life of Jesus, you will feel and
enjoy more peace and satisfaction, and true consolation in your souls, than I,
or any man in the world can tell you of.

SERMON XIV. The KINGDOM of GOD within.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, July 26, 1691.
YOU have read and heard much concerning the day of the Lord, as a great and
notable day; many of you are now living witnesses that the great and notable
day of the Lord is coming, in which the accomplishment of great and notable
things, the mighty works of God, which have been prophesied of, may be lawfully
expected. It is the work of every Christian to wait upon the Lord in the light
of this day, and to be acquainted with the works of the Lord, both inwardly and
outwardly; for the day of the Lord is a day of power, and that power of God
works wonderful things; and if we are not kept in the light of that day, the
Lord may work great things, and we not know it; we shall be looked upon as
careless and negligent witnesses of the works of the Lord, as those that do not
regard them. If you would be faithful witnesses, you must have regard to the
works of the Lord, and the operations of his hands. One that is minded to be a
faithful witness, he will take notice of what is said and done; you are called
to be witnesses of the works of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his doings; you
must stand where you may hear, and see, and understand what the Lord is about
to do at this time.

In testimony and witness bearing, the greatest thing we have to expect in this
day of the Lord, is, that God will set up the kingdom of his Son Christ Jesus;
and unto this all the prophets did bear witness in their time, and now it is
our turn to bear witness of it, by sensible and living experiences of the
accomplishment of those things that they prophesied of, that the Lord will set
up the kingdom of Christ, and bring down and lay waste the kingdom of
Antichrist. This our Savior taught his disciples to pray for* more than
sixteen hundred years ago, that the kingdom of God might come; and all the true
disciples of Christ ever since have prayed for the coming of this kingdom, and
many of them have seen the coming of it, and rejoiced; and others have died in
the faith of it, and have been gathered into the kingdom of Heaven.

But, my friends, that which chiefly concerns us at this day, is to behold the
kingdom of Christ, the eternal Son of God, within us, to go forward and
prosper; and the kingdom of Antichrist suppressed and destroyed, and utterly
laid waste; and this is wrought two ways, first, inwardly; second, outwardly.

First, inwardly; there is a great inclination in the minds of people, to look
more at the operation of God's power in this great work outwardly, than to look
at it inwardly, but unto that there must be a daily cross taken up, and it is
my business at this time to tell you in the name of the Lord, that your duty
and mine is to turn our minds to the working of the power of God in ourselves,
and to see that other kingdom of the man of sin weakened and brought down
within us; then there is no fear but he will carry on his work outwardly, and
we shall see as much of that work as belongs to our generation; but the great
matter and chief government of you and me, is to see the kingdom of God set up
within us, which stands in holiness and righteousness: Our business is to walk
till we see the righteousness of this kingdom set up within us, in our hearts
and souls, and to have a real change made.

We all know, and we must confess, that we have been subject to the man of sin,
whatsoever we are now. We have seen the reign and government, the rage and
tyranny of the wicked one, that has led us into rebellion and disobedience to
the Lord our Maker. How do we like that government, to be ruled by the devil,
and to be led captive, and to be made to do his will, and to rebel against God
that gave us our life, and breath, and being? How do we like the government of
satan? I hope we do none of us like it. It was so with me; and they that are
under the tyrannical government of satan, have many cries and wishes in their
souls, that they were freed and delivered from it, and brought under the
government and obedience of Christ Jesus; and that they were able to serve God
as they ought to do, that they might be translated from the kingdom of sin and
satan, into the kingdom of the blessed and dearly beloved Son of God.

This has been the cry of some ever since they have known the word; and I am
persuaded it is the cry of many at this day. I have good news to bring you; not
that the day of your redemption draws nigh, but that it is come; the day of
redemption is now come, and there are a great many blessing and glorifying the
name of God that they are redeemed, and delivered from the bondage of
corruption; and have more joy and delight in the service of God, that made
them, than ever they had in the service of the God of this world.

But may not some say, how shall this great work be wrought? For it is a great
work, and we verily think that nothing but an Almighty Power can effect it. For
there are many in this assembly have been trying to no purpose, and done what
they could in their own strength, to deliver their own souls from death, and
yet they find themselves in bondage still; nay, they have called in the help
and assistance of those that they thought to be stronger than themselves, and
all have failed, and they are yet weak and entangled, and they cannot find
themselves at liberty to serve the Lord as they ought to do.

I am of this mind, that nothing but the Almighty Power of God can do it; and
when you have come to my experience, to know this as I have done, then I hope
you will seek after that, and you will see good reason for it; and you will
then come to this profession, if the Lord puts not forth his Almighty Power, I
must then perish, for there is no other power can deliver me. When you come to
know this, what must you do? Why you must wait for the revelation of that power
that will take you off from all trust and confidence that you have ever had in
any thing else: A man that has nothing to trust to but the Almighty Power, and
mercy, and goodness of God, he puts his whole trust and confidenee therein, or
else he knows he must perish.

When a man or woman comes to this pass, that they have nothing to rely upon
but the Lord, then they will meet together to wait upon the Lord: And this was
the first ground or motive of our setting up meetings; and I would to God that
this was the use that every one would make of them that come to them, then they
would be justly and properly used, according to the end of the institution of
them at first; we should use them as poor desolate helpless people that are
broken off from all their own confidence and trust, and have nothing to rely
upon but the mercy and goodness of God; and if he pleases to reveal his power
among us, we know that he is able to save us. And when we have met with the
revelation of God's power, and we have met together in simplicity of mind, the
Lord was pleased to communicate his Spirit to us, and open a door for us, and
discover and reveal to us that it was the day of his power: And when we came to
examine ourselves whether we were willing in this day of God's power (for the
prophet gives us a note of distinction between the people of God, and other
people; thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power; which is as much
as to say, when God discovers and reveals his power to them, such a people are
willing to give themselves over to the government of it; when we found we were
subject to it, we had joy in believing, before we attained the end of our hope;
it was gladness to us we found ourselves willing; and I am persuaded that every
one of you would be glad to find yourselves willing to part with that which you
cry out against.

What a cry is there of our bondage and corruption, and of our being led
captive by our lusts. We may hear such a cry from one end of the kindgom to the
other: People cry out of the bondage of corruption, and of their subjection to
sin and satan: I would they were in earnest; there is not that earnestness and
reality in men and women that God looks for, and so there comes nothing of it.
There is no redemption, and no deliverance; the Lord does not hear them, though
they come now adays into his presence, to offer up their prayers. I would have
you to be in good earnest, I wish well to you all; and it would be hard to say
that you do not wish well to yourselves. Here lies your welfare, that you find
yourselves willing to be subject to the power that made you; you have been
subject doubtless to the power that destroyed you; that power that never gave
you life and breath, and would be instrumental of your destruction: The power
of the God of this world never did men good, but destroyed them, deceived them,
and deprived them of their lives.

Now if there was but a willingness in every one of us, freely to give up
ourselves to that power that created us, to obey his will, I am sure there is
never a man or woman among us should long be without the knowledge of it. If I
am but willing to be subject to the law of him that made me, it will not be
long before he discover it to me, and reveal his power in me in the glory and
excellency of it; that power which is more able to preserve me, than all the
power of men on earth, or all the power of the devils in hell is able to
destroy me. When the Lord shall discover and reveal his power in you, you will
be willing to be subject to it.

But methinks the sound and noise of flesh and blood grows loud here: I would
be subject to God, but I would not have him cross mine interest, and deprive me
of that I love and thirst after; I would not have him imbitter my carnal
delights and pleasures, and undo me as to my reputation in the world.

You may see whence this comes, that you would make a bargain, and draw a
contract with the God of your lives about these things; this is a nonsensical
thing; because of all people in the world, you are a people that have had a
veneration for the holy scriptures, the scriptures of truth, and have been
acquainted with them as familiarly as with any book in the world, wherein you
find articles drawn, long ago fixed and sealed; and no new ones are to be
drawn. If any one will be my disciple, John or Thomas, James or Peter, or
whosoever he be, he must take up his daily cross, and deny himself, and follow
me. Now here is a contract made, therefore turn aside from all kind of
reasoning and consulting with flesh and blood.

If you will become spiritual, and partake of spiritual blessings and benefits,
I would advise you to turn from all kind of reasonings that come from the pit
of darkness, that has thus far deceived you, and will ruin you forever, if you
hearken to them. For assure yourselves, new gospel-terms no man can make; and
if any come to preach new gospel-terms, count him a deceiver; for there is no
possibility of being a disciple of Christ, but by taking up a daily cross, and
denying ourselves, and following him as our leader and guide. To him I must go,
and go in no other way, speaking nothing, and doing nothing but what is holy
and pure; he must conduct me in my walking, guide me in my way, and justify me
in it. This is to be a true disciple of Christ.

As soon as he comes to adhere, and join to the power of God revealed in his
soul, he sees the coming of the kingdom of God; he sees it at a distance; he
says within himself, and makes this conclusion, I will follow my captain; I
will become subject to the kingdom of Christ. If I obey this divine principle
of the grace of God, and the gospel of Christ, I shall be his disciple. I read
in his blessed book, that as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the
children of God. I am not to propose new terms, but to accept of the old terms
of the gospel of Christ. I see that the kingdom of God is to be set up, and the
kingdom of the devil to be brought down in me; if I follow this divine
principle, I shall never follow the devil more; if he would have me lie, I
shall refuse, and say I cannot; if he would have me run into vain and corrupt
communication, and foolish jesting, that will be a bridle to me, that I cannot
do it.

I speak now to persons that live under the light of the gospel of Christ, and
that are subdued by his grace; I would speak that which all the logic in the
world cannot overthrow; that which the most cunning logician, with all his wit
and quirks, cannot refute and prove erroneous. If a man be led by the Spirit of
God, he cannot lie; this is a common cure for all men; if I be led by the
Spirit of Truth, and hearken to the principle of truth in my own soul, this
will cure and heal me of the wounds and maladies of my corrupt nature, and set
me at liberty from my old master; I do not like his service.

I hope if any of you like the servitude and bondage of sin and satan, you will
desire liberty before you die: Why do not you desire it now? It may be thou
think to enjoy a little liberty, and reputation, and pleasure in sin for
many years, for six or seven, nine or ten years, and then break off from it,
and repent and turn to God: How do thou know that thou have ten days to live?
It is of high concernment to every one of us to wait for a discovery of gospel
liberty, and an ability and power in his soul, to enable him to break off from
the servitude and bondage of sin and satan, that he has so long lived under;
and to wait upon God with patience, for the setting his soul at liberty, and
setting up the kingdom of Christ within him, and pulling down the kingdom of
satan, that he may be brought into the kingdom of Christ, that consists in
peace and righteousness, and joy in the Holy Ghost. These are the things that
follow one another; when righteousness is set up in me, I shall not be
disturbed, I shall have peace; and if I have peace I shall have joy, and this
joy is in the Holy Ghost; the apostle says the kingdom of God consists in
these things.

Now that every one might be persuaded that God has given a measure of his
grace to them, as well as to other folks, let them consider and say within
themselves, God has not shut me out of the number of his people: He has
knocked at the door of my heart, to bring me to repentance; he has waited upon
me so long, surely he has a mind to save me: Would he call upon me, had he not
intended I should repent and turn to him?

But where is the power? you will say; knocking at the door of the heart, and
checks of conscience, we understand them; but we understand not where the power
is, to be conformable to the will of God.

People will never understand it while they are in the kingdom of satan, and
under the power of the prince of darkness; the apostle tells us, that the God
of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light
of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon
them. If men saw the beauty of the gospel, they would run after it, and embrace
it; therefore the devil blinds their minds, that they should not see the beauty
and amiableness of the gospel, and like the terms of it: He has the rule and
government of the children of disobedience. So long as I live in subjection to
that devilish, hellish power, which leads me forth into sin, I shall be a
stranger to God's power, that would enable me to break off from it.

You never read in scripture of any that ever came to be saved by the power of
God, but there was faith mixed with it, that came to join with that power of
God. Our Savior said to the impotent man, thy faith has made thee whole; thy
faith joining with that power of God: We shall be made strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might, and be able to withstand temptations.

As soon as the soul of man joins with the grace of God, he does forsake the
service of his old master and governor: Sin shall no longer have dominion over
him; though he may meet with the same temptation, it shall not have the same
power over him, but he will be enabled by the grace of God to withstand it, and
overcome it. If you ask such a man, how it is that he overcomes that temptation
that formerly prevailed over him, he will tell you, I have now an helper, I am
now joined to the grace of God in my soul, therefore do I withstand
temptations, and have power over them. Thus comes the kingdom of Christ to be
set up in the soul, and this is that which will sit and prepare us for the
everlasting kingdom of God. They that do wait upon God, shall see this work
wrought inwardly in them, they know more by faith than they can see by sense.

I know, and am certain, that the power the devil has in the world, shall be
broken down, and righteousness shall be exalted, and justice and equity shall
prevail in the nations. I shall not perhaps live to see it, but I may see it by
faith; I have seen enough for my generation, and they that live in the next
generation, shall see it also; for the church of God is the same from one
generation to another. Now unto us it is given to see the things that in former
generations were prophesied of, God having (says the apostle) provided some
better thing for us, that they without us shall not be made perfect.

The church of God from one generation to another, have their measure and
degree of service, and bear their proper testimony, and leave the rest to
succeeding generations: It concerns us in our generation to see a change made
inwardly in our souls, and the kingdom of Christ set up within us, and the
kingdom of satan brought down in ourselves. This does not concern my son or
grandson only, but it concerns me, and when they grow up to mature age, in
their time it will concern them: Therefore that which is most profitable to us,
is, that we have such a station, and stand in such a place in our time, where
we may see the work of God carried on.

I have considered, many a time, that there are many brave men and women in
this age, that might have been eminent witnesses of God in this world, and
borne their testimony to his truth, but their faith has been weak and
ineffectual: They have discovered their unbelieving hearts, and have joined
with the common herd of the world, because they thought such great things could
never be done, that the kingdom of satan could never be pulled down and
destroyed, and the kingdom of Christ set up within us, but I would hope better
things of you, things that accompany salvation; and that he that has begun a
good work in you, will carry it on to perfection, that living praises, and
joyful thanksgivings, may be rendered to him who alone is worthy, who is God
over all, blessed forever; to whom be glory and dominion forever, and ever.
Amen.

SERMON XV. The UNDEFILED WAY to ETERNAL REST.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, July 29, 1691.
My Friends,
THE Lord will be with all his people, that are undefiled in the way, that are
spiritual travelers walking in that undefiled way, that leads to an undefiled
rest. There are some that by this way are entered into rest, that rest which
God has prepared for them. We cannot apply to ourselves that promise that is
made to us of entering into rest, unless we be real and true travelers in the
way that leads to it, for if we do, we deceive our own souls.

Therefore you that have had a sight and vision of the way everlasting, that
leads unto a holy rest, you are an engaged people to make strait steps therein,
and to have it your daily care, and make it your continual business, to look
that your goings and footsteps are of the same nature and kind that the rest
is that you desire to enter into: For it is an undefiled rest, that we all are,
or ought to be traveling after; therefore every one of us must be undefiled in
the way, and every foot-step must be of the same kind and nature, and separate
from all that which defiles it and polluteth it; that so it may have a
tendency to the bringing of the soul nearer to its rest.

This holy rest many travelers have attained by this holy travel, and many are
still in hope to attain it.

But now they that are full of hope of attaining this rest, their footsteps
and goings are not of the same nature and kind; they are not holy and pure,
they are not undefiled; These have not their faces truly Zion-ward, though the
face of their profession may stand that way; but the Lord looks at the heart of
every one, and he knows which way the heart stands, they who have their hearts
truly turned to the Lord, they have the mark of holiness in their eye, and the
mark of purity and righteousness in all their undertakings, because they know
there is no attaining to that divine rest, but by a holy way and travel;
therefore their trust and reliance is alone on the Lord, that is to keep them
in all their way; for if they be ever so clearly convinced that holiness and
righteousness is their duty, and is the way whereby they may attain to the
kingdom of God, though they are ever so fully convinced of it, yet there lies
an impossibility of any walking therein without the divine assistance of the
grace of God; for though they have been convinced by the appearance of his
grace, and have had a light that opens to them a sight of these things, it is
not this sight and vision that will enable them to run the race that is set
before them.

For the manifold impurities and hindrances which are in our way, between our
coming out of Egypt's land, the bondage of corruption, and our entering into
the kingdom of God, are too mighty and too great for any man with his knowledge
and strength to overcome. The children of Israel might as well have gone
through the Red Sea, without the help of God, as the Christian traveller can go
through the many difficulties, and the many impediments that he is to meet with
in his way, without the assistance of God's Holy Spirit.

My friends, it has been a labor and travel at this time upon my mind, that
all whom God has so signally blessed with the knowledge of the truth, that you
may see your way, and most clearly know and understand, that your way leads to
life eternal; that all and every one of you in your particular meetings, are to
have a dependence upon that which can help you in your way.

For I have seen too many that have had a wrong dependence, after they were
rightly convinced, and after they have had a true knowledge of their way
wherein they should walk; they have too much trusted to openings and sights
which they have received; they have thought their mountain so sure, and that
their feet have been past sliding, that there has grown up a state of
presumption, that they have thought they should never turn aside, and have not
had due regard to the renewing of the Divine Power of God in their souls, that
God's children always must have. They have (as I may so say) forgotten what our
Lord said, without me ye can do nothing: They have passed a sentence upon that
doctrine in their minds, and they have thought they could do something; that
they could withstand temptation; that they could do some work for God, and
service to God, without the Divine Assistance of that power that did beget
them; and alas! the least they have sustained has been, that they have run
into evil, and they have defiled their way, and run into temptations, though it
has pleased the Lord, whose mercy is infinite, to pull them many times back
again out of the snare which they were fallen into, and to take them again, and
to wash them, and cleanse them, and purify them, and set their feet on a sure
place. This was more than they deserved; but his mercy, and goodness, and
tenderness, is over all his works.

This he has wrought for many a one; and not only once, but many times; it is
hard venturing; it had been better if such a one had never fallen, or that
their footsteps had never slid from the ways of the Lord, than after they are
fallen, to be renewed again by repentance. It has caused sore judgment, and
condemnation, and anxiety of spirit; and they have given their old enemy an
advantage to whisper in their ears; thou have lost thy ground; thy sins are
gone over thy head, and thou shall never find repentance. These are the words
of the wicked one, who seeks occasion against us; and through our carelessness,
and not being watchful, we put an advantage into his hands. Now seeing you know
he is vigilant, and seeks occasion that he may turn you out of your way, before
you attain to the end of it, you ought to be vigilant to keep occasions from
him.

But some may say, how may I keep occasions and advantages from the enemy? I
answer, the way has been often told you, and I dare say most of you have tried
it, and found it to be true, that so long as you have remained in a watchful
state and posture, and have had your minds exercised by the grace of God, by
which you were convinced of your sin, and by which your duty was manifested to
you, so long you gave the enemy of your souls no occasion; but the truth
preserved you wherein you trusted, and wherein you hoped and waited for the
virtue and power of it. Did you find want of ability then? Did the enemy
prevail then? He did not cease to tempt when you was in the most watchful state
of a Christian; the devil did not then cease to tempt you, but you found in you
a power that resisted him, and said, get thee behind me, satan.

So long as you are upon your watch; so far as you keep your mind fixed upon
the Divine Power, so long you are in a sure place; and whosoever turns aside
from this, they suffer great harm and prejudice; and if ever they be restored
again, it is with loss and damage, and sore exercise; and if they be not
restored, they are lost to all eternity: Then it had been better for them not
to have known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn
from the holy commandment delivered to them. And then they said within
themselves, this must be the way.

Sirs, these things pertain to your everlasting welfare; I speak to you as a
people that God has abundantly loved; and it has been far beyond any thing of
desert. He has made known his ways to you; the Lord may say, concerning you of
this city, as of old, what could I have done more for my vineyard, that I have
not done? So he may say concerning you, what could I have done more to make
them a grown people, a holy people, an entire people, that they may bear my
name, and walk before me in holiness and righteousness, all the days of their
lives? What should have been done more for them?

But this is an exercise to us, whom God has blessed, and set as watchmen, to
behold and see the state of his people, and to feel and bear the burdens that
are to be borne; and this is a great burden, that after all that God has done,
and that we do in the hands of God, all that is necessary for the welfare of
the people, there are some that turn aside, and defile their way; and we
testify in the name of the Lord, that whosoever walks in a defiled way, shall
never come to an undefiled rest; therefore that you do not attain to that
undefiled rest, it is because ye have been defiled: Seeing the holy
conversation of the people of God is the effect of the working of his own power
and Spirit.

Here comes the rest, by and through a Mediator, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is the Mediator between God and man, and the leader of all his
people in the way of holiness and righteousness, which he has made manifest to
them that believe and obey the power: And he has purchased eternal salvation
for all that believe and obey the gospel: But the transgressors do not obey the
gospel; the Spirit of Christ does not lead you to transgression; and the power
and light that comes from Christ, does not lead you to pride, vanity, envy and
bitterness: Wherever these things are led into, there is another spirit, and
that other spirit has another tendency, it leads into the wrath of God.

And my friends, this is that which my soul desires at your hands, and it is
for your good and advantage; it is my duty to discharge my conscience, and to
speak plainly as the Lord shall give me utterance, to warn you that you abide
in the truth; for if so be you be not saved, but will turn aside after your own
hearts lusts, after your pride and the vanity of the world, and the lusts
thereof, you may blame yourselves, and your iniquity will be your ruin. We that
have given up ourselves to God for your sakes, and the churches sake, we speak
these things which we have learned of God, and we earnestly press you that are
convinced, that you walk in the truth which you have believed: There is no
great need of more knowledge, and of the vision of heavenly and divine things;
for abundance of you have seen more of the things of God, than ever you have
traveled and come up into. I would to God, that every one of you that are
convinced, would come up to the measure of the knowledge you have received. O!
that you would answer the Lord's power, in opening and discovering his mind and
will concerning your travel, and the things that belong to his everlasting
peace, that your footsteps may be directed thereby. If you will walk in this
undefiled way, you may lay down at night, and rise in the morning with peace,
and in the favor of the Lord, and have the answer of a good conscience in his
sight.

The means that must help and conduct us in this way, must be that familiar
converse that the soul must have with something greater than itself; the
familiar converse that the soul must have with the Divine Power, with that
manifestation of Divine Light and Grace, which, through Jesus Christ, God has
given unto you. For if a man prize and esteem the truth ever so much, and
suffer ever so much for it, and love the minister ever so much, if he keep not
a familiar converse with the truth, notwithstanding all his profession of love
to the truths of the gospel, and the preachers of it, he will reproach it:
Though he professes and says, I love thee, I love thee; though he has suffered
much in the way, yet if he love not the truth in his own heart, and desire not
to feel the excellency and virtue of it, that man will certainly dishonor the
truth, and grieve the Holy Spirit of God.

We warn you to take heed of your way, and to your feet in your Christian walk,
that you may come to have an abundant entrance into the kingdom of God. Pray to
God that the work of regeneration may be wrought upon you, that you may be born
into another seed, and partake of the divine nature: Then, though the devil
assault you, he cannot overcome you; he will find nothing in you whereby to
betray you into his hands, when that change is wrought, and when God has made
an alteration, and has brought you out of the love of the world, and the love
of earthly things, and set your affections above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God. Now you can say, here comes a temptation with this
instrument, and the other instrument, and the devil lays things before me that
he would have me to do, but I have no inclination to it, I have no mind to be
sucking at the world's breasts; but my mind is set upon this, that I may reach
acquaintance with God, who will be a present help to me, and tread down satan
under my feet.

There is need of your continual care and vigilance, and that you watch and
pray that you may not enter into temptation. It is not so easy a thing for a
man or woman while they are in this world to do any thing without sin; but God
has called you to a holy profession; which is, that you should do all you can
do, to do every thing you do without sin: For whether you eat or drink, or
whatsoever you do, you should do all to the glory of God. This spirit we would
have in you, and we would have all you that have received Christ Jesus, the
Lord, to walk in him as you have received him: Then you shall be kept undefiled
in the way, and delivered from temptation.

To this end you must be still, waiting upon the Lord, that you may have
acquaintance with him from day to day; you are in the world, but you should not
be of the world: The prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ, to his heavenly Father
for his disciples, was not that he should take them out of the world, but keep
them from the evil.

Merchants, tradesmen, and shopkeepers, have always something to do in the
world, but they should pray earnestly that they may be kept from the evil of
the world. There is nothing can be done in the world, but there is evil in it,
which we shall be overcome by, if we do not keep our watch. In the government
of a family, there are occasions and provocations given to be passionate and
furious; many occasions are given to men and women; but we should not be
transported and overcome: Our profession obliges us, that when a child or a
servant gives a provocation, we are not to behave ourselves unseemly, and
unbecoming our holy profession; for it is not in their power, nor in the
devil's power either, to kindle your wrath and anger into a flame: If you are
upon your watch, and wait upon the Lord, he will give you wisdom and strength
to stand against all temptations whatsoever, and to order your conversation
according to the will of God, and as becomes the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

In merchandise, buying and selling, there are snares, and there is evil we may
run into; but this is our comfort and joy, there is no coercion, we cannot be
forced to sin, the devil can only lay a temptation before me; if thou will tell
a lie, equivocate, dissemble, here is an advantage for thee; but the devil with
all his subtilty, power and allurements, cannot say, thou shall run into this
sin, and be overcome by this temptation; for though of ourselves we can do
nothing, yet in the name and strength of our Lord Jesus Christ, we can do all
things; we can do that which is just, and stand over the temptation, and
trample upon it, and not be overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. When
we have bought and sold, we may look back upon what we have done with pure
minds, and clean consciences in the sight of God, and we may come off victors,
and more than conquerors (over temptations) through Jesus Christ that has
loved us.

The more a Christian keeps himself unspotted, and the more watchful he is in
his walking, he may go on from day to day, and see the snares of the devil,
that lies in this vanity, and this and the other vanity and temptation, and yet
escape it.

I would I could say of some of you, that when the devil laid a snare for you,
you did not run into it when you saw it. I have known some that have had
understanding enough, that they need not be told where the snare of the devil
lies; yet so has it been, the devil and their own hearts lusts have agreed
together, and they have run into the snare. This is from the old confederacy
that men have had with God's enemies; you are my friends, says Christ, if you
do whatsoever I command you. If you are the friends of Christ, you will be his
subjects, and yield obedience to him; when he shows them a snare they will keep
out of it: This is the proof of a true Christian, that he will be true in a
time of trial, and will trust in that divine power that keeps him out of the
snare.

One thing more I would say, that divine fellowship that you have with Christ
Jesus, it consists in holiness of life and conversation, and the exercise of a
good conscience toward God, and toward man. It is in vain to tell me that you
will walk in unity with the truth, unless you have unity with the truth in your
own hearts; you cannot deceive the Lord, nor long deceive his people either.
Here is the fellowship that you are to live in all your days, to live in
fellowship with the people of God, and communion of saints; can the saints have
communion in any thing but holiness? and holiness is a blessed, sacred thing,
it becomes the house of God forever; they that are saints, are sanctified and
made holy; and he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of
one; for which cause, he is not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. ii. 11.
They that are sanctified are become saints, they bring forth the fruits of
holiness and sanctification, and they are come into fellowship with God and one
other. Every branch in me, says Christ, that bears not fruit, he takes
away; but every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring
forth more fruit. That branch which bears not fruit, is cast into the fire
and burned.

There are some that bring forth fruit, but it is fruit to the flesh, and the
wicked one, but I hope you are not of that number: These separate themselves
from the life of the true vine; these have no fellowship nor true membership
with the church of Christ, while they walk as captives to the devil, and sin;
these are of the world, and not of the church. If you would have fellowship
with the church, do not think to have it by outward conformity: Do not think
that this will maintain your fellowship with Christ, without a life of inward
holiness and righteousness; for that day you break with the truth in
yourselves, you break off your fellowship with the church of God, and break
your peace with God, and can no way be restored again to the favor of God, but
by an unfeigned repentance; for the mystery of faith is to be kept in a pure
conscience: How is my conscience defiled, if I wrong not this, or the other man
or woman? Some can hold the mystery of faith; so far as it consists in a
profession, they can profess it, and they preach it; but they have not held the
mystery of faith in Christ, so as to receive life, and virtue, and comfort from
him. You have got the history of words and doctrines; but as soon as you defile
your conscience, by doing evil things, and depart from the principle of grace,
you make shipwreck of faith.

But, my friends, as you have a mind to continue and abide in the faith, and in
this travel and heavenly journey, I would give you this as a certainty, it may
do you good when my head lies low: The way to continue in the church of God,
and communion of saints, and to retain your peace with God, is to keep a
familiar converse with the truth in your own souls, and it will keep you from
falling, and lead and guide you in your way, in your travel and journey to
Heaven. As the mother, when the child cries after her, but cannot go, takes it
by the hand and leads it, so if you keep close to the truth, it can lead you
through all difficulties, through great business as well as little, and deliver
you from snares and temptations, and when you are assaulted, it can bring you
off clear. As for communion with God, and communion with the saints and people
of God, it stands in that peace, and purity, and keeping a holy frame of mind
in your heavenly travel, in the undefiled way, that will at last bring you to
the undefiled everlasting rest that remains to the people of God.

SERMON XVI. The DAWNING of the DAY of GRACE and SALVATION.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, August 2, 1691.
My Friends,
YOU cannot but know and be sensible, that a gospel-day, a day of grace and
salvation, has dawned upon you, and that the light of it has broken through
many clouds of darkness, which sometimes you could not see through. This is an
inestimable and unspeakable mercy of God unto us, that the light of the gospel
of salvation shines upon a people, that without it must be miserable.

There has been a very dark and cloudy day upon our forefathers, and also
upon us, in the days of our ignorance. We are apt to wander hither and thither,
and to be turned aside with the wind of mens' doctrine, that we could not find
a rest, a home or a settlement for our souls, in order to eternal life. And
there are many that have cried unto God, that he would please to reveal his
way, and to make it known unto them; and they have been apt to covenant with
the Lord, that if once they come to a certainty, they would walk in it. Unto
such as these the Lord has bowed his ear, and has answered them; and in his
answering the cry of the soul, he has brought salvation near, and has
revealed the power by which he would bring it to pass, in every particular soul
that receives the gospel of his Son.

But now friends, you that are sensible of this blessed and glorious visitation
of his gospel-day, in which salvation is brought near, it is needful for every
one to examine their own hearts, whether they have really received the gospel;
whether they have received and embraced the great bounty, and unspeakable
blessings of the gospel, with which the Lord God of life has visited us, or
whether they have rejected it. For though it is our happiness to know the
visitation of life, yet it does not follow that every one that is visited will
be made an heir of it; for there are many that fall short through their
unbelief. There are many that have received the gospel, who do disobey the
gospel of Christ, and so have not eternal life by it.

When people come to this serious examination of themselves herein, then the
light and grace, that comes from Christ unto every one of us, both to him that
rejects it, as well as to him that receives it, that will make known to them
their state and condition, with respect to the gospel of Christ. For there are
a great many, that by an alienation of their minds from the light of Christ
Jesus, are apt to be mistaken in their state, and to make a better judgment of
themselves, and of their state inwardly, than really it will amount to in the
day that the Lord searches and tries them. But they that make a judgment of
themselves, by the openings and discoveries that they have through the light of
Chist Jesus (for so we are to do in this weighty matter) they make a judgment
of their state and condition, according to the evidence that the Spirit of God
bears to their spirits; and this I hope you will all say is a most certain way.
For if we go to compare ourselves one with another, and say, I am better than
thee, and that man is better than I, here we are liable and subject to a great
many errors, where there ought to be none. But if we come to measure and
determine our present state and condition, by the evidence of the Spirit of
God, bearing witness with our spirits, here we have a foundation to place an
infallible and certain judgment upon. And they that are obedient to the gospel
of Christ, are capable of giving a sound judgment of their state, because they
are made partakers, through Christ, of that grace, and light, and truth, which
they should be obedient to; and they are brought into a kind of knowledge and
understanding of their duty, whether they do it or no. And this knowledge, and
this understanding that God has given them, makes them capable to pass a right
judgment upon their own state. They will not call it a good state, if it be an
evil state; and they will not call it an evil state, if it be a good one. They
know it is good by the principle of truth in their judgment.

Therefore since there are so many uncertainties in the world, and that men are
so apt to take hold of an uncertain way of judging and determining, even in
matters relating to their souls: There is a greater aptness in people to take
hold of uncertainties, in judging about the matters of their souls, than in
those things that relates to their bodies. Seeing people are so liable to it,
it can do none of us harm to exhort one another, and move and stir up one
another, to make a calculation of our states, by something that will not
deceive. There are abundance deceived in this country, as well as other
countries; we shall not need to go into foreign parts to find people deceived
and deluded. It will not be amiss to say, the drunkard, the swearer, he liar,
the oppressor, the proud, and the malicious, are deceived: If they were not so,
they would never be overcome by the wicked one; the author of all evil, he has
deceived them, in that they should think to go on in these things, and cry
peace, peace, to one another, and in their own souls: This is a great delusion;
and the devil is the great deluder that they are deluded by: And it would be
worth the while to find out that which would make a man think himself in a
happy state, and hope to enjoy eternal life, with God and Christ; and when he
goes on in sin and iniquity, it would be worth the while to find out the
delusion.

There is nothing so proper to turn every one to the grace of God, as to search
their own hearts, and try their ways. This is that which will discover their
thoughts, and make them known to themselves: This is God's grace and gift to
men while they are yet sinners and disobedient; he does not withhold his grace,
but gives his grace, and light and truth, even to the rebellious: He gives
gifts to men, even to the rebellious, that he might have a place and dwelling
among them, that they might know there is a God that searches the heart, and
tries the reins, and judges all unrighteousness. If God has given thee so much
grace, that he might have a dwelling in thy heart, should not that restrain
thee from sin, that the devil, by his temptations, might not defile thee, and
unfit thee for the kingdom of God? When the Lord comes to search the heart, it
is in order to the purging of it, and the taking away of iniquity and sin, that
would unfit thee for his kingdom. This is a better way, and more excellent than
living to the flesh, and fulfilling the lusts thereof. Let people live ever so
much to their own corrupt wills, in pride, wantonness, looseness, and the vanity
of their minds, they will not find so much true satisfaction and delight, as in
living a holy life, living in the fear of God, and avoiding sin, and keeping
themselves from the temptations and snares of the devil.

This is a more excellent way; and it is our work and business to declare to
people this more excellent way, which all, one time or other, will confess.
This is irksome, some will say; this will abate my pleasure and delights in the
world, and spoil my secular interest. If it were not for this reason, they
would grant it were better to live a holy life, and to live in the fear of God,
than live in the service of the devil; and their carnal interest lies in the
way, and weighs down the scale, but it is because thou joinest with it,
otherwise the devil, and all the powers of hell, could not weigh it down. If
people would consider these things seriously, they would say, it is better to
serve God, that made them, and gave them life, and breath, and being, than him
that would destroy them; and then when they meet with the pleasures and
delights of the world, that the devil lays before them, they would never weigh
down the scale against a Divine Reason: If thou will give thy heart to it, and
seriously consider it, it will weigh down the scale against all temptations to
live in sin, and pleasure, and jollity. If thou will but join with this Divine
Reason, that tells thee these carnal pleasures and enjoyments are not necessary
for thy soul, but it is necessary to live a holy, heavenly life, and to serve
the Lord that gave thee life, and breath, and all things; that has vouchsafed
thee manifold preservations. If thou will but join with the Divine Reason, and
hearken to that which opens the truth in thine own heart, all the devil can do,
cannot make thee serve him; for the devil has no coercion, no power to force
thee to commit sin; he cannot make a man work wickedness against his will; he
must cloud the understanding, and work upon the will, and allure and entice the
affections by earthly things. So thou can not be forced by the devil against
thy will, to yield to his temptations, to commit any sin; but thou must say, I
will do it.

I confess, when the understanding is bribed, and the will allured and seduced
by the devil's temptations, there is no withstanding them. But on the other
hand, if men would give up themselves to the power of God, they would have
Divine Assistance; and joining with that power, they would be more than
conquerors. Therefore we cannot but be encouraged to keep in the way of the
Lord, and have acquaintance with the power of God, which will preserve you, and
give you victory over all the temptations and assaults of the devil; and
without this power you cannot overcome; but if you have the assistance of this
power, nothing will be too hard for you. When you are in straits, and in a
helpless condition, you sometimes are ready to cry out, I shall not overcome my
spiritual enemies; I shall never get victory over sin and the world, the flesh
and the devil; and I shall never be able to withstand his temptations, but they
will prevail over me all my days. No wonder you make this conclusion, when you
have parted with your trust and dependence on that power that is able to
overcome the devil, and baffle him in your thoughts, words and deeds.

You may be ready to say, alas! of myself I can do nothing; I am not able of
myself so much as to think a good thought; yet by Divine Assistance, I do many
times think good thoughts. In me, that is, in my flesh, there dwells nothing
that is good. Not in my flesh abstractly; separate from the power of God, and
the Divine Assistance vouchsafed unto me. In my flesh dwells nothing that is
good. But if you take me as one that has faith in Christ the Mediator, this
faith embraces the tender of the love of God in the Redeemer. And when I have
this faith, there dwells a good thing in me; and from this good thing that
dwells in me, there flows forth good words and good actions; then you come to
be acquainted with a power greater than your own; and if you trust in it, you
will be able to withstand temptations. When you are tempted to any sin, you
will not only be able to withstand the temptation, but to overcome it too, and
to be more than conquerors in your spiritual warfare. This relying upon, and
trusting in the power of God, is that which we call faith; and this faith is
the operation of God.

To speak in plain words, God will operate upon thy mind, and make thee know,
that this is his power, light, truth and grace, by which he would save thee.
And after God has wrought and opened unto thee in this manner, it is thy duty
then to belive in it, to put thy trust and confidence in it, to be delivered.
But though faith be offered unto me, yet it is not forced upon me; God has
offered faith to all men, but he does not force it upon any. All have an
opportunity offered to them; if they will but join with it, they may have says
wrought in them, and be fitted and prepared for the kingdom of God.

There are many that are convinced of the truth of the doctrine that we preach
to them, but they do not get into the power of the truth; they will hear us
preach of the power of truth, and will hear what this man says, and what the
other man says; and this will serve their turn, that they may talk of
religion, and make a profession: But they do not seek after that power that
should enable them to work out their own salvation. These persons grow in
knowledge, but they do not grow in grace; they will embrace truth as far as
doctrine and words will go; they have professed it, and they have suffered
reproach for it, and yet they have not received the truth in the love of it;
they cannot reach to the power of it; they glory in their knowledge and in
their understanding, but they come not to that which sanctifies them; they are
not able to resist the devil, and to stand against his temptations; when a
temptation comes, they join with it, but they cannot withstand it: They come to
the knowledge of truth in words, but they come not to the knowledge of the
power of it in their hearts and minds, so as to make them prepared vessels for
God's honor; God is more dishonored by them than by those that never
professed his name: They fall into the temptation of the devil, and never
discern the operation of God's power in their own hearts.

Secondly, There is another error as great as this; there are a great many that
when the Lord's power has wrought in their hearts, and they have truth opened
to them in the power of it, yet they have not believed in it, they have not had
faith wrought in their hearts, they have not trusted in it, nor relied upon the
power; so they are weak and feeble, they have little faith, which is next to
none at all. If they have ever so much knowledge, how easy can the devil tempt
them to sin, if they have no faith; this is the victory, says the apostle,
that overcomes the world, even your faith. This is not my victory, that I see
the subtilty and wiles of Satan, and know much; but that which is my victory is
my faith: My trust is in the power of God, and my reliance upon him who is God,
mightier than all the strength of men and devils; that God who knows my heart.
If I be faithful to him, and rely upon him by faith, I shall resist the devil,
and withstanding his temptations, obtain victory over them.

This power you may have by the gospel; but then you must be true to the power
of it in yourselves; for I do distinguish between the gospel, as it is a
doctrine and word preached, and an invisible, divine power working upon men by
the preaching of the gospel; you will all hear the gospel preached, though you
be ever so proud and high-minded, and you will say it is true; but you can
never come to the saving knowledge of the gospel itself, till you find it
working inwardly upon yourselves.

We do not pretend to any power of opening men's hearts, as God opened the heart
of Lydia; but when people come to wait upon God with a serious and religious
mind, you will find the power of the word working effectually upon you, and so
the gospel will become the power of God to your salvation. This is, and shall
be my prayer, for all religious assemblies, that the Lord will be pleased to
teach them, by his invisible word, and beget living desires in them toward
himself, and bring them to an esteem of holiness and righteousness, that they
may adorn the gospel of Christ, by living gospel-lives; for want of this, what
dishonor have men brought to God, and what reproach upon the gospel. O! that
people would come to hear the word preached, with desire to profit by it, and
say, Lord, do me some good this day, give me a powerful refreshing visitation
at this time; give me some living experience of thy Almighty Power working upon
my heart, that I may nor be led by this man's word, or that man's opinion; for
if they mistake, I shall be mistaken: But if I build my faith upon what God in
his word reveals to me, I shall infallibly know what I am to believe and
practice, and I shall receive from God some good thing, and I shall know what
is the good and acceptable will of God; I shall find that there is power in the
gospel for building me up in the most holy faith, and that it is mighty,
through God, for the pulling down of the strong holds of sin and Satan, and I
shall see the salvation of God brought near to me.

When the gospel becomes the power of God, and works upon the hearts of men
by the operation of the Divine Power, they may distinguish between that faith
that is built upon the declarations of men, and that which is wrought by the
revelation and discovery of the mind of God in their souls; this is that which
we may bottom upon, and have an anchor sure and steadfast in our own souls; when
I depend upon Christ, the rock of ages, both of this age, and all other ages,
my faith must be placed upon him; and when I hear the word of a man, I must
have an eye to God, that he will reveal his power in my heart; this will make
me believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and receive that ingrafted word which is
able to save my soul: I shall not only hear the word, but live in obedience to
it. What signifies it to make a profession that I have the light within, if I
do not give obedience to it? For without that, it is all hypocrisy; all
pretense to holiness, or righteousness, all mortification, is but hypocrisy,
any further than we find the power of truth making an impression upon our
hearts and minds, bringing us to the obedience of faith.

Let them therefore that profess righteousness, live righteously, and they that
hear the gospel, live in obedience to it; and those that profess to be
Christians, let them live like Christians indeed: When every one comes to know
within himself, so far as the gospel has shined upon him, that they have
received the truth in the love of it, and love the truth as it is in Jesus, and
are obedient to the gospel, they shall know the salvation of it. There is a
discovery of God's power in the gospel, and there is a believing of it, and
trusting in it; this is that which belongs to a Christian, this is the
beginning and the first step to a Christian life; we must believe in Christ;
for without faith it is impossible to please God. He that believes, should be
careful to walk in the truth that he has received, and then he shall have a
testimony of the power and virtue of it in his own soul. This virtue and power,
if he joins with it, has the government of his heart and life, and gives him
victory over the world, and the temptations of Satan.

You know in the primitive times there were believers that not only held the
faith, but loved by faith; and by that faith they got victory over all the
allurements, and pleasures and vanities of the world. I have fought a good
fight, says the apostle, 2 Timothy iv, 7, 8, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love its appearing. I have got the victory and
there remains an eternal weight of glory for me.

My friends, this is our ambition, and all our labor among you, that you may
be built up in the most holy faith; that you may be brought home to Christ, in
all your meetings and gatherings together: You should desire to be enriched
with faith, and to have your own storehouse filled with all the fruits of the
Spirit, and not only seek for the knowledge of the truth, but be subject and
obedient to what you know, otherwise by your religion you will but hurt
yourselves. And the apostle Peter, 2 Peter, i, 12, speaks of knowing the truth,
and of being established in it, and of some that after they had escaped the
pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, and the latter end with
them is worse than the beginning; for it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the
holy commandment delivered unto them. There is a power goes along with the
preaching of the gospel, that will enable you to do what you know; the gospel
is a powerful doctrine, whether you know it or not, or whether you submit to it
or not, yet pray remember that God's people are a willing people in the day of
his power, they are a certain sort of people that are devoted to God, and
submit all their worldly honors, interests, profits and pleasures, to the
pleasure of God, and desire no other pleasure or happiness, but to enjoy his
presence and favor; they are satisfied with this, and they are a happy people,
being made a willing people in the day of God's power; they are willing to deny
themselves, to take up a daily cross and follow Christ, and have salvation upon
his terms.

There are a great many professors that have notions, and outside appearances,
but they want that virtue, and life, and power, that should settle them in
religion, and a love of the truth. The Lord that knows our hearts, knows that
our labor and travel among you has been designed for your good, and that our
hearts desire is, that you may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. We would
have people consider, and attend and hear what God speaks, and (...) what he
has taught you by the ministers of the gospel: We have all ears to hear, let
us thank God for that; blessed be God that there is a power and an ability of
hearing with an outward ear; but there are many that will not so much as give
the hearing to what might be spoken to them from the Lord: He that has ears to
hear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches; and what he says to
his own soul; hear what the Spirit says of your own state and condition; if it
be good, bless God for it; are you in so good a condition, that you have no
trouble, no distress to lament, no wants to supply, blessed are you that have
none; but if you find that you have done amiss, and if the Lord should call you
this night to give up your account, the Lord has a great deal against you, I
am sure; and I tell you it is your duty to turn to the Lord with unfeigned
repentance, that through Christ Jesus, you may receive pardon and remission of
all your sins, and hear what the Spirit says to yourselves, and in yourselves.

Pray come and make it your work and business the rest of the time you have to
live, to work out your salvation with fear and trembling, that when Christ
comes, you may say, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, purify me and sanctify me,
and prepare me to be presented to the Father without spot, and blameless; the
day is coming that this will be the desire of every one of you.

And it is the earnest breathing and desire of my soul, that every one of you
may have an eye unto the Lord, and he will look down from Heaven, and have
regard to the cry and the sighing of the needy soul. God will arise, and find
out the people that breathe after him, and that desire to be reconciled to him,
through the Mediator Jesus Christ; the Lord loves to find out such a people,
and I am glad to preach to such a people the glad tidings of the gospel, and to
teach as God has taught me; good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he
teach and guide you in the way which you should go. Walk humbly with God; he
will resist the proud, but he will give grace unto the humble. Walk uprightly
before the Lord in this gospel-day that shines upon you; love the appearance of
God, and prize it, though it has not been so glorious to you, as to some
others, yet despise not the day of small things: live in subjection to that
grace that the Lord has given you, and the Lord will give you more grace, and
pour out his Spirit, and multiply his blessings upon you; the Lord has begun a
good work in you, and he will carry it on to the day of Christ, and will
vouchsafe to bring the glorious day of his visitation upon you.

To the Lord I leave you, to his favor and protection I commit you; remember
that there is no salvation but by Jesus Christ, and none to be had by Christ,
till you come to believe in him; to him that searches the heart, and tries the
reins, that pardons iniquity, transgression and sin, for the sake of Christ
Jesus, the Mediator, to him I do commit you, not doubting but that he that has
begun a good work in you, will at last complete and finish it to his own praise
and your salvation.

SERMON XVII. The EXCELLENCY of PEACE with GOD.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, August 5, 1691.
My Friends,
IT is man's great happiness in this world to have acquaintance with God, with
the Lord that made him, from whom he has life and breath here, and his eternal
welfare hereafter; this doubtless every one will acknowledge one time or other,
that peace with God is a great jewel, and the best estate and riches. It is the
great desire of every one that they may attain to this one time or other; and
there is a great neglect of happiness among the sons and daughters of men, in
not seeking of it, and not laboring to attain it while it is to be had; Oh!
how many trifle away their time about sliding and perishing objects, and they
know at the same instant that they are yet destitute of the favor of God, and
peace with him. Oh, friends! the very thoughts and consideration of the worth
of this jewel, and of the misery of being without it, and the uncertainty of
our time while it is to be attained, might put every one upon a serious,
diligent enquiry after the way and means whereby they might attain it, that so
they might have a resting place for their souls, and satisfaction to their
inward man, that it shall go well with them, when time shall be no more.

And they that come to this consideration, and are resolved in their hearts and
minds, that they will labor after this, and set their whole endeavor after
it, they will in the first place seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof: These do need a daily encouragement in their way to Heaven, and there
is nothing on the Lord's part wanting to such souls, but that they may attain
their desire.

But alas! this has been, and is still the misery of thousands, they are
seeking after peace with God, but they err in the way to it, they do not seek
in that way, nor take hold of those methods, by and through which God has
promised peace; you shall scarce meet with any body, but they would have
eternal life and peace with God; we shall not need to persuade people to with
for, and to desire to have peace with God when they shall come to die, and lay
down their heads in the dust. There is not a Balaam, but he desires to die the
death of the righteous, and that his last and way be like his: There is not a
Scribe, or a Pharisee, or any that profess religion, but they are seeking
eternal life. The Lord Jesus did witness concerning them, that they were an
envious, proud, persecuting people, yet that they did seek after eternal life,
and they pitched upon some methods and ways whereby they thought to get and
enjoy it; but all this was error still, they where out of the way of attaining
it, and so are a great many people at this very day; they are in a state and
condition wherein they are never like to enjoy it; the methods and the ways
that they have chosen to themselves, to find eternal life by, and to obtain
peace with God, will never answer the end.

And God has been pleased to discover to us the many by-ways that people have
chosen, and seek peace with God by; therefore we are willing at all times, to
show people their error in these great matters of highest concernment to them.
If they did err in their way of seeking to obtain some earthly good, and missed
their end, they know the price of it, it is but a loss of so much, which if
they had taken a right course, they might have attained; but it is an
unspeakable loss, an inestimable loss, if they lose peace with God, and all the
pains and labor they are at to obtain it.

I beseech you, friends, consider these things, they are of great weight, and
you will say so one day or other; for, says our Savior, what will it profit a
man to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? O! How sad is it to consider, that a man has not made
provision for his soul, that he has not a place of rest for his immortal soul,
and that the arms of the Lord Jesus Christ are not open to receive his soul,
when his body can retain it no longer! If this be a man's state when he comes
to die, it had been better for him that he had never been born: Men may live
and gather riches, and enjoy a plentiful estate; but if they be destitute of
the favor of God, and peace with him, what will they do with these perishing
enjoyments? They cannot possibly satisfy themselves with these transitory,
visible things; but if these persons only mind their bodies, and neglect their
souls, do they not live like the beasts that perish? The beast seeks after his
meat, and when he finds it, he eats it with delight and pleasure, and in a
little while he lies down and dies, and there is an end; so it is with careless
souls, that have no regard to their future state; but they say, let us eat, and
drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we shall die.

Oh! that every one of us did apply our hearts seriously to the consideration
of the weight of these things that concern our eternal state; if persons did
this, then they might come to an enquiry into their own souls, what method and
way is most safe for the attaining of so blessed an end. For you know there are
abundance of people, if you look up and down in the world, you will see every
body almost hunting up and down in some way of religion or other, and are
engaged in religious performances: What is the matter? what would you have? We
would have peace with God here, and everlasting rest hereafter in the kingdom
of Heaven; that we would have. Thus have the nations been scattered and driven
up and down in the pursuit of happiness and satisfaction.

There is a general belief amongst people, that there is a Heaven, and a Hell,
and that they must have their part in one of them; there are none that desire a
portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Those profane wretches
that cry to God to damn them, they do not mean what they speak, they would be
saved for all that; every one will cry at last, Lord have mercy upon me, if he
has but time to say so: Let us cry, Lord have mercy upon me now; Lord bestow
thy savor upon me; Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon me; Lord
touch my hard heart, and soften it and break it, by the power of thy Spirit;
open mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law; open mine ears,
that I may hear thy voice. It is good for people to make use of time while they
have it; whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, and God will
pour out his wrath upon those that call not upon his name. He that calls upon
the name of the Lord, shall be saved; and God gives great encouragement to
people to seek after him.

What mean you by seeking after God? I have gone to church, and said my
prayers; I have gone in the way which my fathers have led me, and directed me,
I hope I shall find mercy at last; I am a believer, I believe in Jesus Christ
that died for my sins, and rose again for my justification; I hope, through the
merits of Jesus Christ, I shall be saved. What mean you by seeking after the
Lord? Do not we all hear of him, and pray to him every day?

Is there any thing more common than this, that people speak to one another
generally about? as for the general knowledge of God, you and I may see to our
sorrow, that a great many (...) Lord, Lord, that are never like to enter into
the kingdom of God. If all that take the name of God in their mouths, should
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, it would be a very foul kingdom: If all the
drunkards and whoremongers of England, and all profane ungodly persons, that
will take the name of God in their mouths, should enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, it would be a very unclean and impure kingdom; there is nothing enters
there that is unclean, that is abominable, that loves to make a lie. So that
there must be some more peculiar people that shall have an abundant entrance
into the kingdom of God; and there must be something that will entitle them to
it. For you may remember our Savior says, no man knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him. So much as may be known of God by
works, you and I may know, without the revelation of Christ; we need not wait
for this knowledge, we can have it by books; we can have it by Christ's
revelation. Nothing would serve some in our Savior's time, but eternal life;
and our Lord Jesus bids them search the scriptures, for in them (says he) you
think to have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Yet for all
the profession they made, he tells them, no man has seen God at any time,
neither seen his shape, nor heard his voice; they were strangers to God, though
they had a general knowledge of God.

So it is at this day; there is a general knowledge of God, and people hope to
obtain peace with God, and eternal life. Their parents and their tutors have
instructed them in the principles of Christianity, and about the attributes of
God; but all this will not bring a man to a saving knowledge of God, and
reconciliation with him: For a man that is as wicked as the devil can make him,
knows these things, and yet may be a servant of the devil, and do his work; he
is not born again, and become a child, In all his external knowledge. Now he
that desires to come to the true, saving knowledge of God, our Savior has
told us, that none knows the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son will
reveal him; this is a sure way to come to the true knowledge of God, by Jesus
Christ; he has the key that opens the heart, and he will bring us to the
true knowledge of God the Father. Christ has the key of David, which opens,
and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man opens. He can bring us to
behold the glory of God in his own face; without him we are never like to come
to the saving knowledge of God.

Poor man is in a lapsed, fallen state, he is fallen into sin, and is in a
state of alienation from God, and therefore he cannot come to him but by a
Mediator; there is one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, and
he must make peace for him, else he will never have it: How then shall we come
to Christ, if he is the only means, and there is no other by which we may come
to the knowledge of God, as the scripture speaks? Hearken to it, how may we
come to Christ? I answer, you will never come to him; if he first come not to
you, you will never be able to do it. It is not coming to Christ, when you say,
you do believe that Christ died and rose again, and ascended up into Heaven,
and sits at the right hand of God, and lives forever to make intercession for
his people, and to read those words and doctrines which he preached up and down
at meetings, and solemn assemblies; but if you believe that he is the eternal
Son of God, and the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, you must
come to him, and entirely give up yourselves to his glory and service; without
this, you cannot come to him, nor will he bring you to the Father: Christ is
come near to us, he stands at the door of our hearts, and he stands and knocks:
Behold! that is a word that calls for attention, for people to take notice of.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock; what do thou knock for? says Christ,
that thou may open the door of thy heart; for if any man open, I will come
and sup with him, and he with me, and my Father will come to him, and we will
make our abode with him.

Now people are loath to be at this pains and trouble, to open the door of their
hearts to Christ, for they will not believe it is Christ that knocks, and that
rebukes and checks them, when they refused to open to him; when they find
something within that reproves them for their sin, and does condemn them that
they cannot be at quiet, they will never believe that this is Christ: How can
this be Christ? they say, He is ascended up to Heaven, and he is at the right
hand of God the Father: Will you make me believe that this is Christ knocking
at the door of my heart? I cannot believe it: But what says our Savior,
unless you believe that I am he, you shall die in your sins: For there is
nobody else can help you out of them

There is a twofold consideration that we are to have of Christ; one is, as he
was made of a woman, made under the law; and another consideration of Christ
is, as he is the eternal Son of God. Men have very gross thoughts of Christ, to
think, that because he is in Heaven, therefore he cannot be here too: They
measure him by themselves; they know because a man is at London, therefore he
cannot be at York at the same time. Thus these men object, if Christ is in
Heaven, how can he be here? His doctrine and precepts are here, let us make use
of them all; he will come again at the day of judgment; but this is a day of
judgment: Does not he judge you now? He is the judge both of quick and dead,
and he is the searcher of hearts, and the trier of the reins; so that thou
can not think an ill thought, but he will tell thee of it; he is nearer to
thee than the wife of thy bosom, or thy husband that is near to thee: Husband
and wife may think an ill thought, but they cannot tell one another of it; but
Christ is one that comes so near thee, that thou can not conceive an ill
thought against thy neighbor, but he will tell thee of it.

This is the Lord Christ, as a Spirit, a quickening Spirit, who is made
manifest in the flesh: He has given to every man a measure of the Spirit to
profit withal: The grace of God which brings salvation, has appeared unto
all men. Notwithstanding the distinction of learned men between common grace
and spiritual grace, this grace that brings salvation, has appeared unto all
men. This manifestation of the Spirit and light within, we have from Christ.
These are the ways and methods that the Lord Christ has taken to approach near
to us. Now your own reason will tell you, if this be the way and means that
Christ takes to approach near to us, we cannot take another way to approach to
him: If Christ has taken, I say, this way to approach to us, by the light and
manifestation of his own Spirit, which convinces us of sin: If this be
Christ's way of coming to us, there can be no other way of our coming to him,
but by the same method of his grace. He says, if you have the light, believe
in the light. I have the light, I am enlightened, there is something that
discovers my evil thoughts: Why must I believe in the light? That you may be
children of the light, as our Savior speaks; they that are the children of the
light shall have it for their inheritance; and they that are children of
darkness, must have darkness for their inheritance: While we have the light, we
must believe in it, and we shall be made children of the light: God has sent
his Son, and the Son has sent his Spirit and his heavenly grace into our
hearts, that we may draw near to him, and be directed how to attain
acquaintance with him, and to do that which pleases God, and come to be in
union with him, and do the works of God. This is that which God requires of us,
that we will believe on him whom he has sent; that we may embrace the light,
and believe in the light, in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Pray what do you mean by believing? There is something within me checks and
reproves me for sin, and calls me off from it, and bids me turn over a new
leaf: Must I hearken to this? Is this that which you mean by believing? As to
this degree of believing, they that reject it now, shall believe it heareafter;
for all the world at last, and the damned in hell shall certainly confess that
there was grace, and light, and means afforded to them, and they might have
gone farther, and escaped that misery that they are fallen into.

But there is a more precious faith that I would have you partake of, a faith
that works by love. Since the Lord has been so gracious as to extend his
mercy and love to me, I am so taken with the love of God, that I will be
obedient to him; this faith that works by love, is the says of God's elect;
that by which we may obtain victory over our passions and lusts, and over satan
and the snares of the world; when we are come to close with the grace of God,
and to believe in Christ, this is well: But we must also yield obedience and
subjection. Yet when faith has brought forth obedience, you cannot be
justified by it, you cannot be saved by your obedience, but Christ alone: He is
the author and finisher of our faith, and a Mediator from first to last.

Now all that come to close with the appearance of Christ in their own heart,
they have laid hold of the method appointed for their coming to him. It is
Christ they must hear; he is come so near to men that they may hear his voice,
and hear him tell us our very thoughts. Why should not I hear him when he
checks me and reproves me for sin? He comes near and tells me that I have done
amiss; Lord, I have done iniquity, I will do so no more. Thus Christ converseth
with his people, and does not only check and reprove them, when they do that
which is evil, but persuades them and enables them to do good. He is a
Mediator, he is a middle person, and has taken flesh upon him, that he might
reconcile them to God, that do believe in him.

Now, when we come to have acquaintance with God, and have chosen him to be our
God, he teaches us to do what is good, and reproves us for what evil we have
done. Who can choose a better guide, to lead him into acquaintance with God,
than Christ that is conversant with us, piercing into our thoughts, and
speaking to us? I may hear him with the inward ear of my heart; when I do evil
he checks me for it, and tells me the thing I should seek is of inestimable
value; and if through my unbelief and carelessness I miss of it, it had been
better for me that I had never been born; now we are in the way of coming to
receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, let us not neglect so
great salvation. No man can save himself, nor save the soul of his brother, nor
find a ransom, nor procure an offering for the expiating of his sin; therefore
let every one that would have his sin expiated and pardoned, and cannot be
satisfied and quieted, till he has peace with God; let him come to Christ, the
Mediator, and come with faith and truth in the inward parts, and submit to him,
and be willing to be ruled by him, then Christ will save him, and present him
without spot and blemish to his father.

Consider that those that are the people of God, are led by the Spirit of God.
They miss their way to reconciliation with God, that love any other way, or
think to come to God any other way than by Jesus, the Mediator, their labor
will be lost: Therefore I must exhort and persuade you that are out of the way,
that you would take God's method, and come into God's way. The terms, I have
told you, are made already; the bargain is not to make now; I will give so much
to be at peace with God, or I will part with this or the other thing that is
dear to me. No, the agreement is made between God and Christ, and his covenant
is ordered in all things, and sure; and his covenant stands sure with none, but
those that are in Christ Jesus. There was a covenant made with Abraham; in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The promise is made to the
seed, that is, to those that are in Christ; the faithful are counted the seed;
now the faithful are those that are obedient to Christ, who is the seed of the
promise, in whom all the families of the earth are blessed. They must come to
Christ the seed, they must not rebel against him; they must come to him, and
believe in him; be there never so many nations and families in the world, the
promise is not to them, but to as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Here is the way for people to lay hold of, for their coming into acquaintance
with God, which is of so great necessity before they die; they must come to
Christ himself by his Spirit in their own hearts. We need not go to this and
the other learned man, and enquire of this and the other sort of people; but we
must cry to God for help and direction, and come unto him, and give up all the
powers and faculties of our souls to him, to be governed by him: God will have
servants that will be obedient to him; if ever we come to obtain salvation, we
must have another master, one is your master, even Christ; I must come under
the government of Christ, and he must lead me, and rule me, if I will be a
child of God.

When people come to see there is no effectual way, but submitting to the grace
of God in their own hearts, and yielding themselves up to the dictates of the
Spirit of Christ in their souls; when they come to this, there are many hazards
and difficulties to be encountered with; there is the appearance of the cross
of Christ, and we must take up this cross if we will follow Christ, and be
obedient in all things unto him. This is that which will kill all my pleasure,
lay waste all my religion, and destroy my hopes; I must be like a man that
built a house without a good foundation; I must pull it all down again, and I
must come to build up again upon a new foundation.

Here many have turned aside, the cross of Christ has seemed to them so sharp,
and hard and intolerable, that they could not bear it; they would not be at the
charge of such a religion; what, must I part with all my delights, and my
beloved lusts and pleasures, and all my interests in the world for Christ? I
cannot part with these, these things lie in my way, I must rather lose my soul
than part with what is so grateful to me, and join with the light of mine own
conscience, and the truth in my inward parts; what, must not I have so much as
liberty of thought? What, must my thoughts be regulated by that which is so
cross and repugnant to my mind? Must I throw out all evil thoughts out of my
heart, and suffer none but good thoughts to remain there? Who can stand here?
Who can bear such strictness as this? Rather than endure this, I will choose to
lose my soul; many have lost the truth on this account, and many are in danger
to lose their souls.

If there be in you any desire of peace with God, that you may not go hence
before you have attained it, take hold of the present opportunity; hardness of
heart is a desperate plague, it comes from a long obstinate continuance in sin;
when we have withstood the day of God's patience and long-suffering, and
grieved the Holy Spirit of God; then God gives us up to our own hearts lusts,
because we will not hearken to the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely; when we stop our ears, and will not attend to the calls of God; when
men will go on, and nothing can stop them, in the career of their lusts and
pleasures, but they will retain their carnal delight and friendship with the
world; this hardness of heart is a desperate plague; take heed of it, that it
does not overtake you, and bring ruin and destruction upon you: Consider the
patience and long-suffering of God, and let his goodness lead you to
repentance: Consider God has waited to be gracious to you, he has exercised
much long-suffering and patience toward you; whereas he might have cut you off
long ago, and given you your portion with the damned in hell; but he has
hearkened to the Mediator that has pleaded for you; he has extended his
patience and long-suffering to the wicked and rebellious also; and for this
reason, the apostle tells us, that Christ is the Savior of all men, especially
of them that believe.

Now the patience and long-suffering of God has been lengthened out to all,
and we have not improved it. Conscience has been sensible of the inward
strokes and rebukes of God for sin, and of the inward calls of his grace to
bring us to repentance; but we have not regarded these calls, nor hearkened to
the voice of God, so as to hear, that our souls might live; O! let us not put
off our repentance any longer; but today, while it is called today, let us
hear his voice, and harden not our hearts, but be of a tender heart; let our
hearts be softened, and tendered under the word of God, and under the strokes
of his judgment. If ever the Lord bring you under a tender frame, you will
receive the word of God with meekness, and mix it with faith; then it will work
effectually to the amendment of your lives; it will work faith in those that
are unbelievers, and strengthen the faith of those that believe. Then we shall
have cause to bless the Lord, and praise and magnify his great name for his
patience, long-suffering and mercy, which at this day he has lengthened out,
and graciously extended to us.

SERMON XVIII. TRUE CHRISTIANITY.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, April 10, 1692.
THE institution of the Christian religion was for this purpose, that holiness
and righteousness might be brought forth in the earth; that God, through his
Son Jesus Christ, might take delight in the sons and daughters of men, that
they might be reconciled to him; for that which the law could not do, by reason
of its weakness, God has had a purpose to do by his Son, and to him he gave
all power in Heaven and Earth, that thereby he might be enabled to perform the
great work of God, in establishing righteousness, and in bringing forth a holy
people, to serve a holy God. This is the great blessing that is come to us, and
to all mankind, through our blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, that came
to turn every one from the evil of their ways. That is the way and method by
which our Lord Jesus accomplished the end of his coming, and the will of his
Heavenly Father; Moses and all his washings, offerings, and sacrifices, could
not make clean and purge the conscience; and by all his offerings and
sacrifices, he could not reconcile us to God: But Jesus, by his once offering
himself did forever perfect them that are sanctified; and by one offering,
reconciled us to the Father, and so brings forth a holy generation unto God,
through regeneration and the sanctification of the Spirit.

And seeing the Lord has been pleased in the riches of his grace to open this
new and living way, for man's returning again into unity and fellowship with
his Maker, the question, my friends, that I would put to you on the behalf of
God, is, for all of you to consider, whether it is not best for every one of us
to lay hold of salvation, to lay hold of that blessing wherewith the Lord has
blessed us, that so the principal institution of Christianity might not only be
named and spoken of, but might come to be enjoyed and witnessed in every one of
our own souls; and that all might wait with expectation on the Lord Jesus
Christ, for fulfilling of this great work in themselves.

There is a general notion among people, that Heaven is a holy place, and that
nothing that is unclean can enter into it, to have a habitation there, when
time in this world shall be no more with us; and that time which we have given
us, I am sure is given us of God, as an opportunity of fitting and preparing us
for his dewlling place; and every day and hour of it ought to be employed in
that great work, that so we might draw nearer and nearer to that state and
condition that suits and befits that holy dwelling where saints and angels, for
evermore, praise the great and glorious God: So that I am persuaded you
believe, that you and all of us, are to be accountable to God for all the time
he has bestowed upon us, whether we use it to the purposes for which he has
given it, or whether we mispend our time upon those things that are not
profitable to us; and upon these considerations, we had need all of us to take
heed to our present state that we are come to, and are arrived at in the
present time; as for the future time, that we all know we are not sure of; and
the future state that we may hope to come to, there is no certainty of it,
unless there be an improvement of the present time, and the opportunities of
our present state: Therefore every one should apply their hearts unto the
seeking of wisdom and understanding, and unto God, that he may give us to
understand our state, and our present fitness or unfitness for the kingdom of
glory and happiness, and of that holy dwelling we hope to enjoy forever.

If I will but turn my mind inward, to the serious consideration of my present
state and condition, I can tell whether I am fit or unfit to approach God's
presence; and if I find I am unfit, I must have recourse to the divine working
of that great power, which God has ordained and appointed for this purpose; I
must come to him to work all my works in me, and for me, according to his good
pleasure; and that he will never do, unless it be by crossing me in my carnal
pleasures and corrupt inclinations; for that which pleases man, does not
please God: And God will not revoke the holy scriptures, that tell us, that
they which live in pleasure, are dead while they live; they that are indulgent
to their own affections, and their own delights, and their own humors, they
are not at all ready to please and glorify God; they are not fitted for it,
therefore he never sanctifies, nor brings any into a true Christian state, but
through a daily cross; so that if I am not already fitted and prepared to do
that which is pleasing to God, I may be fitted by taking up a daily cross, to
glorify God here, and enjoy him forever.

What those things are that you are to do, I need not tell you, nor what you
have done. I judge no man: There is one that judges, he will tell you if you
ask him, what your state and condition is; he will tell the drunkard, if he ask
him, whether he is fit for Heaven; and also the proud and haughty persons
whether they are fit for Heaven: Let such as are guilty of these or any other
sins, enquire of the oracle in their own bosoms, am not I fit for Heaven,
notwithstanding all this? He will tell thee no, there is no unclean thing shall
enter there, nothing that defiles, nothing that hurts or oppresses; the proud,
peevish, malicious person, that is hurtful to others, that hurts his neighbor,
is shut out. There shall in no wise enter into Heaven any thing that defiles,
Rev. xxi, 27. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, Rev. xxii, 15.
None shall enter into the holy city of God, but those that are purified and
purged from all iniquity: Therefore God has sent his son Jesus, seeing none
else could do it: Moses and the Prophets could not do it, therefore he sent
Jesus to bless us, in turning every one of us from our iniquities, and from our
evil ways; one man has this evil way, another that evil way: It is all one to
him; his work is to turn every one of us from our evil ways.

But why then (you may say) are so few turned from their evil ways throughout
Christendom, where Christ is believed in, professed, read and heard; that yet
so few are converted and turned? for we see great numbers of liars, swearers,
drunkards, and unclean persons among us, where Christ is cried up at a mighty
rate, and yet people are not turned from the evil of their ways; there is
something sure that is the reason of it.

I would have all of you consider what the reason of it is, that those that
profess to be Christians, are not turned from the evil of their ways; for
Christ has all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him, and he is able to
do it, and he was sent from God on purpose to do it; but this is a certain
truth, it is not done; and what is the reason of it? He came to his own, and
his own received him not; what is the reason? He has caused his grace to
appear to every man in the world, and yet they are not taught by it. Here is an
object of faith for all, and God has offered faith to all men, since he has
raised up Jesus from the dead, yet men have it not: What is the reason that
this nation, as well as other nations, have been puzzled about it, to find out
things that are so plain in scripture, in relation to the love of God to
mankind, and in relation to Christ Jesus the Savior, and so little of this
work is wrought among us?

Some say there is never a man in the world turned from the evil of their ways;
they live in sin, and they are under a fixed necessity of continuing in it, and
lying under it all the days of their lives, for all this belief of the love of
God, and the power of Christ, and the profession of it: Some say there is never
a Christian in the world can live one day without sin, but will defile himself
with one thing or another; that the devil will prevail over men, and sin mix
itself with our prayers and alms, and all our holy duties; so that there is
nothing clean; nothing pure that We can perform to God. There are others that
are not so rash in their judgment, and not so inconsiderate, but they will
believe some men and women may come to a power and ability to withstand satan,
and resist him in his temptations; and that there are those that have been
turned from the evil of their ways, but they are not; What is the matter? You
have spent time about this, what is the reason you are not turned from the evil
of your ways? The devil has told the people in former days, that the reason
why men live in sin, is, because God has appointed it so to be: And that has
stopped the mouth of many a plain-hearted tender Christian; they have cried unto
God under the weight of their sin, and they see no deliverance after all their
prayers and tears, because they have been told they cannot do it, and that God
has appointed it should be so, and required them to do what they cannot do;
and with some the custom of sin has taken away the sense of sin, and they go
on to perdition in their security.

I hope, my friends, that God has opened your eyes, and that you have better
thoughts of God, than that he has set you a work and a labor to do, and by
his eternal power and decree, has ordained that you should never do it, but
damn you after all. Consider, there are men and women in bondage and captivity,
and God has sent his Son into the world to redeem them from all iniquity, and
turn them from their evil ways; we are nor turned, what is the reason of it? I
beseech you in the love of God, be serious in this matter; serious you must be,
one time or other; when you come to the tribunal of God, there must be a reason
given, or if not, you must be speechless; therefore find it out here. What is
the reason that I am not turned from my evil ways, since God has sent his Son
Jesus to do it, and given him power to do it; why then is it not done?

Some persons upon enquiry, and after their search, have brought forth this
reason: They have alleged the great power the devil has: The devil is so
strong, and has such a power to darken their minds, and enchant their
affections; he injects and brings things into their minds before they are aware
of it. I confess this, and I will say a little to it, I will confess as much as
the argument will bear, that the devil has great power, and a way of injecting
things into the spirits and affections of people: He is God's enemy and ours
too, and he lies in wait, and will do as much as he can against us, that no one
shall get to Heaven; if we come thither, it shall be against his will: I have
heard some magnify the devil's power to such a degree, that he has such power
over a man or woman, that he is able to keep them in sin all their life, though
God has put forth the exceeding greatness of his power for their redemption:
This is hard to believe, that the devil is stronger than Christ Jesus: Well, as
great as his power is, we are in a capacity of knowing a greater power; the
apostle did comfort the Christians, notwithstanding all the power the devil
used with them to defile them, and keep them from inheriting the kingdom of
God, 1. John i. 4. You are of God, little children, and have overcome, because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. I would have you
believe this; I do believe it heartily, the devil only rules in the hearts of
the children of disobedience; and he that has the Holy Ghost in him, has one
greater than he that is in the world: If you believe this, then the question is
thus far answered, that we have a Savior, a Deliverer, that is more able to
redeem us, than the devil is to keep us in bondage: I hope we are pretty well,
now we know we have a keeper: We are assaulted with the devil's temptations,
and they are powerful; how powerful? He has so much power, as he finds in us
an inclimation to yield and join with his temptations: If he comes with a
temptation to a man or woman that has no inclination to that thing he tempts
them to; if they hate that thing, then there is an end of it: The devil's power
lies in this, when he brings a temptation that I have an inclination to, then
he has a party within me; if that be rooted out, what signifies his power, let
him bring ever so many temptations?

There are many of you that understand what I say; if a temptation comes to a
man to commit an act of uncleanness, if he be a chaste man, there is no
inclination in him to yield to it, or join to it, he hates it, it is an
abomination in itself, and grievous and provoking to God, if he does it; a man
abhors it, then what powerful temptation is it? If it light upon a man of an
unclean mind, that is defiled in his heart, he has not only the devil, but his
own lust and corrupt inclination to contend with; but if a man believes in
Christ, he relies upon him, and he will say, Lord, thou see I am under
temptation; here is a great and powerful temptation, I can never withstand it,
but I trust in thy name and power, do thou arise and deliver me from it: Thus
when God does arise, his enemies will be scattered; though the devil's power be
great, yet there is a deliverer that is stronger than he: The reason of men's
being overcome, does not lie in the greateness of the devil's power, but in the
frailty of our nature.

Some will say, that our natures are so frail, weak and depraved, that we can
do nothing as as we ought to do; this is given for another reason, and there is
truth in it, but that truth is but a delusion; they would excuse themselves
when they have yielded to a temptation, I am weak and frail, I cannot resist
the devil; though the devil is not stronger than Christ, yet he is stronger
than I, he works with all his might, power, and subtilty to deceive me, and
ensnare me, and overcome me; I am a poor, frail creature, therefore I must
yield to him: This is a carnal reason; as though I were to grapple with the devil
in mine own strength, and to deliver my soul, as if God has lest me to myself:
If thou say, Lord, thou have set me to grapple with the devil, and to withstand
his temptations, Lord I am not able to do it myself; God will answer thee, I
have laid help upon one that is mighty, that is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come unto me by him; so that thou art not to overcome the devil by
thine own power and ability: If any man reason thus, his reason is out of
doors; for we are saved by Christ, therefore I cannot plead my own frailty,
seeing God has provided a rock for my defense that is stronger and higher than
I, that I may trust and rely upon.

So that you see the frailties of our nature is not a sufficient reason, we
must seek further for it yet; and when we come to search narrowly, and to the
bottom of our hearts, I will tell you here it rests; it has its center in the
perverseness of the will that is in man, that is contrary to the will of God;
it is the opposition of our will to the will of God; we may talk what we will
of salvation and Christianity, that we have a mind to be saved, and go unto God
when we die, and to enjoy the happiness of Heaven to eternity: We may talk
thus; but as long as the perverseness of the will continues, I am the cause of
my own ruin; if I grow in a profession, this perverse will, will grow up with
me under that profession, and under any profession; change your judgment and
opinion as often as you list, this will go along with you; the reason and the
bottom of things will come to this, none can overcome the devil, nor be a
disciple of Christ, without a daily cross. When people come to this, to see a
necessity of taking up the cross of Christ, and denying themselves; when it
comes to this, there are such shifts and evasions, and arts that men have to
cover themselves, to make themselves and others believe, that such and such a
thing is consistent with the will of God, and that they may do it, and save
their own souls; but they boast of their own deceit, and are glad that they can
make a shift to deceive their own souls; so that there is no hopes of their
ever being purged and cleansed, and of having any holy work brought forth by
them; but when a man comes to be sensible of his spiritual condition, and is
sincere and honest, he will be ready to say unto God, if I be deceived in any
thing, open mine eyes. Lord; if I indulge myself in any thing that has a
contrariety to thy holy will, Lord, I beseech thee discover it to me; such a
man will lay aside his own will, if it be contrary to God's will: Now here is
one that is a very fit object for Christ to work upon; he will not be long
before he be savingly convinced. When a man comes to the word, he is convinced
of such an evil in his conscience, where nobody but God and himself were privy
to it, or had any knowledge of it. It is discovered that he lives in such a
practice as is contrary to the mind of God. God has convinced thee, that thou
love it, and live in it, and if thou will but break off that evil practice,
that he has sent his Son Jesus Christ to turn thee from every evil way, and to
redeem thee from all iniquity.

This truth has a savor in it; and if thou art sincere and upright, there is
nothing for thee to say or do, but to set thyself against every thing that is
contrary to the mind of God, and thou will have light from Heaven sent to guide
thee and direct thee in thy way thither; if thou will but receive that grace
that is freely given of God unto thee through Jesus Christ, he will certainly
purge thee and cleanse thee from thy sin, and turn thee from every evil way,
notwithstanding the perverseness of thine own will and the power of satan; and
he will work in thy heart by his grace, till it has brought thee off from
thine iniquity, and wrought iniquity out of thee, and so bring forth a holy
work to God.

Without faith it is impossible to please God: We cannot please God without
faith, nor with it neither, unless it be the gift of God. There is a great deal
of faith in this nation, and in this city; but do you believe all their ways
are pleasing to God? We must distinguish of faith here; (...) the apostle would
give a description of saving faith, he tells you, that it is the operation of
God; if I have not that operation, and a regard to it, how can I have that
working? But since it is the dispensation of the gospel of Christ, and design
of Christ, to turn people to the operation of God in their own hearts, we would
have them believe it.

If there be a drunkard or a profane person, if God work faith in his heart,
he will be convinced and say, what a stroke has the Lord given upon my
conscience, and he will see it is the Lord's work: Then believe, whoever thou
art, and lay hold of this, for this is the operation of God upon a believing
soul, the stroke of God's hand and the power of God, and then thou have the
work of faith, by which faith thou art enabled to keep thyself from that thing
that God smote thee for, and before he gives thee over, the same hour thou will
find the same hand smiting thee for another sin; this will be like fire in thy
bones, kindling up thy zeal and hatred against thy sin, and will kindle in thee
a high fire of love to God, that has not let thee lie in thy misery, but
minded thy condition, and had compassion on thee: This love God will shed
abroad, which will run over thy heart, he has shed abroad his love, says the
apostle, Romans v. upon our hearts by the Holy Ghost, to constrain us to yield
obedience; when thou fallest into the way of says, which is the operation of
God, the devil comes and knocks and bounces on this side and that, but God will
not fail to give thee power to withstand temptation.

The Lord Jesus Christ works in people's hearts, to turn them from the evil
of their ways, that so he may bring forth holiness and righteousness, and
redeem a people from under the bondage of sin, and fit them for the kingdom of
his Father, and to use the apostle's words, present them before the throne of
God, without spot and blameless; he will purify them, and sprinkle them from an
evil conscience; their bodies being washed with pure water, he will sanctify
the creature; his word is nigh them, and in their hearts, he begins a work in
many, and will carry it on in one, and in another.

Here lies the chief work, it is the good hand of God must work all our works
in us, and for us, according to the good pleasure of his will: Work in you a
willingness to bear the cross of Christ, and to deny yourselves; he will
operate for you for this purpose, therefore you must commit yourselves to him.

It is not our preaching which will convert men to God, but it is the work of
God that is pure, which converts the soul to God, and that cleanses, fits and
prepares it for the kingdom of Heaven, Psalm xix. 7. We must come to the word
of God, that will convince us, reprove us, strengthen, encourage and illuminate
us, and do in us and for us all that we stand in need of: To him be all the
praise that works all in you, and prepares you to be a peculiar people to
himself. The word of his grace I commit to you all, take heed of doing any
thing contrary to it; if you do, that which would be your comfort, will be your
condemnation.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
BLESSED God, and Father of Life! thou art glorious in holiness, infinite in
power, the eternal God; thy dominion is an everlasting dominion, thy kingdom is
without end.

O Lord! we bless and praise thy glorious name, that thou have made known
thyself among the sons and daughters of men; thou have revealed to us in thy
word the manner of thy kingdom among us, in setting up righteousness and truth,
and throwing down iniquity.

Powerful God of Life! subject the minds and hearts of all thy people to thy
divine power and pleasure, and let the dread of thyself rest upon our spirits,
that every one of us may fear to sin against thee, and to do despite to thy
Spirit, the Spirit of thy grace, that we may every one of us turn from our
iniquities, the evil of our hearts and ways, that we may praise thee in the
land of the living, and may become faithful witnesses of that salvation which
thou have wrought for us, and for all them that believe.

Powerful God of Life! the souls of thy people which thou have gathered out of
the world, do praise and magnify thy name for what they have seen, and for what
thou have (...); thou have wonderfully appeared in thy love, and brought
^^^vation near, and gathered many into it, it is become a (...) and a bulwark
to them, that they are defended from the evil one, and from the evils of the
world.

O dearest God of Life! raise up poor and needy souls out of the dust, that
they may serve thee, and obey thee, and do thy will, and show forth thy power
and strength in their weakness and infirmity, that they may trust in thee, and
rely upon thee in the time of their distress.

Blessed Father of Life and Power! give grace to the humble and meek, and teach
them in thy way. We have had experience, O Lord! of thy fulfilling thy
promises; thou art still fulfilling of them to all that truly wait upon thee;
thou have begun a good work, carry it on to the praise and exaltation of thy
great name.

Blessed Father! reveal thy power more and more in the nations round about,
that they that long after the life of the Living God, may come and find thee,
and behold thy divine appearance, through the Son of thy Love, in their own
spirits, that so they may receive thy word, and thy word may quicken them, that
they may stand up from the dead, and live; for it is the living, the living, O
Lord! that praise thee, that honor thy name, that offer praise, and glorify
thee.

O blessed Father of Life! carry on thy great work with power throughout all
the earth; gather a remnant of thy seed that are scattered, and bring them home
into the kingdom of thy dear Son, that we may praise thee together, and rejoice
in thy name.

Dear Father! thou have saved this nation, the land of our nativity, to this
day, by a wonderful power, by thy powerful arm; our souls are deeply sensible
of the stretching forth of thy Almighty Hand in our preservation at this day;
so Living Father! if it be thy heavenly pleasure, lengthen forth our
tranquillity, and the enjoyments of thy mercy and goodness to the inhabitants
thereof, that they may learn to fear thee, and turn to thee with their whole
hearts, and break off, by true repentance, from all those sins that grieve thy
Holy Spirit; that so, Living Father of Life! they may come to walk in love and
in union with thy heavenly power, and have concord one with another, and show
forth the power of thy grace manifested to them, and magnify thy love and
power, and give thee honor and renown for that great salvation that thou have
wrought for them; that so thy great name may be exalted, and thy will may be
done on earth as it is in Heaven; that the souls of thy people may be refreshed
with thy love, and the joys of thy presence, and the revelation of thy heavenly
power; for this, we offer up to thee living praises, and Christian
thanksgivings, in and through the Lord Jesus Christ; for thou art worthy of all
praise, and glory, and dominion, forever, and ever. Amen.

SERMON XIX. The MIGHTY WORK of MAN'S REDEMPTION.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, Feb. 8, 1687.
My Friends,
WE are met upon the most weighty affair that can be to every one of us, even
to wait that we may have a true knowledge of the beginning, carrying on and
perfecting the mighty work of redemption, that people may know that redemption
is wrought in their souls; for every ones soul has been lost and captivated,
and led away from the pure presence of God; all have been alienated by reason
of sin, which has been an universal wall of partition and has excluded and
shut out unholy souls from the Holy God; all that have been defiled and
polluted, they have been excluded from his dwellingplace, they have been driven
out into the world, and the world has become a world of misery, and of
distraction and confusion to the sons and daughters of men; there has been
anguish, tribulation and wrath upon all their souls, and an insensibility has
happened unto many, that they have not been apprehensive of the great
depravation they have lain under, and they have not been sensible of the glory
of that state and condition which they were to have enjoyed; and in that state
of insensibility they have not sought after the Lord, but have been captivated
and led away by diverse lusts and pleasures, by which they have wounded their
own souls more and more.

And in such a state as this it is, that the Lord has found us; he has sought
us out, and he has found us cast out into the open field, and wallowing, as it
were, in our own blood; and yet this has been a time of love; and he has
manifested his love to us in this respect, in that he has awakened us and
brought us to a sense of our depraved and deplorable condition, and given unto
a remnant to perceive, that there is a more excellent glory, a more excellent
enjoyment to be had, than any this world can afford.

But a great many of those whose eyes are so far opened, that they can see and
discern a more excellent glory, yet they cannot receive it, for they are not in
a capacity for the enjoyment of it; many have the glimmerings, and some little
light of heavenly things, but they themselves are earthly: Many perceive there
is a holy life, but it is not theirs, for their own life is unholy, and yet
they know there is a life that is holy and pure. Hereupon desires are begotten,
by the word of life in the sons and daughters of men, through the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Mediator; by him desires are begotten in people that they might
come to enjoy that life of holiness, that they might not only see a better
state than what they do enjoy, but that they might come to enjoy it, and have
it for theirs.

There is a universal desire in people that they might have eternal life, and
they believe there is an eternal life to be enjoyed; but every one has it not,
and the reason is, because they are not fitted and prepared for the enjoyment
of it; for it is a kind of treasure that is never put into an unclean vessel;
there must be a cleansing and purifying, that so earthen vessels may come to
retain and hold this heavenly treasure; and when it comes to this, that people
must be cleansed and purified, here the world turns out to diverse means and
methods; some have gone to outward washings, outward cleansings and
observations of this and the other ordinance, and when all that has been done,
themselves being judges, they were yet unclean; when they have done all that
lies in their power and ability, toward their washing and cleansing, and
toward preparing themselves, they have found some secret testimony in their
own consciences that their hearts were still unclean, and that there was
defilement still abiding and lodging in the secret of their souls; and this
has put a great many to a stand, what they should do; when they have come to
the end of all, they know not what to do: Many have cried secretly, what shall
we do to be saved? For all that we can do, cannot save us. We have retained
this, and the other doctrine, followed this and the other way, and made many
observations; but all this does not cleanse our soul, nor purge our consciences
from dead works, this will not bring us to the inheritance of that immortal
life that will give us satisfaction. We hear many speak of satisfaction, and of
joy unspeakable and full of glory; but here is a weight and burden still lies
upon our souls.

Therefore, my friends, that all such who are brought so far, as to be under
such a burden and oppression, might be informed and come to understand, where
the true rest is, and where that power can be found, that is able to answer
those tender desires that are begotten in them; for this cause has the Lord
our God communicated and given the dispensation of the gospel of his son, unto
a remnant whom he has sanctified, that they might speak a word in season to
the weary soul. This is not a day to make a mock of sin, this is not a day to
make a covenant with death and hell, and to resolve to go on in a wicked life,
and to continue in it all their days.

But yet there are a sort of people that desire to have a word spoke in season
to them when they are weary. How many are there in our age and generation, that
one may reckon of this number, that are sinners, and overcome by their lusts
and corruptions, and by the temptation of satan and his instruments. But they
are weary of it, it is a burden to their souls, it costs them many a bitter
tear, many a sigh, and many a sad and sorrowful thought in secret, that they
should have a sight of a more excellent glory, and of a better life than that
of their own, and yet know not how to get into it.

My friends, that same divine word of life, by which any of the people of the
Lord, in any age, were ever restored, redeemed and purchased again to the Lord;
that word of life must have been at work in their hearts, and has been at work
in them, or else thou had never been so far opened; there has been something
that has unstopped thine ears, that thou might hear; and the reason of thy
continuance in thy bonds, after thy knowing something that might have freed
thee, is, because thou have not heartily closed with that which has begun the
work, which God, by his redeeming power, has effected in the hearts of them
that believe in Christ, and thereby an inclination is raised in people to seek
after the Lord.

You know what the apostle says, it is not of us so much as to think a good
thought. But this all people will grant is a good thought, when a sinner thinks
of turning to God, and leaving his evil ways, if he had power and ability, and
cries out, if I knew how to stand against temptation, I would never sin against
the Lord more; this must be a good thought in thy mind: How came it there? Who
is the author of this thought, you will say? This ought to be attributed to the
love of God in Christ, that he has convinced and persuaded us; and that though
there is sin and pollution, yet he has not so forsaken us, as utterly to cast
us off, he has sent forth his quickening Spirit, that is, the Lord from
Heaven, that he might stir up and quicken people to consider their condition,
and bring them to a sense of their present state, that they may come into a
better state than they are in at present.

If this may be granted, that the Spirit of God, and the grace of God, is the
author of these desires, then it will be granted at the same time, that every
one of you ought to be sensible, that such spiritual desires stirring you, are
from the motion and operation of the Spirit of God that has raised them in
your souls; and then I hope you will grant, that if you had but joined with
that Spirit, and with the assistance of that Spirit, all things would have been
possible thereunto.

So that here is the first thing that I would have every one satisfied about in
their understandings, whether they are totally exempted from any such touches
and operations of God or no; for it is said by some ignorantly, that a great
part of mankind have never had any such divine workings of the Spirit of God
upon them, in order to their conversion; therefore it is not in vain for you to
consider your state and condition; for if you, or I, or any here, be under such
circumstances, that they never had, nor are ever like to have any such divine
operations or touches of the spirit of life, in order to conversion, then I am
sure you and I had better never have been born.

If you will consider with yourselves, and lay aside the disputes of doctors
and learned men, you may know the things pertaining to yourselves. Things
relating to others, I may let disputes alone about them; but as for things
relating to my salvation, I must have a certain knowledge of them. It concerns
you, my friends, to know within yourselves, by an infallible evidence of the
Spirit of God, whether you have had such divine touches, workings and
operations upon your hearts, as have inclined you to seek the Lord. I hope I
may believe there are none here but have in their hearts an answer; I have had
such touches and operations in me: This is great love from God; more than any
tongue can set forth. You will be ready to say, I have not deserved this; I
have not so behaved myself toward my Maker as to deserve that he should wait
upon me, and call upon me. When will thou turn, and amend thy life, and hearken
to him that made thee? When will thou leave serving God's enemy, and serve him
that is thy rightful Lord?

So that now this is a great aggravation of our sin to continue in it, and yet
to have a belief that God is still waiting upon us, and that he has such a
kindness for us, as now and then to touch our hearts by the inward operation of
his spirit and grace, in order to conversion.

Now when this is agreed, and men settle themselves in the belief of this, you
know what the consequence will be. When I consider with myself, I that have
been under these workings, have been rebellious, wicked and disobedient to God,
yet the Lord is not so angry as utterly to cast me off, but is still waiting to
be gracious, by the operation of his spirit, to gather me to himself, in order
to sanctify me, and heal my backsliding, to cure my weakness and infirmities,
and at the last to save me, and make me an heir of his eternal kingdom, what is
the consequence of this love? Why, the next resolve must be this; I will either
rebel against his grace, and resist his power, or I will submit to him; which
of these is the best way, the safest way?

Are there not a great many in this age, that are as sensible of the workings
of God's grace for their conversion, as ever you and I were; that are as
sensible that God has called them to holiness and righteousness, as any of us
can be, and yet they have resisted the grace of God? They have said in their
hearts, we will not submit to this power, that will make us so holy, and so
watchful, and so careful, diligent and obedient, for this very reason, because
it will cross my interest, it will cross my pleasure, it will hinder my
preferment in the world, and my reputation among men; and for this reason I
will not bear this yoke. I would be glad to hope there are none such here, that
have made such a covenant with death and hell, and yielded themselves up to the
devil, to serve him all their days.

Let us, who are at this time, and at this meeting, under the operation of
God's grace, and feel the Lord calling us by his grace, and working upon us by
his spirit; let us enter together into a holy, solemn resolution, that we will
obey this good Spirit, and take him for our leader, and submit, though it
should be to a cross: Thus people will think, they Will come to this
resolution, when the work of redemption is begun in their souls, and when they
are convinced of their sin, and their eyes are opened to see the way of
holiness; and though they never take a resolution to walk in it, yet every one
shall be convinced, and see there was a better way than their own, and be
convinced by the grace of God one time or other, that in respect of God's
working of it, it is beginning; but in respect of men that should join with the
operation of God, it is not beginning, for he has no desire to those things
which he does not know, he still depends upon himself; but when the soul comes
to be satisfied, that it is the visitation of God, and joins himself to him in
a holy resignation of his own will, and says, this is the Lord, he is come to
work upon me, he is come to change and alter the frame of my mind: It is the
Lord, let him do what he will; here is a mind brought to submit to the grace of
God, God is able to do that for him which he cannot do for himself.

When people come to the right object of their faith, and act their faith upon
that object, they every day find a progress, a going forward in the work of
grace, according to the work of grace in their souls; and there is a power that
inclines them to believe; it is not for such to cry, if they had power, they
would do more; he that has the spirit of grace, the Spirit of Christ, that had
all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, to put it forth on purpose for the
bringing back of men and women home to God; he that has this object of faith
before him, he will not look for power in his own will and affections to redeem
him, he expects a power to be daily ministered and dispensed to him, as he has
need of it, through the Lord Jesus Christ, who is present with him, in all his
trials and temptations: He cries, here is a temptation that will carry me away,
O Lord help me, put forth the arm of thy power and save me, plant thy fear in
my heart and deliver me, their eyes shall see their Savior, says the prophet.

Thus when a man comes to be joined to the right object of faith, and does
exercise and put forth lively acts of faith upon Christ, his eyes shall see his
Savior; the light that shines into his heart, discovers to him the temptation,
and it also shows him a Reedemer at hand; his Savior is nigh him, and he
trusts in him, and relies upon him, and says, this word of God is in my
heart, and I do really believe, that although the temptation that assaults me
be strong, yet it shall not prevail; whether it be the profits, the pleasures,
or the honors of the world. If I put my trust in this power, I cannot go near
the evil; I am a Christian; I have entered into a covenant in Christianity,
that I will join with nothing but what God approves of: Now when I have
represented to my mind the temptation of the devil, and that evil which he sets
before me, and I know it is contrary to the mind of God, how can I go into that
evil, and break my covenant with God, after I have entered into covenant with
him, to love him, serve him, and obey him? The power of grace upon such souls,
the operation of grace, is so powerful, that the temptation comes and goes, and
they are saved and delivered out of it, because God helps them; but if they
comply with the temptation, then tribulation, wrath and anguish, pursues all
such as are rebellious and disobedient to the will of God.

Now this redemption is carried on gradually from day to day; the truth that
thou believe, it operates by degrees; thou art delivered, first from one evil
practice, and then from another evil work: But there is a great deal more; thou
rejoicest and art glad, that thou art delivered from one sin; but thou would
be more glad to be delivered from them all. I speak to those that are serious
for their immortal souls; when they see themselves delivered out of one evil,
that they were ready to run into, they would be glad if they were redeemed out
of every evil; that their crossness and peevishness, their frowardness and
wantonness were removed: They should be glad to be delivered from all their
sins.

What do you think, say some, that a man, while he lives here, may come to see
all sin, all evil and corruption brought under, and nothing but holiness,
righteousness and truth remain in him; and that there shall be nothing but
simplicity and innocence? Do you think that such a thing can be?

Why should not I think so? You will grant me, that the power of grace is able
to get such power and victory over sin and corruption, that you may come to
hate it as much as ever you have loved it; if you grant me that, the
consequence will follow, he that gave me victory over sin, can give me power
over all sin. All Christians believe, that God's power is infinite; the
scripture testifies, all things to be possible to God, with whom we have to do.
If all things be possible to God, sure this is possible; there is nothing so
contrary to God as sin; and God will not suffer the devil always to rule his
masterpiece, man. Mankind is God's masterpiece, the most eminent creature in
this lower world, made after God's likeness; and though the devil has brought
men into his own likeness now, yet nothing can be more contrary to the mind of
God, than that the devil should have the rule of us, for God would have the
government of us himself.

When we consider the infiniteness of God's power, for destroying that which is
contrary to him, who can believe that the devil must ever stand and prevail? I
belive it is inconsistent and disagreeable with the true faith, for people to
be Christians, and yet to believe that Christ, the eternal Son of God, to whom
all power in Heaven and Earth is given, will suffer sin and the devil to have
dominion over them; there is no other name under Heaven by which I can be
saved, therefore I have put my confidence in him: If the devil must have the
rule of me here, then I cannot be subject to Christ in all things; I may go to
meetings, but can never master the devil and his temptations; this is as
inconsistent with the faith of a Christian, as light with darkness, and Christ
with Belial. If Christians think themselves true believers, then let them see
how far their faith will reach, whether it be like that faith, which was once
delivered to the saints, for by that faith their hearts were cleansed, and they
became free from sin, Romans vi. 22. But now being made free from sin, and the
servants of God, says the apostle, you have your fruit unto holiness, and the
end everlasting life; you were servants to sin, but now you are free from sin;
so that this faith is but one, and if men have got another, it will do them no
good: Take heed thou art not mistaken about thy faith.

I have heard some learned men say, that a believer is a servant of sin, and he
is ever like to be so; but he is not at the same time free from righteousness,
for he has the righteousness of Christ imputed to him, and God looks upon him
as righteous in his righteousness; there cannot be a more anti-apostolical
doctrine, I may be a servant of sin, and yet have the imputation of Christ's
righteousness; I may be a servant of sin, say they, yet Christ is righteous, he
is the righteousness of God, and he has fulfilled the will of God, and has
purchased salvation for me, and he is the object by which I am made righteous.

Consider this, the imputation of Christ's righteousness will never do me good,
till I come to partake of his righteousness, till his righteousness be made my
righteousness, in me and for me. Christ is made to us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; so that if a sinner, one that was
a sinner the other day, come, through faith in Christ, to have his heart
cleansed and purged, and true righteousness planted in him, where sin was
planted, there sin, through the blood of Christ, is cleansed and purged away.

So that Christ is made righteousness to me, and not his righteousness barely
imputed and reckoned to me; Christ is my wisdom, I am a fool without him;
Christ is made righteousness to me; for my good deeds and holy living cannot be
acceptable to God till they be done in him, and commended to God by him; the
proper work of faith is, to fix the soul on him that works all things in us
and for us, that works in us both to will and to do, according to his good
pleasure; and it is the good pleasure of God that we should live in all
righteousness.

They that come to receive this faith at first, have to receive it from an
inward feeling; they have the operation of the word of God in them; so the
apostle reckons faith, not because such a man hears, and such a man believes
what such a man preaches, but faith is the operation of God; you may hear me,
and a thousand preach, and you may die unbelievers for all that, except you
come to this, to know the operation of God, and the work of faith in you. How
does my heart close with this? How does my soul join with this? What virtue and
power do I feel in myself? it may be others that preach, feel the power, but do
I feel it? if not, I come but to a noise and sound: If people feel not their
hearts joining with the word preached, there comes no advantage to them; you
read in scripture, that the word preached did not profit, because it was not
mixed with faith in them that heard it: This is your case, you come to meeting,
and you love to hear the doctrine of truth preached; I tell you, and I will
speak plainly to you, unless you come to feel the operation of the word of
truth in your hearts, you may hear the gospel, and the word of life preached to
you, but it will not profit you much.

How is it possible for a man to have a testimony against drunkenness, and yet
be drunk? a testimony against uncleanness, and yet be unclean? How can a man
hear such a testimony and believe it, and yet commit the sin? He heard it, but
did not feel the virtue of it within himself, and so he did not mortify the sin
that he was inclinable to; but they that come to join with truth, and with
meekness receive the ingrafted word, they find the power and ability of it,
they find how able it is to save their souls, they find how it works, not
only just when they hear it, but it goes along with them, and dwells with them,
and they find the virtue of it overshadowing their souls, with the dread and
terror of the Lord, not with the words that a man speaks; I do not trust to
them, but here is the power and the fear of the Lord, which will preserve my
soul, and keep me in safety; this is that which will keep my mind fixed upon
him, and keep my mind inward, that I do not gaze about me; so that every one
may have an infallible testimony of what they have heard and known.

I have known the doctrine of several sects that have been among us, and the
main thing that many have gone from one people to another about, is this, that
they might know what such a man holds forth more than such a one, and they
think the truth is more perspicuous among such a people than other people; if
you examine the matter, it is this, who preached and proved his doctrine best.
Alas! if they did all concur together, and did preach as certain and infallible
doctrine as ever Christ and his apostles preached, this will all do thee and me
no good, unless we know the power. You know there were thousands that heard
Christ preach, as you now hear me, and there were some so taken with him, that
they went away, and said, never man spoke like this man. But were they all
Christians? Did they partake of life by him? No, some of them were ready to
stone him.

Now bring this home and consider with yourselves, whether you are not some of
you in the same state; when you hear truth preached, there is an assent and
agreement with it in your minds; but when a command comes to be obeyed, and a
cross to be taken up, and self-denial to be shown, or some increase of trade
lies in the way, let truth go where it will, you must follow your interest;
there wants somewhat to fix you in the principle of truth, which is able to
sanctify you and perfect you, that you may be reconciled to God through Christ.

They that are resigned and given up to truth, it is possible for them that
they may be satisfied; they have an infallible testimony of the spirit of truth
witnessing with their spirits, that such a thing is bad, and if they might get
the whole world to do it, they will not. What is profit and pleasure to me? My
pleasure is at God's right hand, and my profit is to get grace, and to have an
abundant entrance into God's everlasting kingdom. Those that have the true
knowledge of Christ, they have profit and advantage, pleasure and delight
enough, which is hid from the world, and ever will be. They are for profit and
pleasure, which they may have with a good conscience. Those things which God
affords them as blessings in this world, they despise them not, but take them
with thanksgiving, and use them for his glory: But if they cannot have profit
or pleasure without sinning against the Lord and their own consciences, let
those who will, take profit and pleasure.

They that come thus to close with truth, they have an infallible evidence
within them; they do not conceive it is thus and thus, because such a man says
it is so; but they have an infallible evidence in themselves. This is the mind
of the Lord; God has signified it by his Spirit, and sealed it upon my spirit,
and I cannot but know it.

What, do you profess infallibility? Yes, else I would hold my tongue; if I did
not know what I assert infallibly, I would never preach more; truth may be many
times concealed. A man may have wronged and cheated his neighbor, and he not
know of it; this man goes away, and his neighbor does not reproach him; but
when he comes to lie down in his bed, he has a sting and a reproach in his
conscience, I know I have done him harm. Is not this infallible? Let me consult
some learned men, that I may know whether I have told a lie. I need not go to
learned men and logicians, to know whether it was a lie; I am infallible in
this, I know certainly it was not a lie; I have a certain evidence, and if a
thousand men tell me to the contrary, I will not believe them. If there be
infallibility here, is there not then infallibility in the word of truth? Shall
I question it, or doubt it, if I have an infallible testimony of it?

Though men have ever so little proficiency, if they have it upon sure terms, and
lasting foundations, let a thousand men come with all their logical skill and
sophism, yet they can never remove a man from the witness in himself. The
remnant that God has brought to this foundation, they have a certainty and
infallibility in their obedience, that they pay to the will of God, and in the
comfort they have to the obedience of the law of God, which he has written in
their hearts. Let what will come, they can never be removed; for this exceeds
all the precepts and doctrines of men; it is the precept and doctrine of Christ
and his apostles. Let people read them, and endeavor to practice them: But
here comes the testimony, the divine power by which the precept was given forth
to them, and is now given forth again to thee and me, with the same liveliness
and power. Let us perform them as did the primitive Christians.

Here now, comfort comes to flow forth from a settled foundation that shall
never be moved. The winds have come and blown upon religion; let what wind will
blow, that can blow, God has built his church upon a rock, and it will remain
unmovable against all opposition; blessed are they that are founded thereupon.
Has God fixed and established us in our society with one another, and with our
Lord Jesus Christ? this is the foundation that God has placed it upon. We
desire that all men may come to the same stability and settlement, and never
more to be tossed with the winds of doctrine, but be built upon Christ Jesus,
the Rock of Ages, the rock of our ages, the rock of us and our children. That
God will carry us on in this society, is the desire of our souls, for
ourselves, and all our friends and countrymen. The way for you to be blessed,
and to have an advantage for your immortal souls, by the testimony that has
been raised up, is, to have regard to the working of the same power, that you
may come to partake of the benefit of those gifts and graces which God has
bestowed upon his church.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST blessed and glorious God and Father of Life! how wonderful art thou in
thy appearances to thy people in the day of thy power, in which thou have
stretched forth thine arm, and have gathered a remnant of those that were
scattered, and art yet gathering and bringing to thyself, those that have been
driven away; and thou have made known thy power and goodness in the hearts of
the sons and daughters of men, that they might love thee. That thou might
beget love to thyself, thou have made known thy love to their hearts; if thou
had not loved us first, we had never loved thee: But thou have been shedding
abroad thy love in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, to constrain us to love thee.
Thy love is manifested to all that are breathing after thee, and none do
breathe after thee, but through the life that thou give them; and those that
were dead in sins and trespasses, have thou quickened, and we would send forth
thy praises and thanksgivings for the great things thou have done for us in
Jesus Christ. All thy works praise thee, and thy saints bless thee.

Holy Father of Life! increase and multiply those graces and holy desires which
thou have begun to work in us, and pluck up every plant that thy right hand
has not planted. Let spiritual Sodom be burnt up, and all that are corrupt;
let those things that thou have planted spring up to the praise of thy name,
and the salvation of the souls which thou have gathered.

O powerful God of Life! let thy blessed presence and living fear be among us,
that all thy children may offer praises, and the sacrifices of humble
thanksgivings upon thy holy altar.

Arise, O Lord! more and more in the greatness of thy power, and dispel the
clouds of darkness that has been upon the sons and daughters of men, and raise
up in every one of us more and more holy desires and breathings after that life
that is eternal. Those that have been scattered, let them be now gathered, and
let those that have been driven away in a cloudy and dark night, be brought to
a glorious and blessed day, wherein they may enjoy the gospel that brings light
to dark souls, that praises and thanksgivings way be offered up in thy house
for thy holy presence with us, that we may be fed there, when we are assembled
together in thy name, according to thy promise. Continue to be in the midst of
us, that living praises and thanksgivings may be offered up to thee, through
Jesus Christ; for thou alone art worthy, who art God over all, blessed for
evermore. Amen.

SERMON XX. The WORD of GOD, a CHRISTIAN'S LIFE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, March 14, 1687.
IT was the doctrine of the great master of the Christian religion, the Lord
Jesus Christ, while he was preaching and publishing, and making known the way
of salvation among the sons and daughters of men; he then preached and
declared, that it was not bread only by which a man lived, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Now the way and means of man's
preservation in life, in a living state, the method and course that the God of
Heaven does open to keep the sons and daughters of men alive, is by this word:
Every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, has a ministration of life
in it; and, therefore, all that are desirous of the enjoyment of the immortal
life, and of the preserving and increasing of it, they are diligently to wait
to be made partakers of this divine ministration. Outward bread is for outward
preservation, but man is made inward as well as outward, he has a soul as well
as a body. Now Christ, to signify to us, what the inward man is nourished and
fed by, tells us, that man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

So now in this our day, as well as in former days, it has pleased God to give
unto a remnant an experimental knowledge of the truth of this; that they have
been quickened and made alive by the word of God; that is, they have heard, and
felt, and tasted of the word of life that was with the Father before the world
began, that has been divinely ministered to them, by the mercy of God, through
Jesus Christ; many that were dead in trespasses and sins, he has said unto
them, live. He has given unto many an inward sense of their state, who
sometimes had it not; he has brought many a one to feel sin to be a burden
and an oppressing load, who sometimes before have taken pleasure and delight in
it. This is a great change that is wrought in a man's mind, that he should come
to be laden with that, burdened and oppressed by that, which was before his
pleasure and delight; yet this great change with been wrought in many a soul,
by the operation of the word of God, of that inward word, that inward voice,
when the Lord has taken men in hand himself.

There are many have taken sinners in hand, and have gone about to convince
them and convert them, but they were not able to do it; but when the Lord has
taken men in hand himself, when his Creator has undertaken to deal with him
himself, then the man cries out, I am a worm, and no man; then he cries out
under the sense of the judgment of God, then he cries out under the indignation
of the Lord, which he has kindled by his sins, he cries out for mercy, then he
prays for remission, then he wishes that he had never provoked the Lord; for
the word that goes out of the mouth of God, has a mighty force and power upon
the spirit of a man, so that he is converted and changed by it; as the prophet
said of old, the word of God is pure, converting the soul.

Now where any come to an experimental knowledge of the word of the Lord, of
this inward voice, whereby God speaks to the sons and daughters of men, they
have received thereby an infallible feeling of their own state and condition;
this is the first lesson learned by it. They come to have a certain, infallible
knowledge of their own state, and they are sure that they cannot be deceived;
for it brings an evidence with it in their consciences, so that whatsoever this
word of life signifies to a man, he has the knowledge of the same thing
evidencing it in his own conscience, as the apostle says, if our hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. Now here is
a way found out for men to obtain divine knowledge by a divine means; for the
Lord speaks by his Spirit, and if men come to hearken to that voice, unto that
speaking, they perceive readily what it says unto them: The Lord tells people
as well now as in former ages, what he has against them; and this every one in
the closet of their own hearts, come to understand. We read in the book of
Revelations, what our Lord Jesus Christ appointed John to write to the seven
churches in Asia, that he had few things against some, and many things against
others.

Now that which is the design of our meeting when we are assembled together,
is, that we may know what the mind and judgment of God is, concerning
ourselves: How shall we know that, unless we ask him, and come to wait upon
him, and enquire at the oracle of counsel, that God has appointed in the bosom
of every man? For he signifies his mind unto the children of men, by that light
and grace which Jesus Christ has planted in them, he has enlightened every
man that comes into the world, with an undeceiving light, and he has
ministered of his truth and grace to every man; though the man be bad and
untrue, and in the dark, and there be darkness in him, yet the light shines in
darkness. The man may be a false man, yet there is true knowledge in him; if
this man hearken to the voice of truth, when the God of truth signifies what
his mind and judgment is concerning him, and his present state.

So that there is an opportunity offered, and if a man believe the word of
truth, which is administered to his own mind, he cannot say such a man has
deceived him, for it is truth itself which is signified to him which he
believes: For the truth is the object of his faith, and he believes it of
himself; he believe^ that while he remains wicked in his unrenewed state, he is
out of the covenant of God, and in the high road to destruction, if he does not
get out of it, and return to God, and mind his duty: He believes this, and he
believes the truth: It has been so with many, it has been so with us all;
this is the first kind of faith and belief that ever we receive; for when truth
signifies to us our fallen state, our alienated state, when truth signifies
and discovers to us the partition wall of sin and iniquity which we have
builded up, whereby the glory and favor of God was hid from the soul, we
believed this to be true; we would have been looked upon as heirs of God's
kingdom, yet when we are come to hearken to truth, we find that we are children
of the devil and do his works; shall a man believe this after he has been
forty years a professor of Christianity? If a man believe truth, there is no
danger in believing it, though it be his own destruction that is threatened.

Now the great thing that I would have ushered into the hearts of men, is, that
they may believe the truth for truth's sake. If men will believe the truth,
they must believe many things against themselves, which they are not willing to
believe; but says Christ, no man can be my scholar, my disciple, but by
denying himself. I must deny myself, my pretensions to Christianity, my
supposed saintship and title to the kingdom of God; now if I would be convinced
that I am a wicked man, a profane man, one that does not live as becomes the
gospel, I must believe truth, the voice of truth being of infallible certainty;
it is signified divinely, by the immortal word that cannot deceive us; this
ought to be the reason why people should believe the testimony of it, though it
be against themselves; they that do so, presently come to find the effects of
it, for they were in their sins and trespasses before, and so are still; they
were before in a kind of liberty, in a kind of ease and indulgence of
themselves, and still their sin remains in them, and they remain in it; but
they are now under a sense of sorrow, under a weight, under a burden, under an
oppression, which signifies they are alive, and quickened; for (if you take an
outward comparison) they remain not senseless and dead; now lay what load you
will upon a dead man, he will neither groan, nor grumble at it; but if becomes
again to life, he cries take off the burden, the weight and oppression, that
lies heavy upon me.

This is the difference between being dead in sins and trespasses, and being
brought to life and sense again; this word of life that comes from the mouth of
God, begets a sense in every one that receives it; it is of great service and
use to all people to be acquainted with it, that desire to be heirs of life
eternal, that desire to be inheritors of the kingdom of God: But how should
they come by it? They think by this and the other duty, and temporary
performance, to obtain it; no, but if they will have life, they must have it
from the God of life that created them, he must create them again to good
works: They can have it but by one way, all must be brought to it that way; it
cannot be by hearing a man preach; unless the spirit does cooperate with the
word of God, there is no possibility of being quickened, and necessity binds me
to hearken and have regard to that one means: Now I say to you, says Christ,
speaking of people's way of living to eternity, man lives not by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God; now when we come to
understand this text, as spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ, we did conclude there
was a possibility of understanding and hearing that inward voice and word of
truth in our own hearts, that God did speak to us by his Son, Jesus Christ, who
enlightened us. Hereupon meetings were appointed at first, that the word should
minister life in them, and life to them that attend them; and to this day our
meetings are appointed for this purpose, that we may have the ministration of
life and virtue, from Christ, the fountain of life and virtue, by whom we were
to be quickened and strengthened, and by whom those that are dead in sins and
trespasses were quickened.

Therefore I would have every one always to have a reverence to the word of
life, that speaks in themselves; for, if we speak as we are moved by the Spirit
of God, and utter those things by verbal testimony, which God has made known
to us; if you have not an oracle in your bosoms, if you do not at the same time
perceive an echo of truth in your own souls, this will do you no good, but be
an empty sound which will pass away again; but the mind that is serious and
settled, in waiting upon God with an earnest desire, that it may receive
benefit in going to this and the other meeting; such a one will say, I pray God
bless this opportunity to me, that so I may receive benefit to my soul. Where
people meet in this manner, they have not only an administration of doctrine
from without, from this and the other instrument, but they have a ministration
of the word of God in themselves, by which a man lives.

Let us not be led and hurried away with the grand error of the times, the
great error of this age, and of the ages bypast, that there is no possibility
for people to understand and hear this voice of God, this inward voice. There
are, say they, no immediate teachings nowadays, no inspirations nowadays;
they might as well say, that there are no conversions nowadays. I will prove
it from the holy scriptures, that there is no man in this age, is like to be
converted to God, or redeemed from his iniquity, and brought to the knowledge
of his Maker, unless he have it by the inward working of the eternal God: Not
by man's preaching and instruction, nor by reading all the good sermons that
ever were preached, without the cooperation of the holy sanctifying Spirit,
which begets life in them that believe; and if these men say none can be
converted, then we must all go headlong to hell, even they and all.

These Quakers may say what they will, there is no immediate teaching
nowadays, no man can know the mind of God, nor understand the scriptures;
none can open them to you.

But, blessed be God, this darkness is removed; this veil is gone over and
taken away; the brightness of the glory of the gospel has expelled this
darkness, and thousands nowadays do not only hear the minister reprove them,
but they hear a voice within that does reprove them for iniquity; and they find
and feel a judgment and tribunal within themselves, and that God has an
immediate way of counselling and instructing them if they will hearken to him.

You that are under any sense of this, that are come to such an inward sense of
the operation of the word of God, if you have heard it reprove you, exhort you,
judge you and condemn you, consider that this word proceeded out of the mouth
of God, and not out of the mouth of any man. You hear the sentence of God upon
you in your own consciences: Whence comes it? This is out of the mouth of God.
Every word that comes out of the mouth of God, administers life, sense and
conviction; and you feel it and receive it, and you may have a more familiar
acquaintance with it. There is not a day or hour that passes over your heads
nor mine, but if we attend to this inward voice, we may know what it speaks to
us, by its counsels, doctrines, reproofs, convictions and illuminations; for
the Spirit speaks expressly, with an express signification, unto the spirit
of man; and if he be under a temptation to tell a lie, and he comes to a little
pause or question, whether he shall tell it or no; if he hearken to this inward
word he will not pause long about it, but such a sentence will arise in him, as
that in Joseph, how can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? How
can I speak a lie, tell a lie, when in so doing I sin against God? Here is a
sentence of truth, will thou receive it or no? No say thou, I will venture
to tell a lie; then shall thou come into the rank of them that do despite to
the Spirit of grace, and trample under foot the Son of God, and count the blood
of the covenant an unholy thing. What sentence such shall have, at the latter
end, you may read at large in the holy scriptures.

Now there is a great necessity that every one be persuaded to hearken to this
voice, not only at a meeting, but on all occasions they have in the world. I
hope I speak to many serious and religious persons that are enquiring about
their immortal souls, what may be best for their souls, whether it is better to
go on in wickedness, or leave off; and that resolve and say, I would be glad to
leave my sins as well as you, if I had power, and to live a holy life. As for
the want of power, (that you have not power) I do not wonder at it; for until
you come to an exercise of faith, in that which has empowered the people of
God, in all ages, I wonder not that you have not power. You say I am so weak,
that I am overcome before I am aware; the devil is so subtle and cunning with
his temptations, that I am surprised and snatched into temptations, and
overcome with evil before I am aware: He is like a roaring lion, going about
continually, seeking whom he may devour. But whom can he devour? Can he devour
those that hearken and submit to the word of God? If he could, then none could
escape him; if the devil could pluck out of God's hands, then nobody would go
to Heaven, nor never shall, if he have power.

Where the devil finds any in their own hands, as suppose a religious person of
this and the other religion, who never experienced any thing of this power of
God, but trusts to his duties and performances, this man is in his own hand;
now such a one the tempter has power over: He can make him cheat his
neighbor, and lead him into drunkenness and uncleanness sometimes, and into
the greatest abominations; but if a man come into the exercise of faith and
dependence upon God, and has left trusting in himself and says, I see I
cannot preserve myself from sin, I see a necessity of putting my trust in the
Lord, and of waiting upon God's power to keep me: If the tempter come to such a
one, he cannot prevail, all the devils in hell cannot stir him one jot; the
devil may tempt him, but he stands in the power of faith; he knows his name,
and says, get thee behind me satan; when the devil comes before him, and lays
a temptation before him, he casts it behind him; if the devil rise up against
him, he can chain him down, he can say in the name of the Lord, get thee behind
me satan.

This is the reason why many are tempted, and not overtaken; why many are
tempted to sin and not overcome: How comes it to pass that we do not do every
thing that we are tempted to?

There is something that keeps us; the devil is not so bad to tempt, but we are
as bad in our own inclinations to yield to him; the heart is deceitful above
all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it? There is more wickedness
in it, than can be uttered. If people be tempted and not overcome, something
must preserve them; if there be something that preserves a man from any evil,
it can preserve him from all evil.

The reason why some people are led into temptation sometimes, and resist it,
is because sometimes the temptation suits not their inclination; sometimes the
reputation lies in the way, sometimes one thing, sometimes another: But when a
thing they are tempted to, suits their profit and pleasure, then away with the
fear of God, and nothing shall hinder them; I will have my pleasure.

But they that understand the keeper of Israel, and come to know his power
lying in their hearts, these always bring their deeds and temper before him,
and they come to him for a verdict and judgment, and they ask, does this tend
to the honor or dishonor of God? Is it good or evil? The oracle of God in thy
heart says do it not, it is evil, thou will kindle the indignation of the Lord
against thee; what will it profit thee to gain the whole world and lose thy own
soul? or what will thou give in exchange for thy soul? Here is one at hand that
can give counsel to all of us, at all times; this is he that we must advance;
our labor and work upon the stage of this world, among the sons and daughters
of men, is to advance the virtue and great authority of the mighty Counselor,
Christ Jesus; we do say and affirm, in the name of God, that the same light by
which God has brought us out of darkness into his mavelous light, and from
the power of the devil into the kingdom of his dear Son; the same power is
extended to you, that you may he sanctified and saved from your sins.

One sect will say, my tenets are so and so, and our ordinances are so and so,
will you come over to us? You shall be a member of our church.

Our duty is to come over to the grace of God that shines in our hearts; now we
are witnesses for God, that he does not desire the death of them that die, but
rather that they would turn and live; for his word is gone forth, and his light
shines, and his glory is risen upon the nations, that they that inhabit the
earth may fear him. Fear God, and give glory to his name, for the hour of his
judgment is come: Do you know that to be true? That you may not be deluded, you
shall certainly know that the hour of God's judgment is come.

Thus when any one suffers himself to be led away with the evil one, when he
feels after that a remorse upon his own heart, he finds a secret judgment and
tribunal set up in his own bosom, against whoredom, lying, drunkenness, fraud
and other sins, he knows be has done amiss; he is not going to a confessor,
that will take off and remove the guilt from his conscience; he has offended
the majesty of the great God, and God has signified it to him, is not judgment
come, and has not God set it up in his own heart? If through custom in sin
thou losest the sense of his judgment, it is not because God has determined to
take advantage against thee, but because thou actest against thyself, and
come to be past feeling; thou wast once under a sense of these things, and
thou wast not past feeling; if thou at any time told thy parents a lie, thou
had remorse; but now thou can tell a lie, and not feel it, thou art past
feeling; whose fault is this? The Lord would have brought thee to love the
truth, but thou choosest lying; if thou perish, thy blood will be upon thine
own head, the Lord is clear from it.

They that receive the word of God have life. For man lives not by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. You are
sensible of God's speaking this word to you: I exhort you all in the love of
God, that you would prize this manner of speaking, and look upon it as the
greatest mercy that ever you enjoyed, that God has not given over speaking to
you, and that conscience has not given over speaking to you, and that the
Spirit of the Lord does yet strive with you; he will not always strive; you may
be of that sort of fools before you die, that make a mock of sin, and be as
trees twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. You that are sensible of this
inward voice, prize it above all your mercies; health and wealth, and all other
mercies, are not worthy to be compared to this voice of God speaking in you:
They that prize this, will never complain for want of power; they will find
power in it; all the power in Heaven and Earth is contained in this truth that
shines unto you. They that come to be exercised in this word, receive power
from God, for God gives it to them; he gives them power by degrees (from being
sons of Belial, sons of the devil) to become sons of God, even to as many as
believe in his name. They that receive this truth, grow tender of a lie, of a
vain word; they find themselves grow tender, feeling and sensible. Here is a
token that the God of life is quickening them; I am now tender of speaking a
lie to my neighbor; I will not do that thing to another, that I would not have
another do to me; when you come to a tender state, which is far better than a
hard-hearted state, you will have an evidence in yourselves, that man lives
not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Blessed are they that God has brought into acquaintance with his word; of all
nations and people upon the earth, they are a blessed people; though there are
manifold blessings that reach indifferently to all, the sun shines, and the
rain falls on the evil and the good, and on the just and unjust; yet this is a
blessing that can only make the soul happy, that an intercourse between it and
its Maker is open; that there is an open intercourse for the Lord to hear a man
cry, and he to receive his word; all those that God has brought into covenant
with himself by Christ, he has made sensible of this intercourse and way of
God's speaking to his people, which he spoke to them by in former days: Take
heed that this way is not stopped up; you know by what it was opened, and what
will stop it up again; when you were in much trouble and grief, you cried to
the Lord, and he delivered you: But if I regard iniquity in my heart, said
David, the Lord will not hear me: You cried to the Lord again, it may be, and
he did not answer you; and the Lord cried to you and you answered him not, but
hearkened to your lusts.

Yet the Lord by his long-suffering and patience has won upon a remnant, and
has brought them over to believe and trust in his power, to remove out of the
way that which hindered the intercourse between God and their souls. What a
great stir was there in removing out of the way the pride, corruption, enmity,
looseness, wantonness, and abundance more of evil things, that made the soul
like a wilderness? What hacking and burning up was there? God's word, like a
hammer, and like a fire, did break up and burn up these things; and the same
word of God, like a sword, did cut down those sins and lusts which prevailed
over you before: By this means God has opened a way for you, to have access to
him, and for his word to have access to you: When you come to the Lord in this
way, you know you live by this word, and if you hear the word of the Lord
spoken immediately to you, your joy and consolation increases, and you have
sweet communion and fellowship with God and Christ, and with one another, by
this covenant of life. How came you into it? It was by removing a great deal of
rubbish out of the way. If you should let this rubbish grow up again, which
kept you from the joy of the Holy Ghost, will it not do it again? If your
pride, corruption, enmity, prejudice, looseness and wantonness, if these be
suffered to grow up in any of you, they will do as they did before, they will
separate you from the Lord and from one another: As the truth brought you to
God and this heavenly fellowship with him, so if a wrathful mind and wanton
spirit get up again, it will separate you from God, and scatter you from one
another, then you will live in the outward life, and die to the inward one and
perish: Remember you were told so.

Every one that goes from this living word, and suffers any thing to arise of
the old nature, so much as that rises, so much will your way of intercourse
with God be stopped; sometimes men cry to God, but they have a bar in their way;
and they come for comfort to the throne of grace, but they cannot receive those
ministrations of joy and peace, which they desire; their foolish hearts are
darkened, and their minds blinded, and they will go on in darkness, and be left
out of the holy covenant which God has called his people to.

You that God has engaged to be his, by the operation of his power, O live in
a holy fear and watchfulness; and know this, that let your understandings and
gifts be what they will, you have nothing but what is given you; and what God
has given you, he can take away. Thou have decked thyself with my flax, and my
wool, and with my silver and gold, and other ornaments, and followed thy
lovers, therefore will I take them away from thee, and strip thee of all thou
gloriest in. Those that forget God, of whom they had these things, that forget
their brokenness of heart, and the subjection of their spirits to God; if they
forget this, let them know, that let their parts be what they will, they will
certainly wither, and their inward life will fail: You that have regard to your
own souls, and do desire heartily, at this time, to be quickened, and find that
the Lord has removed your deadness, and quickened and raised you to such a
degree and measure of life, that you can say, I find communion with God, and
fellowship with my friends and brethren in that one eternal life, I pray God
you may continue in it long, and lay down your heads in this blessed, heavenly
life. Now that you may so do, keep yourselves low and humble, and in the fear
of God, and keep your ears always open to his word, and live as becomes those
that are born again and begotten of God, and are brought to partake of the
divine life. Let temptations surround you, that life will preserve you; he that
never sinned is with you, to keep you from sin; and he that never deceived any,
will keep you from being deceived. To his counsel and conduct, and to his
divine care and protection, I now commit you.

SERMON XXI. The NECESSITY of a HOLY LIFE and CONVERSATION.
Preached at St. MARTIN'S-LE-GRAND, March 26, 1687.
O How happy are they that have bread in their own houses! and that can draw
water out of their own wells! These have a blessed, glorious dwellingplace;
these are the children that their father provides for: All the divine treasures
and the riches of heavenly things are laid up for these; O that all that have a
sight of this blessed state, were got into it! that their minds might not more
wander; that people might not be scattered in their thoughts, that when they
meet together, they might have their expectations entirely from that God whom
they profess to worship. Lord, thou have said that thou will teach thy people
thyself; here a cry goes up to the Lord, and their expectations through faith
pitched upon God; they never meet in vain, but a well springs up, and the water
of life comes to them, by which they meet with divine refreshments; for you
know the promise that our Lord made to his disciples, he that drinks of the
water that I shall give him, shall never thirst more. Why, will once drinking
serve, because I have tasted of the living water that the Lord Christ gives me;
will that serve? No, but he gives me a substantial river, that is the reason
why I shall thirst no more; it shall be in me a well of living water, springing
up to everlasting life; blessed are the witnesses of it; these are they that
are satisfied concerning religion and doctrine; they are satisfied concerning
worship; they are looking after no new things; when they meet together, they
meet in the name of the Lord, and they have their eyes to him, who is a
fountain, and they discern a brightness and a glory that is unspeakable; and
the glory that is speakable, that appears many times through instruments, will
not satisfy them; there is something beyond that, which must satisfy; this will
never do it; such as these will never be satisfied with hearing and seeing,
till they come to hear and see that which is unutterable, and then they are
satisfied: Christ had preached many sermons in the hearing of his disciples,
and there were a great many said, that there was never any spoke like him, or
preached like him; yet one of them that was the nearest to him, and most
acquainted and intimate with him, after some years meeting and hearing of his
sermons, he cries out, show us the Father, and it suffices us.

My friends, this comes near to many of your states; many of you have heard
long, and have heard the speakable word of God, that which could be uttered,
that which could be spoken forth, by the demonstration of the Holy Ghost, by
them that have received it of the Father; this you have heard long, and yet
there are many of you, that if you come to a serious search, you will find a
want; you will still find that you have not that satisfaction that puts you
beyond doubt, beyond fear; there is something that stands in the way, that
hinders your enjoyment of the unspeakable glory of the unspeakable word, and
this will never be removed, but by your innocent submitting to the work of the
power of God in your own hearts, that so you may not only be believers, but
come to be really baptized, and then all is out of doubt; for our Lord said, he
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; he does not say he may be
saved; but, he shall be saved,

Woeful experience has told us in our days, that a great many have believed the
truth, and yet they are never like to be saved, they have made shipwreck of
their faith; but if they had been baptized, if they would have endured the
baptism, if they would have been buried with Christ in baptism, they should
have been saved, every one of them; and now there are a great many that remain
in the belief of the truth, and yet they are not baptized, they are not dead,
not buried, notwithstanding they have received like precious faith with us,
that faith which is of the operation of God, and that is like precious in its
nature to all that do receive it, and would work the same effect in all too, if
it were not obstructed; but notwithstanding they have received faith toward
the saving of their souls, yet their souls are captives, their souls are
subject to lusts, and pleasures, and vanities, and unto empty and foolish
things, and to passions and corruptions, after they have received faith.

For if you take one that is a believer of truth, that is overtaken with his
lust, and passions, and corruptions, he will commonly own that he believes the
contrary, he believes that these things should not be, that it ought to be
otherwise: This is the signification of truth against untruth; if it should be
otherwise, why is it thus then? Why, he finds a life to spring up in that which
is corruptible, that is always contrary to the life of God, and at enmity with
it: What shall I do? I believe the truth, I know it is an holy thing, it leads
all that submit to it to a holy life, and there is this and that unholy thing,
this and that corrupt thing remains, what shall I do?

It is an evident demonstration that thou want the baptism of him in whom
thou believe; thou have believed in Christ Jesus that comes after John, and
was before him; and now having believed in him, thou want to be baptized by
him, and for want of that, the pollution and corruption that was in thy nature
in the time of thy alienation, prevails still upon thee, contrary to thy faith;
and there is no coming to obtain this baptism, but by sinking down into that
which will slay thee, that which will kill thee: But there is such a shifting
to save ones life, there are so many twistings and twinings of people to save
their lives, that at last they lose them; but there are none that could ever
find that life that is eternal, but those that are willing to be given up to
the dead, and submit to this baptism, that is, by the Holy Ghost and by fire:
These only do come to life, they come to the resurrection, for you never knew
any that died this death but they rose again; it is as impossible for death to
hold any one down that is buried in this baptism, as it was impossible to hold
Christ down, when he was in the grave; the same power that brought again our
Lord Christ from the dead, the same power it is that quickens us, while we
remain in these mortal bodies, after we have sustained this death and
crucifiction.

But who can believe this saying? For this is a hard saying, who can bear it?
Is it not enough that I am a believer, which makes me a Friend, and entitles me
to a community among you; and as long as I hold the truth, and profess the
truth, I am looked upon as one of your society? This is very true; this does
entitle people unto the outward privileges of the Church of Christ; but there
is another inner court, that lies under the angel's reed (the measuring-reed)
that is to be measured; the temple is measured, and every worshipper in the
temple is measured; there was an outward court, that was for representing the
Church of God in general, from the particular; the outward court was not
measured, that the Gentiles might come in; the unbaptized people, which were
never regenerated, they might come so far as the outward court, but this did
not entitle them to the privileges of the house of God, nor to any worship or
sacrifice that was accepted upon God's altar.

It concerns you and me, my friends, to be serious about matters of this moment
and importance, and not spend our days, and, as it were, speak by rote, under
an airy profession, though of truth itself, without considering what progress
you have made, what benefit you have obtained, and whether you are come not
only to the shadow of good things to come, but to the very substance of the
heavenly things; for the comers to the outward worship could never, with those
sacrifices they offered, he made perfect; the comers thereunto were not made
perfect, as to the things pertaining to the conscience, speaking there of the
outward worship, Heb. x, 1; but coming to the heavenly things, whereof the
other was but a shadow, they made people perfect, as to the conscience, and did
bring them to salvation. The apostle alludes to this baptism, for he speaks in
a figure of the eight persons that were saved in Noah 's ark; then he brings
down the allegory to christian baptism, not only the baptism of John, the
forerunner of Christ, that preached of Christ, but to the christian baptism
itself; by the like figure whereof baptism now saves us, says the apostle;
not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience. What does he mean by baptism saving us? He means, the answer of a
good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Christ from the dead;
so that christian baptism did bring along with it the cleansing and putting
away of all sin out of the conscience, that might bring them under doubts and
scruples; and then there is an arising of Jesus; the Savior, in the
conscience, the Mediator that brought them to answer for them in the sight of
God; for if people be conscious of sin, and do leave off their sin, this does
not yet cleanse the conscience; for there still remains a conscience of sin;
it is not the leaving off our sin that makes our atonement with God, or that
expiates our guilt, or does away the guilt of the sins that we have committed;
but there must be a forsaking and a leaving off sin by the virtue and power of
the spirit, by which we are enabled, not only to leave off sin, but are guided
and directed to the Mediator, whose blood alone reconcileth us to God, and
cleanses us from all sin. If I should never commit a sin while I live, it is
not this simply in itself that will make me have the answer of a good
conscience in the sight of God; for there remains the guilt of sin contracted
in the days of unbelief, which is a bar and hinderance, that none can approach
the Holy God, but in the atonement and salvation that comes by Jesus Christ;
for all that believe and obey the gospel are accepted in Christ, and that upon
the account of Christ's precious blood, that cleanses us from all sin and
unrighteousness. Whom does it cleanse? Those only that forsake their sins, and
by his power are brought to a holy life; they, by the virtue of his power, and
the cleansing of his blood, come to have their former sins removed from them,
as far as the east is from the west.

But what is this to them that remain in their sins? what is this to them that
are not baptized for the dead? that have not put off the old man, nor put on
the new man, but have only put on the name and profession of Christ, and put on
the outside of him, his garment, but have not put him on, they are not created
again in Christ Jesus unto good works, that they might walk in them? No Wonder
there remains a conscience of sin in them, there is a bar that hinders them
from the sight of the glory of God, and from real and true satisfaction,
concerning their atonement and reconciliation with God, and this hinders them
from the enjoyment of that peace that passes understanding; and it is no
wonder, because they are not come to this baptism that brings the answer of a
good conscience in the sight of God; they are not risen with Christ; how should
they? for they are not buried with him. Know ye not that so many of us (says
the apostle) as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death;
therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
newness of life, Romans vi, 3. Here is a change figured out between them that had
partaken of the spiritual baptism, and were come again to the participation of
life in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and those that were not baptized.

So it is now with every one that comes to believe the truth, and make a
profession of it; there is a way cast up, and there is a door opened for
salvation; but the grand question that every one ought to enquire about, and
put to themselves, is, what progress they have made in this way? Whether they
are baptized yet or no? whether they have put off the old man with his deeds,
and put on the new man and the new man's deeds, which are righteousness and
holiness? They that find, that though they are believers, they are short of
this, they do also find that their shortness is their hinderance, their
shortness in not coming up to the pattern that has been showed them, is their
hinderance, so that they enjoy not the things here spoken of; the being under
this sense, and really sitting under this sense in a meeting, though there
should be no man speaking to them outwardly, yet being come to this faith, and
made partakers of this baptism, people would find in their own bosoms the
hidden word of life ministering to their condition; they would have enough,
there would not be a famine of the word unto them, nor they should not need to
be in expectation of going out to this or the other instrument, but they would
be satisfied when they are met together with the presence of the Lord, that the
Lord is in the midst of them, ministering unto them the word of life, in his
operating and working, speaking in a tongue that every one can understand,
speaking with a kind of voice and language, that every one may understand his
own state and condition; and this is the way that God brought up people from
the beginning, to the knowledge of heavenly things, and opening of the
mysteries of salvation; we had it not of men, but of Jesus our Lord; he was our
great minister, we waited upon him, and trusted in him, and he taught us
himself; he has ministered to us at our silent and quiet waiting upon him,
those things that were convenient for us; we might well say, he gave us our
food in due season; he has not only given strong meat unto men, but has
ministered of the sincere milk of his word unto babes, that lived in sincerity
and self-denial, loving God above all things; and he taught and conducted us in
our way, this way of simplicity, until our understandings came to be opened,
until our souls came to be prepared to receive the mysteries of his kingdom.

In those days there were some that started up in knowledge, and that built
their nests on high, and took slax and wool, and gold and silver, and decked
themselves with them; but the Lord found them out, and brought them down, and
took the crown from their head, and clothed them with dishonor. So God does
from age to age; his judgments will begin at his own house: If you would grow
in the grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, then
grow in humility and self-denial, and keep a constant watch upon your hearts;
examine your hearts, and commune with yourselves upon your beds, and be still;
take heed lest you sin against the Lord, and provoke him. There were some that
provoked the Lord of old, and they committed two great evils: What be they?
They have gone away, and forsaken the fountain of living water; as much as to
say, they have not their dependence upon an invisible power, as they ought to
have: For I am a living fountain, and it is by an invisible power that I am
able to counsel, teach, direct, purify, and open their understandings; but they
have forsaken me, that is one great evil; and the other is, they would not be
without somewhat; they have forsaken the Lord, and they would have somewhat
instead of God; they have dug to themselves broken cisterns, that will hold
no water. And how many in this age have committed these two great evils!

My friends, examine yourselves; are there not many that have been guilty of
these two great evils? They do not keep their close dependence, trust and
reliance, upon the invisible power of God, as they profess they ought to do,
but are hurried away from it; some by the love of the world, some by lusts and
pleasures, some by passions, and others by worldly interests, are drawn away
from the power, to do and say that which the power is against: Is not this a
forsaking of the Lord the living fountain? What do they do then? Are they not
for this and that, and the other man? for hearing this and the other man's
word, and digging to themselves broken cisterns? And have they not their trust
and confidence in going to meetings, in commending this and the other way? Have
they not their trust in their profession outwardly, when it ministers nothing
to their souls, so that they secretly wither for all this? If you had all the
men and angels that were ever sent of God, appointed to preach to you, they
could not minister life to you, unless there be that faith that stands in the
power of God. The faith that stands in any man's words, will not overcome your
lusts; but the faith that stands in the power of God, purifies the heart; it
will not suffer any unclean thing there. As for preaching, let a man preach
against this and the other lust and corruption, there it will remain for all
his preaching, unless men know God's power and life, in which there is
righteousness; for words and knowledge, and sight and speculation, will never
give people victory over their sins.

Therefore you know, every one who is settled must be settled where the
foundation of religion is; it is not coming to meetings, and owning this and
the other doctrine which is the foundation of our religion; God has revealed
his power to every one of us; God has not given his Spirit to preachers and
prophets only, for then there would be a famine of the word, as was in Israel,
the priest's lips only preserved knowledge. If you did take away the priest,
you did take away their knowledge. The prophets had the word of God, and they
only spoke the word of God. If the prophet was taken away, then the word of God
was taken away. The Lord threatened to send a famine among them; they grieved
and vexed, and killed and destroyed, the priests and prophets; therefore, says
the Lord, I will send a famine among you, not of bread, but of the word; and
they shall go from city to city, and enquire for the word of the Lord.

Thus it was in the Jewish church; if there was a prophet they would go thirty,
forty, or a hundred miles to him that had the word of the Lord; they shall go
from city to city, to enquire for the word of the Lord: But blessed be God we
are come to another day, for now the word of the Lord is manifested in the
hearts of all that believe; they know the word: I do not say all that believe
do preach the word, or ought to preach; but the word preaches to them; they
are not as broken cisternt that can hold no water; when they find the word and
hear it, they speak it presently; what is ministered to their own condition,
that they tell to other folks; when people come to the blessing of this
dispensation that God's word reveals in their hearts, they then know what the
signification of it is, they understand the doctrine of it, the doctrine
preaches holiness to them; not that they should preach holiness and yet remain
unholy; not that they should preach humility, and yet remain proud: it
preaches holiness, humility and singleness of heart to a remnant, that like
good scholars and disciples learn the lessons and doctrine of the word of God.

Now when thou have learned them well, and art come to see the effect of the
word, and do bring forth the deeds and works which are the fruits of
holiness, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, and with humility known and
witnessed in Christ Jesus, and art not only meek in show, but meek and low in
heart; when people come to be meek and lowly, and of a clear conscience, purged
from all dead works to serve the living God; then if the Lord gives them a word
of exhortation, of doctrine or counsel, it is very welcome, and it has a
savor through the blessing of God, and they come by it to be built up in their
most holy faith, and this word is brought forth in holiness and righteousness
in their lives, and shows itself in a life of holiness; then thou will shine in
thy conversation to all that thou conversest with, so that they may see thee to
be such a man or woman as have been with Jesus, and learned of Jesus, and
received a word engrafted; when thou do receive the word into thy heart,
there is the engrafting of it: If it has not root there, then, says Christ,
my word does not abide in you. If you feel something of this invisible word in
your hearts, it brings you to a resolution to serve God, and to keep yourselves
from sin, and to answer the profession which you make of God; this is the
effect of the word of God, if it does abide in you. Does it abide? You shall
know anon or to morrow, so soon as a temptation comes to stir you up to pride
or passion, to fraud or deceit, then you will see whether the word abide: If it
abide, you sin not.

This is scripture, a certain fundamental doctrine, that may be as safely
preached as any doctrine: If the word abide in you, you sin not; what of that?
let the word go, and you will sin, when ever you are tempted to it. I write to
you young men, because you have overcome the wicked one, you are strong, and
the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked one. We shall
see as soon as a temptation meets with thee, whether the word abides in thee;
if it abide, thou will not sin, but resist the tempter. Set thy foot upon the
temptation, and go over it, and thou will have the dominion; and this will make
thee a free man or woman, and thou will stand fast in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made thee free. The apostle supposes them free, and that they have
got dominion; then stand fast, says he, in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made thee free. It is a liberty not of lust and sin, but a liberty of the soul;
the soul now is not at the devil's will and call.

For it is a shame to the doctrine of Christianity, that we profess things, and
yet deny them in practice: We profess that there is a power in Christ to keep
and preserve us out of sin, and we profess to believe this power is
communicated to them that do believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for their
preservation; that is, he will not withhold it from them: We profess these
things in the face of the whole world; and yet when the devil calls one man to
covetousness, and another to defraud his neighbor, and another to defile
himself, he is drawn away thereby; what hypocrisy is here to profess this, and
act the contrary? I do not wonder that they that profess they cannot live a day
without sin, that they should fall; but they that profess to believe there is
power enough in Christ, and that it is offered to them, to live in sin and
yield to temptation, this is horrid wickedness. They that are of an upright,
single mind, would die before they would sin, knowing that God is Almighty, and
gracious, and willing to bestow his power, and wisdom, and grace, upon them
that ask it; they would die rather than sin against God presumptuously: let it
cost me my goods, my estate, my liberty, or my life, how can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? They love God above all; you never heard them
complain that they wanted power, for the Lord is at their right hand, and they
shall not be moved. They cannot fall; though they are tempted, they will not
fall into temptation. They have power when they see the devil before them, to
put him behind them; the nobility of their extract, of their new birth and
regeneration, puts such a temper and disposition into their souls, that they
scorn to be at the devil's command, as if they were his children.

Oh! it is a noble and honorable thing to be a child of God, a very high
dignity to be in such an honorable relation to God, and to have a right to the
heavenly mansions, to sit down in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. I would to
God you were all ready for it, that you had the wedding garment on, that you
might not be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness. What is the
reason that you do not sit down in this heavenly frame and temper, and draw the
waters of salvation out of your own souls; could the Lord do any thing more
than he has done, and could his servants do any more than they have done for
your help? Are not their labors demonstrations of it? We have been as epistles
of Christ written in your consciences. We have been testifying that there is
something wanting in too many, the want of resigning up themselves to the
baptism of the cross. People are willing to be counted friends; but they are
friends of God, that do whatsoever he commands them; that is the Christian
lesson, not to say, I will be a friend to you, and a friend to the church, and
to such a sort of people; but I will be a friend of God, and do whatsoever he
commands me; whatsoever command God lays upon you, either to take up a cross,
or to deny yourselves and follow him.

Learn this lesson, and you will be disciples indeed, and members of the church
too; not members of a church privileged outwardly only, but members of a church
of the first born, and you will have your names written in Heaven; when one
comes to have his name written in Heaven, he comes to know his name, it is a
white Stone, not a speckled one; they that have it, they know it, they are not
ignorant of one another's names, that are written in this book; they have a
fellowship that nobody can declare; their communion is in that bread and that
cup: This is a cup of blessing indeed, and this has blessed us, and will bless
us. God will preserve a people in this fellowship. You that are at a distance
now, you must come nearer to him; God will choose a people by whom his name
shall be magnified; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, we
cannot but desire this for all, especially for the household of faith; we cannot
but desire their perfection, their growing up in the grace of God, that they
might come to be partakers of Heaven. And in the next place, our love is to all
people, every where; we would be glad that all were saved; they that despise
us, when we are speaking of heavenly things, speaking like a child, like a
stammering child, speaking of the glorious excellencies of God, of the loving
kindness of God, speaking of those things which God has spoken to our souls,
they that despise these things, we would be glad that they might be saved: If
they were partakers of these things, they would be glad as well as we, and they
would be more really happy in respect of this world, for the time that they are
to live here; they would live a happier life, even in this world, and they
would have everlasting life in the world to come.

The love of Christ constrains men thus to judge, that every one that has
received like precious faith, ought to answer that grace and faith which God
has ministered to them in a holy life and conversation, and every one who is a
stranger to this thing, ought to be of an enquiring mind, and an open heart, to
wait for the day when God will visit them with the same grace; when you give up
yourselves to a daily cross, as Christ's disciples, you will not be running
after any one to teach you to know the Lord, for you will all know the Lord,
from the least to the greatest; I that have been but a little convinced, shall
I know the Lord? Thou shall know the Lord, thou that art dead in thy sins and
trespasses, thou that have not known the blood of cleansing, thou shall know
the Lord to be thy judge, and thy lawgiver, to teach thee how thou must live,
walk and act; and is not that a good knowledge? This is the way they reckoned
upon in old time, it is a notable expression, the Lord is our judge; there is
the beginning, he began there, judgment began at the house of God; those he
brings into his house, he brings them under the discipline of his house, the
Lord is our judge, he is our king and lawgiver, and he will save us; this same
exercise of discipline under judgment brought to them the faith and experience
of his being their lawgiver, and this brought them to a faith of the last
sentence, we shall be saved; and the Lord answers such a-people, that he will
bring salvation to them, salvation shall be for walls and bulwarks: Did the
people of this nation but know salvation was brought near to them, and that it
was their bulwark, there would not be a crying up this and the other rotten
thing for a bulwark.

We talk of a bulwark as well as others; we have a bulwark, blessed be the God
of Heaven, made of better stuff than theirs; for it is the salvation of God
which has kept us from the pollution of sin, and from a running into all
excess and riot that others have run into; it has kept us from the evil, it
has kept evils out of us, and we have found that certainly true, that all
things work together for good, to them that love God, and fear God; that all
the providence of God together, have all wrought for our good; and this is the
bulwark that we have trusted in, and it has served hitherto, and it will serve
us and our posterity to the end of the world: This is a bulwark that will never
be stormed, that will never be thrown down nor laid waste: Though all the
powers on earth, and all the potentates in this world should agree together,
they shall not prevail against it; we have salvation for walls and bulwarks; if
I be within these walls, salvation is round about me; if I am got into this
eternal bulwark, I am safe from the devil and his instruments; here is a
bulwark to be relied upon.

Many wonder we differ with them in some opinions; we have that confidence in
this bulwark, that we desire not another; God will last and abide forever, so
will this bulwark; all the care that I take, and all the care that you should
take, is to keep within these walls: Do not sally out, if you go out, the devil
is watching, and seeking continually whom he may devour; he will catch
straglers; if people will go out for profit, or for pleasure, or interest, the
devil will catch them; how can such people talk of salvation for walls and
bulwarks? the devil has got them in his snare, and they are caught in
drunkenness, uncleanness and other sins; the reason is, they have gone out of
their bulwark, they have sallied out of their walls, for the devil could never
have forced them out.

O take heed, says the apostle, lest there spring up in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God; as if he had said, you are
Christians now, you are a people come to a good state in Christ; but consider
you have no strength to stand but in him; no power to keep yourselves but in
him; take heed, at all times, that there spring not up in you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God; take heed lest there spring up in
you such a thought as this; I may take this pleasure, and the other profit;
consider that thou die and witherest if thou depart from the living God; take
heed of taking liberty above the fear of God: It is not our talk of salvation
for walls and bulwarks, that will do us good, but our keeping within these
walls.

I remember a notable saying of the apostle, which has a great emphasis in it,
and a great deal of doctrine; he writes to the church, after they were become
a people of professing Christians, take heed lest you come to be beguiled by
the serpent, as he beguiled Eve; he did not speak of Jezabel, a wicked woman;
but he spoke of Eve, a good woman, created after the image of God, in
righteousness and holiness; they were come to a life of sanctification, to a
life that was hidden from ages and generations. You must look to yourselves,
and look upon yourselves as in the state of your mother Eve, a woman brought
forth in righteousness and holiness, that might have stood in that primitive
state, notwithstanding all the subtilty of all the serpents in the world; but
having hearkened to this old serpent, she was beguiled; there grew up a
consultation in her reasoning part; it may be so as he says, I will try.

So I say to you that are come to a state of sanctification, and in some
measure to know the cleansing power of God, that you have not believed in it in
vain, but it has effectually wrought some change and alteration in you, and is
still carrying on the work of your salvation. Many temptations will attend you,
and many snares will be laid in your way; but God has preserved you to this
day: I know the devil's wiles and temptations are manifold; they are fitted to
every one's inclinations, fitted to every opportunity, and to every occasion in
this world: Men are tried every way by the tempter, to see which way he may
ensnare them; he tries every way to ensnare and entangle the simple, that he
may turn them to the right hand or to the left, that their souls may be
destroyed and perish.

I cannot speak to you by a more emphatical word, by a more familiar
exhortation than this, take heed you be not beguiled as Eve was: Many will be
tempted as she was, but I would not have you do as she did, and yield to the
temptation: Take heed that you do not defile yourselves, but keep your garments
white; you that have been washed and cleansed, labor to keep yourselves
unspotted from the world; this is pure religion and undefiled, that which has
enlightened many a nation, and shall enlighten many of those whose religion is
to be undefiled, and to keep themselves unspotted from the world. I pray God
increase the number of them, that so the blessed work of sanctification that
has begun in this way, may be carried on to his praise, and the salvation of
our souls, to the spreading forth of his glory, and the exalting of his name;
that the strangers which are scattered and desolate, may be brought into his
holy way, and walk in it; that we all, in a fellowship together, walking in
that holy way, may through the eternal Spirit, offer praise and thanksgiving to
God, who is worthy to receive glory and honor, power and dominion, forever and
ever. Amen.

SERMON XXII. BAPTISM and the LORD'S SUPPER asserted.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, April 15, 1688.
If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
IF I should say no more, there is that in every one's conscience that will
make application; if he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of his, you
may say, whose is he then? If they be none of Christ's that have not his
Spirit, whose are they? They are all his whose Spirit rules them, every one of
us does belong to him whose Spirit rules over us, unto whose power we are
subjected. You know this distinguishes people in the world, one king knows
his subjects from another king's subjects; they are under the obedience of
this, that, and the other king or prince, his law is over them, they are
subject to it; so here is a decision of all the people in the world, whom they
belong to.

We, all of us, I hope, do expect there will be a decision at the day of
judgment, and believe the things we read concerning it, that there will be a
decision, and some will be placed on the right hand, and some on the left; some
will have the sentence of, come ye blessed, and others the sentence of, go ye
cursed; but now there is a way of finding out the decision of the matter before
we go out of the world, before the day of judgment, when there will be no
remedy, what then is, must be and abide so; now there is no need it should
continue so; if it be amiss, it may be mended; if I do not belong to the right
prince, if I be not under the right power and spirit, I may be, for now it is a
day of grace, a day of mercy; I have been a rebel to the right prince, I may be
pardoned and taken into favor; it is far better for people to know their state
now, than to know it then, because then there will be no remedy.

The apostle, in laying down fundamental, apostolical doctrines, that were to
be believed and taken notice of, and are in our age, so that we may say, things
written of old time, were written for our learning; he makes this affirmation
and position of doctrine, he that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none of
his, he does not belong to him; though he be called a Christian, he is not a
Christian, if he has not the Spirit of Christ; it is but a name he has got,
he has not that which makes him essentially so, for nothing can make a
Christian, but having the Spirit of Christ; therefore when they would vindicate
their being Christians, they prove it thus; for he (speaking of God) has sent
the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, and we know the mind of Christ; we know
him that is true, or we are in him that is true; these things, if they were
right, if they were true, were evident demonstrations that they were a sort of
men who depended more upon the Spirit and spiritual teachings, and spiritual
guidance, than upon all the rules and methods of teaching that were in the
world.

I speak of this, friends, because you know as well as I, how averse this age
of ours has been, to have any thing spoken of spiritual dispensations, or
about spiritual teachings; though a man has been counted formerly a wise man,
a learned man, or a man of parts, if once he come to smatter out a little about
inward teaching, it is enough to spot him, and make him ridiculed of his
acquaintance, as if there were no such thing in the world: We have a book,
called the bible, it is from one end to the other full of such expressions, of
being led by the Spirit; you have an anointing which teaches you all things:
The whole tenor of the New Testament is about spiritual teachings and divine
operations, and of faith being the operation of God; and the Old Testament has
abundance of expressions by way of prophecy, that in the New Testament days, if
people would look for the law of God, they must look for it in their hearts;
and if they would know God, they must look to the Mediator, the Lord Jesus
Christ: The New Testament also directs us that way; Christians should be the
most spiritual people in the world, that is the guide, the rule.

But, say they, the scripture is the foundation of faith and manners, belief
and practice; this is too often but dissimulation, and I am afraid it is to be
found in some; what, is the scripture the rule of faith? and may people believe
what they find in scripture? Yes, but say some, it is best be aware for fear of
error. What is in the scripture is serious, sound and orthodox, and did
Quakers, think you, never find in scripture that people were to wait for the
Spirit, and pray in the Spirit, and serve God in the Spirit, and that all
religion that is not in power, is not available, did they not find it in
scripture? And you that are not Quakers, did you ever read the New Testament?
How came it to pass that ye never found these texts? But some people read and
read the New Testament twenty times over, and mock and deride, and persecute a
man that shall speak of the Spirit's teaching.

I have admired at it, how intelligent men, to whom God has given a competent
understanding, should be so blinded; they have learned to read English, and
they have read the New Testament over several times, and the Old Testament too,
and they have read those sentences of Christ's doctrine, that do so currently
and unanimously speak of divine teachings and spiritual operations, spiritual
worship and spiritual religion, that must have some motion and stirring of the
Holy Ghost to be the original of it, and that all others are not acceptable to
God; doubtless they have read these things, but I have often desired and do
still desire that they would read it again once more, and try and see what God
will do; he has oftentimes made use of the holy scripture as a means to awaken
people and to open their understandings, and let them see the mind of the
spirit by which the scripture is written, and the next time if they can find
scripture text and apostolical doctrine, to teach people to wait upon the
Spirit, I hope they will leave scoffing and mocking.

It has been hitherto looked upon as an invention, to speak of the teaching of
the Spirit, and waiting upon the Spirit, and being moved by the Spirit. This
apostolical doctrine, prayer and worship, has been looked upon as an invention
that we have brought in: To look for the Holy Ghost in that way that was never
known to our fathers, is a fantastical conceit of the Quakers, say they: To
tell people they must be led by the Spirit in divine things, as in prayer and
worship, and the like, that in these things they must wait for the Spirit, was
there ever any man that was counted good for any thing that ever preached so,
before they came? Do we read any such kind of thing in scripture?

O! the blindness that has happened to this nation! I have considered, not
without admiration, how the devil (he is a Spirit too, and a wicked one) how he
should have power to prevent our acknowledging the belief, sense and feeling of
the Spirit of God nowadays; there are thousands in this nation that have
formerly believed that it was as impossible for a man to believe the divine
motions and strugglings of the Spirit of God in this life, as to raise their
fathers and mothers out of their graves; some of their learned teachers have
told us it is a whimsy and fancy, and that there was ^o inspiration of the
Spirit nowadays, but that it was a foolish fancy in us to wait for such a
thing, it is needless, say they; there was an immediate teaching in the
apostles days, and they had the sense of the Spirit of Christ working in them,
to teach them to write letters and epistles to the church, which letters and
epistles were written by the moving of the Holy Ghost, but we have no need of
it now, the Holy Ghost has brought order and government into the church, we
have it now in black and white printed in our books, therefore say they, there
is no need of the Spirit, and people need not be acquainted with the operation
of the Spirit nowadays, in regard they have it in their books what manner of
worship they must perform.

I grant them their due, that they have the direction of the scripture; I am
able to understand that people are to worship God, and pray to him, and are to
meet together and to observe this and the other doctrinal precepts there laid
down; I confess I can make shift herewith to frame out a form of religion, and
if I do not mistake in the opening and explication of the doctrine, I could
make a right form too, but I am liable to mistake, another man that understands
Greek better than I, says that the Greek word ought to be translated so, and
the form ought to differ in such a respect; some say the only way of government
is by bishops, and the word bears it in the original, and another says he has
stretched the word, for the word means presbyter; another says presbyter
signifies no more than choice of church elders and deacons, and such like, and
this is all out of one book, the settlement of bishops, presbyters, and elders.

Here a number of form-makers all fall out about the meaning of the word; what
remedy can any mortal man provide for this? We must not be killing and slaying
one another about words; if I be an episcopal man and say the word signifies
bishops, I may be a wicked man still; and if another say it must be presbyter,
he may be a wicked man too, and if another say it should be pastor, elders, and
deacons, he may be a wicked man notwithstanding.

Thus they have rent and torn one another about church government; what remedy
shall we have for this, that these quarrellings and contentions about terms and
words may come to an end? Could a man prescribe a more certain remedy for all
these mistakes than this, if they had a measure of this Spirit which did work
in the apostles when they wrote down these words, which the apostles had in
writing them, then I say they could tell you what the Spirit meant, for the
Spirit is the same and not changed, and the words are the same to a small
matter, so that if a man had that, he might end all the controversy; but where
shall we have a man that has this Spirit to end the controversy? There is none
nowadays say the Protestants, and say the Papists there is none but one that
has this infallibility; and many will not suppose that neither, for some of
them say, that one man is as infallible as another man; there is a great
dispute whether any one man be infallible, or a great many men together are
infallible about doctrine and worship: This might be cured all at once if we
could come to this conclusion. Papists, Protestants and Quakers, here is an end
of all outside worship, he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his:
If there be not Spirit in it, it is not Christ's religion and worship.

So that they that jangle and bark and bite, are without, among dogs and
sorcerers, that are strangers to the Spirit of Christ; there is a spirit in
them that denies the Spirit of Christ, there is a Spirit that rules in them
that are without the Spirit, for nobody that I know of, acts things without a
spirit, and without being moved. What, are good and bad all moved by the
Spirit, and yet are there no motions? I have sometimes turned the question upon
people, and asked them if there were no motions of the evil spirit, has it no
such kind of influence that it can move upon our spirits, that we can sensibly
feel ourselves thrust forth to such an action? I never met any man that would
deny it, they are so generally favorable to the wicked spirit; no man will
deny but the devil has a way of moving and stirring upon the spirit of a man,
and to suggest to him such an evil thing, and as I have sometimes said, it is
so received an opinion, that when the malefactor comes to be arraigned at the
bar for some grievous crime, they lay the foundation of the indictment, such a
day he was moved and instigated by the devil to do such a thing; here is a
settled motion for the devil, for him to influence peoples spirits, but no way
for the good Spirit of God to influence men's spirits; here is nothing left us
but a bad instigation; but to know inward motions to good things, it is not to
be expected nowadays.

How should ever the cunning serpent, that would have power over the best of us
all, be said to winnow us? Christ signified to Peter, a bold and resolute
disciple, satan desires to have thee, and winnow thee as wheat; if the devil
had power over every one, to make them his servants and slaves, what remedy
have we but we must all perish and go headlong to hell with him, unless there
be some way of resisting him? That is true, say people, the devil must be
resisted; we find it in the New Testament, resist the devil; this is a good
exercise; but tell me one thing, when I go about to resist the devil, must I
resist him in my own power? If I was to say you might do so, you would say I
was an erroneous preacher, and well you might: This is an old free will
doctrine, that a man may resist the devil by his own power, and escape his
snares, and do the will of God: This has been cried down by the doctors of the
Church of England, and by most of all sorts of Christians; and for our parts,
since the Lord has opened our mouths, we did never speak a word in favor of
it, as if we went about to resist the devil in our own strength; if we did, the
devil would make fools of us: He that goes about to resist the devil in his own
strength, will be entrapped and ensnared by him, in that men have a propensity
to sin, and by his cunning and subtilty, may be led into a snare before they
are aware.

Thus it is agreed on all hands, that our power, as men, is too weak to resist
satan's temptation, so that you see we must have the assistance of the divine
power, or all go to hell; there is no medium between those two extremes, some
extraordinary power must assist me, or else the devil will have me. If you will
not admit of a supernatural power to come in to help me and you, we must all go
to hell, there is no remedy: I will say my prayers, says one; do so, yet in
the best of your prayers there will be sin; and if I regard iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me: I will go and hear sermons, say you; the very
man that preaches will tell you, that hearing of sermons will do you no good
at all, unless there be motions of the Spirit of God, so that you will be wrapped
from one thing to another, and have diversity of doctrines, and come to no
fixedness; and while you concern yourselves about doctrines, all the while the
devil prevails upon you; as for the tongue, he has the rule of that, and as
for the hands, he has the rule of them, and makes you do those things that by
his perpetual suggestions he moves you to; so that your going to church and
saying your prayers signify nothing to bring you from under the wrath of God,
and from the captivity of the devil: Has not the devil those in captivity that
go to church, and say their prayers, and give alms? These are things that you
can do by your own power, the saying of your prayers, and fasting, and giving
of alms, these things thou may do, the devil will not hinder thee, for he
knows that these will not bring thee out of his clutches, nor out of his chains
and fetters.

There is but one way and means by which the devil may be effectually resisted,
that is by taking to our help (...) stronger than he; I have gone for help to
many stronger than I, in my young days, that I thought to be stronger
Christians, and many of them did afford their help in the work, by counsel, by
persuasion, by exhortation and by doctrine, but all this did not do; and the
reason was this, because the devil was too strong for me, and so he was for
them. As long as you go for help to this and the other place, until you find
one stronger than the devil, expect no deliverance or help from any thing in
the world, but lay aside all confidence in the flesh, in any many man on earth,
or in all the doctors words and best preaching you shall hear, lay aside your
confidence in them, they will never do you any good in this respect, for they
will never break your chains off; many are loaded with them, but some, I hope,
are weary and heavy laden, and feel the weight of sin, I pray God increase the
number; though it be a state of sorrow, it is better than the state of fools,
that make a mock of sin; I would have you weary and heavy laden with your sins,
and brought into this state, to see yourselves captivated by the strong power
of darkness, and to see you are unable to deliver yourselves out of it by your
own power.

For me to fall into the hands of a tyrant that is stronger than I, and no man
to deliver me, how sad would it be. If I could find a man stronger than this
tyrant, and that would kill him, I should be his servant, and have a better
master: No man can kill this tyrant, that has led me captive and made me a
slave; if he say, be drunk, I must be drunk; if he bid me swear, I must swear:
This is the slavery that the devil has got his servants into, that whatsoever
he says, that they must do, if he bids them do it: O! wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me? I cannot deliver myself, and no man can deliver me; I
would be acquainted with all Christians, if they could help me; I would try all
religions that are this day in the world, to see if there be help for me: Many
are oppressed with sin, and they go to and fro, to see what help can be given
them, to free them from the bondage that the devil has them in: This sort of
people are to be pitied, and the souls of all good people will pity them, for
such as these seek the living among the dead; they seek that to redeem them
that cannot redeem them: We have sought, say they, for power and strength from
them that had not enough for themselves, they were captivated as well as we,
and all this because we came not to him that is stronger than the devil. You
will take the same course, and stay till gray hairs come, and you go down to
the grave with sorrow, unless you come to one stronger than the devil, and then
trust in him, believe in him, and expect deliverance by him. The reason why
people do not expect deliverance is, because these two things are shut out of
their belief.

I. They believe not that a sinful life will carry them to destruction.

II. They think there is not any possibility in this world to live any other
than a sinful life.

The devil has brought men to this pass, that they live as easily in a sinful
life, as a fish in the stream: We are in the way, say they; when we were
baptized, we were initiated into the Christian church, we were baptized with
the sign of the cross, that shows we are soldiers of Christ and bear his badge
and banner upon us; and the man said at that time, I was made a child of God
and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven; if this be not true, then I am
cheated and deceived, for I am to believe this to be true; the church has
affirmed that these things are to be believed; and to question the veracity of
the church, is to question all.

I would question whether thousands find the truth of it. When thou were
baptized, there was a kind of covenant and bargain made for this child of God
and heir of eternal life, that he should forsake the devil and all his works,
and the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and the sinful lusts of the
flesh: And there is security given that this child shall never serve the devil
and sinful lusts, and never be proud, but serve God and keep his commandments:
Now this security being taken, then they suppose that this child will certainly
be an heir of the kingdom of God. It is very true, stand to thy church; if this
security that is taken for a child be but effectual, then there is no doubt of
being a child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven. But if this
security fail, is the church to blame if men's hopes to eternal life fail? Was
it not my condition, that thou should forsake the devil and all his works,
and the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and the sinful lusts of the
flesh, and if thou break the bargain, and thy part of the covenant, and miss of
eternal life, who is to blame? Look to the security, see that thou forsake the
devil and all his works, and the pomps and vanities of the world. But thou
may rather say, I have enjoyed as many of them as I could; and for the lusts
of the flesh, I have enjoyed as much of them as I can; and what, do thou
believe thyself to be a child of God and an heir of the kingdom of Heaven,
notwithstanding?

If I promise to deliver a man any particular kind of goods, upon the payment
of so much money, if I fail in delivering the goods, he will not deliver the
money; a man must forsake the devil and all his works, and never lust after the
pomps and vanities of this world; that is a child of God, let us see him grow
up, and if he goes on to be faithful in this covenant till he die, I do not at
all question but he will be an heir of eternal life; but when all this is
broken, and the security signifies nothing, and the man is given up to serve
the devil, breaks all God's holy laws, erreth and strayeth from the way of
God's commandments like a lost sheep, and grasps at the pomps and vanities of
the world, as much as he can, and thinks he gets no more than comes to his
share; and when he shall indulge the lusts of his flesh, this is a child of the
devil; he is a child of that Spirit that was a liar from ths beginning. Never
talk of being a child and an heir of God's kingdom, such a man is in fetters,
he is to go along with the devil and his angels, and there is a kingdom
prepared for them, and a kingdom of darkness, and he must have his portion with
them in everlasting misery: Tophet is prepared of old for all the workers of
iniquity.

What for those that are baptized? Yes, but do not you deny baptism?

No, not I, I would have men and women baptized with a baptism that will do
them some good. Some have seen the vanity and weakness of this kind of baptism,
and called it baby baptism; and therefore would go and be baptized and plunged
in the water over head and ears, but they came up again with the same heart and
mind, and the same polluted soul. John baptized in Jordan, and all Jerusalem
and Judea came to be baptized of him: There were a sort of baptized persons
then that crucified the Lord Jesus Christ, that never did them harm in his
life, but much good.

This baptism had never an apostolical patron, but there is another baptism
that is so infallible a baptism, that if a man were surely baptized withal, he
was sure of Heaven, he would never need any other assurance of Heaven than to
be baptized with the baptism of Jesus Christ: The lip of truth speaks of him,
he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: He shall be saved in spite
of the devil and all his temptations, in spite of persecutions and the
stumbling blocks laid before him. Here is a baptism worth a man's while, worth
all his labor, if he could obtain it; he that comes after me, says John the
Baptist, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire; here is a
baptism belongs to Christians, an ordinance ordained. Far be it from us to deny
baptism; but we would light of the right, since there are so many sorts: This
baptism is so right and certain, that it ascertains a man of his salvation, but
it is done by the Holy Ghost and with fire: If it be by the Holy Ghost, then it
is far enough off from us; for there is no Holy Ghost in our days, say some, so
this baptism is ceased, and inspiration is ceased. If the Holy Ghost and fire
be the matter of baptism, the thing being failed and ceased, the consequence
cannot follow; thou and I cannot be baptized because there is no working of the
Holy Ghost in our days; say some, this baptism is with the Holy Ghost and with
fire; with fire for burning up our corruptions, and purifying our hearts. But
the Holy Ghost has done working upon men, say they; why then there is an end
of baptism: A man is hungry, and when his time comes to eat, he has no
victuals, yet he sits him down as if he did eat; will this feed and nourish
him? So men nowadays, they have a baptism wherewith they are baptized; but
baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, is the right baptism, therefore do
not baptize until you find the Holy Ghost, this will be far better; this is the
baptism that they which come to know it, are sure of salvation by it; for by
this baptism, they are borne up and tinctured in their souls with the Divine
Spirit of Christ Jesus, proceeding from the Father and the Son, till they
receive his likeness, and so die unto sin: As many as were baptized, were
baptized into Christ's death. The apostle opens it, in that he died he died
unto sin once, but in that he lives he lives unto God; so that they that were
baptized, were baptized into Christ's death; and you that are dead unto sin,
how should you live any longer therein?

These that were baptized lived without sin; can that be true, that no one
lived without sin but Christ only? Yes, says the apostle, you that were free
from sin, are alive to righteousness; their life stood before in sin, and now
that life is taken away by baptism, and they are alive to Christ, and he that
lives he lives to God. He that comes to be partaker of the first
resurrection, if he live ten, twenty, forty, or a hundred years, he lives to
God, he lives no more in the pomps and vanities of the world, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh, but he lives unto God. This baptism, whoever comes to be
baptized with it, shall be saved; so that we do not deny baptism.

But we hear say, that you deny the Lord's supper. We have never had such a
thought, God knows; there is nothing that our souls long after more; but people
have been making a kind of work of their own, they have lost a reality, and
make shadows, as children do, who when they see things made in the house for
service, they will make the like in sand and clay. People do not not see what a
great thing it is to attain to the supper of the Lord; as things come into an
evangelical opening, we spoke then more lively and freshly of things. Behold I
stand at the door and knock, if any man open to me, I will come in and sup with
him, and he with me. For the understanding of this text, go and examine, and
search all the commentators you can find, and see what the learned men say of
it; see if they do not apply this to the inward call of the Spirit and grace of
Christ, to let him into our hearts; and would one think that those that wrote
these things should be against the spiritual dispensation of things? They say
that this knocking at the door of the heart signifies the call of God's Spirit
at the door of the heart. There are two sorts of sinners that God knocks at
the door of their hearts; one is, a man that is weary of his sin: For his part,
he wishes that he might never sin more. As soon as he perceives the knock, and
is called upon to let in the grace of God, to help him against temptation, he
freely opens his heart to receive it, and says, with all my heart I will
entertain and welcome the grace of God; glad I am that God has had so much
patience toward me; and since God offers his grace, I will embrace this grace
of God above all pleasures, and I will take it into my heart; the grace of
Christ is the greatest jewel that I know. Honest Paul, he took this course, and
prayed, Lord take away this tempter; here is a temptation that troubles me,
and I am not willing to yield, for all the devil follows me with it; he cried
unto the Lord, and besought him three times, earnestly, to take away the
temptation; and the Lord answers him, my grace is sufficient for thee. What
matter if the tempter buffet thee, and trouble thee, have thou not received my
grace into thy heart? Thou art a believer, and thy trust is in me, and my grace
is sufficient for thee. Let the tempter do his worst, keep thou to the grace of
God, and thou will withstand and overcome the temptation when it comes.

If a man opens his heart and receives Christ when he comes, then you shall
find such an alteration in that man, that go and try him with the same
temptation which prevailed over him the last week, it will not do so now;
though he be as weak as water, and as prone to corruption and iniquity as
before, yet now having a faith begotten in him, that the grace of God will
defend him, he keeps out of the devil's snares. Now this man trusting in this
grace till his sin and iniquity be purged out, now is the time to spread the
table; there is a clean heart, and the heavenly guest is now come, and the
dainties of the kingdom are brought to him for his nourishment. Now, says
Christ, I will come in and sup with him, and my Father a so will come, and we
will sup with him, and he with us. This never happens to any body so long as
the table and heart is soul; for the table must be clean, and the devil and sin
thrown out, and then will the Lord confirm and ratify, and seal the covenant;
so that here is a seal with a witness. When a man has this testimony of the
love of God, that God is reconciled to him in Christ, then Christ will come in,
and he will bring his Father, and they will sup with him; and this is that
which will give complete satisfaction to such a soul.

All the tongues of men and angels are too short to speak of these things, as
they are in themselves, but they are all manifested by the Spirit. All the
mysteries of the kingdom of God, are manifested by the Spirit of God; now to
say there is no Spirit to be regarded nowadays, that is as much as to say, we
must never regard the kingdom of God, for no man can discern the things of God
but the Spirit of God, no man can tell what they be; as no man can know the
things of a man but the spirit of a man.

But I must look to this and the other form, and mark, and methodize them, for
we can know nothing of the things of God themselves.

I hope you are all of another judgment, and believe that this is a trick and
cheat of the wicked one; people do find the Spirit and will feel it if they
will wait upon the motions of it. I do not only mean when you are here
together, but when you are separated one from another; when you feel the
motions of this good Spirit, embrace them, and make them yours. This Spirit is
a gift that is given; so may a shilling or a piece of bread be held forth to a
poor creature, but if he receive it not, he may perish for all that; it is not
his, though I have appointed it to be his, and have separated it from my other
substance to be his. If he receive not what I offer and would give him, he may
perish for all that.

Here is grace and truth comes by Jesus Christ, and God has offered it to all
men, in that he has raised up Christ from the dead; the grace of God which
brings salvation, has appeared unto all men; but all men have not received
it, therefore all men have it not; and they that have not the grace of Christ,
and the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; but it does not follow that they
never will be none of his. When they have received the gift by Christ, and say,
I will be his sheep or lamb, they will come into his favor by that gift, and
shall partake of the good things of his Father's kingdom; but till they have
received this gift, they are not the better for it, they have not any benefit
by the death of Christ; they have no help, no benefit by it, except it be the
patience and long-suffering of God, who for Christ's sake bears with their
weakness, and waits to be gracious, and for Christ's sake offers them favor;
but they are not come to the possession of it, till they open their hearts, and
receive the grace of Christ; then they are convinced of Christ's end, and that
there is a possibility of enjoying the Spirit of God, and of being taught and
led by it.

Take this along with you, that it is your absolute and indispensable duty to
wait from day to day upon the great God of Heaven, the giver of every good and
perfect gift, that you may have that blessed gift, that you may have the
assistance of a greater power than your own to lead you out of sin into
righteousness, that through Jesus Chirst you may be acceptable to God.

SERMON XXIII. CHRIST the WAY, the TRUTH, and the LIFE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, April 18, 1687.
I Fear the high places are not taken away; it has been so in all ages, and it
is manifestly so in this day; where the heart is not rightly prepared for the
Lord, there the high places are not taken away: For all the high places in the
time of Israel's idolatry, they were ever set up when they departed from the
Lord, and all the high places now they are up in a time of ignorance of God;
when people have forgotten the Lord, then they exalt themselves, then pride,
and arrogance, and every evil way prevails upon us; but when men come to seek
the Lord with uprightness, that brings down their high conceits, that brings
every one into humility; for every one comes to be convinced in themselves that
none can find the Lord, but as they are brought to be humble; nay, indeed, none
seek after him aright but such, none have the promise of finding him but the
humble.

Therefore it is the duty of every one that is a real enquirer and seeker after
God, to know the right preparation of mind, to know themselves in such a frame
of spirit, that they may seek in hope, that they may have a right and just
expectation of finding him whom they are seeking after; for this has been the
reason that a great many have been frustrated in their endeavors, and in their
purposes of seeking after the Lord, they have not been rightly prepared for him
to manifest himself unto them, they have not known the preparation of his
sanctuary; there was a peculiar preparation that was requisite to those that
drew near unto the sanctuary of God, they were hallowed, that is, made holy,
ere they drew near to the holy place; but alas! this has been greatly
neglected in our days, unholy people with unholy minds have been seeking after
the Holy God, they have been enquiring after a holy way, and were not prepared
to walk in it, there was nothing raised in their minds, that was fit to walk in
that way.

For so long as men or women stand in unity with their lusts and concupiscence,
with the spirit of this world, and the way of it, they are not capable of
receiving that which should lead them into the way of holiness; nay, if it
appears to them, they cannot receive it, for it is with them as with other
guests, there be other lovers already let in, which employ the powers and
faculties of their souls, so that if the most beloved of all, the most
excellent, if the chiefest of ten thousand do appear, they cannot see a
comeliness in him. The prophet speaking of this state and condition of men, did
prophesy concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, when we shall see him there is no
comeliness in him why we should desire him, and so it has happened to a great
many nowadays, though the truth has appeared to them, yet they have not
looked upon it as a pleasant way, as a way desirable, but a way to be shunned
if possible. What shifts have a great many people made to keep themselves, if
possible, out of the way of truth, arguing for this and that, and disputing for
one way and another that was out of truth's way, out of the way of holiness.
What was the meaning of all their arguments, but to tell us they might be
happy, they might be saved, though they did not come into truth's way, and walk
in truth's way? And though they did abide in those things, that were contrary
to the testimony of truth in their own hearts, yet it might go well with them.

This is the strength of the arguments of all sorts, of all persuasions in the
world, that have been arguing themselves out of the truth, and would argue us
out of the truth too, and would take the liberty to do those things which are
not agreeable therewith; but now the reason of this is because the preparation
is wanting, they are those that have no need of truth, and that have no need of
God, and of a Savior; but think they can make shift without them; he is not
become the chiefest to them, they can abide in the high places, they can call
upon the name of the Lord, and they can worship in the groves, and in the high
places both together, like those nations that were brought to inhabit the
kingdom of Israel when the ten tribes were carried away, they sent for priests
to teach them, they sent back to the king of Assyria to send them some priests,
to teach them to worship the God of their country, and when the priest came to
teach them, he taught them the ceremonies of the law, and the diverse
observations that the Jews used to practice in that country, and so they grew
into a formality of serving the God of Israel, they called upon the name of the
Lord, and every nation worshipped their own Gods.

How is this nation, and the nations of Europe, now inhabited with such a
people that are called by the name of the Lord, but every one worshipping their
own Gods; one makes gold and silver his God, another makes his pleasure his
God, another his honor, another this, that, and the other lust, and they bow
down to them, that is, they yield themselves to their lusts, concupiscence and
corruptions, that they stand in unity with, but they call upon the name of the
Lord too; they do apply themselves to some kind of form of worship, which they
say is unto the immortal and invisible God; but alas! they come not to the
knowledge of God by this. All that the priests could do that the king of
Assyria sent back, could not bring the Samaritans to the knowledge of the God
of Israel, they only brought them to a report of such a God, that had set up
such a law: They had the report of it, and for fear that the lions should tear
them in pieces, they would enter into that form, but they worshipped their own
Gods still.

So it is now, people do not come to the knowledge of the true God, the living
God, by entering into any form of religion; for instance, prayer, hearing of
any ordinance or church fellowship, these give not men the knowledge of God,
there is but one way to come to that, but one only. Men have found a great
many, it is past your skill and mine to reckon up the many ways that men have
found out upon the face of the earth, how they might come to the knowledge of
God, and to peace and reconciliation with him; but they have only played the
fool, and spent their time in vain, especially they that own the scriptures of
truth to be a true and faithful record of the mind and will of God, they play
the fool abominably; for the scripture that they give so much reputation to in
their profession does testify the way is but one, and there is no other way for
people to be reconciled to God, than by coming into Christ; to be found in him,
to be regenerated and born into his nature, and have his qualities put upon
them, that as he was pure, they may be pure; that he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified by him, may become both one, and so be reconciled to the
Father through him. This you know is the common profession of Christendom, or
at least of our nation. And in other nations, the common profession is, there
is no Mediator but one, no Reconciler but one. Indeed some others hold there
may be other Mediators, and that there are others that may contribute to them
by their mediation, and by their prayers and merits, but the generality of the
nations are otherwise.

Now for people to fall out, and say, my way is best, and thy way is not best,
and to fall into contests about many ways, when the scripture concludes there
is but one way, is not well; we had better all agree about this doctrine, that
there is no possibility of reconciliation with God, since we are fallen out
with him, and since sin has made a separation, there is no way of being
reconciled again to God, but by and through our Lord Jesus Christ; nor by him
neither, unless we receive of his Spirit to quicken us; nothing can quicken us,
enliven us, or recommend us to God, but the Spirit of Christ operating and
working in our hearts, that he may prepare us for the Father's kingdom.

If people would agree upon this, there would be an end of all labor, and
toil, and jangling about the right way, for the consequence and conclusion
would be this: That the man who does not know himself the sanctifying power of
the Spirit of Christ Jesus, he is out of the way to reconciliation with God,
let his form and profession be what it will: If therefore he be reconciled to
God, it must be by and through the Mediator, and he will never recommend him to
the Father till he has made him a temple to let in the Spirit of Christ, to
work in his heart, to fit him for the kingdom of God: And men have no other way
to come to it; for though they be zealous in every prayer and form, it
signifies nothing to any great purpose, their hope will be frustrated; there is
no other way, says Christ, of coming to the Father, but by me; I am the way,
the truth and the life. If I am out of the truth, I am out of the way; and if I
am out of the way, then I cannot come to the end of the way. This is plain
reasoning among men: If I tell a lie, that is out of the truth: If I have vain
communication, or deceive or wrong my neighbor, that is out of the truth; if I
am in that which is manifested in my conscience to be contrary to the truth, I
am out of the way; though I be strict in that way, as to profession, yet I am
out of the way to God, I am out of the truth; there is no way to God but by
Christ, who is the way, the truth and the life; whoever is out of him, is out
of the way; which made the apostle say, that his labor, endeavor and desire
was, that he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but
having on the righteousness of Christ Jesus.

Many men think to recommend themselves to God by their righteous, just and
honest dealings, and doing wrong to nobody. This is good in itself, but does
not recommend us to God, unless it be done by the righteous and holy Spirit of
Christ Jesus, unless it be of his working; he must have the working of
righteousness and truth in us; he must plant it, and it must grow by his
working, if it be acceptable to the Father; for without me, says Christ, you
can do nothing. A man out of Christ, a stranger to his Spirit, may do
something, but nothing available to the well-being of his soul, 'till he have
reconciliation by Christ Jesus: If he be reconciled to God, this Mediator must
be the Reconciler, and he must fit and prepare him for reconciliation with the
Father.

All the divisions, sorts and sects of religion, must all come to an end; if
this measuring line be laid to them, they all appear too short; and there is
nothing will do a man good, but that religion that obliges and ties him to the
good pleasure of God, through the Spirit of the Mediator, which he feels
working in him, by which he is raised from death to some degree of life: When
he is sensible what a burden sin is to his life, that godly life which he
has, he is burdened with every sin, and oppressed with every vain thought,
and every vain word, if he be not in some measure quickened, he is not sensible
of this burden; but being quickened, he is sensible of the burden that lies
upon his life, by reason of his sin; and then, being under the weight of his
sin, he calls to God for his assistance; he cries to God to help him; he now
knows that he has striven and labored in vain. O God of all grace, if thou
vouchsafest not help to my soul, if thou do not interpose by the assistance
of thy grace, I cannot overcome this sin. There is a continual cry to God for
divine assistance, and as they cry to God for assistance, he ministers
assistance to them, by which they are able to overcome the enemy of their
souls, and all temptations when they come: And when a man finds such divine
assistance, his faith is strengthened and confirmed, and so he fights the good
fight of faith, and at last gets the victory; victory over his sin, and his own
lusts, and concupiscence, and victory over the assaults and temtations of the
adversary, and at last he comes, through the grace of God, to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly and godly in
this present world.

Now when people do thus, it is by the grace of God. This life of
righteousness, sobriety and godliness, is not the effect of their labor and
exercise, and of their endeavors herein, but it is the effect of the holy
Spirit that has been the teacher. When you see a man has become a good
scholar, eminent in all sorts of learning, you will conclude he did not attain
to all this of himself, he did not learn this and the other language, this and
the other art and science of himself; no, he had some judicious and able master
and teacher, who communicated of his learning and knowledge to his disciple and
scholar: This is the efficient cause of his improvement. Now if a man, by the
grace and the Spirit of God, and the teachings of it, live a holy, godly life,
this is the effect of something; he did not always live such a life, how comes
he to live such a life now? Is it by his own industry, labor and exercise? No,
it is by being exercised, taught and led by the Spirit of God; so that it is
the effect of the grace of God that he should live such a holy life, this is
the meritorious cause of it, as he is a creature, and by this only acceptable
to God in Christ the Mediator.

Thus a man comes to be justified and accepted, not because he is a godly man,
but is made so by the Spirit of God: You are not under the law, says the
apostle, but under grace: You are under the teachings of it, under the
directions of it: Grace can reprove people; for that grace and that truth that
comes by Christ, and manifests itself as a light in the hearts of
transgressors, reproves their sin, and calls them out of it; it reproves them
for it, and exhorts them to leave it, both at one time; so that we must
acknowledge all our righteousness, holiness and obedience to be of God, and all
that we do in order thereunto, as it is done by the teaching, by the influence
and operation of the grace of God given us in Christ Jesus; it is the effect of
him who is our Mediator, he works it in us, and for us, of his good pleasure.

If we be justified, we are not justified for a righteous, holy life, and for
our obedience; but we are justified through Christ, who works a godly life in
them that believe, so that a man is not justified by any other way or means;
and all other ways a man takes of being reconciled to God, are vain and
fruitless, and have been spoken against by all that were moved by the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament. Says the prophet, what, shall I come before the
Lord withal? I am fallen under death and sin, and in a separation from God, I
would fain be reconciled to him; what shall I do to be reconciled to God? He
goes about to reckon without Christ, and without faith and holiness. Shall I
take a thousand rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I come nearer
still? Shall I make an offering of the fruit of my body, for the sin of my
soul? Shall I offer my firstborn to God, that I may not be rejected and
brought to a separation from him? Thus men when they come to be sensible, do
feel in themselves that all this is to no purpose: The answer comes, thou
may live, but all thy contrivances about making an offering are vain: He
has showed thee O man! what to do. It is not thy finding this way and that
way, viz. thy rams, and thy oil, and thy firstborn; it is no way of thy
devising and imagining that can reconcile thee to me, I have showed thee, O
man, what is good. What is this that is showed? It is comprised in a short
compass, it is to love mercy, to do justice, and to walk humbly with thy God.
Will this serve without offering rams and oil, and offering my first born? This
will do if thou can but love mercy when it is shown thee; that is, embrace
mercy, and love it. He has showed mercy to all men; then love it and receive
it; do justly, leave every thing that is unrighteous, and do that which is just
in the sight of God, but do not boast of thy justice and righteousness, but
walk humbly with thy God; here is the whole duty of man. Here is no dependence
on dead works, or my own exertions, in order to my justification.

Indeed the consideration of these kind of lessons do corrupt some men, and put
them upon doing this or that, and upon forbearing this or that, and has
brought many to confession and great abstinence, and put them upon great
doings, thinking this would answer the justice of God; I have loved mercy, and
given all I had to the poor. If I do justly, and abstain from this and the
other liberty, if I walk humbly, that is, if I humble myself by this and the
other manner of penance and contrition, then I do what God requires, and then
I have pleased God.

Now all that have gone this way to work, to do justly, and love mercy, and to
make themselves humble, and humbled themselves in such a low manner, they have
missed the mark. He has showed thee, O man! what is good; that it is
impossible for fallen man to answer this himself; he may be convinced of his
duty to do justice, but by his own power and strength he cannot do it; there
are so many temptations from without, and so many from within, such a
propensity in nature, that will prevail against all the bonds of charity that
he can make.

Therefore is help laid upon one that is mighty; without the grace of God that
comes by Christ Jesus, a man can never do right, though convinced: Though the
Lord has showed him what is good, he shows us that we are unable of ourselves;
he has taken care to send his Son: God has so loved the world, that he has
sent his Son into the world, that he might help those that have need of help,
that every one that is in distress might have an eye to Christ, the author and
finisher of their faith; when men have a reference to their faith in Christ,
this makes their duty acceptable; I cannot do it except the Lord strengthen me;
therefore I will have respect to the Mediator, Christ Jesus, who was sent for a
light into the world. God sends forth his grace for every one to lay hold on,
who generally believe, that though they are unable to do what God requires, yet
he will enable them to do it; for as many as received him, to them he gave
power to become the Sons of God, though they were the devil's children before; he
is the same yesterday, today, and forever. He abides always the same in his
grace to men, he is in his operation to them the same; he offers grace to them
that are in a frame of mind to receive it; they may know that his power will
give them ability, and that whatsoever they do of themselves will prove
fruitless, because it is not done in Christ's name and power, and so not
acceptable to God.

The greatest thing that we are to be concerned about, if we will be religious,
and concern ourselves about divine matters, about the kingdom of God and the
world to come, is, to see what frame of mind we are in at present, whether the
high places are taken away, whether we are not exalted in our own conceits of
knowledge and wisdom, and reckon not to be beholden to him for his grace. If we
be highly conceited, and think we can stand upon our own legs, the high places
are not taken away: Men are not in this state prepared to seek the God of their
fathers; therefore, let every one turn to God, and see how it is with you; see
whether there be a mind brought low enough to be subject to Christ, and to the
gracious teachings of his Spirit.

A man may say, I can make a sermon, I can make a prayer and exhortation, and I
can make a book, and send it abroad, I can do all this by my own parts and
abilities; so thou may, and may make it all full of good words, but thou
can never make it acceptable to God; for without me, says Christ, you can do
nothing. Thou must have the assistance of the Spirit of Christ, else thou can
not make a good prayer, nor a good book, nor any thing good; God esteems the
very plowing of the wicked to be an abomination to him. Where the mind is not
exercised by the Spirit of God, if he should pray from morning to night, and
spend all his days in penance, it will do him no good. If I, says David,
regard iniquity; you may think I am a man in favor with God, a man after God's
own heart; yet if I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my
prayer. What signifies prayers and sermons, made of good words, if they come
not from a heart separate from iniquity? If it be not so, it will do no good at
all, in point of acceptance with God.

O let the fear of the Lord enter upon every heart! wait all to feel the Divine
Power of the Lord, that brings down every high thought, that so you may look to
the preparation of your hearts, that is a right preparation; when the people
are so low, so broken and so tender, that they are nothing in their own eyes,
but what the Lord will make them to be; then they are as clay in the hands of
the potter, they are fashioned by his hands, and made the workmanship of God in
Christ Jesus, the one Mediator between God and man. They must bear the likeness
of Christ Jesus, bear his Heavenly image, they must have his qualities, and
have the same mind in them that was in him: I do always that which pleases my
Father, says the Lord Jesus Christ. Indeed he has the doing of things in the
hearts of men, and God is pleased with him, and where men have the doing of
them themselves, they are thrown back as dung in their faces; where any rightly
desire justification, where men have a right preparation of heart, so to seek
the God of their fathers, as to find him and be accepted of him, it is through
Jesus Christ, in whom he is well pleased.

In all your assemblies, prayers, exercises and meditations, you must be
separated and drawn off from your former lovers, and you must be joined to him
that God has sent to be a leader and a guide unto you, then you will find
daily his assistance; and as you have assistance from him, you will find
acceptance with God, and he will show you the Father, and that, and nothing
else, will satisfy the soul hungering and thirsting after God. Show us the
Father, and it suffices us. So when Christ, the Mediator, comes to have
wrought so far as the purifying of the soul, and the sanctifying thereof, and
thereby fitted it for his glory, such holy souls shall behold his glory; for
the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly.

That you may be brought to this state, and kept and preserved in it; that the
Heavens may rain down fatness upon you, and that you may feel the living
virtues that flow from Christ to every member, is the labor and travel of the
servants of God, for their own souls, and the souls of others that are in unity
and fellowship with the Holy Spirit.

SERMON XXIV. CAPTIVE SINNERS set free by JESUS CHRIST.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, April 29, 1688.
THERE is nothing will make people live to God, but that which they receive
from God. For as all men are by nature in a state of death, so there must be
something beyond nature to make them alive again; and this is what every one
ought to wait upon God for, that you may feel something that is supernatural,
and that you may be acquainted with God's gift; the gift of God, says the
scripture, is eternal life. Many find a life in this world, that is not the
gift of God. The life that people have in sin, it is not the gift of God; the
delights and pleasures of this world are become a life unto them. The world is
that to which every one must die; they that are not dead to that, they all live
to themselves, they do not live to God, for none can live to God, but by the
life that comes from him. That which people receive of man, gathers them unto
man; that which they receive of God, carries them to God.

So men have made gatherings, and have communicated of what they have to one
another, and by virtue thereof, have made them a people: Many men have gathered
many people, many churches, and they live to them that gathered them; they do
not live to God, for want of receiving something from God, but all they that
come to receive the gift of God, they die to the world, and they come to live
such a life as the world does not love, does not care for, and has no pleasure
in: If you were of the world, says Christ, the world would love you; but
because you are not of the world, they hate you. How should this be understood,
were not they some of the men of that generation? How does he mean they were
not of the world? Why, I have taken you out of it, says he; and yet they were
there still, and they were named by certain names, the sons of such and such
men; yet for all that, they were not of the world; and that which differed in
them was, being made partakers of that life which the world knew not.

And so there will be an enmity in the world against the life of holiness; they
will hate any body that lives in it; and as it was then, so it is at this day,
they that are of the world, they hear and receive those things that are of the
world, from the men of this world; but they that are of God, they hear them
that are of God, and they receive the things of God, and their greatest comfort
and joy that they have is in their communion with God in Christ Jesus, through
whom, as through a conduit, the blessings of the father are ministered to them,
and through whom, as from the fountain of life, their life is renewed from day
to day.

But these things are hid from the world, from the wise and prudent of it; they
cannot dig into the depth, nor ascend to this height; they cannot comprehend
the length and the breadth of the things of God, which are in Christ Jesus;
they may reach unto something of the love of God, that is in the creation; they
can tell when the sun shines upon them, and when the rain falls upon their
fields; and when it falls in due season they call it a blessing; and while the
covenant with winter and summer remains, they look upon it as comfortable, and
perhaps sometimes will bestow a saying, I thank God for it. All these things
are beneath us, and there is neither love nor hatred known by them all. I saw
the wicked, says one, I beheld his dwelling place, and he flourished like unto
a green bay tree, and was wicked still, notwithstanding all this.

But now, they that see where they live, that live to God, they can say, that
their leaf never withers, but they bring forth their fruit in due season; but
he did not so. But the wicked man that flourished like a green bay tree, behold
I looked, and he was removed, and his place was no more to be found: There came
a blasting upon all his blessing and his flourishing came to an end; his riches
perished, and his good things passed away from him. But the man whose delight
is in the law of God, and makes it his pleasure both night and day, he is like
a tree planted by the rivers of water, whose leaf never fades, and brings forth
his fruit in due season.

But this is hid; there is no body in the world but would have something of
this life too; they would be sure of eternal life, but they would not die to
the other life, they would not be crucified to the world, they would not be
separated from their lovers; if they could get into the state of a righteous
man, an hour or two before they die, when they are sure they shall die, it
would please them; but to live that life that is to God, is to die to the
world, and to part with that they have, their comfort, their joy, their peace
and honor, and all their worldly enjoyments in it, before they can come to
receive the gift of God, they think is hard: But they that look after it, and
have a mind to find it out, without parting with the world's life, they deceive
themselves.

Do not you see how men have deceived themselves in these days? They have
sought after the kingdom of God till they are scattered in their own way; they
are quarrelling about their own way, as if they never had any scripture to be
their rule: They cry the scripture is their rule; this is the way to eternal
life, says one; and this is the way, says another; and the one and the other
say all these ways are false saving their own; and all these contenders about
the way to eternal life, they all say the scripture is the rule.

And yet the scriptures speak of the way too, and tell us the way plainly, the
way to rest, peace and life eternal. If the scriptures had been silent in it,
and had said nothing but of genealogies and histories of armies and wars, it
had been something; but the scriptures of the Old and New Testament speak of a
certain way to eternal life, and say it is the way of holiness, a way shall be
cast up for the redeemed and the ransomed of the Lord to walk in, and the
wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not mistake in it. Though he never took a
degree at the university, he shall not err in it; though he be a fool in the
account of the world, and never understood Greek or Latin, yet he shall not err
in this way.

The way that leads to the kingdom of God, is called the way of holiness; but
while many have been reading in their books, they have been contending for a
way of unholiness; no wonder then they have been quarrelling about it, and have
all missed it, and that in the main point of all: Let them make a way, which
way they will, and frame it ever so wisely, according to the best wit they
have, be it a way that has all material qualifications that should make it a
way of holiness, these men may walk in it, but they will never find the way to
the kingdom of God, though they have sought it out: Go to one place and another
place, and ask them what is your way? Our way, say they, is the right way, the
most sure and certain way that can be found for people to walk in: But whither
will it lead me? It will lead thee to the kingdom of God: That is it I would
have; but will it lead me to holiness? No, never in this world, thou must never
come to holiness; do the best thou can do here, it is but sin; the best day's
work thou make is but sin; the best child of God on earth cannot live a day
without sin: Do you hold out that in your way? Yes; then I have done with that,
and must go to another people.

So many have gone many ways to the kingdom of God, and when the upshot is
come, they have found every way a polluted way, a sinful way; I know this way
will never lead me to God; sin first led me from God; I had been well enough as
I was created at first, if I had never sinned against God; a sinful way will
lead me from God. It is against common sense, and against rationality, to say
we did first go from God by sin, and must go to God again by a sinful way. Who
will believe that such a way will lead men to God's kingdom? and that any way
will lead men to God, that will not lead them to holiness?

The Psalmist says, if I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear
me; though a man keeps close to meeting, and ordinances, and duties, and
performances, iniquity it seems remains still; there is no rooting it out in
this world. This continuing and remaining with a man, makes all his
performances, and duties, and prayers unacceptable to God; they are all turned
back again upon him, and cast as dung upon his face, and true enough too; so
that here is no coming unto God in this way; the comers thereunto know well
enough they are not reconciled to God, if they are men that are conscientious.

There are a sort of people so stupid and sordid in their judgment, that if a
man tells them they are reconciled to God, they will believe him though
conscience reproves them a^ hundred times a day. If the parson of the parish
say, that he has made this child an heir of the kingdom of God and an
inheritor of eternal life; I know some have believed it forty years after, and
have born themselves up upon this man's word all their life: Do you think there
is any danger of me, that in baptism was made an inheritor of eternal life, and
an heir of the kingdom of God? God has not appointed ordinances in his church
for nothing.

I speak not of such sordid hard-hearted people, that never entered into
themselves to know how it was with them, whether they are converted; but I
speak of sober conscientious people, that do not desire to be cheated in a
point of salvation, though they have been deceived a great while, they may be
undeceived: Then they must take this for certain doctrine, that nothing can
reconcile them to their Maker but that which takes away sin. God hears not
sinners, he will never be reconciled to a man in this world, as a sinner; but
there are many thousands (blessed be God) in this age, as well as in other
ages, that were sinners, and reconciled to God through Christ, and had
remission of sin; but never any man in his sin was reconciled to God, though he
did believe the truth, if he did not come to the sanctification of the spirit,
he could never be reconciled to God.

So that there has been, in all ages, a way of the working of the Spirit of
God in the hearts of them that believe, to prepare them for the sinless
kingdom, for that glorious kingdom, into which nothing that hurts, defiles
or corrupts, can enter. And because we cannot enter with corruption and
defilement, he has appointed the ministration of his Spirit to work out that
which might hinder the cleansing of us from sin, that we might have an abundant
entrance into his glorious kingdom; so that whilst they say there is an
impossibility of living without sin, I had as lief they had said, there is an
impossibility of entering into the kingdom of God; for never any shall come
into the kingdom of God, but those that are without sin; for there is no
purgatory after death.

The Papists have a better conceit than the Protestants in that respect: The
Protestants conceive sin to be expelled at the point of death; and they say,
all the sins of believers, all the guilt of sin, after we are believers, is
pardoned, forgiven and done away, by the death of Christ upon the cross; we
will have it, if we can get it. If men can imagine a way into the kingdom of
God, they will have one. They believe that a man may sin and contract no guilt;
and that he may sin till his dying day, and then all sin shall pass away, and
he shall enter into God's kingdom. The Papists say none can come to Heaven till
they be purged from sin; and they say God has appointed a place for that
purpose, and persons must go into purgatory, and they must lie there till they
are purged, and purified, and fitted for Heaven. Now, say the Protestants,
truly; there is no such thing, we find no such thing mentioned in the
scripture, therefore such a thing as this cannot be; for the apostle said, we
have declared to you the whole counsel of God, and he speaks not a word of
purgatory in all the New Testament. The Protestants have got a way to help
themselves, and the Papists, also, to help themselves, and both lie under
danger: As for the Papists, if their priests mistake, and there be no such
place as purgatory, then they must be brought back to the doctrine of the
scripture, which declares, that as death leaves us, so judgment shall find us;
and as we sow so we must reap; if we sow to the flesh, then of the flesh we
shall reap corruption. Then the Protestants, likewise, if they mistake in
saying, a man may act sin and yet contract no guilt, then they must be brought
back to the doctrine of the scriptures, that tell us, the soul that sins
must die: If a righteous man forsake his righteousness, and does that which is
evil, his righteousness shall be remembered no more, but in the sin that he
has committed he shall die.

This is sound doctrine: I had rather trust the doctrine of the prophets and
apostles than the doctrine of all others, either Protestants or Papists; and
had rather depend upon their doctrine for salvation, that were inspired by the
Holy Ghost, than upon those doctrines that say, there is no inspiration
nowadays. Some conceive this scripture may be interpreted thus and thus; and
others conceive it means so and so, but we must, say they, submit to better
judgment: I am a fallible man, I submit it to better judgments. Now when people
are concerned for immortality and eternity, to have such things dished out in
such a manner, what souls are so dull but they would bestir themselves, and
consider and look about them before they go hence, and how it shall go with
them when they are gone?

We are now to work out our own salvation, that is on our part: None ever have
wrought out this salvation, it is wrought out on God's part already, and it is
to be made ours; he that is our Savior, he has suffered for our sins, and
rose again for our justification; he was made to us, of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Now wisdom signifies the opening
of the counsel of God; righteousness signifies the subjection of our wills to
the will of God; sanctification signifies obedience to the Spirit of Christ.
Sanctification signifies obedience to something; to what? what shall we be
obedient unto? what is our rule? He that is led by the Spirit of Christ, he is
his; but he that is not led by the Spirit of Christ is none of his; so that it
is plain, sanctification signifies obedience to the Spirit of Christ, and
redemption signifies buying again, or setting free from bondage.

We know when our friends are in captivity, as in Turkey, or elsewhere, we pay
down our money for their redemption; but we will not pay our money if they be
kept in their fetters still. Would not any one think himself cheated, to pay so
much money for their redemption, and the bargain be made so that he shall be
said to be redeemed, and be called a redeemed captive, but he must wear his
fetters still? How long? as long as he has a day to live.

This is for bodies; but now I am speaking of souls, Christ must be made to me
redemption, and rescue me from captivity. Am I prisoner any where? Yes; verily,
verily, he that commits sin, says Christ, he is a servant of sin, he is a
slave to sin: If thou have sinned, thou art a slave, a captive, that must be
redeemed out of captivity; who will pay a price for me? I am poor, I have
nothing, I cannot redeem myself, who will pay a price for me? There is one
come, who has paid a price for me; that is well, that is good news, then I
hope I shall come out of my captivity. What is his name, is he called a
Redeemer? So then I do expect the benefit of my redemption, and that I shall go
out of my captivity. No, say they, you must abide in sin, as long as you live:
What benefit then have I by my redemption? I could have been in captivity no
longer; if I had not been redeemed, I must wear my shackles and fetters still,
and be subject to my old master and patron, and when he will have me be drunk,
I must be drunk; and when he will have me be unclean, I must be unclean.

Thus many professed Christians there be (you see it with your eyes) that will
tell you they believe all the articles of the creed, and they have been
baptized into the Christian faith, and can rehearse all the principles of the
Christian religion, and perform the duty of Christians in going to church,
saying their prayers, and giving alms too it may be; they are such as would be
called Christians, they would be called so, yet they are not redeemed from
their vain conversations; for what makes their shackles and fetters about them?
When their old master bids them be drunk, they will be drunk; and when he bids
them commit whoredom, or lie, or cheat their neighbor, they will do it: You do
believe the devil leads you to this; you will not say the Spirit of God led you
to it. If one demand, how did you do it? You say, the devil prevailed upon me:
What, has the devil power over men after they are redeemed? What sort of
redemption is this? Then comes in the old shift again, we are redeemed from the
punishment of our sin, but not from the act of it.

Now if those that are called ranters had told me this tale, it had been like
them; but when doctors of divinity tell us this tale, it is so unlike divinity,
that it is carnal, sensual and devilish. To tell believers they are redeemed
from the punishment of sin, but not from the act of sin; that this is the
benefit which we receive from Christ's sufferings; that we may sin on, free
cost; that there is no guilt contracted by it; will any man or woman, that
understand they have a soul, venture their immortal souls on this divinity? I
hope not. They will not venture their soul on this foundation-doctrine: I hope
God will awaken the consciencies of people, that they will not hazard their
souls upon such a carnal, devilish foundation; that if the devil should preach,
he could not preach a worse doctrine than this, to persuade Christians they may
live in sin, and sin will not hurt them, nor impair or break their peace with
God, and reconciliation with him.

I will tell you how it has been with me; in my childhood, if I had spoken a
vain word, or a false word, I had contracted such a guilt thereby, that I was
ashamed to draw near to God, to pray to him; I knew he would not hear liars, I
knew there was no way to be accepted without repentance and amendment of life.
I believe others have met with the same dealing from God, by the secret strokes
of conviction that have come upon their hearts, when they have sinned against
God.

So that I am still of the mind, that the persons that depend upon this kind of
doctrine, do at sometimes, especially when sickness comes, and death looks them
in the face, or in times of common contagion or pestilence, at such a time they
have a weight of guilt upon their consciences; for this doctrine will not
support them at death, but that then they believe they have contracted guilt,
or committed sin.

I have wished many times that the Lord would open the eyes and hearts of the
people of this city and of this nation, to see how miserably they have ventured
their souls. Will merchants in this city ever venture their goods at such a
rate as men commonly venture their souls? What, will they venture their goods
in a ship without a bottom, before she goes to sea? Now this doctrine has not
a foundation; shall I believe a person that tells me I do not contract guilt,
when I feel it upon my heart; when I commit whoredom and drunkenness, and cheat
my neighbors, shall any one persuade me that I do not contract guilt?

O friends! we are speaking of great matters; it is about eternity, that we are
speaking, it is about the hazard of eternal happiness; therefore I pray, let
every one be serious, and consider what I say, for I speak in God's name, and
on your behalf: Men are to come to a true search in themselves, what a life it
is that they live. Many support themselves by the doctrines and precepts of
men, and they buoy themselves into conceits of salvation; let them examine
whether it be a life that has its support from the Spirit of God; this is
material for every one to consider. There are none can live to God, but by the
life they receive from God; the grace of God, which brings salvation, has
appeared to all men. Now here is an universal doctrine.

There are a sort of men in this city and nation that tell us, that saving
grace is given only to the elect. Saving grace is given to all men; but you
must construe those words, all the elect, where they are somewhat injurious,
and would cast off the condition of the text, if they make a distinction in the
latter part of the sentence, for it will not be good sense: The grace of God
that brings salvation, has appeared to all the elect, teaching us to deny
all ungodliness, etc. Here is us taken out of the all. The same grace, that is
our teacher, appears to be the teacher of others, though they turn it into
lasciviousness. The grace is the same, though they make many
school-distinctions between common and saving grace. The apostle explains it,
by telling what grace he means; the grace of God, which brings salvation,
appears to all men, and that is by teaching us; what does it teach? I pray
consider it; it teaches us to deny all ungodliness and all worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. Where is sin now,
if a man be taught by this grace, and the dictates of it. Can a man live in
sin, and yet live righteously, soberly and godly too? Can a man live in sin,
and yet deny all ungodliness at the same time? Where have men's understanding
been, that cannot understand their mother tongue, and consider sense? Where are
men's understandings that will say, I may deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and yet follow the lusts of my own heart? You would think I speak
nonsense if I should speak thus; and yet we have been put off with such
nonsensical stuff as this. We must pray to God to send his holy Spirit into our
hearts, to enable us to live godly, righteous and sober lives, and at the same
time believe that we shall never do it, but that it is a business of
impossibility.

Now when men come to lay these things together, and when they consider between
God and their own souls, how it is with them, many are amazed to think they
should ever be put off with such incongruous, disagreeing, and dissonant
things, that are not consistent with one another.

But do you think it is possible for any man to live without sin? Yes, or else
I would say it is impossible for any to be reconciled to God; for God will
never be reconciled to sinners, as such; for his bargain and covenant is made
of such kind of articles. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes. Cease to do evil; learn to do well, etc. Then
come and let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; though they be red as crimson, they shall be as
wool, Isaiah i, 16, 17; still these are the terms, put away the evil of your
doings, then patience, mercy and long-suffering, shall be extended to you; God
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold; what, from those
that say their prayers, or go to the church or meeting? No, but but no good
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly; Psalm. lxxxiv, 11. These
are the men.

And when the Lord distinguishes by his prophet whom he would have among them,
he speaks of a sort of people that called upon the name of the Lord; those that
feared the Lord, and spoke often one to another; that is, of the goodness of
God; they were a sort of people that trembled at the word of God; a sort of
people that did not do as others did, hunt after pleasures, riches, and the
honors of the world, but to be acquainted with the inward word that wrought
upon their hearts; in that day that I make up my jewels, they shall be mine,
says the Lord. Whose shall the others be? Thou will own these for thine, but
whose shall the others be, that think not upon thy name, and tremble not at thy
word? There is a place for them too: Tophet is prepared of old, made both wide
and large; the fuel thereof is fire and brimstone, and much wood, and the
breath of the Lord kindles it. This is for all that are wicked, and that work
iniquity.

This is in the Old Testament; then comes the New Testament, in John's
Revelations; there is a separation again: There are a sort of people which are
called the true worshippers, and the angel was commanded to go and measure the
temple, and those that worshipped therein: The outward temple was not measured,
but left for the Gentiles to tread in, and left without the measure; for
without are dogs and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters,
and whosoever loves and makes a lie. And then the Lord speaks to his prophets
in the Old Testament again; if thou put a difference between the precious and
the vile, then thou shall be as my mouth unto them; but if thou huddle them
altogether, and sew pillows under elbows, then thou shall not be as my mouth.

So that in all ages God aimed at a separation of the state and condition of
his people; and one sort of people were purified, through the sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth; and another sort were unsanctified and
unpurified, and remained in their sin; and the end of Christ's coming into the
world, it was to call people to repentance; he came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance, and to leave off their sin. To as many as received
him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, to as many as believed on
his name. Whose sons were the other? They made as high a rattle of profession
as the other: He tells them who is their father, you are of your father the
devil; and he did orderly prove it, and that was thus; that they did the
devil's works, ergo, they were the devil's children. It was Christ himself, the
greatest doctor of divinity that ever was in the world, that spoke these words:
And this is the manner of logic whereby he argues with the Pharisees, to make
them believe that they were the devil's children; they that do the devil's
works are the devil's children; but you do his works, therefore you are his
children; so they sought to kill him, they could not bear such arguments.

If one should go and search out a people in this city and nation, and see one
man of this religion, another of that religion, and pick them out, and use this
argument with them: There is a man professes high, he professes a light
within; if you look upon his deeds they are dead and dark, why then he is one
of the devil's children: If you put me to prove this, I say he does the devil's
works, he is an extortioner, a deceiver, and a drunkard and unclean person, and
does the devil's works, and so is none of God's children. And so go to another
sort and use this argument, it is safe enough, you can never fail in this kind
of argument which Christ used; and if people would use it with themselves, and
think themselves no better, then we should have people confess themselves the
devil's children.

None come to be God's children, till they come to acknowledge their lost
estate, their deplorable condition; that they are fallen from God, and through
sin and iniquity are got into a nature that is at enmity with God; then they
will cry out, who shall deliver me from this body of death, and childship of
satan, this heirship of wrath? I am an heir of an inheritance; I am an heir of
wrath, and I would fain part with this inheritance and heirship, and have an
inheritance with the saints in light: We shall never know this, till we come to
divinity without sophistry, and without tricks and quirks, and come to Christ's
reasoning. He that does the devil's work is the devil's child; then they will
confess this is of the devil, and the other is of the devil. This is an evil
work; and I see that I have need to be brought into another condition.

When people come to an acknowledgment of the truth, and of their own
condemnation, then they are one step toward redemption and salvation. No one
ever took a step toward their salvation, till they acknowledged their own
condemnation. He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one;
and they that are joined to the Lord, are one Spirit. An evil tree, says
Christ, cannot bring forth good fruit. When Christ spoke this, he spoke it to
men and women, and he spoke it of men and women, and not of trees: And when he
said, no man can gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, he speaks of a
generation of men: As if he had said, this thorn must be translated and changed
into another nature before it can bring forth grapes; and this thistle must be
changed into another nature before it can bring forth figs.

There must be a change in the nature of man before there can be a change of
the fruit and effect of his doings; whatsoever he sows, that he shall also
reap; whatsoever a man does in the body, he must give an account thereof at the
day of judgment; for the books will be opened, and men judged according to the
things written in those books. If there be a book for thee and me, I will
warrant thee there is a great deal in it; there is a recorder and a clerk for
the book, which God has opened in every man's conscience; and there is set
down every man's transgressions and his sins: Says one, thou have written my
transgressions as with the point of a diamond; thou have engraven it so deep,
that it seems impossible that it should ever be blotted out again: Some have
had their sins so deeply engraven in their conscience, that they have thought
they would never be blotted out, they were written as with the pen of a diamond.

When people see and consider that they have ventured their souls upon such
slight grounds, I hope they will be awakened to seek after righteousness; when
they see there is nothing good in them: Where there is any thing good, it is
God that has given it to them. Some will say, if I be perverse, corrupt and
wicked, I cannot help it, therefore I must be beholden to my Maker to help me,
else I must never be helped. Now, because God knows that we are helpless, he
has laid help upon one that is mighty, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ; and
Christ has sent forth his Spirit into the world to convince the world of sin,
and to lead his people into all truth: And this grace that comes by Jesus
Christ has been so universally showed, and so universally extended to all men,
that I never met with a man yet that had none of it: But let them be as bad and
as dark as they could, yet the light of Christ shined in that darkness, into
the darkest heart, that ever I met with in all my life: He shows men, that
his light shines in darkness, and the darkness cannot comprehend it.

Therefore the work that God has set us about, and the service which he
requires at the hands of many of us, is to turn men from their own darkness
unto the light of Christ their Savior, and from the devil's power, that has
enslaved them, to the power of God that can redeem them; and yet we are far
enough from that which they call free will; it is God's will that every one
should be saved: But some will not be saved, they will keep their own wills and
not resign them up to God; they have a free will to go to destruction. As for
salvation, if they will obtain it, they must part with their own wills, and
they must take a yoke and burden upon them, before they can be saved: If
people can have their wills, they will not take Christ's yoke upon them: He
that will be Christ's disciple must deny his own will and take up his daily
cross; these are the terms of the gospel.

But you will say, no man, by all the power he has, can redeem himself, and no
man can live without sin.

We will say amen to it: But if men tell us, that when Gods power comes to help
us, and to redeem us out of sin, that it cannot be effected, then this doctrine
we cannot away with, nor I hope you neither. Would you approve of it if I
should tell you, that God puts forth his power to do such a thing, but the
devil hinders him? That it is impossible for God to do it, because the devil
does not like it? That it is impossible that any one should be free from sin,
because the devil has got such a power in them, that God cannot cast him out?

This is lamentable doctrine: Has not this been preached, this doctrine of
impossibility of living without sin? It does in plain terms say, though God
does interpose his power it is impossible, because the devil has so rooted sin
in the nature of man. Is not man God's creature, and cannot he new-make him,
and cast sin out of him? If you say sin is rooted deeply in man, I say so too;
yet not so deeply rooted but Christ Jesus is entered so deeply into the root of
the nature of man, that he has received power to destroy the devil and his
works, and to recover and redeem man into his primitive nature of righteousness
and holiness; or else it is false, that he is able to save, to the uttermost,
all that come unto God by him. We must throw away the bible, if we say that it
is impossible for God to deliver man out of sin. Is not Christ entered into the
root of our nature? And has he not taken upon him the seed of Abraham, after
the flesh? Has he not entered into the root of all men's natures, and tasted
death for every man, that he might quicken every one that is dead in sins and
trespasses? All these things speak the love of God to mankind, in order to
their salvation.

Much might be said to these things, these clouds of error and darkness that
have overspread the nation; yet, this I say, if one were to speak of it ever so
long, it must be by the eye that God gives you, that you must see it; it is he
that opens the hearts of men as he did Lydia's: If there had not been the power
of God that reached her heart, Paul could not have opened it.

When all is said that can be said, the counsel of God which has sounded in
your ears, is recommended to you, that every one may retire in quietness and
stilness of mind to wait for the feeling of that quickening power of the Spirit
of Christ that is sent into the hearts of men; that it may open your eyes to
see your present state; then you will see a better state, a further state, and
when you see with your inward eye that your state is not so good as you would
have it to be, then trust and rely upon the all-sufficient and powerful
operation of God's Holy Spirit to mend your state, and give you power over your
corruptions, and to go on from one step to another, toward the cleansing and
sanctification of your souls, so that you may receive something from God to
enable you to live to God; for all that you receive from men will only make you
live to men, but that which you receive from God, will help you to live to God;
that will purify you and sanctify you, and make you clean through the word: So
through the word you will come to cleanness, purity and holiness: And when you
are come to the way of holiness, you may believe you have got into the way of
God's kingdom, and never till then.

It is not enough to make a profession, but we must live up to the profession
of that religion that we make; it is not holding this tenet and the other
tenet, and saying, this minister, I am sure, preaches the truth; thou may
be a child of the devil for all that. I now speak indifferently to all people,
without respect to any sort: They that believe they are walking toward the
kingdom of God, and yet their way is not a holy way, they have cheated
themselves, and deceived their own souls, and they had need look about them and
take heed what they do; the glass is running, and time is hasting away, and our
life may end we know not how soon. It is good to prize and improve time, while
you have it, and bring your deeds to the light; see what reproofs,
instructions, counsels and openings you have met with from the Lord, and see
how you have answered and been obedient to them, and so you will come to take a
sound and infallible account of your condition; and if it be not so good as it
should be, wait upon the Lord to mend it; he that made you can mend you, he
that made your ears, must unstop your ears to hear the word of God.

To that power that carries on the works of sanctification and redemption by
his word, to that word I must leave you, and to his spirit I commit you. This
word will be with you, and if you part not with it, it will not part with you;
it will go with you to your houses, and to your shops, and to your beds; it
will lie down with you at night, and rise with you in the morning: To that end,
Christ is a leader and governor, and the captain of our salvation, to lead the
van, and carry you on in the way of salvation; and as many as follow Christ,
and are led by the spirit of God, they are the children of God.

SERMON XXV. The SHEEP of CHRIST hear his VOICE.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, May 10, 1688.
My sheep (says the true shepherd) hear my voice.
THE sheep of the true fold hear the voice of Christ, the good shepherd, and
know the voice of strangers too: But, says he, the stranger they will not
follow. This scripture has been a mark of distinction in all ages, that has
been peculiarly bestowed upon the people of God, that they have had a
discerning knowledge to make a certain distinction between them that were of
God, and those that were of the world: Now they that are of God hear us, says
the apostle.

Now, that you may all find in yourselves this peculiar gift of God, to be able
to understand and discern between the precious and the vile, that you might
know the ministration of life from the ministration of death, you must all be
gathered inwardly into that which you have received of God; for they that are
only exercised with gifts and parts, and acquirements that appertain to this
world, they have been always subject to delusions, apt to be led away into a
by-path and crooked way, that leads to destruction: But they that are under the
government and direction of the gift of God, they have been able thereby to
make such a distinction of voices, and of sounds, that they have been preserved
from the delusions of the age.

This was the difference of old between the prophets of God and the false
prophets, between the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the false
apostles; the difference was not so much in their words, for they had in a
great measure the same words; if the true prophets used to say, thus says the
Lord, the false prophets would say so too; if the true prophets declared
against sin, the false prophets likewise would do so; for the false prophet
stole his word from his neighbor: But the greater matter by which the people
of the Lord were preserved, was, that hidden and divine wisdom they received of
God, by which they discerned the voice of the spirit from the voice of
strangers, from the voice of them that were of the flesh; and that was the
cause that the Christians in the primitive days did not adhere to, and follow
those false apostles that came to them in their own names, and held a form of
godliness, but denied the power of it.

But they among them in whom their witch-crafts did enter, they went away from
the spirit, and sought to be made perfect in the flesh; they went to the
outward observation, and to the beggarly rudiments of things that perish with
the using, and from the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus.

And as it has been in those ages of which we have read, so it comes to pass
in this our age, in which a dispensation of the spirit of truth is manifested
and revealed unto the children of men; there is a remnant that have received
the testimony of eternal life, and have believed the testimony, and waited on
him of whom the testimony is born, not to have life by the testimony, but to
have life in him; so they receive their life by the ministration of the Spirit
of Christ, and they live to God, and others who have received no life from him,
but have a life in the words, and sounds, and noises and terms, and
distinguishing phrases of things, their life lies there, they live not to God
but to themselves, their glorying is not in the cross of Christ, but in the
words and outside of things; so that every one had need, at such a time as
this, to approve their hearts unto the Lord; who knows the inside of people's
profession, the inside of their religion, that knows how the heart is concerned
toward God, and what they say and do upon the account of his service, so that
all that are met together might come to receive more and more of the life and
virtue that sanctifies the soul of him that receives it.

For, alas! my friends, it is not the gathering together of the most excellent
words about religion, and about worship and service, which will approve any man
in the sight of God; that is but the painting of a sepulcher, and covering the
rottenness that is in many; but the Lord sees into the inside of every
professor, and whosoever names the name of Christ and departs not from
iniquity, they do but take his name in vain, and contract a guilt upon their
own souls; so that every one that seems to be religious, ought to enquire
whence their profession springs; if it springs from a real posession of a
measure of that which sanctifies the life, and shows itself forth, in its
working and operation, many times abundantly more, than it does in word and
profession; it manifests itself in holiness and righteousness, to the honor
of God; it is the aim and design of all such to exalt the name of him whom they
profess, by holiness and righteousness shining forth in their works, for it
will never shine through words alone; many good words may be spoken, yet God
not glorified, but his name may be dishonored by them; but whosoever comes to
feel that which is life in themselves, they know what will honor God, they
feel the birth immortal that is of God, of his own begetting by the word of
truth.

This living birth is that which brings forth living praises; the other is but
flesh, that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and it glorifies the flesh,
and when the flesh is most of all glorified, most of all exalted, it is then
but as the flower of the field, it is then cut down and withers; the sun of
righteousness shines with the beams of the everlasting glory of God, and
causes it to wither and come to naught,

So friends, let your minds be gathered inward, that you may be able in your
own selves, by virtue of the divine gift of God, to distinguish between the
voice of the true shepherd, and the voice of a stranger, so that your minds may
not follow a strange voice, that you may follow the Lord with your whole heart,
with a full purpose of heart; for there is a real word of prophesy discovered
in the inward parts, which does distinguish between the precious and the vile
in every one's particular; and that which is precious in one, it answers to
that which is precious in another; and that which is vile in one, it answers
to that which is vile in another.

For there is an inward and secret mystery of iniquity, as well as a mystery of
godliness. The mystery of godliness is when God is manifested in the flesh; the
mystery of iniquity is, when the wicked one is making himself manifest, and
appears and discovers himself in the flesh, that he may rise up and glory in
the flesh.

Now the eternal truth, which never changes, this is that which gives a
discerning, this has always put a difference between the true and false
prophets, the true and false apostles, and between the true and false
ministers; the difference has not been so much in words as in power, as the
apostle speaks concerning some in his days, that had endeavored to deceive,
and to draw men aside from the simplicity of the gospel; when I come, says he,
I will know. Now, he does not assert, that he will pay particular attention to
their words, whether they were judicious or no; for he says, I will not know
their words, but their power. How should he know their power if he were not in
the power himself? Now this divine power, as every one acquaints himself with
it, it works unto the sanctification of them, when they have fellowship with
the stirrings and movings of all others that are partakers of it: This is that
which will establish and confirm your minds in the true faith and simplicity of
the truth, that you turn not aside to the right hand or to the left. If you
have regard to the principle of divine truth that you have received from God,
then you can receive confirmation from any one that has a measure according to
it. There is a measuring line, and the reed of the sanctuary, that measures
the temple and all that dwell therein, that measures them with one reed and one
measure, and every one answers to that measure, according to the stature and
degree of growth of the grace of God they arrive to; and now they are come to a
fixed foundation.

Others there are in the world, that have laid their foundation upon this
creaturely help, and the other creaturely help, upon this man, and the other
man; but now true Christians come to have their foundation, their rooting and
building upon Christ Jesus, upon that word of life that first of all gathered
their minds into a desire after holiness, into a desire after acquaintance with
God that made them.

You that are true Christians can remember, how you were begotten, and that
which did beget you; that word of God that is incorruptible, that is immortal,
that was not of a dying quality, that need not be supported by this, and that,
and tne other means, but it has its support in itself, it has its nourishment
in itself, and it grows up in itself, and every one that receives it they grow
up in it, until they come more and more to partake of the life and qualities of
it; that as he is, so they may be in the present world.

But this is never known, but where the word of God has its free passage: Many
have tasted of this word of God, and by tasting of it, have been acquainted
with the power of the world to come; they knew well enough the power that would
bring forth another world, a new Heaven, and a new earth, and righteousness in
it; many have felt the power that have never continued to see the working of
it, never continued to see and witness what this power would work; going aside
from the power of the world that was to come, they have never seen the coming
of it, but their foolish hearts have been darkened again, and their
imaginations have grown vain, and they have conceived to themselves a false
liberty to the flesh, and their wills have been strong, and have prevailed over
them; that though they had tasted of the powers that did belong to the world to
come, they never saw the working and operation of that power to bring to pass
that which by sight and vision they did behold.

Therefore it is needful for every one of you, in every state and condition the
Lord has brought you into, to keep yourselves in a deep humility; to know the
afflictions, temptations and trials you are under, and to exercise your minds,
not only on account of what you have got over, but let every one know the sta^^
and condition in which at present they are laboring; for when some come to
look at what sufferings and difficulties they have got over, they are apt to be
exalted above measure, and lifted up in their minds; let every one consider
what is their present state and work; their help lies in that condition. Some
have always a foundation of their faith present with them, that they may feel
the object of their faith where they hope for help, where they hope for comfort
and strength to be present with them.

Now every one that believes in the word of God, their care is, that they may
know this word of God, that they may hear it, feel it, and behold the beauty of
it under the exercises of it; how it conducts and leads, how it counsels and
advises, that so, in all things they are to pass through, they may not be as
those that have run into it; as those that do this and that of their own wills,
but may be properly followers of something.

I go into this, or that, or the other thing, not to do mine own will; I do not
run into it, but I am led into it; my leader goes before me, the word of God,
that has conducted me and led me: I am a follower of God in all his
dispensations, and in all his leadings and guidings; I am to follow him, for he
teaches me his way, he instructs me in the true way: The best of all his
scholars and disciples, they are to be led and guided into that work and
service they are to do, that they may run into no irregularily or absurdity,
for he will lead you into holiness, righteousness and humility, where all
become the servants of God in Christ Jesus, and servants to one another: There
is a mutual concord and harmony in the work of this spirit, in the service of
this power, where every one finds what they are appointed and directed to, and
all the members of the body of Christ know they ought not to be disjointed and
rent, and separated one from another, but tied together in joints and bands, to
edify one another in the love of God; so that here is one spirit that has been
the guide of this one people in all ages.

Many people have been guided by many guides, and they have been scattered,
divided and separated one from another, and have been under this, that and the
other name; but all God's people have been guided by the Spirit of Christ, that
universal Spirit that is one with God. In the Old Testament times, and the New
Testament times, they were all led by the universal Spirit of Christ, and they
were of one heart, and of one mind, serving the Lord; there was a concord and
unity among them; and if at any time any discord or division happened, it was
because the roaring lion that goes about continually seeking whom he may
devour, had found some or other that he might devour, and draw into his snares
and gins; for there are some that he may, and some that he may not. Who are
they that this roaring lion may destroy? The devil knows who those are that he
may prevail upon; he knows that those which are in the hands of God are out of
his reach: My Father, says Christ, is greater than all, and none shall pluck
them out of my Father's hands; yet doubtless those that are in the Father's
hands are tempted and tried, the roaring lion goes about seeking to devour them
if he might; a man that he devours, he swallows up with prejudice, enmity,
covetousness and pride, and he will lead him into any evil thing; he has many
gulphs to swallow men up in, but if he meet with one that is kept in God's
hands, he knows such a one is out of his reach, and he is not able to catch him.

If he meet with a man that he can prevail over, as he did over our father Adam
and mother Eve, such as are in their own hands, that stand upon their wit and
parts, and knowledge and eloquence; those that stand upon these things as their
foundation, they are in their own keeping; these are they whom he may devour
and catch, and ensnare in one or other of his gins, and swallow them up in one
of his gulphs and temptations: But seeing God has opened and manifested these
things by his Spirit, and seeing the secret wiles of satan are discovered and
made known by the shining of his light, how ought every one that is a believer
of the truth, to depend upon God for his protection, and be careful that he
goes not out of his Father's hands, that he never trust himself to his own
keeping for his security and preservation, lest he meet with a temptation that
may swallow him and devour him.

I remember our Lord Jesus Christ when he was upon earth, he put his disciples
in mind of what happened long before, remember Lot's wife: You may take notice
of her, the power of God took hold of her and brought her out of Sodom, and was
leading her to a place of safety, but she had something of Adam's apostasy in
her nature, she looked back, and was turned into a pillar of salt. Our Savior
was pleased to make use of this passage that happened some hundreds of years
before, to show how she failed of coming to the place of safety, though she was
led out of Sodom by the hands of one of the angels of God. O! remember her, she
was turned into a pillar of salt, and this remains instructive to this day.

If we remember where our safety is, and from whose hands we must expect it, we
need not go to look at Lot's wife. We have seen many in our days that have
stood fair for redemption, they have had a power revealed to them, that is able
to redeem them, and save them to the uttermost; but afterward by exalting
themselves above this power, and taking the government of themselves into their
own hands, they have robbed God of his glory, and he has withdrawn himself
from them, and then it was with them as with Soul, when the Lord departed from
him, the evil spirit entered into him.

We have before our eyes from day to day, those that have known the beginning
of the redemption of God's power, and have been in a great measure brought out
of Sodom, and out of the way of Egypt, and they have had opened to them the
mystery of the kingdom of God for their encouragement, but at last they have
taken and arrogated those gifts to themselves, and looking upon themselves as
far excelling others, magnifying their parts as if they were their own, when
they were the gifts of God. Then the Lord has left them, to let them see
whether they could stand of themselves, and they have fallen, and been taken in
the gins and snares of the devil, who, like a roaring lion, is going about
continually, seeking whom he may devour.

Now, my friends, it greatly concerns us all to know what refuge we have to fly
to, in a time of trial; we have a time of trial now, though not a time of
external suffering and persecution, and enduring hardship yet upon us, to try
our faith and trust in God; yet we have no reason to be secure, carless nor
remiss in our present duty, nor to put the evil day far from us, but to be in
the exercise of humility and watchfulness as becomes Christians; for there is
now as much danger and peril in this time of liberty and tranquillity, as there
was before.

If any one in the time of persecution and suffering has said within himself,
I had better give over and part with the truth, and forsake the ways of the
Lord, and give over my testimony for his name, for I shall be undone and ruined
in the world; this man by his carnal fears has lost his testimony.

So likewise if a man in this time of liberty and freedom of serving the Lord,
and bearing testimony to his name, if he shall not entirely trust in the Lord,
to carry him on in his work and service, and continue his dependence upon him,
and wait for the assistance of the Holy Spirit of God to work in him to will
and to do of his good pleasure, this man shall lose his testimony, as well as
the other: Therefore, let every one of you keep up a dependence upon God's Holy
Spirit for carrying on the work which he has begun in your souls; consider
what work it is that Christ is now at in every one of you; I know what his work
was when I was first convinced, he was burning up and hewing down every thing
that hindered his carrying on the work of sanctification and redemption, and
firmness and stability in the covenant of life and peace.

And now our meeting together ought to be in the name of Christ; I hope it is
so with most of you: I hope it is not to see and hear what this or that man
says, but to know within yourselves what part of the work of redemption the
Lord Jesus Christ is carrying on, that you may join with him, and be a willing
people in the day of his power, and say as Paul, Lord, what will thou have me
do? If thou will have me part with my all, Lord here it is, I offer it up; and
if thou will have any service done, Lord here I am, speak, for thy servant
hears; let there be in every one of you an attentiveness, and an humble
waiting upon the Lord, and say as the Psalmist, behold, as the eyes of servants
look unto the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the
hands of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God until he have
mercy upon us.

Whenever a Christian has his dependence upon God's wisdom and power, such a
one shall never want wisdom, the Lord will give him wisdom to preserve him
against all the wiles of satan; and he shall never want power, for the Lord
will enable him to fulfill and perform what he requires of him; he shall be
replenished with judgment and understanding, ability and power, to direct him
into the good ways of God, and to enable him to walk in them.

It is the earnest desire of my soul, that every one of you may be exercised in
those things which are profitable for you, and which may be comfortable to your
friends and brethren; that you may all grow up into a stability and
stedfastness in the good ways of the Lord, that you may not be shaken and
tossed with every storm and tempest; that when there comes a time for the trial
of your patience, and fortitude and courage, you may not be tossed to and fro
like children, but be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, that so living in all holy obedience and patience, and continuing in
well-doing, you may have a constant supply of strength and power from God
ministered unto you by his Holy Spirit.

SERMON XXVI. No TRUE WORSHIP without the RIGHT KNOWLEDGE of GOD.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, May 24, 1688.
My Friends,
THERE is no man can truly worship God, till he comes to a measure of certain
knowledge of him; for all the worship in the world where the veil of ignorance
still prevails upon the mind, is all abominable; there is no acceptance with
God: There must be a knowledge of God before there can be a true worshipping of
him; for they that worship before they know God, they worship they no not what;
they worship a God they have heard of, but do not know; so every one that would
be a true Worshipper, must first come to that which gives a true knowledge,
that raises up a certainty in the mind, this is the Lord, we will trust in
him; this is our God, and we will serve him.

And that all people might come to this certainty of knowledge, therefore it is
that God has sent forth his Spirit, that the things of God might be
communicated by the Spirit of God, for without the assistance of this Spirit,
men seek after the knowledge of God in vain; if they seek after the knowledge
of God, they cannot find it, and if they seek after the worship of God, and
after acceptance with God, they cannot find it; so that all religion, and
religious performances, that people are exercised in, where the spirit of truth
has not the beginning, they will all prove fruitless in the end.

There are wise men in the world, who have employed their wisdom to find out
the true God; but God in wisdom has ordained, that the world by all their
wisdom shall not know him; so there is an end of all their labor: How shall
they know him then? As none can know the things of a man, save the spirit of
man that is in him, so none can know the things of God, but the Spirit of God;
so that they that resist the guidance, direction and counsel of the Spirit of
God, are like unto those that would enter into a house or palace, and remember
not the door that leads into it.

People would fain come into the divine knowledge and into the understanding of
divine mysteries, but they would come by it another way; they would study for
it, they would learn it by arts and sciences, they would attain it by their own
industry; and herein they labor to excel one another. If there comes a man
among them that tells them, friends you are all out of the way, then they are
angry, and instead of enquiring what is the way, they are angry that their way
must be rejected. Friends, you will never come to the knowledge of God but by
the Spirit of God; then they mock, and then they scoff and scorn the doctrine
of the Spirit, for the teaching of the Spirit has been the common scorn and
derision of our age.

It is so in our day with many; if they cannot come to the knowledge of God any
other way but by the Spirit, they would deny to make use of that, to be subject
to that, and these put their trust in their own power and industry, to find out
the mystery of the knowledge of God; so they are ever learning, but are never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth: How should they? How can a people
come to a knowledge of the truth, without the spirit of truth that reveals it?
Can any come to the knowledge of Christ unless he that sent him reveals him?
Where are people's books? where are their bibles? where is their rule (they
call it so) that all their endeavors for many ages have proved fruitless in
respect to the knowledge of God?

This is but your say so, some may say; how does it appear that we have not
attained to the true knowledge of God? and to the true worship, and to the true
religion?

I will tell you how it appears; for all, in all ages, that have attained to
the knowledge of God, they have been made partakers of his divine nature and
his divine qualities; they have brought forth a sort of fruit in their lives
and conversations, that has been of the same nature, it has been holy and
divine. They have known the sanctifier, and they have been a sanctified people,
so they have become one with him, and have shown forth the beauty of holiness
in their lives, that is a demonstration that may show the knowledge of God, for
without it they live another life, an unholy one, a corrupt one, a life of
self-love, a life of pride, vanity and enmity, and that they never had from
God, but from another root; a life of iniquity and sin, it came from another
seed; so that they are still without the knowledge of God.

And again, all that have come to the knowledge of God, they have trusted in
him; that people cannot do nowadays, except here and there a few that do know
him; the generality of the age they cannot trust God; they must have something
else to rely upon, and trust to, for in him they cannot trust. Now the Lord
said by the prophet of old, they that know my name will trust in me; that is
enough if people know God, whom to know is eternal life, even to know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: This is life eternal; if
people were come to this divine knowledge, they would never take care or study
for any refuge, or set up this, or that, or the other thing to lean upon. A
rich man he trusts in his riches, one trusts to one thing and another to
another, but they would trust in the living God, and he should be their God and
their rock, and they would venture their concerns upon him, both in this world
and that which is to come, if they did but know him. People may talk as much as
they will, but he can never, properly, be said to be my God, and thy God, till
we cast our care upon him, and can venture our concerns upon him, both in this
world and that which is to come; and can say, he is our God, and our reliance
and dependence is upon him.

Now this is the effect and consequence of this knowledge of God; such as come
to partake of it, they shall have no need to be bid to worship him. You shall
have no need to make a law, that this people shall worship the God that they
know; there needs no law to command the people of God to worship him; his law
is written in their hearts; and they that know him, will worship him. There was
never any man on earth, that had the knowledge of the true and living God, that
needed be put upon worshipping him, that needed a law to oblige him to it; for
the very knowledge that is given of God through Christ, this brings forth
naturally an adoration of the invisible power which men put their trust in; it
produces an adoration that is true worship; it causes an humble reverence of
that power; it brings the soul upon its knees, as it were; it brings the soul
to stoop and bend, and bow upon all occasions to God, as his God: It raises
his expectations to receive counsel, and judgment, and understanding, from him,
as the fountain of wisdom; and hereby people are taught to worship in the right
divine knowledge.

But to tell men of the worship of God before they know him; though you make as
many laws as you will to force them to worship that God they do not know, yet
you can never do them any good, nor make their worship acceptable, nor make
them devout; you can never bring devotion, nor divine adoration into their
hearts, by all the laws that you can make.

But there is a spirit of life that sets the soul at liberty from its former
bondage to sin and satan; and when this law comes to be revealed in my heart,
what says this law? Worship God, give honor and glory to him. This law says,
submit thyself to him that redeemed thee, thou art his, thou art no more thine
own; this law being written in the heart obliges a man to a true worship, and
to worship God in spirit and truth, for this man has done imagining among the
Heathen, that there are Gods many, and Lords many: He has done imagining what
God is, and where he is, for he is now come to know him; he is instructed
beyond the best scholar in Athens, let him be ever so mean and despicable in
the world; if it be ever so poor a lad or lass, they are beyond the best
scholar in Athens; for the best scholar there came only so far as to contradict
their fellow scholars: Some of them were for Mars, and some for Jupiter, some
for one God and some for another: These scholars, by some beam of divine light
shining in them, had come to perceive that the influences that were in Mars,
Jupiter and Venus, and the Sun and Moon, and other planets, they received them
from an higher power, that is, God. They denied not that these plaets had power
and influences given to them; sometimes they are called heavenly bodies; the
sky, or canopy of Heaven; and sun, moon and stars are called heavenly bodies,
they have power and influences; but this was given them, and that power must be
greater than theirs from whom they receive their power, virtue and influence,
even that God who is the maker of all things. The scholars at Athens understood
so much, as to see there was a God greater than the planets which the nations
worshipped; they thought that God was to have an altar as well as Jupiter and
Mars, and those other Gods, and therefore they built an altar to the unknown
God, whom they ignorantly worshipped.

If thou and I are come to the knowledge of the true God, then we must know
more than these scholars of Athens, who erected an altar to the unknown God:
When the apostle came to preach divinity among these scholars of Athens, who
were masters of arts and sciences, he preached to them, saying, that unknown
God, whom ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you; we do not need to
declare to you the Gods of the nations, for you worship them, but to declare to
you the unknown God whom ye ignorantly worship; these were the great scholars
of Athens that the apostle spoke to: What do thou declare of God? He is the
God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and dwells not in temples made with hands, neither is
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to
all life and breath, and all things, and has made of one blood all nations of
men to dwell upon the face of the earth, and has determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their habitations, that they should seek the Lord,
if happily they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far from
every one of us; for in him we live, move and have our being; for as certain
also of your own poets have said, for we are also his offspring; for as much
then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is
like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art and man's device.

Here is a way of learning, you need not turn over books any more; if I would
know the true God, I must know who gave me life and motion, and who created me,
he is not far from me; and how should I find the knowledge of him? feel after
him, if happily you may find him; for he is not far from any of us; in him we
live, and move, and have our being; we cannot live without him one moment; he
gives life, essence and power, to all creatures in Heaven and Earth; we must
have him with us, or we cannot live; I die as soon as my life departs from me,
so do you; if my breath and life continue with me, it is by the power of him
that gives it, in whom I live, and move, and have my being; still it is in him
that first gave it.

Here all the great scholars and philosophers were counseled to feel after
him; so are all people nowadays: This is our business, when we go to preach
the knowledge of God to them that want it; our commission runs not, that we
must read such a book, such an author, and turn over such a leaf, and there you
shall have a discovery, and a fair demonstration of the attributes of God, of
his wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, omnipotence and omniscience; our commission
runs not that way, but our commission runs thus; that we turn people from
darkness to light; and from the power of satan to God; to turn their minds from
that which may hinder the knowledge of Christ, from darkness, blindness and
ignorance; God is not far from them; perhaps they might find him, if they did
seek after him.

There are a sort of men nowadays (such as were in former times) that say
unto God, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; such a sort
of people are dark, and blind and ignorant, and are like to continue so, that
say to God, depart from us; God is come to them, but they bid him depart from
them: We are sent to these people that are dark and ignorant, and have not the
true knowledge of God, though they have abundance of notions, hearsay
knowledge, learning and speculation; our business is to convince them of their
ignorance, and to turn them from darkness to light.

There are a people that have mocked and scoffed at us many years; what, say
they, is there a light within? Must we go to the light within? Has every body
a light within?

Yes, I believe so; and you must believe so too, if you will believe the
scriptures. Christ is the true light, and he has enlightened every man that
comes into the world. If he did light them, how did he do it? I will tell you,
say they; he spoke a great many gracious words, and somebody has writ them
down. What, will this prove the light within? Because we have got a New
Testament, and Christ has spoken a great many gracious words, and they are
written down and recorded, does this prove the light within? No, people might
have been in darkness still, for all the books of the New Testament, and the
Old Testament too, and for all the books in the world; for they would never
have conveyed light into the hearts and consciences of men, if God had not
placed it there.

Indeed these books may be instrumental, and God does make use of them as a
means for the conveying of light and grace, and working of true conversion; but
the holy scriptures cannot do it of themselves, unless there be a co-acting and
cooperation of the Spirit of Christ with them; without this spirit they cannot
convey saving light to us; how prove you then a light within? The apostle tells
you, if you will believe him, 2 Cor. iv, 6; God, who commands the light to
shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ; so that every one
that retireth into himself, will know quickly, and understand his error, and
confess that there is a light within, and that by this rule, because there is
something in the heart, that makes manifest that which is reprovable; if they
do or say a thing reprovable, that which manifests a thing is light; that
which manifests dark words or works, is light.

Now when they have found this light within, the next question in controversy
is, whether this will give men sufficient light for the true knowledge of God;
whether this be sufficient to bring a man to life and salvation?

I am of that judgment, that it is sufficient; and I believe it heartily, and
preach it boldly in the name of the Lord, that the light that shines in your
hearts, shines there to give you the true knowledge of God, in the face of the
Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ. You cannot believe this, you will say, for you
have had this ever since you was a child, and you know not the least good it
has done you; all our learned men and ministers, go to what sort you will,
they speak very slightly of it; this light within is nothing but natural
conscience, a poor light, it is but an ignis fatuus, that will mislead us. But
let me tell thee, the reason why it does thee no more good, is, because thou
have been loose and wanton, and vain, and would not receive the reproofs of
it; reckon up the time, and call to mind, when thou did receive the reproofs
of it, then it did thee some good, and brought thee to remorse, and brought
anguish and sorrow, and trouble into thy mind, and brought thee to a right
sense of what evil thou had done; but if thou did not regard it, no wonder
it did thee no good; its reproofs and counsels were like the seed sown by the
high way, the fowls of the air gathered it up, and it did not grow; that is,
the devil plucked it up, and then the soul lay as seed that brought forth no
fruit to God, and the devil might have what advantage he would.

I will tell you the reason why so many learned men, men of great abilities,
speak so slightly and meanly of it, because it has done them no good, inward
nor outward, that they know of: How should it do you good when it has done
them none? The reason why it does them no good, is because they do not believe
in it; and did Christ ever do any body good that did not believe in him? He
gave men power indeed to become the sons of God, the greatest good that they
are capable of; but it was to those that believed on his name: Were all they
the sons of God that heard Christ preach? No, some were the devil's sons; our
Savior tells them, that they were of their father the devil, and they did his
works; they came to meetings and heard Christ preach; he discoursed to them,
but it did them no good, for they did not believe on his name.

And then it appears in the next place, that if this light be taken heed to,
and if men come to be taught by it and receive instructions, they would then
have it all for nothing, they would have it all for God's sake; all the
counsels and understanding of divine mysteries, all the openings of God, and
all their knowledge of God would be obtained without charge: What then would
become of the trade of preaching Christ, and the attributes of God; then their
silver-shrine-trade will be spoiled, and then their Diana is gone; and this
light has done them no good inwardly because of their unbelief; and it does
them no good outwardly, because it spoils their preaching trade, because it
teaches men for nothing, but teaches them, for God's sake, the light of the
knowledge of God, that shines in the face of Jesus Christ, wherein are the
openings of the mysteries of the kingdom of God.

So that if any come to know the virtue and the power that turns men from
darkness to light, they are come to another state, and turned from the power of
satan to the power of God; and when the power of God is revealed in them, then
they say, this is my God; now I know the true God; they speak as those that are
acquainted with him; this is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: It is not to know him at a distance, but as
always present: The soul comes to be acquainted with God, as familiarly as a
man is acquainted with his friend, and better too: A man that is acquainted
with his friend, only knows some things pertaining to him; but those that are
acquainted with their Maker they know the whole counsel of God, so far as
belongs to their peace; therefore it was not in vain said of old, acquaint thou
thyself with him, and be at peace: Be but acquainted with that inward power
that knows thy thoughts, and then nobody need to preach a sermon to thee of the
omnipresence of God; nobody need make thee a doctrine of it, and offer reasons
and motives for thee to believe it; it is all foolish labor; I know that God
is with me, and near me; I feel him in me, and with me, at my down-lying and
up-rising; when I am in my shop and about my business, he is with me in all
places; and such a man is also well instructed about the omniscience of God;
God's knowing every thing; I have learned that since I came to know him, all
the doctors in Europe can tell me no more than I know in that point; the Lord
observes all my goings, and numbereth all my steps; Lord, thou make manifest
the thoughts of my heart, thou searchest my heart, and tryest my reins. Here is
God's omniscience and knowing all things. Here is divinity growing out of the
life.

Then the wisdom of God is infinite; so are all God's attributes infinite,
incomprehensible and unspeakable, they are all so in him, but he makes manifest
a measure of his wisdom; he brings a man from being such a fool as he was
before, to become a wise man; he was such a sot and fool as to become drunk and
tumble in the dirt; he could not stand upon his legs, but now he is become wise
and sober: Another was so foolish as to defile himself and wallow in his
uncleanness; now such a man comes to true wisdom, it begins in the fear of God,
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: What does his wisdom do? It
keeps him out of the dirt; it makes him live, first as a man then as a
Christian, to live righteously, soberly and godly, in this present world: It
leads him into the knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of God; to know
and comprehend with all saints, what is the height, and length, and breadth,
and depth, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge: This is more
than bare sobriety and moderate living; such are taught to live soberly,
righteously and godly, to live by faith, and to be led into the knowledge of
the mystery of the kingdom of God; to know the Lord Jesus Christ to their
justification. This is the learned and the wise man; he has got the substance
as well as the shadow; he has the marrow as well as the bone; he is reconciled
to God, through Christ; he has remission of sins through Christ Jesus, that
died for him and rose again.

When you come to be partakers of this, it will do you good; notions will not
do it; when you come to know God for yourselves, and understand him for
yourselves, to know him as your Savior and Redeemer, that has rescued you
from the snares of the wicked one; whoever does this, they will worship God;
when they have this knowledge of him, they will bow to him, they will be like
those of old that said, he is our judge, he is our lawgiver, he is our king,
and he will save us: There arose a testimony in the hearts of good people of
that age, that God was their judge that judged them, their lawgiver that
directed them, how they should make their way to him; that he was their king,
and ought to rule them, for he must save them.

So when people come to know God for themselves, to be inwardly acquainted with
God for themselves; when a company of these souls meet together, when they have
been at this school, and learned this lesson of divinity, they then sit down
and wait upon the Lord, that God that searches the heart and tries the reins,
and observes how they do service for the honor of his name, and they receive
spiritual gifts from him to their edification and comfort, and they receive
judgment from him when they do any thing contrary to his mind.

The Lord Jesus Christ is the Minister of the Sanctuary which the Lord has
pitched: If men have a church, as they call it, they must have John or Thomas
for their minister: We know who is the minister of such a place; but here is a
minister set up in God's sanctuary, this priest's lips shall preserve
knowledge. All that come to God's church are taught of this priest, he is a
high one, the high priest of our profession, we have not such another; he is
not set up by a carnal commandment; his induction came not from any priest in
this world, but his induction came from the God of Heaven and Earth; his Father
set him up for a priest; he comes by a Heavenly induction and commission, he is
a priest forever, after the order of Melchisedeck, not after the order of
Aaron: If you come to God's church, you may hear this minister.

Some have called a house of stone, or wood, a church, but that will not do
now, therefore there are people that know better than they, who see churches
gathered of living stones; men and women are gathered to these churches. Now
the apostle says, the church is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
If you will come to church you must come to Jesus Christ, the church is in God,
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the general assembly, the congregation of
his faithful people. What do you mean by a church? Ask a learned man, that
understands Greek and Hebrew, what is the meaning of the word? A church, says
he, is the congregation of the faithful, it is an assembly of the faithful
people congregated together. Where must they meet? they must meet in the
general assembly of the firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven. The
Hebrews were come to that church, though they lived many hundred miles asunder,
in Asia, Cappadocia and Bythinia: You are come to the general assembly of the
firstborn; there is a priest, there is the high priest of our profession, the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is a priest after the order of Melchisedeck, not after
the order of Aaron. How long is this priest like to stay in his priesthood?
Forever; he is a priest forever, not after a carnal commandment, but according
to the power of an endless life.

The priests that were after Aaron's order, they could not continue: Death
snatched one away, then they must have another priest; but here is one that
has a priesthood higher than the Heavens, by the power of an endless life:
Here is the priest of God's church, and the teacher of God's people; so that
when God's people come to church, that is, to God the Father, there Christ
teaches them, according to the old prophesy, I will teach my people myself.

We have labored to bring people to this teaching, that they might come to the
knowledge of the living God. Now there needs none to teach them, for they are
taught of God; blessed be God, our labor has not been in vain, we see the
fruit of our labors, and are satisfied. We have been laboring to bring men to
know the Lord; now all shall know the Lord, from the greatest to the least, and
bow before him, and worship him; they hear that their high priest's lips shall
preserve knowledge. If they do amiss, he chastises them for it; if they do
well, then he comfort them by his Spirit: Now our labor is, that all may be
brought to this, and that every one may know the Lord, and may fear him and
serve him, and worship him in his temple: Our bodies are a temple for that use,
to worship God in; know you not that your bodies are temples of the Holy Ghost?
you must worship in yourselves, you must go into yourselves, you must know the
exercise of the grace of God in yourselves, and the workings of the spirit of
truth in yourselves, and that your souls in your bodies may be bowed to the
power of the spirit, and that your worship must be in the spirit; you must pray
in the spirit, and give thanks in the spirit.

Though those that set up worship in the church, talk of divinity and religion
in every part of it, yet the substance of all the shadows of the law are
fulfilled in the gospel; the substance of all the modes, and rites, and forms
of religion, are fulfilled in the gospel-way: So then let every one compare and
examine their state, and consider how the case stands between them and their
Maker, what knowledge they have of God, and what trust they have put in him,
that so they may be persuaded and prepared to come within the pale of this
church. But you must first come out of the world, else you can never come into
that church that is in God; if you be in the world, you must go to the world's
church, and be the members of the world's church; and you shall have this for
your pains, the world will love you; but if you come out of the world's church
into God's church, the world cannot love you.

Be as good as thou will, thou can never be so good as Christ Jesus, and they
loved him not, because he was not of the world; if you were of this world,
says Christ, the world would love its own; but since you are not of the world,
I have taken you out of it, therefore the world hates you; if they do so to the
green-tree, what will they do to the branches? are you better than I? says our
Savior; the servant is not greater than his Lord: Those that are the disciples
of Christ must be content to be persecuted, reviled and hated for his name's
sake; for thus they treated him who was holy, and harmless, and undefiled, who
gave them a good example, and who did them no hurt, but did them good; yet the
world hated him, and it is but reasonable to expect that you should suffer from
the world in the same manner, and bear it at their hands.

If you come to this church that is in God the Father, and Jesus the Mediator,
the church of the firstborn that are written in Heaven, and come out of the
world's church, then the world will be about your ears; all the world will set
themselves against this church, against the woman that shall bring forth a
birth, that shall rule over the nations: There appeared a great wonder in
Heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon
her head a crown of twelve stars, and she being with child cried, traveling in
birth, and pained to be delivered. And there also appeared another wonder in
heaven (a terrible thing) and behold a great read dragon, having seven heads
and ten horns; and the dragon stood before the woman that was ready to be
delivered, to devour her child as soon as it was born: And she brought forth a
man child, that was to rule all nations with a rod of iron, and her child was
caught up to God, and to his throne. When the dragon was ready to devour this
birth, God took it into his own care, in spite of the devil and all his
instruments, and he will save the child and preserve the woman; he that sits in
Heaven will laugh at his enemies and defeat them. There is a place appointed
for the woman in the wilderness, where she is preserved by the Almighty Power;
where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of
the serpent; but she must come out again after some time, in spite of the devil
and all his instruments, of all his dragons and serpents: The woman must come
out of the wilderness, and the man-child must come down with great power, to
rule the nation.

This has been accomplished, say some, above fourteen hundred years ago; and
if you will take their word, the church has been come so long out of the
wilderness. But the church that they speak of, has it not wanted holiness and
righteousness? Has it given glory to God on high, with peace on earth and good
will to men? No, their church has lived in tyranny and barbarous cruelty, and
shedding of blood. They say the church was in the wilderness in Dioclesian's
time, and when Constantine came to the empire then she came out of the
wilderness.

If it had been a holy church, we should have seen the man-child come down from
God, and holiness and righteousness would have run down like a mighty stream,
and truth would have filled the whole earth. All these things have not yet been
fulfilled, for we have seen the professors of truth fallen in the streets; they
have been persecuted and troubled, and thrown into prisons and dungeons; but
there is a better church somewhere to be found.

I read of the holy church, the lamb's wife, the spouse of Christ that has
been hid somewhere, a great while, in some corner or other in the wilderness;
but she will come forth again out of the wilderness, leaning upon her
well-beloved: She does not come leaning on this prince and the other potentate:
She comes not out of the wilderness leaning on captains, generals and armies,
but leaning on Christ her well-beloved, the immortal, invisible power of the
Son of God; she trusts in it.

All the other churches, I have read of, they have leaned upon one prince or
potentate, or one emperor or another, and they have relied on these great men
as on their bulwark; but this church that comes out of the wilderness, will
come leaning only upon her well-beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
author and finisher of her faith; she will put her trust in him, for he will
deliver his church from all her enemies: And though the serpent cast out of his
mouth water as a flood, after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away of the flood, yet the Lord will cause the earth to help the woman, and the
earth shall open her mouth and swallow up the flood which the dragon cast out
of his mouth. Let the dragon do what he can to destroy the woman and her seed,
she knows what her beloved can do, he will command the earth to open and
swallow up the flood, and she shall go dry through it.

How happy are they that lean upon Christ their well-beloved! The church of
Christ in all ages has leaned upon him, and he has founded his church upon a
rock, so that the devil and all his instruments, and the very gates of hell
shall not prevail against her. The members of this church have Christ Jesus for
their teacher, and they receive counsel and direction from him: He is their
priest and teacher, and he teaches them by his spirit and his word, which he
has placed in their hearts, and given them an understanding to know him that
is true: Christ's word you must keep to, if you will be true scholars. This is
true divinity; if you will have the mysteries of the kingdom of God
communicated and opened to you, give heed to his word, and that truth that is
in your inward parts: Attend to that light and that grace that is manifested in
your hearts, and the Lord will show you more of the power and efficacy thereof;
and if you be faithful in a little, he will make you rulers over much; live
answerable to the understanding and knowledge that God has given you, and if
you be faithful in a little, he will communicate more and more of his mind and
will to you; and if you be led by the spirit of truth, you will trust in it,
and hearken to it, and understand the language of it in your own hearts; and if
you be a willing people in the day of God's power, God will work all things in
you and for you, and work in you both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure.

SERMON XXVII. GOD'S WONDERFUL LOVE to MANKIND.
Preached at St. MARTIN'S-LE-GRAND, November 9, 1690.
IT is our great concern, while we are in this world, to promote the glory of
God, and to work out our own salvation, to endeavor, as much as in us lies, to
be sensible, and to help one another to be sensible of the love of God to us:
This is the only thing that can give us true comfort, to have a sense of the
love of God to us in Christ Jesus: There is nothing more certain than that all
of us are partakers of the love of God, which is imparted to us daily, and we
live not a day without it; but we may, if we have not a care, live many days
without it, and without the comfortable sense of it; and that is the reason,
that a great many of the sons and daughters of men, do show forth in their
lives, so little love to God, because they have so little sense of his love to
them; for the apostle John, that had attained to a great knowledge and
experience in Christianity, plainly declares, that the reason of that love
that we have to God is, because he first loved us; and I do not believe that
any man can have any true love to God, that is not sensible of the love of God
to him.

And as for those temporal blessings that we enjoy in this life, as health and
strength, and our very breath and being, and well-being, that every day and
hour are continued, they are from the love of God to us, and the lengthening
out of our lives and vouchsafing us opportunities for the good of our souls,
are evident tokens of God's love and good will to us. Where these things are
not considered and regarded, men live like the beasts that perish, and regard
not him that made them, but go on in disobedience to him, and dishonouring of
his great name, and heaping up wrath upon their own souls: And thus does every
man, while he remains in his natural state and condition; for there is in every
man by nature the seed and root of all sin and rebellion against God, which
makes him return evil to God for the good he does to us.

And I believe we are all of us sensible, in some measure, of the depravity
that is fallen upon all mankind, and of that enmity to God, and that aversion
that is in men to the doing the will of God, and that impotency and inability
that is in every man to the reforming of his ways, and the changing of his
heart, and leaving off his corrupt and vicious inclinations, without the divine
help and assistance of the grace and Spirit of God.

Now they that are thus far sensible of their alienation, by nature, from the
Lord, and are also sensible, that the time they have here, is the only time
they have for their preparation and being fitted for that everlasting kingdom,
which we all would enjoy; how ought this to affect the mind of every one, that
while they have time, they might prize it and improve it, and come to an inward
sense of the love of God, that so they might have a love raised in their hearts
again to God? For people will never be obedient unto God, till they love him,
nor ever love him, till they are sensible of his love to them.

Therefore, that which is the means and way of God's making himself known to
the sons and daughters of men, that means, and that way, every one ought to
embrace; every one ought to be acquainted with it, and have the exercise of
their minds in it, that so we might come to the knowledge of God, and might
know, by an experimental and sensible feeling, the kindness of God to us.

And truly friends, they that are minded to spend their time, and exercise
themselves, in the consideration of the mercy and kindness of God, they have
work enough for their whole lifetime, to consider and contemplate the manifold
mercies of God bestowed upon them; for we have our life and breath from him,
whom the whole world obeys, and serves; God, that made all living creatures,
has created us, and preserved us; he has had long-suffering and patience
toward us until now, and he is yet mindful to do us good, which is evidently
manifest by the invitations and promises he has made us, and the workings of
his Holy Spirit that he has made us acquainted withal.

For who is there in this assembly, that God has not made sensible of the
tenders of his grace, and invitations to repentance and reformation, that they
that live loosely and vainly in the world, might turn to the Lord with all
their hearts, and consider their ways and doings? God has waited to be
gracious to the sons and daughters of men, and his mercy and patience has been
beyond all human patience, beyond the patience that ever you did bestow upon
any, this the Lord has bestowed upon you; therefore I entreat you, in the love
of God, let this consideration sink deeply into your spirits, that you may be
affected with the kindness of God, and his patience toward you, and his
long-suffering, while you have been sinning against him.

But some will say, how shall I know this? After what manner may I experience
this love of God to me? How may I be sure that the Lord has a love for me?

My friends, it is not only temporal kindness that we enjoy from God; it is not
only the lengthening out of our days, that is an evident token of the love of
God to us; but there is a demonstration and manifestation of it, that is
universally extended to the sons and daughters of men, in that he has sown his
word in them, and has sown his truth and his grace in their hearts, that every
man, though he may be ever so wicked, ever so foolish and vain, yet he has many
times checks and reproofs in his own heart: I know it, and I doubt not but you
do.

Pray whence comes that principle which does stop you in a course of sin, and
check and reprove you for sinning against the Lord? If you attend to it, and
consider it, you will find it proceeds from God; it comes from him, from him
comes our life and breath; then people should be incited to receive the grace
of God; the favor and mercy of God which he has bestowed upon them, in order
to their salvation. The scripture tells us, that grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. If thou have any good, it came by Jesus Christ; and if thou have any
truth, it came by Jesus Christ, who is the fountain of truth, and the fountain
of the grace of God; it is he by whom God has made himself known to the sons
and daughters of men; it is Christ alone, that God has ordained to be a
Mediator between God and man, that so he might be the minister of an
everlasting covenant, which we are brought into with God; so that now people
should come to the consideration of the way and means that God has ordained
for their redemption, namely, that he has given Jesus, that great and
unspeakable gift of his love and kindness, to the sons and daughters of men;
here is grace and truth, that came by Jesus Christ: How is it come? It is come
into my heart. Though sin, and lusts and corruptions, perhaps, have a place in
many, yet Christ has a place too* he has made his grave with the wicked, and
was numbered with the transgressors; he was like the seed that lies under the
clods, and is the least of all seeds, yet when it comes out of the ground, it
rises high, and spreads abroad its branches, and brings forth fruit; this love
of God, this unchangeable holy truth, is in every one; why then should not
every man be ruled and governed by it?

But some men will say, is truth better than falsehood, and grace better than
lust and corruption?

You may see that, by the light that is discovered in the inward parts: Let
every man turn inward to the grace of God, turn to that light that shows itself
in the creature, and see what it will do for us: This is the doctrine that the
apostle was sent withal; he was sent with a commission to turn men from
darkness to light, and from the power of satan to God: Why did he do it? It was
for this end, that men might have remission of sin, and that they might come to
an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus our
Lord; so that this gospel is the same that it ever was, though men have diverse
ways of preaching, and several methods and ways of declaring the truths of the
gospel; blessed be God the apostolical doctrine is preached again, and the
blessed gospel has the same power attending it that was in former days, and
may have the same effect; and that this may be the portion of every one of you,
is the end of our labor. And we have in our eye but two things.

First, to discharge a good conscience in the sight of God, who has given us
his word to preach, and to turn men from darkness to lights and from the power
of satan to God; that we might keep ourselves free from the blood of all men.

Secondly, another end is, the desire that God has placed in our hearts, that
all men every where might be saved; this is God's will; if any be damned it is
their own will, and the devil's will; this is God's will, that none should
perish, but that all should come to repentance and be eternally saved. Now in
this work of your salvation, we would have regard to him that sent us to preach
the everlasting gospel, and we would discharge ourselves faithfully, and be
made manifest in your consciences, that the benefits of the gospel might come
to be yours; that you might answer the purpose of God, in sending Christ to be
the Savior of mankind; you must turn from sin to God, and then you will find
the blessing that comes by Jesus, which is to turn every one from his evil ways.

You may read this in a book, and you may also plainly read it in your hearts:
The Lord Jesus Christ has given you light to distinguish between good and
evil; if you do good, you may make a comfortable reflection upon yourselves,
and this will be your rejoicing, the testimony of your conscience on that
account; but if you do evil, though all men do justify you and commend you, yet
you will be condemned in yourselves; so that you have that in yourselves which
distinguishes between things that differ in their nature and kind, and you
have a little enlightening by the knowledge and understanding you have received
concerning the things that are pleasing and displeasing to God; if after you
know this, you will go on in a way displeasing to God, he will at length be too
hard for you, and plunge you down into the abyss of his wrath to all eternity.

After persons are satisfied and enlightened with the light of Christ, and come
to the experience of things in themselves, they will love the light and walk in
the light; but there are many in this age that have read the scriptures
plentifully, and yet still go on in a way of sin, they cannot love the light
that reproves them; he that does evil he hates the light, and the dawning of
the day is as the shadow of death to him, and it brings nothing but
condemnation upon such persons, so that they do not love the light, though it
is evident they have it and enjoy it; and it shall be their condemnation
whether they will or no; if they do not love the light and embrace it, it will
never be to their salvation.

God has given Christ to be a light to the Gentiles, and his salvation to the
ends of the earth. He is the light that enlightens every man that comes into
the world; the apostle John tells you the genealogy of the word of God; in the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God; and
the same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made; in him was life, and the life
was the light of men; the life of the eternal word was the light of men; what
men do you mean? I answer, he is the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world. He extends his light to every man, but it is
condemnation to every man so long as he continues to be a sinner against God:
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

Now all men are by nature dead in sins and trespasses; after our first parents
fell into sin they were dead to God; in the day that thou eatest thereof thou
shall die; when they had eaten the forbidden fruit, they did not die as to
outward appearance, but they died as to that communion they had with their
Maker; in this dead state lie all the sons and daughters of Adam; but, as our
Savior speaks, though they be dead, they shall live again; Christ is the Lord
from Heaven, a quickening Spirit; this is the object of our faith that has
been extended and offered to mankind ever since the fall; there is no name
under Heaven, no other power or spirit by which a man can be saved; this great
Mediator, the eternal Son of God, is the light that lights every man that
comes into the world: Faith in Christ is the same that ever it was,
notwithstanding the many forms of worship among the sons of men; some of God's
setting up, and some of men's setting up; yet among all these, the object of
faith is the same, and says the same.

In the 11th chapter of the Hebrews, that little book of martyrs, the apostle
there gives you a catalogue of the mighty things that have been done by the
faith of God's people; he begins with Abel; by faith Abel offered a more
excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was
righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it, he being dead, yet speaks;
by faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was not found,
because God translated him, for before his translation, he had this testimony,
that he pleased God; and so the apostle there goes to Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph and Moses: And what shall I say more, says he, for the time
would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and Jeptha, of
David, Samuel, and of the prophets, who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made
strong, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. All these great and noble
things were done by faith; it was the aspect their souls had upon Christ the
Mediator between God and man; it was their trust and reliance upon God through
Christ the Mediator that did support and uphold them in all they did and
suffered. This faith is still the same.

There are many faiths in the world beside, but they will prove but the faith
of hypocrites. Some have a faith, that if they do this and the other work, they
say you may trust your souls upon these good works; but this is not the faith
of Abraham, the father of the faithful. But some called Christians are gone so
far in the doctrine of merits, that they think they can do enough for their own
salvation, and for their friends and relations too; that there may be more
merit still over and above, that others may have benefit by the merit of their
works of supererogation: But this is not the faith of Abraham, and other
saints, by which they wrought such wonders in the world. I would not have men
trust at all in their own works for salvation, but trust in Christ alone, who
is able to save, to the uttermost, all that come to God by him.

But some will object that we are taught the doctrine of faith in Christ, and
justification by him.

Well, for my part, my tongue shall as soon drop out of my mouth, as oppose the
doctrine of being justified by faith in Christ. But, let me tell you, this may
be misapplied: If a man believe that he is justified by faith in Christ, and
yet knows, in his own conscience, that he is condemned, he believes a lie; he
is seduced and deceived. A man cannot be justified by Christ, when the Spirit
of Christ condemns him: Such a one, when he comes to lay down his head upon
his dying pillow, all his faith will fly away. I have met with some instances,
lamentable instances, of those that were called Christians, that have made a
profession of religion, and at last have laid down their heads in sorrow. If
this be your mistake, consider, while you have time, that you may die in peace.

Now the proposition and tender of the love of God to mankind, has always
carried that limitation with it, that every one in the world ought to observe;
if a man hope to be saved by Christ, he must be ruled by him: It is contrary to
all manner of reason, that the devil should rule a man, and Christ be his
Savior: The whole tenor of the New Testament is against it (pray read it as
often as you please, for it is a good exercise) you will find the true
Christian's faith to be this, that he that has faith in Christ has an
operation upon him for the cleansing his heart, and purifying and purging his
conscience from dead works, that he may serve the living God; though he has
been a servant of the devil, it will make him leave his former servitude, and
bring him under the influence of another law, the law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, which will make him free from the law of sin and death. The
apostle sets down the several conditions he had passed through; I was alive
without the law once; he thought himself a man, a brave man, a man of
understanding, that had profited among the Jews; I was alive, having respect to
that law which should have been my governor; but when the commandment came, sin
revived and I died. He had read the law, the commandment, many times, and had
been at the reading of it in the synagogue; but there was a coming of the
commandment which he had not been acquainted with; there was a writing of the
law of God in his heart; when he came to this inward work upon him, where was
then the life he lived? When the commandment came sin revived, and I died:
There was a professing life he formerly lived, but he was slain by the power of
the commandment, it laid him in the dust as a slain man; when he was in a slain
condition he found out that law in him that was the law of sin and death, and
this caused a combat and a war in him; I find a law, says he, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me; for I delight in the law of God in the
inner man; but I see another law in my members warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members:
Now this brought him to a poverty of spirit, into a sense of his miserable
condition, and then he cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death!

Now some people in this day, they are like the apostle, they have a law in
their members warring against the law of their minds; the good that they would
do they do not, and they can go no further: But the apostle Paul did reach
further, though he did not in that state know deliverance, yet he had a faith
that he should be delivered, and that he should not be miserable all his days.
Thus having led the Romans into the several states through which he passed, he
brings them to a further state, the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the law of sin and death: And now there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. How shall we know this? They
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Now Paul was come to that
sanctified state, that state of freedom and liberty which Christ Jesus will
bring all those unto that believe in him.

Holy men, in former days, did experience and find a great strife and warfare
in their own hearts, they would all do well, and exercise a conscience, void of
offense, toward God and toward man; but there is a law of sin that wars in
their members; if we yield to it it leads to sin and death; but if we yield
ourselves to the law of the spirit of life, there is a power that is derived
from the Mediator, that will translate the soul out of the kingdom of darkness
and sin, which the devil is the prince of, and bring it into the kingdom of
God's dear Son.

There must be a real change wrought in us before we can come to God, and to
fellowship and communion with God, which alone can make the soul happy. Let
this be the exercise of every one of us to adore and magnify the great mercy
and the kindness of God, that he has not withdrawn his spirit from you, but
has placed a monitor in your bosoms that calls upon you to cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, and to consider that the wages of sin is death: Here is a
sin, I may commit it; there is a temptation before me, but I know there is a
bait and a hook; I may swallow it if I will, but if I do, it will be my ruin:
Would I come to eternal death, and have my portion with liars and wicked
persons in the kingdom of darkness, where the worm dies not, and the fire is
not quenched? Or would I have my portion with saints and angels? If I would
have my portion with the blessed in the kingdom of God when I die, I must walk
in the way that leads to it; but the gate is strait and the way narrow, and few
there be that find it; labor then to be one of those few.

But what signifies our labor (some may say) if we can do nothing that is
good, not so much as think a good thought? What signifies our labor? All the
labors and endeavors in the whole world cannot make a man happy.

I now speak to a people to whom God does vouchsafe the help and assistance of
his grace and Spirit, and the visitations of his love and power; you must now
endeavor to do something; if a man endeavor, with the help of God he may do a
great deal of good, and shun a great deal of evil: Though all our endeavors,
in our own power and strength can signify nothing, yet they are required by
God, and by joining them with his grace, and laying hold of opportunities, by
divine assistance, we may do what God will accept. But if a man do any thing in
his own power and strength, whether prayer, hearing, reading, meditation, or
any other duty, he had as good let it alone.

I would consider you as those that God has followed with his grace and the
manifestation of his spirit; this is given to every man to profit withal, and
every man has opportunity to work with it; but he must work while it is day,
for the night comes when no man can work.

Let every one of us that are now met together, labor to be sensible of the
love of God to us, and love him above all, and express our love by a willing
and persevering obedience, that we may have the love of God shed abroad upon
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, and offer up living praises to him through Jesus
Christ, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father: To him be glory and
dominion forever and ever. Amen.

SERMON XXVIII. SALVATION from SIN by JESUS CHRIST.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, August 9, 1691.
IT is a general doctrine in the world, that no man by any means can ever be
set free from sin in this life: This is universally received among almost all
Christians, in all churches; and though they differ ever so much in other
things, yet they agree in this; so that this doctrine has got a sway in the
world, and it is accounted a great delusion and a heresy, and a grand error for
any to question the truth of it.

Now while a man is of that belief, that there is an impossibility of living
without sin, and of breaking down the kingdom of satan in any one soul in the
world, how can men hope or believe that righteousness should prevail in the
heart of one man? There is neither king nor beggar, nor bishop nor a gospel
minister, but the devil must have a rule and government in him, so long as he
lives in the world. As long as this is believed, it is not possible that the
other belief should take place; it is madness to think that I must be under the
rule and government of satan if I am under the government of the Son of God.
And it is still greater madness to say, that Christ and the devil are both my
governors and rulers: It is prodigious folly and madness to speak after this
manner.

This belief prevails over all men; over the wise, and mighty, and noble, and
learned, that they can never be freed from the power of sin in this world, but
that the devil will lead them into sin every day; let men be ever so sober,
ever so abstemious in their lives; let them spend ever so many hours in prayer
every day; let them come to meetings and hear sermons, and write them, and
repeat them, and do what they will, here is a bar of unbelief that lies in the
way, that makes men depart from the living God, and his power, and lose the
benefit they shall receive from Christ: And therefore they go to obtain it
another way, that is, to have the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and
they shall be pure and holy in the sight of God, when they are polluted in
their own eyes; and when they see their daily failings, infirmities and
corruptions, yet God may not see them; but that he sees them holy, just and
righteous in his Son.

What strange kind of doctrine is this? I must presume that God will see me in
his Son, Jesus Christ, when I never was in Christ: How can this be? He that is
in Christ, is a new creature; old things are done away, and all things are
become new: But if there be old things remaining still, and I am not become
new, shall I presume that I am in Christ, and that God will see me in his Son?
When people come to use the understanding that God has given them, they will
look upon themselves as barred out by their unbelief, that the nations have
drunk in; and it is as sweet to them as the honey and the honeycomb.

But, blessed be God, many have vomited it up already; If they would have
placed this doctrine upon man's natural ability, I would have said Amen to it.
I know there is none of us all have a natural ability and power to deliver his
own soul from sin and satan; but when they come to place it upon God, that
though the Lord make bare his arm, and reveal his power; though they come to
have the grace of God, that still they could not be delivered from sin, this
has blasphemy at the bottom of it. The other reflected upon man's power; this
reflects upon the power of God Almighty: That the devil has got such a power
over us, that God has not power over us, nor can have power and dominion over
us, so that of a whole nation he cannot have one man to serve him.

Much might be said in answer to this: When men are once willing to serve God,
they will be willing to leave the service of the devil. There is no way to
answer that good wish, but by wating upon God for the revealing of his power: I
pray God that when you come to a meeting, you may say, Lord, let thy power go
forth upon my heart; let thy arm be made bare, and deliver me from the power
and dominion of sin. Some will say they feel God's power in a meeting; I feel
the power of God working upon my heart, in order to the taking away sin and
transgression, and giving me victory over it, through the Lord Jesus Christ. If
they feel this power of God upon them, it is their duty to believe it and
depend upon it: If I believe it, I must wait for the dictates of it, and
believe that I shall be able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me: Then faith will come forth into works, and appear to be a living faith.

You may remember what the apostle James says, as the body without the Spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead also. As soon as a man comes to join
with the mighty power of God, he will be able to withstand temptation: If he
comes into evil company, he will deny them and not comply with them; he will
find then something of a power and ability to serve God; though he is not come
to perfection, yet he is walking in the way of holiness, and pressing forward
toward the mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: He will say, I
have got a little nearer than I was toward the place where I would be, toward
that life which I would live and die; then let death come when it pleases God,
it shall be welcome.

This is the wickedness of many in the world, they will not live such a life as
they would be willing to die in. They cannot come at it unless it be given them
to believe, for it is the gift of God; they must come to their governor and
leader, which goes before, to the gift of God, which is eternal life; then let
death come when it will, if I have the gift of eternal life.

It is a miserable thing to think that there are many that have not laid hold
of eternal life: It is manifested, that we may lay hold of it, there is a hand
of faith joining with it. When a man comes to lay hold of eternal life, this
life will purify him and sanctify him, at least by degrees, till he be wholly
sanctified in body, soul and spirit: This is that which the apostle writes in
one of his epistles, your salvation is nearer than when you at first believed.
When they first believed, their salvation was a pretty way off. He describes
salvation to be the end of their faith and hope.

When a man comes to be delivered from his sins, he shall serve God without
fear; but when a man comes to live by faith, he shall overcome; he is a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, and he must fight valiantly under his banner, till he
gets a victory over all his enemies, and then his salvation is much nearer than
when he at first believed.

I would I could say so of some of you; for I fear your salvation is farther
off: Some go straggling here and there, as sheep not having a shepherd; this is
that which my spirit is exercised with. You that are travelers toward the
kingdom of God, it is the wonderful grace and mercy of God, that ever it should
come into your minds to seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof.
They that have obtained this mercy from God, shall receive and enjoy other
mercies, better mercies; blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness: That is one mercy; but there is another mercy, they shall be
filled; they shall be satisfied: When a man comes to this, he must take up a
daily cross, and exercise self-denial; but if he follow Christ, he shall be
satisfied; he shall then have nothing but peace and joy; he shall then sing
praises and glory to God in the highest, and to the Lamb forever.

There is none can understand the glory that is laid up for those that take up
their cross and follow Christ, and love his appearing. This is the greatest
blessing that God does give unto his people, he has sent his Son Jesus to
bless us, and turn us from our iniquities. This is a blessing indeed. Take heed
that you do not admit of any new terms: Do not think to bring God Almighty to
new articles, the terms are declared and concluded on already: If you will
obtain the blessing, you must be turned every one of you from your iniquities:
The terms are already made, the law of God must be written in the heart and
inward thoughts, and you must close with that power that will write the law in
your hearts, and by traveling toward the kingdom of God, you will see the
coming of that kingdom in you.

It was the joy of my soul, that I saw the kingdom of Christ would be set up in
my heart, before it was set up there; then I saw the Lord's wonderful work, and
there was a great alteration in me, when the Lord was pleased to wean me from
the world's breast, and take off my heart, and wean it from worldly lusts, from
the world's joys, and pleasures, and fashions, and the world's honor and
reputation: I say the Lord was pleased to wean me from these things, and
brought me to a holy resignation, to give up my heart to him: If I have joy, it
must be from the Holy Spirit; if I have pleasure it must be in the presence of
God, who in the multitude of my thoughts within me made his comforts delight my
soul; and if he bring not comfort to you, you will never have it; you cannot
expect it till you do believe; and when you have faith, you can feel the
kingdom of God within you: There must be the new birth, the work of
regeneration, for except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God;
there must be a translation from death to life, there must be a turning out of
the old bottom and a fixing upon a new bottom, upon Christ Jesus the rock of
ages; there must be a subjection to his holy power and government, else you
cannot see the kingdom of God.

Many have gone on in a profession many years, and never saw the beauty of it;
and every little trifle in the world has diverted them, and drawn them away.
This and the other pleasure has drawn away their hearts, they have seen the
glory of the world, which has captivated them: But those that make a
profession of the truth, and have seen the beauty and glory of the kingdom of
Christ, they should, be shy of returning to the world again, for the apostle
says, it happened to them according to the true proverb, the dog is turned to
his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire;
it had been better for them never to have known the way of righteousness, than
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them:
They made a profession, and were members of a visible church, and had a name to
live, but they were inwardly dead, the sight of the kingdom of God is not given
to such, but unto babes, that have a divine birth, and that desire the sincere
milk of the word, that they may grow thereby. God has hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes.

I speak to those who are here this day, that would receive some kindness from
God, and that desire the knowledge of his ways, and that the mysteries of his
kingdom may be revealed to you, let your minds be retired and you shall find
the great things belonging to your peace made known to you. We have spoken much
of this, but I would not have you know it only by our sayings, I would have you
go into yourselves, to see whether God has not bestowed this grace and
blessing upon you: If God has given you grace, do not turn it into wantonness;
do not abuse the grace of God. What is it that you do when the grace of God
has convinced you, that such and such a thing is sin, and if you do it, it
will turn to your ruin? Dare you venture to commit sin after you are convinced
of it? O take heed of doing despite to the spirit of grace, and of grieving the
Holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption.

I wish that the weight of this consideration might lie upon you, and that a
holy dread and awe of God might be wrought in your hearts, that you might be
kept from sinning against God. You know there is a general outcry against
presumptuous sinning, sinning against light: Why should not we all cry out
against it? It is a most dreadful thing for any man to sin against his
knowledge and conviction; if any of us have been guilty of sinning aganst
light, let such a one say, I have done iniquity, I will do so no more, but
enter into covenant with the Lord, and say, O Lord, so far as thou have
revealed thy will unto me, I will obey it; I will delight to do thy will, O
God, though I cross mine own will. Whatever I cross I will not cross God's Holy
Spirit, by which I may be sealed to the day of redemption; I will never do this
though I hazard my chief interest in the world: This is the temper of a true
Christian, and I pray God make you all of this mind.

And now my friends, you that desire to see this great work wrought in
yourselves, commit the whole work to God, and trouble not yourselves about it.
I am sure God will carry on his own work, and bring down the devil's kingdom,
and rebuke that unclean spirit that is gone forth over the whole nation, and
pour out abundantly of his Holy Spirit to carry on a glorious reformation. This
I believe God will certainly do, from what he has wrought in my own soul. I
know not what instruments are to be employed in the work, I leave that to the
Lord; but the kingdom of Christ shall be advanced, and it shall be outwardly,
and a besom of destruction shall sweep away all his enemies from the earth, and
the wrath of God shall burn against them; but there is an obduration has been
upon the nations of the world, and something has stood in the way in all
generations.

But, however, I am sure we all may well say, that Christ is the Savior of all
men, but especially of them that believe. He has saved this city and nation
from the plagues and vengeance that hang over us. Many years the Lord has
spared us, and waited to be gracious for a long time, to see if we will at last
turn to him. How long the Mediator will intercede on our behalf, we cannot
tell; there is a time when the long-suffering of God will come to an end, God
has brought a scourge upon the nations round about us, and the flames of his
wrath has kindled upon them, and destruction has overtaken them; how soon it
may be our lot, we know not; all our money, our silver and gold, and valor and
courage, will not be able to ward it off, if the Lord but blow upon us. It is
even at the door; there is but one way to save us, and that is turning to the
Lord, and crying to the Lord for the continuance of his mercies and
long-suffering, and patience toward us. In this cry to the Lord, let us all
unite, that are lovers of the nation, and let us join our earnest supplications
in this work, seeing the Lord has made us the monuments of his mercy and
preserving goodness.

We have been continually surrounded with war and blood, and flames and
destruction; and the cry of the orphans has been heard from other nations. And
while they have been consumed with flames, and deluged in streams of blood, we
have sat under our own vines and fig trees; but judgments hang over the nation,
and whether they will fall or not, the Lord knows: But what shall we do for the
good of our nation, and cities and families, but labor every one, in the fear
of God, to reform our lives, and to take heed that we sin not against the
light, left we die, and perish in the middle of those terrible judgments that
hang over us.

Let us turn from our evil ways, and depart from all iniquity, that the kingdom
of Christ may be set up in ourselves. It is the righteous in the nation that
the Lord looks at, and for their sakes he will spare a nation. If there be a
people among us that walk in humility, and lament and mourn for the
abominations committed in the midst of us, God will have regard to them, and he
will hear the cries and the supplications of a praying people.

Friends, you that cannot make use of sword and spear for the saving of a
nation, you may do good by your prayers, and turning to the Lord with an
unfeigned heart, and let your sincerity appear before him. If I would take a
common prayer book in my hands, and pray ever so devoutly and solemnly, if I be
not sincere, what will that do? Or, if I pray without a book, or if I pray
without a form, or reject the form that others have made for me, what will this
avail? But the cry of the poor, and the sighing of the needy, and the effectual
fervent prayer of the righteous, has availed much for the saving of this
nation many years.

Therefore, I exhort you all, as you love the nation, and as you love
yourselves, and your families and relations, sin not against the Lord; for he
is now setting up righteousness, equity, and justice, and it shall prevail in
the nation. God has been pleased to gather in many, that have been enemies,
that are now turned from sin to God, and led by the truth: And it is their
greatest joy, that now they are no longer servants of sin, but are now become
the servants of God.

Now truth will prevail, and righteousness go forth as the morning sun, and we
hope the Lord will show mercy to us for the glory of his own name, though we
are an unworthy people: It will be matter of joy and gladness to us, if the
kingdom of God be come; then we may say our prayer is answered. We have often
prayed, thy kingdom come, and thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. If
the will of God be done, then I can do mine own will no longer, then I can be
led away by satan no longer; the devil will have little power, if I do God's
will on earth, as it is done in Heaven; then praises will arise in the hearts
of every one that delights to do the will of God, and God will carry on his
work for the glory of his own name, and for the redemption of his people, that
Christ may be preached for salvation to the ends of the earth.

SERMON XXIX. The ACCEPTABLE SACRIFICE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, July 3, 1692.
ALL people that would worship God and meet together for that purpose, they had
need have a great reverence upon their minds, and a holy fear upon their
spirits, that when they enter into the house of the Lord, and draw nigh to the
living God, they might not offer the sacrifice of fools, but may offer to God
that which may be acceptable to him. For all worship, and all religion, and all
offerings and oblations that ever were offered to God by any people, they have
had a return unto the offerers and worshippers, either of acceptance or
rejection. Many you know have been rejected though they have offered, and many
have been accepted of God, and their offerings have been a sweet smelling
savor in his nostrils; and, I hope, we are all of that mind, that we would be
glad to have our worship, and service and offerings to God, accepted in his
sight, and that our present assembling together might be for the better, and
that every one might have an answer of peace, and of acceptance in their
bosoms; but that can never be unless men be qualified and prepared in their
drawing nigh to God, and in all our offerings and worship that we perform, our
hearts be prepared according to the preparation of the sanctuary, the
preparation of God's dwelling and holy place.

The worshippers must be holy; there must be the fear of God, and a reverence
of the great God upon their minds, before people can offer an acceptable
sacrifice unto him, as the holy apostle says, Heb. xi. 6: He that comes to
God, must believe that he is; which signifies, that a preparation ought to be
in the minds and hearts of people that would draw nigh to God; or perform any
service or worship to God, they must have the knowledge of the God whom they
worship, they must first know that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. Here is a qualification for worshippers, for
religious persons; as they expect when they meet together to find the Lord in
the midst of them, they must be qualified accordingly, there must be an awe
upon their minds.

I am in the presence of God, I have an expectation from God, that he will open
his abounding treasury, and minister some good unto me, or else to what purpose
do people draw nigh to God? It is because they would have something of him; but
they must come in an humble petitioning frame; he gives grace to the humble.
It is the lofty, the proud, those that exalt themselves, the fat and the full,
that want nothing. These, says the prophet, the Lord beholds afar off. A
proud man or woman cannot draw nigh to God, the Lord looks upon them afar off;
nor do they partake of those divine and heavenly comforts and blessings, and
counsels and instructions that the humble mind has the promise of and will
certainly enjoy, the humble, God will teach, he will instruct the meek in his
way; but what is this to the lofty mind? What is this to one that is exalted,
and conceited and puffed up, and reckons himself full and wanting nothing,
while he is swimming in the streams of pleasures of this world, and savours
only the things of the earth, the pleasures of a sensual mind? These persons
are not hungry, and so they are not fed; they are not thirsty, and so they
never obtain that which can satisfy the soul. Our Lord Jesus Christ pronounced
a blessing upon them that hunger and thirst; but what is that to them that are
full and lack nothing?

So my friends, in this and all other religious assemblies, a great care ought
to be upon every one, that their coming together to wait upon the Lord may be
in that reverence and fear, and that hope and expectation at the hands of God,
that they might be bettered by it, or else they all lose their labor, as Cain
did; he would be an offerer, he offered sacrifice, but was not accepted;
because his mind and heart was not right before the Lord, his sacrifice was
rejected. It was before he had killed his brother; he had great guilt upon him,
before he had killed his brother; he wanted the qualification of well-doing; if
thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? But if thou do not well, sin lies
at thy door. He was got into evil doing, and an evil mind hindered his
acceptance with God; so it does with all men and women in the world that meddle
with religious worship, and sacrifice to God, if they meddle with evil doing.
There must be a taking off the mind from the evil of sin and corruption, and
the mind must be brought over to something that they have received from God
before ever they can be accepted.

You know the general doctrine of all Protestants is, that we have no
acceptance with God but through Jesus Christ; we have no way to please God, nor
can do any thing that shall be acceptable in his sight, but through one only
Mediator. Now if I should go to worship God, or perform any religious duty
without respect and deference to the sense and participation of the virtue and
power of that only Mediator, how can I be accepted? And it has pleased God out
of his infinite love to mankind, to send this great Mediator into the world,
that every man that comes into the world is made a participant of something of
the life and virtue of that Mediator. So you read, John i. 4. in him was life,
and the life was the light of men, the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world; and that with respect to men whether they are good or
no, both good and bad, though all men are bad by nature: So that though they are
children of wrath, and heirs of eternal damnation in their natural state, by
reason of sin, yet for all that this one Mediator, in whom this light has
shined, has sent forth his light among the sons and daughters of men, that is,
the light of men, that enlightens every one. So there is an offer made of
something that presents itself to the view of every man that is good; if he
apply his mind to it, he may have that good that comes by Jesus Christ; he may
draw nigh to God; as bad as he is, he has some good, that God has bestowed
upon men good and bad. There is no man such a liar, but he has some truth in
him; there is no man so ungodly, but he knows that which is pure and holy, that
which has reproved him, checked and convinced him of his ungodliness. This
presents itself to the view of every man and woman, and calls them to
repentance.

Now for men to make a show and pretense to worship, and not have regard to the
glory of God, how can they draw nigh to God, or God draw nigh to them? Our Lord
Jesus Christ says, that where two or three are gathered together in my name, I
will be in the midst of them; but if people meet together in their sin and
wickedness, if they have a loose and vain mind, and intend to go on in
wickedness and sin, if they meet, they meet not in Christ's name, but in the
devil's name, and he is in the midst of them, and he works and rules in the
hearts of the children of disobedience. So that this has been the ground and
reason why abundance of meetings upon this account have been fruitless as to
the benefit of their souls, and the expectations of people have been frustrated
as to their salvation; they have not met with that in which the blessing is,
and to which the promise is made. The promise is not made to people that the
devil rules; there is no promise to such but the promise of eternal wrath to be
executed upon them, with the devil and his angels to all eternity; if you can
make that a promise.

The promise of life and salvation which is recorded by the prophets and
apostles, it has always relation to the seed that are in covenant with God. In
this the covenant stands, says God to Abraham, Genesis xvii. 7. I will establish
my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
The covenant is made to Abraham and his seed, that is, with Christ Jesus the
Mediator. It is he that brings to God, those that trust in him and come to him,
he that comes to him, he will in no wise cast out; they that do not come to
Christ, are cast off already. All men, by nature, are cast away already; if any
of them will be saved, it is by coming to Christ, who is able to save, to the
uttermost, and to make peace for them, and of twain to make one new man; and to
make peace between God and the soul.

There is a necessity for all people, that have any sense of their natural
state and condition, that according to nature have no title to the kingdom of
God, to be reconciled to God. By nature they cannot make a claim to
righteousness and life; they connot reconcile themselves to God by all their
works; says the prophet Micah, will the Lord be pleased with a thousand rams,
or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? He has showed
thee, O man! what is good: And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? They that will be saved,
must lay hold of salvation in that way and method that the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth has prescribed. He has prescribed a way for every body to be saved;
he would not have any one to perish, but that all should come to repentance,
and obtain everlasting life. God has made a way that will serve every body
alike; thousands as well as ten; and all the world as well as one man. Now the
way that God has made, is turning out of the state into which they are fallen,
and forsaking that governor that rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, and closing with Christ, whom God has appointed to reign in
every ones heart. People in Christendom will say, they have closed with Christ.
Do not you hope to be saved by Christ, on the terms of the covenant? It is not
crying, Lord, Lord, but doing the will of God; the terms are, all men must
believe in Christ, the eternal Son of God; and through the power of that faith
they have in him, he comes to rule over them, and they become subject to him.
And if a beliver be not subject to Christ, he is all one as if he was an
unbeliever; circumcision, or uncircumcision, avails not any things but a new
creature; and faith which works by love.

The covenant does not stand in mere words; if I conform to such articles, then
I am a Christian; if I believe all the articles of the creed, then I am a
Christian, and a child of God. If a man will say, I believe, his say so is not
sufficient. The condition of the covenant that God has made, is, that Christ
shall rule and have the government of those souls that he presents to God: How
should it be otherwise, seeing he is not to present any to God that are
unclean? Christ has no commission to present any to God in their uncleanness
and wickedness. He that believes, must be cleansed and purified by him: If so,
then that cannot be done, but by ruling over them. If they had the rule of
themselves, they would be polluted, and be like water, whose current is stopped
with dirt and mud, not running in its own proper stream. People will commit
sin, when they have the rule of themselves; but when Christ presents people to
God, and when they come to be led by him, they are cleansed and purified.

When the apostle describes true faith, he does it by this quality and property
of it, it purifies the heart. All other faith is but the hope of the hypocrite;
but real faith is the operation of God, faith the apostle; and that faith
works in an unclean heart to the cleansing of it, and in an impure heart to
the purifying of it: If the heart comes to be purified, then it must needs
follow that the conversation must be pure also. No one does an ill work, or
speaks an ill word, but it is from an evil heart. Now if the axe come to be
laid to the root of the tree, and the word of the Lord operate in the heart
powerfully, if ever so much evil be in it, the axe when laid to the root of the
tree will cut it down; the power of God will execute judgment upon every thing
that is contrary to him; Christ is holy, harmless, and undefiled, and separare
from sin and sinners; and though he extend his life and virtue to the life and
soul of the most wicked man in the world, it never joins with their
uncleanness, but keeps immaculate and undefiled in the heart of the worst of
men.

Now this immaculate power that comes from Christ, it will purify the hearts of
men, and preserve them from evil thoughts, words and actions. This is the
manifestation of the one Mediator that they must be governed by, else they
cannot be presented spotless to God the Father. There is a necessity of coming
to a Savior otherwise than by words and profession; we must come to him and
heartily join with him; we have all joined with the devil, he has suggested,
moved, and instigated, and people have followed his instigations and motions;
there is no man but is sensible of a devilish motion, why not then of a divine
motion? Though now it is become a bugbear to say, we are moved by the Spirit of
Christ, why not by that Spirit, as well as by the spirit of the wicked one? No
man doubts but that there are motions of the devil which they are sensible of,
that sometimes they have joined with him, and sometimes they withstand him.
What is the reason that men should join with evil motions? There is no just
reason for it. The reason why you and I withstand the motions of the devil, is
because we find another motion conveyed into our hearts by the Spirit of God;
if a man has one motion to commit uncleanness, he has another motion to keep
himself pure; if he has a motion to speak a lie, he has another motion to
speak truth; there are two movers at the same time, in the same heart, which
shall we join with? Shall I join with the devil's motion? If I find any thing
of the love of God in my heart, it will constrain me to mind the good motion,
and make me withstand the evil motion; so that the moving of the Spirit of God
is not such a wonder.

There are none who have not had bad motions in them, and they have also
motions of the Spirit of truth; they have met with evil motions, and they have
admired them too much, then it is time to repent; if there be a distinction
between a motion of the Spirit of truth, and a motion of the spirit of error,
then I may boldly say, it is our duty to join with the Spirit of truth, and not
with the spirit of error; if there be a desire in us to be saved from the wrath
to come, then the way to be saved from God's wrath is to be saved from the
cause of it; take away the cause and the effect cease. The cause of God's
wrath being kindled against man is sin, for God had no wrath against man when
he first made him; for he made him after his own image, and gave him power to
continue in that holiness and righteousness, wherein he created him* but he
fell, and was cast out of paradise, and an angel was sent with a flaming sword
that turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. Thus man fell under
the wrath of God by his sin; but how shall I have the wrath of God allayed? By
breaking off from sin, and returning to God again.

This looks like a covenant of works, say some; do you say I must break off
from sin, and so escape the wrath of God?

Yes, I do; but no mortal man can break off from sin but by joining with the
Mediator, he is the author of eternal salvation, he works in us to will and
to do, and enableth us to work out our own salvation; it was sin that drove man
out of paradise, and brought upon him the wrath of God. Sin is the devil's
work; now that Christ might be a Savior to us, he will destroy the devil's
work; for this purpose, says the apostle, the Son of God was manifested that
he might destroy the works of the devil. Now the devil was not the destruction
of man simply in himself, but by tempting him to sin, which is the devil's
work; and Christ was manifested, to destroy the devil's work; that propensity
to sin that is in the nature of man, which makes him rebel against the mind and
will of God. Christ the eternal Son of God became man; he took the nature of
man, that he might bring man again to his primitive state, wherein he was
created after the image of God.

Now how does the devil perform his works? does he do his works coercively? No,
he uses no irresistible force. But does Christ the Mediator work coercively,
with an irresistible power and force, to bring a man again to God? No, no more
than the devil did to beguile man from God. Man might have stood and continued
in his state of innocence if he would; he might join with evil, and yield to
the temptation of the devil, if he had a mind; he knew if he gave over his mind
to evil, he should be ruined; and it proved so. Man was resolved to try what it
was to yield to the devil, and obey him. He told them that if they did eat of
the forbidden fruit they should be as Gods, but they became more like the
devil; this they got by being obedient unto him, not that the devil laid an
irresistible force upon them, you shall eat of the fruit of this tree; but
there was only a presentation of it to them, and with that he prevailed, and so
came to the destruction of mankind.

Christ the Mediator, in order that he may present us to God, comes himself and
presents his commands to us, and his command is, that we must break off from
that servitude and subjection that the devil has brought man into, and there
must be a subjection unto Christ; we must believe in Christ, and hearken to the
word of God, and break off from sin; but where is the power? If God would have
me holy, let him make me holy; if he would have me pure, let him make me so,
and give me ability to do that which of myself I cannot do; when it pleases
God to give me grace and captivate my will, I shall become a good Christian.
Now here is a great mistake, that people should think they must wait for an
irresistible power to bring them back to God; there is a presentation of love
and mercy, and earnest invitations, and the long-suffering and patience and
goodness of God's long waiting upon sinners. God, who commanded light to shine
out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. iv. 6. What
shall I do with the light that shines into my heart? I will shut mine eyes
against it; I love darkness rather than light, and evil more than good; this
light will lead me to holiness and righteousness, I will quarrel with it, it
comes to bereave me of my comforts in this world, of my merry companions, and
of all my bravery, I will not hearken to it. Alas! for these; this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light, because their deeds are evil, says our Savior. If I had not come
and spoken to them, they had no sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin.

Here is the gospel preached by Christ himself; here is the presentation of an
opportunity for every man and woman to return again; but I must be in the way
of returning, that is, by joining with that which presents to me holiness,
righteousness, chastity and humility, that presents and offers to the soul all
the virtues and graces that are in Christ, and shows it the light and grace
that comes from Christ. Now this light and grace showing itself to my soul, I
have a view of. Have thou a view of it? Have thou seen purity, humility,
sobriety, meekness, and self-denial, and an heavenly frame of spirit in thyself
or somebody else? How do thou like it? I like it not at all; I love to have
honor and dignity, power and dominion, and my elbow-room in the world; I love
not this meekness, humility and strictness of life, that a man must have a care
what he speaks, and set a watch upon his lips, and upon his heart, tongue, and
hands, I do not like this kind of life.

If thou do not like a good life, somebody will like it, and live in it; and
notwithstanding all thy vapouring, thy hating, and despising it, when people
come to live this kind of ife, they will outlive thee; thy proud life, they
reigning life, and thy having elbow-room in the world, will at last come to be
limited; the hand of God is against it, and it will bring down the pride of
man. When thou come to lie upon thy dying pillow, expecting every moment to
expire, and breathe thy last, then thou will say, O that I had been more
serious, and lived more like a Christian; lived a godly life, and given up my
heart to God, and been more watchful over my thoughts, words and actions! There
is such a friend of mine, that has lived better than I; if I had lived such a
life as he has lived, I should have had more comfort; and they that are
despisers of the godly, though they do not like such a life now, they will like
it then.

Friends, you that are lovers of your souls, and meet together that you may
become better, and have expectation and hope, that you shall receive comfort
and benefit by your meeting together, I tell you, as a servant of God, and a
lover of yours, it is but a little while, and you will wish that you had chosen
the most holy, harmless, innocent life, that ever you saw yourselves, or heard
of from any body else; and you will wish that you had been more watchful over
your thoughts, words and actions. There is a day, a day approaching, when we
must give an account for every thing that we have done, whether good or evil;
you must give an account for your cursed debauchery; for your swearing, lying,
and inordinate passions; you must give an account for every vain thought, and
every idle word.

If this will certainly come to pass, how shall I prevent these idle words and
evil actions? Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, says the Psalmist?
By taking heed thereto, according to thy word. I am not as those that say lo
here and lo there: I do not say, you must come and learn truth of me, but if
you find it, you must find it in yourselves: What if I live in the truth? That
will not serve thee; and if I be a holy man, that will not sanctify thee; thou
must hearken to truth's speaking in thyself; thou may hear it speaking in
thine own heart; you may hear it call you to righteousness and holiness; and if
you hear it, you may do it too, if you please; for there is a power that goes
along with it.

I know enough, thou will say, but I cannot do what I know; I have not power.
What ails thee that thou have not power? If I had power, then would I abstain
from all sin, and break off from my evil ways; but the devil throws this object
and the other object in my way, and by his temptations he does ensnare me, I
have not power to resist: Would you have me do more than I can do? and as long
as I have not power I am to be excused.

Now here is a device of the devil to keep people in his net still. If men
would be true to themselves, they would not be long without power: If thou art
convinced of the evil of thy ways, and that it is thy duty to break off from
sin, there is a power offered to thee, that, if thou joinest with, thou may
overcome all temptations, and forsake thy sin: I would have you all prove, and
search, and see whether I speak truth or no; I am persuaded there is not a man
or woman here but they have sometime abstained from an evil work, which they
were tempted to. How were you restrained; because you knew it was an evil work,
you durst not do it; the devil had not a coercive power to force you to do it;
I knew it was an evil thing, and I joined with that in my mind which dissuaded
me from it; and I prayed to God to give me power to abstain from it. The devil
tempted thee on still, who helped thee against the temptation? God restrained
thee by his grace. Will not he be a present help unto thee? he is the same
yesterday, today, and forever; depend upon him still, and he will be always
ready to help thee, and support thee, and strengthen thee, and thou shall be
kept from sin in an hour of temptation: Consider that all power in Heaven and
Earth is given to Christ, and if he be able to keep thee thou shall not fall
into it; those that come unto me, says Christ, none shall pluck them out of my
hands, and my Father is greater than all. If thou come unto Christ, he will
in no wise cast thee out, and if thou depend upon him, he will preserve thee,
and none shall be able to pluck thee out of his hand. If thou join with the
truth, and with that which is holy, thou shall have strength and ability to
withstand temptation and overcome it; and (I may speak with reverence) Christ
has bound himself to those that trust in him; those that keep the word of my
patience, I will keep them in the hour of temptation. If I keep waiting upon
his power, that is ready to help me, and have a mind to be purified and
sanctified, and to have righteousness brought into my soul, and have mine eyes
unto God, and my expectations from him, he will work in me to will and to do of
his good pleasure.

Now here people have a fixed foundation for their faith; but there is no
working at this rate without bearing a daily cross. There are a great many can
receive the truth in words, and receive doctrines, and tenets, and that with
delight; but there is no practicing holiness and righteousness without a daily
cross and self-denial. There are a great many who have come to truth, as far as
it stands in words, but when it comes to something that they must do, to speak
the truth, and live in the truth, they meet with so much of the temptation of
the devil, so much lust and corruption, and ungodliness in themselves; they
meet with such evil things that their souls join with and yield to, that they
cannot go on in the ways of holiness, unless they look up to Jesus, and have an
eye to their Savior, and take up his cross and follow him. Whatsoever
reproaches, sufferings, and persecutions they endure, they must have a godly
resolution to follow the Lord Christ, and say, I will obey his commands, he
shall have the rule and government of my life, and be the guide of my way;
whatsoever stands in my way, I will take up my cross and deny myself; without
this there is no good Christianity in the world.

There are a great many that seem to be religious and are professors of the
truth: We all know there are many professors of the truth in notion, and with
some zeal will talk of it; but they do not know how to live and walk in the
truth, they do not live uprightly and honestly in it; they do not keep their
words; they do not live justly and honestly with all men, nor do unto others as
they would have others do to them: They can tell how to speak and act; then why
do they not do it? They have got a notion that they are above the cross of
Christ, and self-denial is far below them. People will not live in the truth.

This is wanting in the whole world: If we look around we shall find a great
many are illuminated; there is abundance of knowledge and understanding among
professors, abundance of learning, and great numbers of learned men: What is
the reason that oaths, and curses, and all manner of wickedness run down the
streets like a river; there is pride, and wrath, and envy, and revenge, and
violence to be found among us, as if it would draw down vengeance upon us. They
have heard preached in pulpits much of holiness, humility, patience and
meekness, that a meek and quiet spirit is an ornament of great price: Men have
heard much preaching against pride, profaneness, and drunkenness, and
uncleanness, but they have heard it like a tale that is told, not much
concerned about it, and have given little credit or regard to what they have
heard of these things. Why are people so wicked? The reason at last results in
this, men are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, they are not the
servants of Christ, but serve diverse lusts, and pleasures, and are led captive
by the devil, at his will; and so they go on in iniquity. No laws can restrain
and curb them, when the law of Christ is not written in their hearts; but when
men come to see a necessity of self-denial and taking up the cross, this will
produce a reformation.

This is what I labor for, and all good men and women will do it: It is time
to try for reformation. Vain fashions, and garbs, and pride have been cried up,
why should not we cry for reformation before the wrath of a provoked God is
kindled against us, and his vengeance poured down upon the nation? We must
reform our lives. How shall men reform, you will say? By getting the law of God
within their hearts, that is pure, and holy, and heavenly, that will be as a
light to men's feet, and a lanthorn to their paths: Now till people come to this
they will go on in sin and iniquity, till they be swept away with some
overflowing and dreadful judgment.

So that, my friends, in the fear of God, and out of love to you, I seek that
you may be brought to God, through Christ; that you may live in the love and
fear of the Lord, and, when you come to die, you may have rest and peace for
your souls. There is no rest for those that are evildoers; there is no peace,
says my God, to the wicked. The ungodly cry, peace, peace, and talk of peace,
but there is no peace for them, but they shall have for their portion
tribulation, and wrath, and anguish; this shall certainly come upon every one
that does evil. It is no matter what religion you are of, if you do not obey
the truth, but live in unrighteousness.

Now, friends, my exhortation to you all is, that you will return to the truth
in your own hearts, and do it while you have time. I am not persuading people
to love my opinion, but to love God's truth in their own hearts, to love it and
obey it, and you cannot do this unless you resolve to take up a daily cross,
and be followers of Christ, who is gone before to prepare a place for them that
are his true disciples; and then he will present them to God, as holy,
harmless, and undesiled, for these are heirs of that everlasting kingdom, which
God has prepared for them that love him.

SERMON XXX. CHRIST the WAY to ETERNAL LIFE.
Preached at GRACE CHURCH STREET, May 6, 1688.
THE desire of all nations is come; that which all people desire in their own
way, is come in God's way; for all nations and all people on the earth desire
eternal life; they would all be happy in the other world, and in order
thereunto, they have fitted themselves with diverse ways and methods, in which
they have proposed to themselves the enjoyment of eternal life; but by reason
of the darkness that is in them, they have erred in their ways, they have been
scattered, they have been driven and tossed hither and thither, and can never
agree about the way that leads to eternal life.

This comes by reason of the great darkness that is over the sons and daughters
of men in general, in which they have lost their way, and are endeavoring to
find it again: But the subtle adversary led them out of the way, and as long as
he leads and they follow, they will never find the right way: The great
calamity that is come upon the world in this respect, is very greatly to be
lamented; for when the eye of the mind is opened, to behold the universal state
of mankind, and to see how they are scattered hither and thither, and often
left in confusion, by the craft and delusion of the wicked one, and that none
of the ways that they have found, are like to bring them to the proposed end,
because they are defiled, because they are, unholy; this has bowed down the
spirit of the Lord's servants many times, and a great cry has arisen in the
hearts of those that have seen the fruition and enjoyment of life eternal; O,
that the sons of men might hear! and O that they might consider their ways
before they come to their latter end! for mark friends, this you may take for a
certain doctrine, and a sure rule in judgment, concerning all the ways that the
sons and daughters of men walk in; if they be unholy, they will be
unprofitable; the way of the Lord was, and is, and ever will be the way of
holiness, and the people that walk therein, they were, and are, and they will
always be a holy people; now the sons and daughters of men have not gone to
measure their way by this rule, but the greatest endeavors that ever have been
in the world, from the beginning (the greatest endeavors that men did
undertake) were to see how near they could approve their doctrine and practice
with the scriptures of truth, and that has been the bone of contention, that
they have stumbled about from one generation to another, one crying my way is
right; and here they have been contending, disputing, and jangling and debating
one with another, and could never agree, and could never come to that
understanding, which is given by the Holy Spirit, that moved holy men to write
the Holy Scriptures of truth; if they had, it is manifest they would have
agreed, for this one spirit must agree with itself, and will give judgment
according to its own righteous judgment: Men being alienated from the life of
God, by evil works, and by the suggestions of satan, they have not known the
way of peace, and have not come to that which is the desire of all nations, as
now in the fullness of time, the Lord God eternal, who created the Heavens and
the Earth, the sea and the fountains of water, he has looked down and beheld
the miserable calamitous state of the sons and daughters of men, and he has
seen how they have been scattered and driven to and fro by idle shepherds, and
how every one has indulged himself in his own way, though unholy and impure;
and it is because of the darkness of the night of ignorance that has been over
the people; and therefore in his infinite love and mercy, he is risen, and has
brought forth his light and his truth, that the nations might be enlightened,
that they might come and see with a divine eye that the truth is but one, and
the way but one, and all that do really desire to be inheritors of eternal
life, must come to walk in that way. So that people are never brought back
again out of that way wherein they have been scattered and driven about, till
they come to see the way they practice to bring forth iniquity; they see there
is no light to be had in them, they see the anger of God kindled, and the
indignation of God poured out by reason of sin and unholiness.

Now when they come to be convinced by the light of Christ Jesus of their
disobedience, then they come to feel and find a principle, a seed and root that
gives them a law which they should obey, and hear the right lawgiver, and have
respect unto him: Here is the revelation of Christ Jesus by his Spirit, and
this extends itself in its operation and working to the sons of men, to them
that are afar off, as well as to those that are nigh; therefore our continual
exhortation, from time to time, according as the spirit has given us
utterance, is not so much to make profession of this and the other doctrine of
Christianity, as to persuade all men every where, that they believe in the
light, and hearken to the voice of the light in their own consciences, that
they hearken to that which is purely of God in themselves, as we know,
whosoever comes to love the light of Christ Jesus, wherewith they are
enlightened, it would discover doctrine to them, and make known faith and
practice too; it will lead them in the way everlasting, it will open their
understanding far above all preaching this and the other doctrine and tenet.

What signifies it to show colors to the blind, or to speak words to the dead;
till men come to have their senses opened, that they may discern things
belonging to the spirit of truth, the carnal man cannot understand the things
of the gospel of Christ, the carnal man is not subject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be; there must be something done in the soul, to bring it
out of its carnality, and bring it to something that is spiritual, before it is
capable of understanding the things of the spirit: Therefore when our minds can
witness what we came hither for, when we meet to serve and worship God, we
shall have a hope to receive some illumination, some refreshment, some comfort,
or some knowledge of things divine; it is in vain to attend religious doctrines
with an irreligious mind. It is my judgment of charity, that every one that
comes hither, has some expectation of illumination in their understandings,
some gift, or some instruction; this they may receive from the God of Heaven,
by the ministry of those who must be the mouth of God, to speak to them in his
name: When people are thus prepared, and their minds fixed to hear the truth;
if they do not find it in themselves, if they come not to a sense of the word
of life in their own hearts, their hearing cannot give them life. We are
commending ourselves to every man's conscience; let your minds be turned
inward, search and consider, is there a light that enlightens every man that
comes into the world? Is there a desire of eternal life manifested in me? Is
there that in me that puts me upon obedience to God, to mend my life and
conversation, that I might be recommended to God? Is there something in me that
checks me when I speak amiss, and do amiss? I do appeal to the witness of God
in you; if that be so, then believe me for the word's sake, the testimony of
God in your hearts.

Let us next consider, whether we had best agree on this conclusion, that God
has enlightened us, and whether we had not best obey that light; this is the
best way, let us put the question, and wait for an answer from ourselves. There
is much indeed to be said on the other side: If I should hear and obey that by
which I am enlightened, if I should hearken to the reproof of my own
conscience, I should lose a great deal of the pleasure and of the comfort of
the world, I should lose a great deal of the profit which I gain in my trade
and calling, and of the delight and pleasure I have with my neighbor.

This is not to be denied; I would have things put in the balance; I grant you
will lose some pleasure, and ungodly gain, and the friendship of the world; but
pray consider, and let us go through the account: If thou obeyest this light of
Christ Jesus, this is God's way of drawing thee nearer to himself, to make thee
an heir of his eternal kingdom; whereas by thy indulging thy carnal parts, thou will lose thy immortal soul; if thou should gain the whole world, and lose
thy own soul, what will it profit thee? Thou should consider, why I am
enlightened; how comes it to pass that my nature is evil, and I am fallen from
my primitive state, from the knowledge of God, and from the enjoyment of his
presence, and communion with him? How comes God to take notice of me, and to
enlighten me and kindle in me a desire of returing to him? why should he do
this for me? Thou will never find a reason in thyself of this extraordinary
kindness, of this singular mercy of God to thee; it is because his mercy moved
him, and it was his compassion that stirred him up: He has sent his Son Jesus
Christ into the world, that men might have light in and through him, and have
it abundantly. The mercy of God is a fountain from whence all this flows to us;
if this prevail not upon thee, no argument will: What, was it mere mercy, mere
grace, that God was not willing to see me perish, and run headlong to
destruction? He was loath to execute his wrath upon me, therefore he found out
a way by which I might return to him. This made a good man cry out, behold!
what manner of love is this, wherewith the Father has loved us? Here is the
grace of God; here is the good will of God; here is the way; a way, what way? A
way of coming to God; a way of being again reconciled unto God, whom we had
provoked by our sins; a way of enjoying eternal life again, after we had lost
all pretense to it.

The next question is, who will walk in the way that leads to eternal life? We
would all have eternal life; it is the universal consent of all nations; all
would have eternal life; but the question is, who will walk in the way that
leads to it? Some of the nations round about, and many in this nation, they
will walk in their own way, and yet they would have eternal life; but their way
must be of the same nature and quality with the life they would have; if the
way they walk in be not of the same nature and quality, it will not lead to it.
Let every one examine their way; let every one examine their progress, and
their lives and footsteps in this world; if they sow to the flesh, they shall
of the flesh reap corruption; and if they sow to the spirit, they shall of the
spirit reap life everlasting; a suitable fruit to that life they live, and the
way they walk in. If we conclude with reason; with pure, found reason, we must
conclude it is better for us all to walk in the way of holiness; and we shall
have more reason to believe that we shall have life eternal, than in walking in
an unholy way, therefore we should be resolved to walk in the way of holiness;
and if people are brought to this, it is an easy thing to draw them to
confession: You say true, it is better to walk in a holy way than an unholy
way; but alas! we have not power so to do; we are feeble, weak, dark and
ignorant; and we have many lusts, temptations and impediments, lying in our
way, that it is not possible for any to walk in that way; we know the way, we
understand the way well enough; you would have us walk by the sight of Christ,
and the dictates of our own consciencies, then we should never be condemned for
any thing we do, but we should stand in an openness of access to God; when a
man sins against God, sin lies at the door; but they that sin not, have an
access to God. Alas, these things cannot be done! What can a poor creature do
that wants power?

My friends, this excuse must go no further; let us try and consider in the
presence of God this day, the powerful God that is the assister of his people;
let us try how far this will go, I have no power of myself; all good men grant
it to be true, you have not power to walk in the way of holiness: But let us
ask another question; does God require of thee and me to walk in the way of
holiness, and does he deny power to us to walk in it? We cannot walk in the way
of holiness, but by the operation of his power working in us, unto the
extinguishing of the life of sin and corruption, that has hindered us all this
while; God knows we cannot do it ourselves. Christ tells his disciples, without
me ye can do nothing, nothing good, nothing that is right. This being concluded
on, all power comes from God; the next question is, how, and which way must we
receive power from God greater than our own power? Which is the way of people's
receiving power from God? You have read how people came to have power; to as
many as believed, to them he gave power to become the sons of God. What
signifies this to them that do not believe? If believing be the way to obtain
power, it is nothing to those that do not believe; there faith is necessary, in
the first place, for obtaining of this power: This is a great mystery, such an
odd saying, that the world knows not what to make of it: Believers, we are all
believers; I believe the truth of the principles of the Christian religion, and
I believe all the articles of the creed: To talk of believing at this time of
the day, we have believed this twenty, or thirty, or forty years, but the first
act of faith is yet to be done after your sense: It is true, with the greatest
part of the nation; the first act of faith is not yet begun, for their faith is
men's faith: We are for the faith that was delivered to the saints; it is the
gift of God, it comes from the operation of God; so that I may conclude,
whosoever remains a stranger to the operation of God, he is a stranger to the
true faith; and they who estrange themselves from that which God works, are
strangers to the operation of God. Therefore, till people's minds are turned to
Christ, whom God has sent, who is appointed to be for salvation to the ends of
the earth; till men come to reduce the government both of the soul and body to
him, as the captain of their salvation; till they come to be thus resigned,
they cannot come to the true faith.

Now when God works this resignation in us, a man will reflect upon himself
and say, alas I have been mine own keeper too long, I see I have gone off from
God, now I will return to him, and resign up myself to the Lord, that he may
work in me what he pleases to work: When men come to this resignation of soul,
they have faith given them, they must believe God will never leave them nor
forsake them, but he will magnify his power in their weakness; I will rest my
soul upon him, and cast my care upon him that cares for me; it is not faith
barely in words, and in the articles of the creed, but it is a faith in the Son
of God, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given; I may expect a share of
it, he will give me a little, if I come to him for it; and if I be faithful in
a little, he will give me more; the reason why you want power, is, because you
want faith; and the reason of your want of faith, is, because you want a
resignation to the will of God; you will be your own carvers, and your own
keepers and guides. When you come to this resignation to the will of God, God
will give you power, and then you will find him the God of all grace; you are
what you are by the grace of God, and by his power, and by that power you will
obey his will: Here is faith that gives glory to God, to that God that takes
an unholy man and makes him holy; how does he this? By his holy spirit, which
is as fire that burns up that which is corruptible; then the man is well (I
speak according to the dictates of the spirit) when he is reconciled to God by
Christ Jesus, the Mediator between God and man, the Mediator of the new
covenant, who makes our peace. That you may come to the knowledge of the day
of the Lord's visitation, is what our souls labor and travel for, that you may
be in the unity of the same spirit after the desire of all nations is come; he
is come to you, that you may all say within yourselves, salvation this day is
come to our houses, and into our hearts.

SERMON XXXI. CHRIST ALL in ALL.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, June 10, 1688.
THE Lord Jesus Christ is the light, life and virtue that can only satisfy.
Christ is all in all.

There is nothing can satisfy the souls of the upright, unless they feel life
and virtue to flow from Christ Jesus; and this, whether it flow instrumentally
or immediately, always comfort; it always refreshes the upright in heart.

Therefore all they that desire satisfaction to their souls, that meet together
upon that account, they ought to have their eyes turned to the Lord, that they
may be capable to understand the ministration of the spirit, whether in
themselves, or through any other. For while they are exercised outwardly, and
the dependence of their souls is upon that which is outward, there remains a
veil upon the mind, that they many times hear excellent things spoken of the
kingdom of God, but they understand them not, because they are alienated and
estranged in their minds from that of God in themselves, that should give them
an understanding. We never pretend to give people an understanding, we have
always said, that is the work of God. We have spoken many things of the kingdom
of God, excellent things have been revealed to us by his holy spirit, and the
same spirit has given us utterance, to speak of the great things of the law of
God; yet many, that have been constant hearers of these things, remain
ignorant, and are insensible, because they are not exercised in their own
measure of the grace and light of the Lord Jesus Christ, by which they should
receive and understand them.

This has made me often lament the case of many of the people of this city and
nation, who are daily hearers of the word of God preached, and retain it not in
their hearts: The sowers are gone out to sow, but many receive it in the
high-way-ground; the way that every thing can pass in, there they receive the
word sown, and the devil catches it away; and though they have heard excellent
things, of the strength, ability and power of God, that he ministers to his
people, they remain so weak and so feeble, that they are blown away with every
blast of the adversary, with every temptation, and with every snare and gin
that is laid for them, they are catched, and ensnared, and taken; and so these
come to meetings again and again, one year after another: I might say unto you,
wherefore do you come? It may be you may say, we desire to be satisfied; we
desire satisfaction for our souls. Do you so? Then I tell you, you may come all
the days of your life, and want it, and lay down your heads in sorrow at last
for all that. For all the words in the world will never communicate that
heavenly life and virtue which brings true satisfaction to the soul, unto any,
except to those that have an exercise in their own mind and spirits, in that
which they have of God; they must first be brought to know the way they should
walk in, and to believe that is the way: When people believe this is my way,
the light within is my way, the grace of God is my way; that searches and tries
my heart, that is my way I must walk in, speak in, and think in, and do all
that I have to do in; when I believe this is that way, then this belief
obliges men to take heed to their ways, to their footsteps. And here they that
are thus exercised, are in a tender care every step they take in their way; and
so perhaps they may receive great benefits by hearing the reports they do daily
hear from those that were in the way before them, and have traveled further in
it, than they ever yet have done. The experiences of the servants of the Lord,
are daily helpful to them, and they are daily comforted, strengthened, and
confirmed, to hear how they have sped, that have traveled through their
condition, and through their present state; the helps and advantages they have
met with, will do thee good, and comfort thee: But what is this to those that
are not in the way, that have not faith in the way? Though they have a clear
belief of the doctrine and way itself, yet they are not exercising themselves
to walk therein; for they do but as the rest of the world, saying, this good
man, and the other good man, made a good sermon. Why was it good? Not for any
good they found by it, but because he raised his doctrine well, and proved it
from the scripture, therefore we are obliged to believe it.

But now this good doctrine, if it be ever so good, and ever so firmly proved,
it brings forth no fruit to the amendment of life, saving in them that believe,
saving in them where there is an exercise in the fear of God, where people are
concerned for their soul's satisfaction. For they that look for true
satisfaction by this, or that, or the other way of the world, they spend their
days without satisfaction, and so at last they die in sorrow; and so it will be
to the end of this, and all succeeding generations.

And therefore, my friends, though I confess it is not a grief to me, but a
joy, to see people willing to hear the truth, and to come together in great
assemblies; tho I say, this is not a grief, but a joy, for I am not about to
discourage them that do so: Yet I must be plain with you; I know what I say,
and you will know it too one day, that all this meeting together, and gathering
in great assemblies, and hearing what is preached to you, with ever so great
delight to your minds, it will do you no good, unless you believe in the grace
of God, that has been ministered to you through Jesus Christ.

And when people come to this foundation, and build on it, and grow every day
more and more diligent in the exercise of their minds toward God, and examine
their way, and examine their footsteps, how they have walked yesterday, how
they have walked this day, and how their minds are exercised at this present
time, whether they have answered the grace of God; when they come to be thus
exercised, they will look upon themselves as bound in duty to give account to
God every moment, for their thoughts, words and actions. When they are thus
exercised, then let them come to meetings in the name of God, and hear the
experiences of them that have gone before them, and treasured up sayings in
their hearts for their encouragement, and they will find this will be a help to
them: But if people go and build a religion upon the sayings of this and that
man; nay, were it upon the sayings of Christ himself and his apostles, if they
were here to preach to them, and build a religion upon their words, and
sayings, and doctrines, without the operations of the Spirit of God upon their
hearts, inclining them to holiness and righteousness, this religion will do
them no good: By this, to make the best of it, they might make a shift to reach
to a form of godliness; people conforming themselves outwardly, to the outward
precept or command from without, it might amount to a form of godliness; yet it
might be supposed and granted, that the power of God, the power of divine life
and virtue, where it comes, it does sanctify and season the mind, and bring men
into an awful reverence of the living God, their Maker, that they might stand
in awe, and not sin against him; for here is the life of religion.

This has a great difference from the manner of building men in religion, that
many have been acquainted withal. They tell us, our fathers before us were
built up in these forms, and modes, and methods of religion; they received so
many doctrines, ordinances, sacraments and articles; and when these are
received, believed and professed, there is a saint for you, there is a child of
God, and a member of the church. How came he to be so? He was instructed in all
the principles of the Christian religion, and subject to all the ordinances of
the church, says one; and says another, he could speak excellently concerning
the doctrine of our religion; therefore he is certainly a child of God, and a
member of Christ; but all this acceptance of the principles of the Christian
religion, of doctrines, and ordinances, and sacraments; all this will not
amount to the purifying of the heart, and cleansing and purging of the
conscience; nay, it would not come to a far less matter, to the bridling of the
tongue; but they would be in a passion upon the least provocation, and upon the
least disgust and distaste given them, their tongues would run over into wrath,
and into wantonness, and profaneness; and upon any occasion and provocation
given, their corrupted words would prevail, and lead them into deceit and
covetous practices; and though the fruits and works of the old man remain, yet
they will follow the principle of the regenerate, as far as they consist in
words.

If our Lord Jesus Christ say, except a man be born again he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God, then this old corrupt birth will preach a sermon upon this
text, and profess it. How many have taken upon them to preach a sermon, upon
some excellent sayings of Christ, that never knew what regeneration was; for
the new birth always has a new life; but they have lived the life of carnal
corrupt fallen man, and yet preach a sermon upon regeneration: Thus the
minister has done, and the people have believed him, and have been gathered
into such and such a church; for most put themselves into one church or other;
they have been covenanted Christians, members of a church; but they have wanted
that which makes a Christian, a religious man, viz. the answer of a good
conscience.

A true Christian, he is bound to be an obedient child unto God, that begat him
of his own will, by the word of truth; and such a one may be in expectation of
an answer of peace from God, through Jesus Christ, in whom he has believed,
and by whom he is reconciled to God. If you take away this new birth, and this
new nature, and an answer of peace, from God to the soul, then tell me what the
Christian religion is, more than the religion of Heathens and Pagans, that
worship stocks and stones? All the rest is but talk, and men are never a whit
the better for it: One man may excel another in talk and discourse: A debauched
man many times has been able to talk at a great rate, and to speak notable
things; and some have been ready to say, it is a pity a man of such excellent
parts should lead a wicked life: But alas! if such a one can talk of the power
of God still, and the devil has power over him; or if he speak highly of the
wisdom of God, yet he himself plays the fool abominably; so that by such a kind
of life, and such a kind of religion, people never attain to satisfaction;
after forty, or fifty, or sixty years spent therein, they must after all, lay
down their heads in sorrow, when they have been constant keepers to the church,
and sayers of their prayers, and receivers of the sacrament, and steadfastly
believe the articles of the creed, and make profession of all the parts of the
Christian religion; yet after all, they must lay down their heads in sorrow:
Why, what is the matter? what did they want? They wanted faith in the power of
God, that should enable them to overcome their sin, and live in obedience to
God; and they wanted to their outward profession, the answer of a good
conscience, and justification through Christ the Mediator.

They talked of redemption through Jesus Christ, but were never redeemed from
their sins: This is so evident and plain, that there is no speaking to the
contrary: If you see a drunkard, or a swearer, or an unclean person, and if he
shall preach, and make an excellent sermon of the redemption that there is in
Christ, and therein tell you, what great benefits they receive by Christ, that
are true believers; and that Christ is a Redeemer, and redeemeth them from the
curse of the law, and from the guilt of sin, and reconcileth them to God; so
that he that was under the curse of the law, and an heir of wrath, is now a
child of God: Now if you come to examine this man, and ask him, whether he is
redeemed, and delivered from sin, so that sin has no more dominion over him,
he will tell you, no: What not redeemed, when thou have been a believer thus
long? Art thou still under the bondage and captivity of sin? Then thou art
under the government of some other master than Christ; some other master has
rule over thee, if thou art not redeemed from thy swearing, lying, drunkenness,
and uncleanness; if thou art led to these things, thou are under the power and
government of some other master than Christ. Now this has startled people,
when they have been thinking, that they have been baptized persons, and
professing Christians, and they have flattered themselves with a groundless
confidence, let me die when I will, this night, or to morrow, I shall be saved
by Christ; I am an heir of the kingdom of God: Let me tell thee, thou
dishonourest the name of God by thy presumption.

When people come to examine matters, and read over the book of their
consciences, and see what servants they have been to the devil, how the devil
has led them up and down at his will, those that were covenanted Christians,
followers of Christ; when the devil has said to them, follow me, then say
thou I will; when the devil says, follow me to this and the other evil thing,
I see I cannot resist; I cannot withstand the temptation; I was overtaken, and
surprised, and led away by such an allurement, and ensnared by it: I pray thee
leave off professing, for thou disgracest the Lord Jesus Christ; he and his
disciples did not so: He was tempted as thou art, and his disciples were
tempted as thou art; so were Christians of old time; and Christians that live
in the present time do meet with many temptations, but they are not at the
devil's beck and call, as thou art.

The apostle Paul, in one passage of his life, we find came to be awakened and
startled: There was a light from Heaven shone about him, he heard the voice of
Christ speaking to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and he said, who
art thou Lord? and the Lord said, I am JESUS whom thou persecutest; it is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks; and he trembling and astonished said,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts, ix. 4. He was brought to this pass
after his convincement, but before that he was overcome and led captive; and
when he would do good, evil was present with him: To will, says he, is
present, but how to perform I know not; but he did not call this a happy state.
He did not say then, I am in a good condition, When I am led captive by the
devil at his will: The good that I would do, I do not, and I am carnal, and
sold under sin: He does not say, this is a good condition, I am satisfied with
it; see what he calls that condition; he gives it a more right name than many
do nowadays, that say, this is the state of God's children; that the best of
all God's children have not power to live without sin, and overcome all their
corruptions, that they sin in their best duties, and can do nothing but sin,
and that sin mixeth itself in all their holy duties and performances: Many of
their ministers tell them, that if they think they can perform any duty without
sin, they deceive themselves, and run the hazard of being accursed. But they
learned not this of Christ, but of some other matter. Paul gave this state
another name; I would you were as wise when you are in this state and
condition. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? I see a wretchedness
in this condition; I see, if I be not delivered out of it, I must perish to all
eternity. This is not a state to live in; who can live at ease in such a
condition as this? Who can but cry out, who shall deliver me from this body of
sin and death? Alas! we hear no such cry now among priests or people, and
separate congregations: I fear this cry is almost lost among us, unless it be
some few that hear the voice of God, and feel such a stroke of the divine power
as Paul did, and answer to the heavenly voice. I confess that I myself have
heard such a cry, and have been sensible of my woeful captivity and bondage, by
reason of sin. And though I had a mind to do good, I could not do it; it was my
desire that I might sin no more, I would not sin against the Lord, if I could
avoid it; and when I would do good, I found that evil was present with me; but
I was far from sitting down there, and saying, this is the state and condition
of God's people; it is as well with me as it was with the apostle Paul,
therefore I will sit down in this state: The people of God cannot find
satisfaction in such a state as this; though I confess, that God's peculiar
people at first: came to this state, for their conviction; and the opening of
their minds, and enlightening their understandings, to see the evil of their
ways; but they do not come to this state, as to their rest, and then persuade
themselves that they are in the condition of the children of God; but they give
their state a right name, and cry out, O wretched wan that I am! what a
miserable condition am I fallen into! I did not see it before: Now my eyes are
opened, now my understanding is illuminated, now I see that the corruption of
my nature prevails against the grace of God; and when I would join with the
grace of God, and the motions of his Holy Spirit, the enemy is present to lead
me away; I am not now in a happy state, but I am so far advanced that I am
convinced of my miserable and wretched state and condition; if some way or
other be not found for my deliverance, I shall never see the face of God with
comfort. Then arises that cry, who shall deliver me? Thus the apostle Paul
(Romans vii.) sets forth the state of his convincement, and how miserable a
condition he was in: Then he goes further, and tells you how it was with him: I
thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. O! I have cause enough to thank God,
I am not a wretched man now, I am not carnal, sold under sin; I am not led
captive by the devil at his will now. Why how so? the apostle says, the law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has set me free from the law of sin and
death. Here is something to glory, and to comfort the soul in: The law of the
Spirit of life triumphed in his soul, and delivered him from the law of sin and
death, and redeemed him from the power of sin, and made him serve God with
freedom and liberty. I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: I would have
all come to this, to thank God; not only in words, but in reality, in deed and
truth. For one may teach a parrot to talk over these words; but it is the law
of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, that will make you free from the law of
sin and death.

This is a hard lesson, therefore you must go home into your own consciences,
before you can make a right judgment of things, and give a right answer to
yourselves. The law of the spirit of life will set thee free from the law of
thy passion, and of thy pride and covetousness, and sensuality, and the law of
thy carnal inclinations. Art thou set free from these?

Now when people come to examine themselves, they have no way to flee to, but
they must take up a daily cross, and trust to the Lord Jesus for their
deliverance; who has enlightened them, to see their wretched and woeful state;
and illuminated their understandings, that they might come to him, in order to
their being delivered from the dominion of sin.

The greatest part of the world think this is a thing impossible, and therefore
do not hope to be set free from the bondage of their sins. Which of these ways
is it that thou take? I am afraid many of you have taken the wrong way: I
judge no one in particular, but I speak this in faithfulness and love to your
souls.

If there be any (...), that are sensible of their sins, and in a captivated
state under sin and satan, who have despaired of ever being for at liberty, and
have said, it is a vain thing to expect it; for some learned men have told
them, that there is no deliverance from sin in this world, therefore it is in
vain for me to strive, in vain for me to engage myself in a continual care and
conflict, in a continual warring and watching against sin; for this deliverance
can never be obtained in this life: It is in vain to seek for a thing that can
never be found, and to strive for that which can never be obtained. If there be
any such here present, I have this to say to them, that the Lord, in his
infinite mercy, has done two great things for you, to help you out of this
despair, of obtaining a full deliverance from the bondage of your sins.

First, God has placed a witness for himself in your bosoms, in your
consciences. Let me ask you, have ye not got victory over many sins and
temptations, that you have been assaulted with, from your childhood to this
day? I might challenge any person in this assembly, when a temptation has been
presented before you, has there not been something within you, to tell you of
the danger of complying with it? Has not thy conscience warned thee, and
called upon thee, O take heed, do not this evil thing, do not cheat thy
neighbor, do not commit this sin; whether drunkenness, or uncleanness, or
whatsoever sin thou wast tempted to: Now, did thou join to that voice in
thine own conscience? And did it not help thee over the temptation? And when
thou did escape the sin, wast thou not glad of it? and did thou not rejoice
that thou obtainedst victory over it? Satan laid a snare, and an opportunity
before me, to commit such a sin; but I did not join with it, and now I am glad
of it. It was not only the devil's fault, for he came to his own, but there was
an evil inclination in my heart to it: How came it to pass thou did not do
it? I knew it was a sin against the Lord. How did thou know that? I knew in
my conscience, that if I did it, I must sin against light, and against
conviction, and against grace received; and that was the reason I did not do
it. Thus thou acknowledgest thine own conscience helped thee against the
temptation.

Now I appeal to all your consciences, that hear me this day, whether God has
not done this kindness for you; and there is none here but has been some time
helped out of temptation? I do not believe that ill of any, that they comply
with all the temptations they meet with, but the light in their consciences
has shown them the evil of sin, and they have been kept out of it, and they
have been glad of it afterward.

Now this is one great kindness, which God has done for every one of you, in
order to help you out of this despair of being delivered from your sins.

Despair in the common notion of it, is that which makes a man doubt of his
eternal salvation: I shall go to hell when I die; there is no mercy for me.
This despair has so wrought upon people, that many have lost their wits, and
common sense, and at last made away with themselves; many have been distracted
and undone in this world, while they lived in it, and at last have dispatched
themselves out of it. And there is another despair; a despair of getting
victory over their corruptions, and obtaining a freedom from sin: This latter
despair, this nation is generally fallen into; though the effects of the other
despair is lamentable to behold, the effects of this will be as bad one day, if
not prevented by rectifying that mistake men lie under. Why should thou
despair of the power of God to help thee, and of the grace of God, and of the
good will of God for thy deliverance? if thou will not join with the grace of
God, and the power of God that is ready to help thee, and give deliverance from
thy sins, the consequence will be dreadful at the last. Therefore believe in
that grace of God, which has helped thee against some temptations, and given
thee victory over some sins, that it will, if thou faithfully join with it,
give thee victory over all.

Secondly, Consider God has done another kindness for thee, he has sent his
light and truth into thy heart, to engage thee in a war against sin: There are
a great many faithful soldiers of Christ, that have fought this battle before
you, and have obtained the victory, and they will tell you, they never went out
to war in their own names, but in the name of the Lord JEHOVAH: When they
relied upon him, and in meekness and fear waited upon him, he gave them power
to overcome; and they were made conquerors, and more than conquerors; for they
have overcome those enemies, that sometimes overcame them; and Christ has
fixed and settled them in this conquest, never to be overcome more. Here is
both an outward and an inward evidence: The outward evidence will do you no
good, till you come to lay hold of the inward evidence in your own hearts; then
the outward evidence that God sends, will be serviceable to you.

Therefore, my friends, I tell you (as I said before) nothing will satisfy the
soul, but the virtue and life that flows into it from the fountain of life;
here is the way to it. If you should hear of a treasury, and store of bread
laid up for all that are willing to come to it; if you knew not the way to come
to it, and were ready to perish with hunger, what a cry would there be among
you! If a man should come and tell you where there is such a treasury of bread,
when you are ready to perish with hunger, and tell you the way to it is
intricate and narrow, but that he himself has been there, and that he can tell
you the ready way to it, and that he himself had relief and supply, and great
plenty bestowed upon him, and that he would bring you thither, O how welcome
would such a one be to you! O that you were as wise in spiritual things, and as
much concerned for your souls, as you are for your bodies, and would take the
advice of Gods ministers! They would turn you to the light within; the grace of
God in your own hearts, which you are partakers of; and speaking to you in the
name of God, desire you to follow the duties of your own consciences, and you
will come quickly where there is bread enough. By that light within, you will
see your state is not so good as you imagined it was. This oracle within, is
that which you must live with, and dwell with; you must go home with it, and
lie down with it, and you must rise with it, and follow the dictates of it; if
you do so, before the week be out, you will have experience to tell me, if I
should come and ask you, I have got more victory over my sins, by following the
dictates of the light of the grace of God within my own bosom, than by all my
reading, hearing and praying, and performing other duties.

Make a trial of this, and you will find the presence of God with you, and that
he is a God at hand, and not afar off; and if you buckle on your spiritual
armor, the captain of your salvation will not be far off, but be present
before you.

Therefore keep your eye unto Jesus, the author and finisher of your faith, and
you will be able to do all things through Christ that strengthens you; and you
will be able to conquer those sins and temptations that have conquered you.

May the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, break down the body of sin
and death, and bring you into the glorious liberty which God has prepared for
his children.

SERMON XXXII. CHRISTIANS should often think on the NAME of the LORD.
Preached at DEVONSHIRE-HOUSE, July 17, 1692.
THE people of God in former ages, did often think upon the name of the Lord: I
would it might be the daily practice of all that make profession to be the
people of God in our days, to think often upon the name of the Lord. This you
know is an inward exercise, invisible and known to none but God; he only knows
when you are met together, whether you are thinking upon his name, whether the
exercise of your minds is upon his power, or upon whatsoever else your minds
are engaged. They whose exercise and desire is, to feel God's power, and to be
acquainted with his name, the Lord is nigh to them, to reveal his mighty power,
and his name to them, and they are a people that partake of his goodness and of
his virtue, and have an experimental knowledge of the diverse administrations of
both his judgments and mercies to their own souls, and so they can proceed from
thinking to speaking of the goodness of God from the experience that they have
in themselves, that the Lord is good to them.

For all that some do in their manner of speaking of God and his goodness, and
crying up the name of the Lord, it is all worth nothing, it is but noise: But
every one that partakes in his own soul of something of the divine virtue and
goodness that flows from God invisibly to him through Jesus Christ, he has
assurance in himself that he speaks the truth: It is not mere words, made ready
to his hand, but it is his own knowledge and experience of that which God has
wrought in him by his own Spirit; there are none that think upon the name of
the Lord, and his power, and the working of it, but they are able to speak of
it effectually and truly.

I know it has been, and is the practice among many, that they are able to
speak of God's goodness from what they find in the writings and sayings of some
that lived before them, that did bear an honorable testimony of God's goodness
in their religion; and they learn to say it over again in their particular age:
But what has this tale that they have told, wrought? This report they have
made, how God was with the Christians of old, the primitive Christians and
martyrs; they have told a tale of these things, and what has it effected? It
has either brought forth Christians, or it has not.

The way for people to be grounded and settled in divine knowledge, is for
every one to speak what they know: And if they know nothing of these things, to
say nothing of them. And the way for them to come to receive divine knowledge,
is, by thinking, by meditating, by considering of that converse that God has
with their own souls; for there is a way provided for all men to converse with
God that made them: Every man and woman may ask questions of him, and may have
answers from him, if they have patience enough to wait for them; every soul
here present, that with seriousness of mind shall ask of God what their state
and condition is, if they were to die presently, God will tell them, he will
answer them; he will shine unto them by the light of his Son Jesus Christ, and
let them know whether they are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of
their iniquity still, or whether they are redeemed out of it, and brought into
covenant with himself: But will you believe his answer? I would have no man go
about to ask such a question of God unless he has a mind to believe the answer
that God gives him. To what purpose should men ask, if they ask amiss? If they
ask without faith, they do not believe except the answer please them.

Many, in our days, have put up their petitions and prayers to God, that he
would discover to them the state and condition of their souls: The Lord has
answered them, and notwithstanding all the profession that they have made of
his name, and of their faith in his Son Jesus Christ, and of the work of
redemption, yet he has often declared thou art still unredeemed, thou art
still in thy sin, and lusts, and concupiscence prevail over thee; thou art
still in bondage. This is God's answer to many; but there is something arises
in their minds, that they are not willing to believe this; I would think better
of myself than this: What if thou do think better of thyself? Thou art never
the better, for the word of the Lord stands sure. There is no removing of it;
there is no denial of the truth. If this truth condemn thee, all the world
cannot justify thee; and this truth by which God condemns the sinner is in the
sinner's own heart: What will he do with it? It is in the sinner's conscience;
it does not only condemn him by book, out of this chapter and that verse, out
of this author and the other author, but he is condemned by God's true and
faithful witness, in his own conscience. Thou will not believe it; but if thou
believe not this, then thou remainest in thy unbelief of the truth; and
nothing else but believing it can save thee; no counsel else can deliver or
redeem thee.

So that the best advice and counsel that I can give a people in this case, is
this; that when they come to such a religious meeting as this is, they would
come with a mind prepared and fitted to think upon the Lord; to think upon his
name, and the way by which he brings people to himself; for no man can be
called a child of God, that does not partake of his nature. If a man be ever so
wise, and rich, and great in the world; if he be a prince or an emperor,
without this he is a child of wrath. Now if these children of wrath meet with
something that convinces them; if they are touched and become a sensible
people, then crowns and diadems are nothing to them. Such a one will say, if I
be a child of wrath, a captive to sin and my own lusts and concupiscence, yet
for all that I will go to a religious meeting, where I hope the word of God
will be preached; I hope to meet with something there that will do me good; and
I have a desire that I may be translated out of a natural state, from being a
child of wrath, to be brought into the kingdom of God. If I have this desire in
me, God that made me, wrought it in me; for by nature we cannot so much as
think a good thought. When men think of being better, and of amending their
ways, and doing their souls good, these are very good thoughts in themselves.
When such thoughts are begotten in any men's hearts, I would have them to
ascribe them to the grace of God, and nothing else. Preachers may do much where
these desires are begotten; but it is not in their power to beget these desires.

Many have come to a meeting with loose, profane and wandering minds; and
though many good things have been spoken to them, it has not reached so far as
to beget good desires, their hearts have been so alienated from the grace of
God in themselves, which is the great superior worker, to which we are but
servants and ministers; there is none can beget any thing, but he in whom all
power is. They that are under the power of darkness, the devil begets in them
wantonness and vanity, profaneness and hardness of heart. Some go away from a
meeting without being touched and persuaded, and they have no good hope of
being better: But where people are really touched in their spirits, with a
desire after something that will do them good, they must come to the fountain
of good, the God that made them, and they must think upon him; if they cannot
see his glory, and hear his voice, yet they can think upon him. This is the
least duty of a Christian, to think upon the name of the Lord, when their minds
are exercised about divine matters, about the state and condition of their poor
souls. If I die this night, what will become of me? This and that sin I have
committed; how shall I be able to answer to God for one of a thousand of all my
loose thoughts, words and actions? They that come to a consideration of this,
and a due sense of their state and condition, though it is such a state that
they do not like; though it is not such as it ought to be, yet notwithstanding
it may be better; they may be brought out of it into a better condition.

Now this is the duty of all, to wait upon God, the fountain of all good, that
they may receive something from God, for every good and perfect gift comes from
above, from the Father of lights, the Father of thy light and my light, that
light comes to us from the Father of lights: If we have any perfect gift
bestowed upon us, it is bestowed by God; therefore you will grant that we are
all obliged, from the greatest to the least, to wait upon him, if we have the
least expectation from God, by meeting, otherwise we had better keep away.

But I am apt to judge that the most here are come with some desire, that if it
please God they may receive benefit by their meeting: Where shall they have it?
They say, if such a man preaches, then I can edify much by him: This is a
great mistake; for, let who will preach, there is nobody can receive any
benefit, but it must be from the Lord, as the fountain of good; for the best
preachers in the world are but instruments in the hands of God; if God does not
bless his labors, the preacher can do nothing to the souls of people; he can
sound the truth in their ears outwardly, but he can reach no further, God only
speaks to the heart. If thou mind the preacher and not God that made thee, all
his preaching will do thee no good; it may indeed help thee to a notion or
speculation, but that comes not to the inside, that will be no better, the
inside wants mending.

There are great deformities, scars, spots, stains, wounds and lameness upon
the souls of men, by reason of their sins, lusts and corruptions; and there
wants a remedy, and there is no physician of value but God that made us after
his own image. The devil has brought in deformity, he has made one proud,
another cruel, another wanton, another an oppressor, another malicious; this is
all the devil's work: And for this end Christ Jesus came into the world, that
he might destroy the works of the devil. He came to destroy pride, malice and
lust; these are the devil's works, that Christ came to destroy: Why does he not
do it? He will destroy all the devil has wrought in every man that will be
subject to him: Can a surgeon set a bone, if the patient be not subject to
his hand?

But this is far beyond all comparison; Christ has received all power in
Heaven and Earth, yet he always looks for a willing people; he sends the day of
his power upon a people, and he works upon their hearts by an invincible
power; he makes them willing to be helped, and and healed, and cured, and then
he cures them. I dare say, there is not one here that is willing to be
reformed, and to submit to Christ to be saved and redeemed by him, but he will
do it; he that is willing and obedient, shall eat of the good of the land, and
shall know the good of redemption. See whether it be come to a state of
redemption; here is universal grace offered; for the light of Christ Jesus
enlighteneth every one of you; it shows you your lost state and condition: When
we see our condition bad, that it is not as it ought to be, who would not have
it better?

What means prayer, that Christian duty? What shall we pray for? Must not
people be sensible in themselves what they should pray for, before they come to
pray? And what is it that will make them sensible but the light and grace of
God? They see their own wants when God works faith in their hearts, and they
believe that God can supply those wants. Why should I go to a beggar, to pray
him to give me an hundred pounds? I believe he cannot do it, therefore I will
not pray to him for it: Now necessity brings people to prayer, but there must
be faith in him to whom we pray, that he is able to supply our wants, and
relieve our necessities. Upon this account the apostle says, he that comes to
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. He must first know that there is a God to come unto, and then that he
is a rewarder.

Here is the foundation of all true religion and true worship; they that go to
God and say their prayers, and join with others in saying their prayers, if
they have no sense of God, they had as good hold their tongues, for their
praying is to no purpose: They that pretend to believe in God, without an
experimental power of God working upon their hearts, their belief is not worth
a straw; without their respect to the power of God, all their belief is
nothing; but if they know that God has such an operation upon them, that no
man or woman in the world can discover that to them, that God discovers, then
they know that God is the searcher of hearts and the trier of the reins,
Jeremiah, xvii. 10.

Suppose I know that there is a God, and at the same time I believe that he
will never hear me; that I am a reprobate creature, and that he has cast me
off forever, and that he has sealed condemnation upon me, to all eternity.
What reason has such a one to pray? This is a desperate condition. But while
we believe there is a God, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him, it is not in vain to pray; yet there is something antecedent too to
prayer; there is knowledge, and faith by reason of that knowledge, that God is
a rewarder: He that has this, let him pray in God's name. But what must he
pray for? He must not offer the sacrifice of fools; he must have regard to his
lips; if it be mental prayer, he must pray for that he stands in need of; it is
for something he prays, that God has revealed by his Holy Spirit; this he
stands in need of; it is something that he needs; it is power to overcome
corruption, and power overcome temptation, that he stands in need of; he stands
in need of a Mediator to procure for him the pardon of his sins: These things
he stands in need of, then let him pray; he that is afflicted, let him pray.

So that if a man or woman go to prayer, they must pray to God, in the belief
of his goodness and mercy, that he will bestow some blessing upon them, that
may be for the better, that may be for their good. When they come to a meeting,
to worship God, and hear the word spoken outwardly, they must pray for
something that may be for their good; Lord give me something that may support
my soul, and something that may enable me to withstand temptation. People
should have their minds thus exercised, and they should think upon the name of
the Lord according to their particular necessity; they should pour out their
supplication to the Lord: This is such worship as God looks for, and such as he
is pleased with; he will deliver those that thus pray to him out of
temptations, so that they shall not prevail over them: One man's temptation is
of one sort, and another's of another sort; but they are all delivered by the
grace of God, and helped over them, upon their prayer to God; for they find by
experience that he is a God hearing prayers.

Now, when we have prayed, what is the next work? It is to wait for an answer
of our prayer. I prayed the other day to God for power to withstand such a
temptation; when that temptation comes again I do expect that God will answer
my prayer. Do thou so? Then I pray thee have an eye to the same grace of God
that convinced thee, and showed thee the temptation; and have thy faith
exercised upon that grace of God, and thou will find it sufficient for thee, I
will warrant thee: Let the devil come with a temptation ever so suitable and
subtle, keep thine eye upon the grace of God, and it will deliver thee. This
was the case of Paul; when a messenger of satan was sent to buffet him, he
besought the Lord thrice: The temptation did attend him, and God gave him an
answer of his prayer; my grace is sufficient for thee. As if he had said, let
the devil come with ever so much power he shall never overcome thee.

I speak to those that are well skilled in this kind of work, and have met with
sharp temptations, and sometimes perhaps they have been overcome by them, and
at other times they have withstood them: What is the difference; why, one while
they are loose and careless, and did not pray for the assistance of divine
grace; another while they kept close to it, and were delivered.

Therefore when you come to meeting, with a desire to receive benefit from God,
with your expectations Godward, to receive comfort from the hands of the Lord,
let your eye be upon him, and the working of his grace in your own hearts, and
hearken to that voice that is within you, and it will be more effectual than
mine. If you find the work of grace in you to be the same thing that I speak
of, then believe me for the truth's-sake; believe me because you find the same
work and testimony within yourselves. And I am persuaded there is no one here,
but sometime or other have withstood that temptation which they have met
withal. Pray tell me how they did it? Why, the temptation came unto me, and it
pleased God to show me the evil of it, that it was a bad thing if I yielded to
it. How did thou resist it? had not the devil a coercive power over thee, to
force thee to it, whether thou would or not? That God that showed me the
evil of it, delivered me from the evil; I was not judged and condemned in
myself, because I found myself delivered from it; there are none of you, if you
would not be lazy and idle, but you might be delivered every day, and have
experience in your own souls, that when the devil comes and tempts, the Lord is
at hand to deliver you by his grace and power.

So that the only way for people to be preserved from sin and iniquity, is to
have a reverent respect to that grace of God which they have already received.
I would have that vain conceit, that has long reigned in the world, taken out
of your head. When you see a wicked husband, wife, or child, you say, if they
had grace they would be better; I say they have some degree of grace already;
God has sent forth his grace and truth, to teach men to deny ungodliness, so
that I would not pray that God would give my husband, wife, or child, or friend
grace, but that he would break their hard hearts, that they may submit to the
grace of God that is already bestowed upon them. I believe there is not a
person here that is utterly void of all grace; but they walk not according to
it, they trample upon it: For every one being endued with a measure of grace,
through Christ, our duty therefore is to have a reverential regard to the grace
of God, that we have received.

What grace have I received from God, may some say? I have received so much
grace from God (thou may truly say) that I can tell when the devil brings a
temptation to me; when he tempts me to uncleanness, theft, wrath, malice, or to
deceive my neighbor, I have so much grace that I can tell I am tempted in such
a respect; the grace of God shows me this is a temptation of the devil: But the
question is, whether I am subject to the grace of God, and love his grace
better than the profit or pleasure of a temptation? It comes as a bait, but the
devil cannot make me do that which he tempts me to; it is not in the power of
all the devils in hell, or of his servants on earth, to make me do this evil
thing: The light of my own conscience shows it to be a temptation. Now I am
free and at my choice, whether I will love the profit and pleasure that comes
with the temptation more than the grace of God: I believe there is no one that
has been tried by a temptation, but they can say so: I leave it to him that
searches and tries all your hearts, and knows your thoughts, to judge whether
you joined with the temptation, that you might have the profit and pleasure of
it, or joined with his grace, that thereby you might have resisted the
temptation: You that have done the one and the other, tell me which is the best
bargain; when you have joined with the temptation, that you might have the
profit and pleasure that came along with it; or when you joined with the grace
of God, that showed you the evil and danger of the temptation. The same God
speaks to you that spoke to Cain, if thou do well, shall not thou be
accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door. If thou have yielded
to a temptation, sin lies at the door, there is a breach made between God and
thy soul.

The same man at another time, having smarted so deeply for it, being judged by
his own conscience, when he meets the temptation again, he says, let the
profit or pleasure go where it will, if I yield to this temptation I cannot go
to God but as a criminal to a judge; let the profit or pleasure be what it
will, I will not join with this temptation. Can the devil force thee to comply
with this temptation? No, if thou be true to the grace of God in thy own heart,
it will make thee able to resist the strongest devil in hell. Christ has
purchased for the sons and daughters of men a power to withstand the devil's
power, and all his devices and temptations, and you shall obtain victory, and
have dominion over them. If you have a mind to grow in this dominion, when the
devil comes to tempt you, resist him, and you shall, through the power of
Christ, be enabled to overcome.

If satan tell thee of the profits and pleasures of this world, remember that
the world passes away, and the lust of it, but peace with God endures forever:
By the grace of God you will be able to overcome the devil and all his angels.
This power is given to all that believe and obey the gospel: If you would have
benefit by it, you must be exercised in resisting of temptation, and have
regard to the grace of God, and the workings of it in your own hearts; and then
you will be able to say, when a temptation comes, promising profit and
pleasure, how can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Turn your
eye to God's favor, which is better than life, and you will be more than
conquerors; you will say the fear of God seized upon my soul, and the grace of
God came to my assistance, and was as a bulwark against temptation. Here
praises will go up to God; here will be occasion for thee to speak good of his
name. Remember what David said; my soul, praise the Lord, that has delivered
me from the horrible pit. Thus David and the saints of old praised God in their
day, and why should not we? They breathed forth living praises and
thanksgivings for the deliverances wrought for them; and shall not we do it?

Now this cannot be done without thinking upon his name, the name of that God
that made us: Here I live in the world, I live and breathe still, I have
health, and strength, and an estate, how came I by all this? Did I make myself?
No, there is a God that gave me life, and breath, and being; he holds forth the
hand of mercy to gather me to himself, and to redeem me from all iniquity, that
I might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of
my life: If I believe this, I shall rejoice in him, and love and praise him,
and daily wait upon him for the accomplishment of his work. He desires not the
death of sinners: If you believe the Almighty, it is impossible for him to lie,
all things are possible to him except that; he says, he would not the death of
him that dies: What would he have then? He would have you turn and live: What
means does he use? What I would have done I would use means to accomplish it.
You would say, what means has he not used? What is it that God does more wish
for than that men would repent, return and live, and be happy forever? He has
created them, and given them life and breath, and continued his grace to them,
that they might have time to prepare for eternity; and he has given his good
spirit to instruct them, but they have rebelled against him. He has sent forth
his word, the gospel of salvation, which has been preached to them; and he
has waited to be gracious, and exercised much patience and long-suffering
toward them; so that I may say, what means has he omitted? He has planted
them as a vineyard, in a very fruitful hill; and he has fenced it, and
gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and
built a tower in the midst of it, and made a wine press therein, and he looked
that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought wild grapes. Judge, I pray
you says the Lord, between me and my vineyard: What could have been done more
to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?

But notwithstanding all your unfruitfulness, the day of your visitation is
continued, the Lord is willing to show mercy to your souls. This is all the
Lord your God requires of you, that you would think upon his name, believe in
him and trust in him, and wait upon him for the operations of his grace in the
use of his ordinances, and your attendance upon them, and hearkening to his
voice, and obeying it, and so to hear that your souls may live.

I will affirm, that there is none of you here present, whether you be Quakers
or no, but you may meet with The divine operations of the power of God in your
own hearts, if you will regard it, and when you meet with these operations and
regard them not, I cannot help it; if you will resist the good things of the
Spirit of God, I cannot help it; if you will be of that mind, always to resist
the Holy Ghost; if as your fathers did so do ye, then you must all perish, both
you and your fathers; there is no escaping but by being subject to Christ
Jesus, and his quickening Spirit; if there be any divine operations that you
meet with in your own hearts, let me persuade you to submit and have regard to
them; for I know the devil is near at hand; and when people meet with divine
operations in their souls, that humble them and bring down their pride, and
convince them of the danger of their condition, he lies in the way and suggests
some poisonous thing that takes off the edge of these operations, that, they
may dislike them: It is true, they meet with the convictions of sin; but they
reckon they have that faith and belief in Christ, that does in the sight of God
obliterate all their sins that can be laid to their charge, both past and to
come. If I would look, say they, to the divine operation, or any thing wrought
in me, it were enough to make me mad; I look wholly to the merits of Christ; my
mind is wholly fixed upon him who is the author of eternal salvation; his
meritorious sufferings and obedience can obliterate and blot out all my sins.

My friends, I tell you, many a poor soul has split upon this rock by
undervaluing the divine operations of the Spirit upon their hearts; they make a
false and wrong application of the merits of Christ, which indeed are so great
that nobody can overvalue them; but we must not make a false application of
them, for this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the devil; he takes away the guilt of sin, not that you might live in
it still: Whosoever believes in Christ, shall have power over their sins and
not be under the dominion and power of sin; sin shall not have dominion over
you; for you are not under the law, but under grace. But God be thanked, you
were the servants of sin; though you have obeyed from the heart, the form of
doctrine which was delivered you: Being then made free from sin, ye became the
servants of righteousness, Romans vi, 14, 18.

But thou will say, I am guilty of a great deal of sin already, what shall
become of me for the guilt I have contracted?

If we confess and forsake our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all sin; 1 John, ix, 9. Here is a true application of
Christ, his merits and righteousness; when there is a confessing of sin to God,
and a forsaking of it, here is an offering and a sacrifice made to God by our
Lord Jesus Christ for the expiation of sin; he has by his precious blood
purchased the pardon of all my sins, that he might present me to God without
spot or blemish; here is a true application of the righteousness of Christ; but
how can I apply it to myself while I live in sin?

Here God's witness in the conscience of a sinner pleads against the sinner;
when he endeavors to believe that his guilt is taken away, and all his sins,
past, present and to come, are pardoned, while he continues to live in sin, and
sin has yet dominion over him.

Take heed you split not upon this rock; if you be humble Christians, you will
think upon the name of the Lord; and when ye find the operation of God's power
begetting good desires in you to hate sin and love righteousness, you will then
believe; you will then pray to the God of all grace; for the prayer of the
faithful is acceptable to him: The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, James v, 16.

Let your supplication therefore be poured forth unto God, to endow you with
power and wisdom to subdue all your spiritual enemies, and to conquer your
concupiscence, and the inordinate desires and affections of your own hearts,
that you may take up the cross of Christ and follow him as your great pattern,
and in his name, and by the help and assistance of his Holy Spirit, you may
know how to overcome all temptations.

His PRAYER after SERMON.
MOST glorious Lord God! wonderful is thy great power over all, which thou have
revealed and made manifest in this thy blessed day. Thy arm, O thou Almighty
God! is stretched forth; thou have touched a remnant with a sense of thy divine
love, whom thou have gathered unto thy name; thou have revealed thy great
salvation, and therewith thou have made glad the souls of thy children; thou
have endeared thyself unto us by the discovery and manifestation of thy
abounding love, who did love us, when we were strangers, and did preserve
us when we were enemies, and brought a glorious day of visitation upon us, and
opened our eyes to behold the light thereof, so that we were a people engaged
to speak good of thy name. Thou have declared and manifested to the sons and
daughters of men thy good will, and thy universal grace that thou art daily
extending to them, that all may be made partakers of the riches of thy house,
and of thy great salvation which by the Lord Jesus Christ thou have ordained.

And, O thou powerful God of Life: since the day that thou first gathered us,
thou have been with us, thou have been our guide, and our eyes have been
toward thee for instruction, thou have taught us and led us in the way in
which thou would have us to walk; thou have led us, O Lord, in the way
everlasting with the poor, the humble and the meek of the earth; and thou have
placed our feet, O Lord, near the everlasting mountain, which thou have exalted
upon the high kills of the earth, and thou have revealed the glory and the
splendour of thy house, thy holy dwelling place, and have raised breathings in
the hearts of thy people, that they may dwell in thy courts forever: And now,
Holy Father! thou have gathered a remnant, and brought a peculiar people to
trust in thy name; but still we do all that we do by thee; thou must be our
keeper, thou must be our preserver, therefore we wait upon thee; we expect all
from thy hand, therefore our applications are unto thee, that from day to day,
and from time to time, we may find thy living presence in the midst of us.

And, O living God of Life! thou have given thy children large experience that
thou art a God nigh at hand to us, in all our trials, in all our exercises; as
our eyes have been turned to thee, thou have preserved us, and revealed thy
heavenly power, O Lord, in preserving and delivering thy church and people,
that they may bear a testimony in their generation for thy great love, and the
great salvation that thou have wrought for them and made them partakers of.

Now blessed God of Life! the desires and supplications of thy people are unto
thee, for the glorifying of thy power, and the exalting of thy glorious name.

O Lord! let the mighty operation of thy power bow down all stout and stubborn
ones, that have rebelled against thee, and that have withstood the tenders of
thy grace, and the motions and strivings of thy Holy Spirit: Thou art able to
bow them, and to break their stony hearts; thou art able to speak effectually
to their souls, and to make them submit themselves to thee.

Holy and living Father! let the progress of thy word and gospel be great in
our day; let it have a free course and spread itself mightily to those that
believe not, to beget a feed of faith in their souls, that they may believe in
thy name, and trust in thy power, and wait to see the great work of redemption
wrought for the salvation of their immortal souls, before the day of their
visitation goes over.

Powerful God of Life! thy little remnant which thou have redeemed, keep them
by thy power, and preserve them in uprightness and cleanness of mind; preserve
them in the places and stations wherein thou have appointed them to dwell, that
so in all the trials, and tribulations, and distresses, that may come upon
them, they may be quiet and still, and in patience possess their souls; and let
them have strong consolation in that everlasting covenant which in thy Son thou
have made with them, and revealed to them; and let them not he moved and tossed
with the hurries of this world, with the tumults and disorders that evil men
make in it, and the storms and the tempests that are raised; but let their
hearts and minds be stayed upon thee, that they may know how to behave
themselves toward thee and one another, and toward all that are without, and
thereby glorify and magnify thy great name by the beauty of holiness shining in
their conversations, which may reach the consciences of men, that all that see
them may say, these are the plants that the right hand of God has planted, and
see the fruits that are brought forth from that root of life revealed in Christ
Jesus.

Powerful God of Life! carry on thine own work in this city and the whole
nation, and in other places among the people which thou have chosen and
gathered to thyself out of the world.

Powerful God of Life! remember those that groan in secret, making their moan
to thee, that they cannot lay hold of thy salvation for their souls: Prepare
them for that consolation that their souls are breathing after: They are night
and day wrestling with thee by earnest prayer, but what will all their
wrestling signify, except thy word and the power of thy grace assist them, and
teach them to lay hold of thy strength, that they may fight the good fight of
faith, that they may get the victory, and rejoice in thy salvation, and see the
glory of it? Thou see how the children of men are working and contriving
diverse ways for their own salvation; make them to know that all their own ways
and inventions are in vain.

Blessed God of Life! confound the devices of the ungodly that seek to lay
waste thy heritage; and all those that thou have gathered by thy word, do thou
preserve them, that they may serve thee with sincere and upright minds all the
days of their lives; and offer up daily thanksgivings and living praises to
thee, the true and living God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, through
thy eternal Spirit, who alone art worthy, God over all, blessed forever and
ever. Amen.

CONTENTS.
SERMON. I. THE Great Mediator of the Everlasting Covenant, PAGE. 3 SERMON. II.
Heart Preparation for receiving the Gospel, PAGE. 17 SERMON. III. The First and
Great Commandment, PAGE. 22 SERMON. IV. The Standard of Truth, PAGE. 45 SERMON. V.
The Great Duty of remembering our Creator, PAGE. 56 SERMON. VI. The Divine
Monitor, or Light from Heaven, PAGE. 70 SERMON. VII. The Inward Preacher, or the
Office of Conscience, PAGE. 84 SERMON. VIII. Saving Faith, the Gift of God alone,
PAGE. 96 SERMON. IX. Truth's Testimony against the Power of Sin and Satan, PAGE.
104 SERMON. X. Bearing the Cross of Christ, the True Mark of a Christian, PAGE.
111 SERMON. XI. The Spirit of Christ, the only True Guide, PAGE. 126 SERMON. XII.
Pure and Spiritual Worship, PAGE. 138 SERMON. XIII. The Divine Life of Christ
Jesus, PAGE. 148 SERMON. XIV. The Kingdom of God within, PAGE. 156 SERMON. XV. The
undefiled Way to Eternal Rest, PAGE. 165 SERMON. XVI. The Dawning of the Day of
Grace and Salvation, PAGE. 174 SERMON. XVII. The Excellency of Peace with God,
PAGE. 185 SERMON. XVIII. True Christianity, PAGE. 196 SERMON. XIX. The Great Work
of Man's Redemption, PAGE. 208 SERMON. XX. The Word of God a Christian's Life,
PAGE. 222 SERMON. XXI. The Necessity of a Holy Life and Conversation, PAGE. 234
SERMON. XXII. Baptism and the Lord's Supper, PAGE. 250 SERMON. XXIII. Christ the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, PAGE. 264 SERMON. XXIV. Captive Sinners set free by
Jesus Christ, PAGE. 275 SERMON. XXV. The Sheep of Christ, hear his Voice, PAGE.
291 SERMON. XXVI. No True Worship without the Right Knowledge of God, PAGE. 301
SERMON. XXVII. The Wonderful Love of God to Mankind, PAGE. 316 SERMON. XXVIII.
Salvation from Sin by Jesus Christ, PAGE. 327 SERMON. XXIX. The Acceptable
Sacrifice, PAGE. 335 SERMON. XXX. Christ the Way to Eternal Life, PAGE. 351 SERMON.
XXXI. Christ All in All, PAGE. 356 SERMON. XXXII. Christian's should often think
on the Name of the Lord. This last Sermon was preached at Devonshire-House, a
short Time before his Decease. PAGE. 369

