AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED IN THE BRICK MEETING HOUSE, IN THE CITY OF NEW HAVEN,
ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, A. D. 1787.

IT BEING THE ELEVENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.

BY DAVID DAGGETT, ESQUIRE, ATTORNEY AT LAW.

Per aspera ad astra.

NEW HAVEN, PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

At a Meeting of a very large Number of Gentlemen, at the State-House, in
New Haven, on the 4th. Day of July, A. D. 1787.
VOTED, That the Thanks of the Gentlemen present, be presented to DAVID
DAGGETT, Esquire, for the very instructive and elegant Oration, with which he
was pleased, this Day, to honor the public celebration of the anniversary of
the INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA; and that the Committee
appointed to superintend and conduct the Ceremonials of the Celebration,
request Mr. DAGGETT to favor them with a Copy thereof, for publication.

Committee.
ELIAS SHIPMAN, PIERPONT EDWARDS, RUSSEL CLARK, SAMUEL RUSSEL, TIMOTHY PHELPS,
THIS day completes eleven years since these United States became a free,
sovereign and independent empire. This event, much conduced to the
accomplishment of a revolution, which has been the favorite theme of the poet,
the historian and the orator, and the admiration of surrounding nations. -- In
consequence of this, it has been predicted of America, that she would be the
asylum for the oppressed, the seat of literature, and a theater on which there
would be the most illustrious displays of civil and religious liberty.

While with a prophetic eye, we could behold these things -- how easy to write,
how easy to speak, in the most elevated strains, in the celebration of the
anniversary of American Independence: But unhappily for him, who is requested
to speak on this day, those brilliant scenes are not yet realized, but are
intercepted by an almost impenetrable gloom. And, though for myself, I believe
God has designed this empire to be the most illustrious on earth, yet from
present appearances, and in the eye of reason, the thought appears rather
romantic. --

In describing what America was, and what she now is, you will witness for me,
or against me, that I speak with truth, or misrepresent. -- In describing what
she will be, in future, you will permit me to range uncontrouled, and
conjecture for myself.

The discovery and first settlement of this country, are known to every one. --
Observations on these subjects, would afford little entertainment; yet let it
be remembered, that even in this early period of our existence, we exhibited
some specimens of that fraud and injustice which has been too conspicuous ever
since. -- I mean in forcibly or fraudulently depriving the natives of their
possessions. -- We may now hug ourselves in the peaceable enjoyment of what
descended to us from generation to generation, without enquiring into the
validity of our title; but it is happy for us, that the denunciation of heaven,
which says, "Cursed is the man that removes his neighbors landmark," has not
also descended. -- In general, our ancestors were simple in their dress; diet,
and equipage -- submissive to government, and religious, even to superstition.
They were scrupulously punctilious in observing the duties of morality; yet,
through their great zeal, in many instances, carried into the most gross
absurdities. As literature began to flourish, and commerce extend itself,
luxury and its attending evils necessarily prevailed. -- From our primaeval
simplicity of manners, we soon degenerated into that licentiousness which is
ever to be found among the more polished parts of the world, and at the
commencement of the late war, though not as yet hackneyed in the ways of vice, we
were by no means signalized for that sacred veneration for religion and the
social virtues, which was so conspicuous a century or two before. -- A happy
people indeed we ought to have been, for our situation was, in many respects,
truly eligible. -- Now we look back, and speak of those glorious days, which we
saw antecedent to the war, and regret that they are fled. -- We call it an age
of liberty -- of religion -- of happiness -- We compare it with the present,
and pretend the deepest sorrow at the comparison. -- But in thus speaking, in
thus thinking, we exhibit a striking specimen of human weakness. The truth is,
we were then far from being happy. -- The same direful complaints were then
heard from the farmer, the merchant, and the various other professions. -- Our
fields, in their estimation, were then laid waste, with the destroying insect,
a drought or a flood. -- Our navigation was fettered by foreign nations, or
destroyed by hurricanes, and our political fabric tumbling from the corruption
of its members. Could we, as a nation, like Protius, assume a thousand
different shapes, still a spirit of restlessness and complaint would prevail.
In extolling the early periods of our existence, as a people, we much resemble
an individual, who is continually passing encomiums upon the days of his youth.
-- Nothing is more common, than to hear men say, "the happiest days I ever
spent, were when a child." This is to be ascribed to a passion we all possess,
for being in some other situation than that in which we are. --

It is however to be conceded, that before the revolution, our circumstances
were in various respects preferable to what they are at present. Our public
character was much less tarnished -- fraud was not then taught as a science,
nor exhibited by our legislative bodies for the imitation of individuals. It
only lurked in bye places -- its influence being checked by a majority of the
members of the community. -- Our government was then much more efficient and
energetic. -- We are told of the great liberty we enjoyed. Liberty it indeed
was, but we were wise enough to distinguish between liberty and licentiousness.
This state, and many others, were under a most perfect aristocracy. -- The name
truly we disowned, yet quietly submitted to a government essentially
aristocratic. --

The minister, with two or three principal characters were supreme in each
town. -- Hence the body of the clergy, with a few families of distinction,
between whom there was ever a most intimate connection, in effect, ruled the
whole state. The loss of this happy influence of the clergy, in this country,
is deeply to be regretted, and is to be ascribed to two causes -- the increase
of knowledge, and growing opposition to religion. -- Knowledge has induced the
laity to think and act for themselves, and an opposition to religion has
curtailed the power of its supporters.

Thus we were, when the vile acts of legislation in a mother country reduced us
at once to the dire alternative of tamely submitting to abject servitude, or
commencing a war with one of the most potent empires of the world. The spirit
of an American was too great to brook the former, though scarcely equal to
attempt the latter. Petitions were preferred -- and in the style of
supplicants, we earnestly solicited an enjoyment of those rights and privileges
to which, on the principles of righteousness, we were entitled. But our
adversaries, self-sufficient, and goaded on by an unappeaseable thirst for
dominion, were disposed to decide the unhappy controversy only by the sword. --
At this time too, many of our sages in the cabinet, doubtful of the apparently
unequal combat, deserted us.

Look back, my friends, and ask, Was not the attempt presumptious, beyond
comparison? We, few in numbers, undisciplined in the field, and destitute of
naval armaments, nobly dared to encounter a nation, whose arms had been the
terror of Europe, and who, according to their own ideas, could crush us at a
single stroke.

In taking a retrospective view of our situation, we can but stand amazed that
despair did not divest us of our native fortitude, and render us easy victims
to our assailants. Yet, by a kind of enthusiasm totally unprecedented, and
equally inexplicable, we made an opposition formidable to our enemies,
animating to the votaries of American liberty and astonishing to the world. --
We were favored with a happy union of wisdom and valor, in the cabinet and
field, beyond what the warmest imagination could have suggested. In the midst
of these brilliant achievements, however, we pursued a line of conduct toward
those who thought differently from us, altogether inexcusable. It is futile to
ascribe such acts of rigor as were then committed, to that patriotism which so
justly marked this period. To say that we were so surprisingly virtuous, as to
become vicious, is a finished absurdity. Honesty will fix it as a blemish upon
our political escutcheon.

At length, on the 4th day of July, 1776, we "absolved the political bands,
which had connected us with Great Britain, and assumed among the nations of the
earth, that separate and equal station to which the laws of nature, and natures
God entitled us." We declared ourselves FREE and INDEPENDENT states.

This declaration was made by as illustrious a body of men as ever graced the
councils of America. -- Examine the reasons which they urge for their conduct
-- see the singular firmness which they exhibit -- Behold the peculiar
solemnity of expression, and hear the undaunted appeals to heaven, in
vindication of this transaction, and say was it not nobly done? -- Had we been
at that instant destroyed as an empire, was it not nobly done? But from that
instant we succeeded in accomplishing a most glorious revolution, and was it
not nobly done? --

This event, if wisely improved, might have been of singular advantage to these
states. -- A nation, like an individual, while dependent, will forever be
confined in its operations. No real incentives to great exertions, and
strangers to enterprise, they drag heavily along, contented with a state of
mediocrity. But the moment they assume a character for themselves, their mode
of thinking and acting is changed: they feel an importance, which to support
and dignify, will call forth all their dormant powers.

The independence of any people opens a field for great improvements; -- it
erects a theater on which men of abilities may display their talents with
applause. Thus many, who otherwise, never would have been noticed in the mass
of mankind, are induced by a laudable ambition, to become eminently
distinguished. An event of this nature, lays a foundation for a successful
cultivation of the arts and sciences -- for numberless improvements in
agriculture, commerce and legislation, and for arriving to the summit of
national importance.

It cannot admit of a doubt, that many individuals, of the first natural
genius, have lived and died unnoticed, merely through want of opportunity, to
exhibit their true characters. Why not many communities from the same cause?
Yet, as many a giddy youth has embarked too early in life, and taken the helm
before his prudence was sufficient to guide him, and finally been destroyed on
some fatal rock: -- Such we have just grounds to apprehend will be our fate,
through our independence.

This event took place when the attention of every man was turned toward the
war, in which we were engaged. It would have been madness then, to have thought
of regulating our internal concerns, to the neglect of a far more important
object; and yet it was destruction to omit them. And when our struggle was
finally crowned with victory -- a victory far exceeding our most sanguine
expectations; we, elated with success, falsely imagined, our peace and
prosperity permanently secured. We flattered ourselves that independence was
liberty -- was affluence -- was government -- was every thing -- It did not
occur to us that then was the only time for rendering our acquisitions
permanently advantageous. Arguing thus, we have become independent of almost
every thing, and have only to solace ourselves in that independence.

It should have been a primary object with us, to raise a revenue adequate to
the exigencies of our government. Congress aware of this, and seeing the
exhausted state of our treasuries, and yet fearful of checking the industry of
the agricultural part of our community by a land tax, at an early period
recommended an impost. A most wise and salutary measure, beyond a question!
Some of the states through ignorance of its tendency, and others from motives of
self-interest, refused a compliance. -- Rhode Island, as a specimen of what she
could do, and a prelude of greater things yet to come, opposed the measure.
New York is still in the opposition. -- Here congress in this politic, in this
laudable attempt to extricate us from debt, and rescue us from that
ingratitude, that dishonesty with which we now stand chargeable, were entirely
frustrated. -- Here too how apparent is the inefficiency of our federal
government! -- What an absurdity in politics! -- We vest congress with a power
of making war, and of concluding peace, and acting as our foederal head in
every respect, and yet deny them the means of discharging their sacred
obligations. -- The reason is obvious; our governments were formed when the
name of power was terrible to us. -- The people had been taught, that vox
populi est vox dei, and that all power originated in them; and practicing on
those ideas, cautiously avoided delegating enough to the supreme authority to
enable them to exist in that capacity, and yet, strange to tell! when this
truth is become as evident as that two and two make four, and when we have
already felt the unhappy consequences of it, in an eminent degree, our
legislative bodies are still wishing to curtail the powers of congress, and
make them more complete in insignificancy! -- Thus, by rendering the grand
council of these independent states the most dependent body in the universe, we
are totally incapacitated to improve those advantages which resulted from our
separate state of existence. -- But we cannot expect national prosperity, so
long as fraud and injustice are supported by the sanction of public bodies. --
God forbid, that this charge should be applicable to all the legislatures of
the states! -- I shall only take the liberty of stating facts, and conscience
will take the liberty of making the application.

It is an agreed point, that the officers and soldiers of the late army, justly
merited the applauses, gratitude, and generous reward of their country. Their
bravery was indeed applauded, and some of us possessed grateful hearts toward
them: -- But did we give them that ample recompense which their noble services
deserved? -- Justice says, no -- honor and honesty say, no -- and nothing
strange, if the ghosts of those departed heroes, who fell gloriously in the
cause of liberty, the cries and distresses of whose helpless children, and
disconsolate widows, have already entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath,
should arise, and also say, no. -- We may plead our poverty, we may attempt an
extenuation of our conduct, but the fact stands recorded against us, in the
register of our national iniquities. -- Our refusing, or neglecting to pay the
public securities, according to their nominal value, is impiously unjust. The
great argument for annihilating or scaling those securities, is, that they have
been exchanged at a discount of 50 or 75 per cent. -- I ask, does this
circumstance invalidate the obligation on the part of government? A full
consideration has been received -- a solemn promise has been made -- a sacred
obligation has been executed -- Has this obligation been cancelled? -- Has the
other party consented to any alteration from the original stipulation? No --
Then the public are bound to pay it to the uttermost farthing; unless
independence has inverted all our ideas of contracts -- unless justice, when
applied to fifty, a hundred, or a nation, and when applied to an individual, is
essentially different. People, however, never will be reasoned out of this
idea, for they never reasoned themselves into it. It was "conceived in sin, and
brought forth in iniquity." If we have any regard to morality or religion, we
never shall, by a stretch of unwarrantable power, nullify past contracts. --
Should I ever see such manifest iniquity practiced so openly, I should consider
the nation on the verge of destruction. -- How could we expect honesty among
individuals, if fraud were thus sanctified by those who ought to be paterns of
all that is worthy of imitation! And yet, is not this the case? -- is not a
procrastination of payment -- is not a neglect in attempting to pay what is
due, as dishonest as refusing to pay at all; and are we not chargeable with
both? -- And yet, by no means would I wish to see the poor oppressed, or
industry checked. If our inability prevent at present, let us exhibit a
disposition of honesty, and our creditors will patiently wait. -- If, however,
there is not a sufficiency of property in the country, I would project a plan
to acquire it. -- Let us repeal all the laws against the African slave trade,
and undertake the truly benevolent and humane merchandise of importing Negroes
to christianize them. This has been practiced by individuals among us, and they
have found it a lucrative branch of business. Let us then make a national
matter of it. -- We should have the sublime satisfaction of enriching
ourselves, and at the same time rendering happy, thousands of those blacks, by
instructing them in the ways of religion. -- This would be no innovation. --
This country permitted it for many years, among their other acts of justice;
but their refusing to pay sacred and solemn obligations, is not of so long a
standing.

The war from which we have so lately been extricated, also, necessarily
brought on a long train of evils. It vitiated the morals of the people at
large. -- It destroyed that virtue which is so essentially necessary to a
popular government. -- It introduced luxury, that bane of civil society. -- It
drained us of our wealth, and left us as some convulsive and racking malady
frequently leaves the human constitution.

Many thousands of our inhabitants had been employed in the various departments
of the army and navy -- some indeed returned to plentiful fortunes -- some to
peaceful industry. -- Yet, many, destitute of property, and the means of
acquiring it, could only think of supporting themselves by the sweat of the
brow. -- This idea was intolerable. -- It led them to despise their country,
dispossessed them of their patriotic sentiments, and fitted them to sow the
seeds of civil discord; -- others had through the war, aggrandized themselves by
the fluctuating state of property, and rioted upon fortunes acquired by a
single exertion, or a fortuitous concurrence of circumstances. -- These soon
found the scene changed, and that an industrious pursuit of some constant
employment would alone support them. This they could not submit to, and
ascribed the declension of their fortunes to the badness of the times, scarcity
of cash, and a thousand other causes.

The alarming state of our finances, compelled the legislature to lay heavy
taxes. -- This caused the most bitter complaints. -- They parted with their
property with the utmost reluctance. Is this liberty -- is this independence,
say they -- How preferable the years of 1772 or 73! -- We were told during the
struggle for freedom, of happy days -- of a quiet enjoyment of our possessions
-- of "sitting under our own vines and fig trees -- But how different the
situation! --

Thus have arisen contentions and civil discord in almost every state in the
union. -- Massachusetts has long been torn with intestine factions, and their
government almost prostrated by a despicable banditti. This state has not yet
experienced a civil war. -- We are, however, very contented, while New York is
rioting on thousands, annually drained from our coffers. -- Rhode Island has
acted a part, which would cause the savages of the wilderness to blush. --
Fraud and injustice there, stalk openly. -- Nay, they enter their legislative
bodies, and are there fondly fostered and cherished. -- Witness their whole
system of public proceedings for twelve months past. -- That little state is an
unruly member of the political body, and is a reproach and bye-word among all
her acquaintance.

In short, the whole nation is now languishing under all those evils which have
originated in consequence of systems of wretched policy -- flagrant acts of
injustice, and an impoverishing war. -- The whole political frame is convulsed
and threatened, from external attacks, and its own natural imbecility, with an
immediate dissolution.

The eyes of all Europe are fixed upon us. -- Their writers and orators, who
extolled our success, and predicted our future greatness, now laugh at our
folly -- burlesque our policy, and contemn our dishonesty. They respect us for
what we have been -- admire us for what we might be, but despise us for what we
are.

A Shays, an ignoble contemptible Shays, without abilities, without influence,
has, for a while, prostrated government, in the three western counties of
Massachusetts. And what if a greater than Shays, a CROMWELL or a CAESAR should
arise; -- where are our bulwarks against the attack? If we look up to congress,
they are chained and fettered in impotency. -- If to foreign nations -- they
will retort with propriety, Where is your gratitude, for past favors, and your
recompense for past services? -- Where is your faith and honor in discharging
obligations for money generously loaned you when in the deepest distress? -- If
we invoke the assistance of our countrymen, we shall call in vain. --
Patriotism is fled. -- The days of 1775, we cannot recall. -- We cannot inspire
our citizens with that disinterested love of their country, which caused them
to encounter imprisonment, -- exile, -- slavery and death. -- If we appeal to
heaven -- the cries of the widow and orphan, whom we have wickedly robbed, have
already entered there, and called for vengeance! Will not then the righteous
Lord, who loves righteousness, "laugh at our calamity, and mock when our fear
comes?" -- Shall then some insinuating courtier, or some formidable desperado,
blast the hopes of this young empire? Shall they here erect a tyranny or a
despotism more to be dreaded than death, in her most hideous forms? Was it for
this, COLUMBUS to explore this new world, surmounted every obstacle, -- braved
death, in ten thousand different shapes, and finally expired in reproach and
contempt? Was it for this, our venerable ancestors left their native country,
and in defiance of millions of savages, and in hazard of every earthly
pleasure, in a desert wilderness, laid the foundation of this empire? Was it
for this, the brave sons of Mars, made that memorable opposition to our
assailants, at Lexington? Was it for this, the immortal WASHINGTON quitted the
enchating scenes of domestic felicity and by a series of military
achievements, equal to those of any hero of ancient or modern days, rescued us
from that destruction with which we were threatened? Was it for this, that the
brave, the heroic MONTGOMERY, nobly fell a martyr to liberty, before the walls
of Quebec? Was it for this, that illustrious BODY OF SAGES, at Philadelphia, in
defiance of British menaces, declared us INDEPENDENT, and nobly fixed their
names to the declaration? Was it for this, we exulted in the reduction of
Burgoyne and Cornwallis, those signal victories, which prostrated the exalted
hopes of our haughty foes? Was it for this, we saw thousands of our youth, the
hopes of their parents and their country, boldly embrace death? Was it for
this, we saw whole villages sacked, beautiful towns laid in ashes, and almost
whole states depopulated? Was it for this, we waded through seas of blood, to
establish ourselves in that peace, and independence which promised us lasting
honor and immortal felicity? Was all this done, I say, were we thus elevated to
a summit of glory, which was the envy of all the empires of the world, only
that we might exhibit a more complete scene of wretchedness and misery, and
finally sink deeper in infamy and contempt? Forbid it heaven! Forbid it, oh my
country!

From this melancholy picture of our political affairs, let us turn aside, and
enquire, if there is not ample ground for joy and festivity, even on this day.
-- We have heretofore seen many gloomy days. -- Our ears have heard the din of
war, and sound of arms. -- Ye parents, how often have your tender children been
wrested from you, and exposed to death in the field of battle! -- How often
have we in this city, been filled with dismay, at the approach of our merciless
adversaries! Do you recollect, my fellow citizens, the memorable 5th of July
1779, when the British troops made a descent on this beautiful town? -- Did the
bells ever convey such melancholy tidings, as when they rang the alarm of that
inauspicious morning? -- Did the thunder of cannon ever appear with such awful
solemnity? -- Do you recollect the confusion which every where appeared? -- Do
you recollect seeing here and there, a weeping mother, with her dishevelled
locks, wringing her hands, and enquiring with anxious solicitude, for the
partner of her bosom, or the dear son of her delight? -- Do you recollect, you,
who boldly went forth to oppose the enemy, with what heartfelt anxiety you
looked back upon your peaceful habitations, your tender children, and your fond
wives -- doubtful whether you should ever return to them? And ye, my venerable
fathers, do you recollect how you beheld your numerous progeny, and with
parental fondness wept over them? -- There the unrelenting foe, with more than
hellish malice, assaulted a venerable, a respectable old man, plunged a
poignant dagger in his body, and left him languishing, and languishing he died!
-- Here one of your neighbors was in a moment struck dead! -- and yonder you
saw one, whom you had long known, weltering in his blood, till his agonizing
struggles had stretched him a breathless corpse! -- Such scenes we have beheld,
and such have been realized in many other towns. -- Nay, how often have these
states been on the verge of destruction! Yet we have risen superior to all
these embarrassments! -- We have once beheld ourselves the conquerors of a most
powerful kingdom! Has not then America ever been the peculiar favorite of
heaven? -- and may we not, by an affiance in the same protecting hand, still be
a happy people? -- We have an extensive country, which embosoms an unfailing
source of wealth. We have a climate peculiarly salubrious, and admirably
calculated to the rapid population of our territory. -- We have men, justly
signalized for their literary, political and theological knowledge. The arts
and sciences have here made a most surprising progress. -- Their votaries and
patrons are numerous. -- Great encouragements are given to improvements in
agriculture and manufactures, those sure mines of riches. -- It affords the
highest pleasure to the friends of these states, that at this alarming crisis,
industry is so visible. -- It was urged not long ago, by many, that so long as
we could purchase foreign commodities, cheaper than we could make them, we
might neglect manufactures; but the absurdity of this idea is too apparent to
need an illustration. -- By importing the articles of our own consumption, we
at the same time put an effectual check upon industry, and drain ourselves of
cash. -- Manufactures however, have certainly become an object of much more
attention than three years ago; and if I am rightly informed, in this state,
and many others of the union, the earth never wore so many marks of
cultivation, as at present. -- Sad experience has convicted us of this truth,
that the sources whence we must derive our affluence, are within our own
country.

Economy in our domestic concerns, must be considered as an important matter.
The community is composed of individuals -- by their joint exertions it is
maintained.

These objects should claim the particular attention of the ladies. You, my
fair friends, are possessed of a kind of magical influence over the other sex.
Let those who are so very complaisant as to wait on you in the morning, and
enquire with earnest solicitude after your health, find you employed in
graceful industry, and they will go and do likewise -- they will call at a more
leisure hour. -- You can establish fashions, or destroy them, by a single smile
or a frown. It is with you to promote economy and industry, or luxury and
extravagance at your pleasure. -- By attending to the former, you will yield an
essential service to your country -- by doing the latter -- you will become
partners in the guilt incurred by its destruction. -- You will not hesitate to
exert yourselves, for the happiness of an empire which owes its existence to
one of your sisters. -- It was through the influence, the generous influence of
ISABELLA, queen of Spain, that America was ever discovered. -- You will feel a
peculiar pleasure in cherishing and fostering the child of so memorable a
female personage.

That fire of patriotism, so necessary for the accomplishment of worthy and
illustrious actions, must reanimate our breasts. -- While the interests of our
country are secondary objects with us, our exertions for its welfare, will be
feeble and fruitless. -- If we have a fortune in view -- If we are in the
pursuit of the gratification of some favorite passion, our whole soul is
engaged -- the springs of action are all in motion, and the whole man appears.
-- But we have acquisitions worth ten thousand fortunes to protect, -- we have
the interests of millions to secure. -- We have an empire to rescue from
approaching dissolution; and can we be unconcerned? Can we be inactive?

Our national character must be freed from that reproach with which it stands
justly charged. Faith and honor will sufficiently arm us against every
embarrassment arising from poverty. -- If a man once establishes a character
for integrity, he remains unshaken though misfortune takes him for her own. --
His reputation is an exhaustless fortune. -- The same observation will equally
well apply to states or kingdoms. -- Great-Britan cannot pay half her debts in
cash; yet she has a credit sufficient to discharge the whole. --

We must consent to a change of government. -- Whether this change shall be
partial or general, is not for me to say. -- A more energetic, a more coercive
power than at present is felt, must be vested in some public body. -- This
matter is submitted to a convention of the states, now sitting at Philadelphia.
The unanimity of the states, in choosing delegates to this convention, is a
forcible argument of the full conviction that the people feel of the weakness
of the present system. -- This measure has justly exalted the hopes of every
patriot. -- A measure from which we have nothing to fear, but every thing to
hope. -- At their head, sits the illustrious WASHINGTON, in description of
whose finished and complete character, language fails. -- There is FRANKLIN,
whose penetrating mind, looks through all the works of nature. -- There are
GERRY, SHERMAN, MORRIS, CLYMER, WILSON, READ and WITH, who made a declaration
of that independence which we this day celebrate, and whose fame is coeval with
our national importance. -- Why need I particularize any? -- Such a band of
venerable personages, baffle all description! -- Yet I must not omit to
congratulate Connecticut on the happy choice of her members. -- This state can
boast of many worthy characters, and we are peculiarly happy in our
representation in this great council of the states.

There is the collected wisdom of the community. -- There is virtue enough to
incline them, and knowledge enough to direct them to adopt a system calculated
to make us a happy people. -- Could we once see a government firmly established
over us, which should adapt itself to the genius, manners, customs and peculiar
situation of this country, we might bid defiance to the malice of our enemies!
-- It is impossible for societies to exist without an energetic, coercive
power; and the same principle which induced men, while in a state of nature, to
enter into compacts, will soon compel these states to a change of government.
-- Shall we then suffer this change to be effected by our fellow citizens, by
those who are with us, to enjoy the felicity of a well regulated society, or
with us to experience the horrors of anarchy? Or shall we submit this
alteration to capricious fortune? -- We cannot hesitate in determining this
question, unless we are stupidly inattentive to our own happiness, and
criminally negligent of the interests of unborn millions.

Whether we of this age shall see the present commotions quelled -- the present
discordant sentiments and interests reconciled, and peace and tranquillity
established, I do not pretend to say. -- Yet the whole history of this country
destines it for future greatness. -- Nay, at this period, is there any part of
the world where happiness is so generally diffused as in these states? -- We
have wantonly sported with privileges of inestimable value -- we have richly
deserved every national calamity, and our political affairs wear a gloomy
aspect. -- Yet point me to a spot on this globe, where the whole body of the
people enjoy so much prosperity as the inhabitants of this empire! -- England
may justly pride herself upon a most excellent constitution; we may also hear
of the parade, brilliancy, and grandeur of her nobility: But where is that
equal distribution of property, and that general diffusion of knowledge which
so effectually prevent oppression and slavery? The plodding industry of
Holland, secures them a reputable station among the European nations; while the
French are justly admired for that politeness of manners, and brilliancy of
genius which is so characteristic of them. Indolence and haughtiness are
cardinal virtues in Spain; and misery and wretchedness are picturesque of
Ireland. -- Look through all Europe, which is justly called the most civilized
part of the world, and where is the kingdom whose situation we ought to envy?
-- But extend your views to the wilds of Africa -- there behold millions of
savages, who only vegetate -- plunged in ignorance and barbarity -- sunk in the
most abject servitude, they apparently exist but to be miserable. -- Traverse
the immense region of Asia -- see the pomp of an Asiatic despot -- see him
sporting with the liberties and lives of his subjects -- a stranger to every
tender feeling of the soul -- he only lives to exhibit the wickedness of his
nature. -- There is a quarter of the world, which contains five hundred
millions of inhabitants. Asia, though once the nurse of the world -- though it
contained the garden of Eden, and though there were the most magnificent displays
of divine wisdom, is now buried in luxury -- in the most gross superstition and
idolatry. -- The fragrancy of their spices, their costly gems and the
magnificence of their monarchs, scarcely deserve to be noticed, when we
contemplate five hundred millions of immortal minds uncultivated, depressed and
enervated; yet capable of ceaseless expansion; capable of successive
improvements in felicity through millions of ages! --

If then, as a nation, we are so eminently distinguished -- if nature has been
so peculiarly lavish in bestowing her gifts upon us; with what elevation of
mind ought we to reflect on that important transaction, by which we become an
INDEPENDENT EMPIRE! --

This event, and the subsequent revolution, have already disseminated much
useful knowledge through the world. -- Hence have originated just ideas
respecting the rights of human nature; the ignorance of which, hitherto, has
enslaved three quarters of mankind. -- Our independence, if rightly improved,
will afford much felicity to individuals, and greatly dignify this young
empire. -- Millions yet unborn, shall celebrate this event. -- The pleasing
story shall be handed down from generation to generation, and future ages shall
rise up, and for this transaction, call us blessed. In view of such a glorious
revolution as we have accomplished -- in view of such a valuable country as we
possess -- in view of such scenes of magnificence as may hereafter be realized,
and of such happiness as we now enjoy, let us unite in the innocent festivity
of this day: -- Let us cordially join in all laudable exertions for the glory
of America, and in love and gratitude to HIM, who is the source of all felicity.


