AN ORATION, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
NORTH AMERICA, DELIVERED JULY 4, 1787, At the REFORMED CALVINIST Church in
Philadelphia, BY JAMES CAMPBELL, ESQUIRE,

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, AN INTRODUCTORY PRAYER, DELIVERED ON THE SAME OCCASION,
BY THE REV. WILLIAM ROGERS, A. M.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by PRICHARD and HALL, in Market Street, between
Front and Second Streets. MDCCLXXXVII,

At an Annual Meeting of the Pennsylvania Society of the Cincinnati, held at
the State-House in Philadelphia, July 4th, 1787;
On Motion, unanimously resolved,

THAT the Thanks of this Society be given to JAMES CAMPBELL, Esquire, for his
Oration, delivered this Day, in commemoration of the Independence of the United
States of America -- Also to the Rev. WILLIAM ROGERS, for his Introductory
Prayer, on the same occasion -- And that a copy of each be requested for the
press.

Extract from the Minutes, RICHARD FULLERTON, scr'y.

Introductory Prayer.
SUPREMELY great and infinitely glorious LORD OUR GOD! From everlasting to
everlasting THOU art the same! Unchangeable in thy nature, in thy word, and in
all thy works! Clothed with light as with a garment, and with majesty as with
a robe! Who make the clouds thy chariot, and walk upon the wings of the
wind! Possessed of every adorable ATTRIBUTE and divine PERFECTION!

We, thy unworthy but dependent children, assembled on this joyful occasion,
humbly desire to approach the THRONE of THY GRACE, in and through the merit of
thy coequal SON, our EVERBLESSED SAVIOR! For HIS sake, be pleased to pardon
our manifold sins, and to blot out all our transgressions! Justify our persons
through IMMANUEL'S righteousness, and sanctify our natures by the powerful
influences of thy most HOLY SPIRIT! May we wholly be devoted to thy service,
and live uniformly to thy praise!

With united hearts and uplifted voices, we render unfeigned thanks to thy
name, O THOU SOVEREIGN RULER OF AII. WORLDS, for those numberless mercies
wherewith we have been and continue to be visited! We adore thee for thy
creating power, preserving goodness, and redeeming love! Suffer us never to
forget any of thy favors, as we are altogether undeserving, even of the least!
Particularly, O GOD! are the inhabitants of these States, on THIS DAY, under
the strongest obligations to bless THY NAME, for that Liberty, civil and
religious, which they so fully enjoy! We would join the general body, and
ascribe praise and thanksgiving to thy ADORABLE MAJESTY, for this AUSPICIOUS
Anniversary, A DAY long to be remembered by us and future generations! A DAY,
whereon this extensive Continent was, by the representatives of a numerous and
oppressed people, DECLARED FREE AND INDEPENDENT! -- HEAVEN approved the
declaration, our arms were crowned with success, sweet peace has visited our
borders, the soldier once more became the citizen; Retiring, without regret,
from stations of command, our military officers returned with cheerfulness to
the several duties of domestic and tranquil life! Our ears are no move pierced
with the confused noise of war, our eyes are no longer pained with the horrid
spectacle of garments rolled in blood. -- While we thus thankfully acknowledge
thy reiterated favors in our political hemisphere, we beg leave also to
mention thy providential smiles in crowning the YEAR with thy goodness, and
causing thy paths to drop fatness; "Our pastures are clothed with slocks, our
fields are covered over with corn and with wheat, our husbandmen shout for joy,
yea, they also sing."

That we may continue to enjoy these important blessings; Be pleased, O LORD,
to visit all the nations of the earth, and incline their hearts to peace and
love; shower down upon them thy heavenly grace; may they know THEE as the KING
OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS! In an especial manner, DO THOU visit our land,
graciously regard our country, protect and defend our infant, but hitherto
highly favored empire, bless our CONGRESS, smile upon each particular State of
the UNION; May those who are in authority rule in thy fear, prove a terror to
evil doers and a praise to them who do well! As this is a period, O LORD! big
with events, impenetrable by any human scrutiny, we fervently recommend to thy
Fatherly notice that august Body, assembled in this city, who compose our
FOEDERAL CONVENTION; will it please THEE, O THOU ETERNAL I AM! to favor them
from day to day with thy immediate presence; be thou their wisdom and their
strength! Enable them to devise such measures as may prove happily instrumental
for healing all divisions and promoting the good of the great WHOLE; incline
the hearts of all the people to receive with pleasure, combined with a
determination to carry into execution, whatever these thy servants may wisely
recommend; That the United States of America may furnish the world with ONE
example of a free and permanent government, which shall be the result of human
and mutual deliberation, and which shall not, like all other governments,
whether ancient or modern, spring out of mere chance or be established by
force. -- May we triumph in the chearing prospect of being completely delivered
from anarchy, and continue, under the influence of republican virtue, to
partake of all the blessings of cultivated and civilized society! In tender
mercy bless this Commonwealth, the President, Vice President, and Supreme
Executive Council, our Legislative Body, and the respective Judicial
Departments!

Finally, we commend to thy paternal regard, all orders of men, all seminaries
of useful learning, the Ministers of thy Gospel of every denomination, the
Church of CHRIST, and all for whom we ought to pray. -- With heartfelt
gratitude we anticipate the GLORIOUS ERA, when instead of the thorn shall come
up thesir tree, instead of the briar shall come up the MYRTLE TREE, and WISDOM
and KNOWLEDGE shall be the stability of the times, both in church and state.

Prepare us, O LORD, MOST HOLY! for every dispensation of thy righteous
Providence, for life, for death, for judgment, and the joys of Paradise --
Humbly entreating THY gracious assistance, in suitably discharging all those
duties enjoined us by thy word, and enforced by thy authority, we close this,
our solemn address, by saying, as our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST has taught
us --

OUR Father, who art in Heaven; hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them who trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, and the power and the glory, forever and ever. AMEN.

The Honorable THOMAS M'KEAN, Esquire. Doctor of Laws, and Chief Justice of the
State of Pennsylvania.
SIR,
AS a publication of the following sheets is requested by a Society, whose wish
bears with me the weight of a command, permit me to beg that your name may
accompany it. I am the more induced to make this request, as the distinguished
share you have had in our National Councils, the presidency your important
office gives you over almost every blessing which Freedom and Independence can
bestow; and your unremitted exertions, official and personal, in establishing
that great event, to commemorate which was the design of this performance, all
join to designate you the most proper person to whom I can look for patronage.
Unaccustomed to write, and never having spoken publicly before, it was neither
my object or expectation to rise to applause; my hopes were negative, and to
escape censure is my utmost wish. With sentiments of the highest respect,

I have the honor to be, Sir,

Your obedient humble servant, JAMES CAMPBELL.

AN ORATION, etc.
IT is so much a rule of modern declamation to make the exordium to consist of
personal apology, that any departure from it might, I fear, be deemed a
violation of that respect which is held to be due from a speaker to an
audience; and indeed if there ever was propriety in the rule itself, or justice
in the popular construction of its omission, I feel it to be at this very
moment, when I have so much occasion to entreat, and you so much room to extend
your indulgence, and when not to express would be in some degree not to feel
that deference which the presence of such an assembly can never fail to inspire.

Sensible then, as I am, of the difficulty of the task which your partiality
has commanded me to perform, and conscious of my inequality to discharge it as
I ought, I am left without an alternative but to make choice of a subject,
which from the relation it bears to the purposes of your institution as well as
the occasion we are now convened to commemorate, will in some degree ensure to
me that candor and attention which, were I to rest on any abstracted efforts of
my own, must necessarily be withheld.

This subject, Gentlemen, you will at once anticipate, in reflecting on the
advantages which have resulted to mankind from the Independence of America. A
summary recital of those advantages will constitute the principal object of my
present enquiry and discussion.

Our petitions and remonstrances having been rejected, and insult being added
to injury, it became at once essential to our safety and freedom to burst the
bonds of dependence and shake off the yoke of foreign legislation. It was this
bold but necessary measure which gave us rank among nations. -- It was this
that emancipated us from military law, and rescued us from all the horrors of
slavery. -- Had not this act and the events which it drew after it taken place,
how very different at present would have been our situation. -- In place of
contemplating the majesty of a free people, convened in awful simplicity to
consult their safety and promote their happiness, we should have beheld the
pomp and extravagance of royal governors trampling upon the sacred rights of
the people, and treating them in all their acts of power as if they were
created only to minister to their pride or ambition. -- The property of our
merchant would have been held by a precarious tenure -- our country would no
longer have been cultivated by the proprietors and sovereigns of the soil -- a
farmer and a slave would have been synonimous terms. -- If then, such would
have been our situation in a state of subjugation to Great Britain, how much
have we gained by a separation from her. -- Welcome then the glorious
Anniversary of American Independence -- forever welcome be the return of that
day which made us citizens of a republic, and gave us a rank in the scale of
being -- high -- above the subjects of a monarchy. -- To comprehend the dignity
of a republican, turn to the page of history and contemplate the different
characters of the freemen of Greece and Rome, and the slaves of the Egyptian
and Persian empires -- or compare the speeches of a Cicero and a Cato with the
servile addresses of the parasites who surrounded the thrones of the Roman
emperors. -- But why should we travel back to antiquity for examples of the
dignity of conduct and sentiment inspired by a republican form of government --
we have beheld the citizens of the United States raised by their personal
interest in the government of their country to a pitch of glory which has
excited the admiration of half the globe. -- It was the spirit of republican
liberty that animated the patriot in the cabinet, and supported the American
soldier under all his sufferings in the field, during a long and arduous war.
-- It is the same patriotic spirit which has convened the members of our
Foederal Convention, at the expense of private ease and fortune, to supply the
defects of our confederation -- to prop the tottering fabric of our union, and
to lay the foundations of national safety and happiness -- Illustrious Senate,
to you your country looks with anxious expectation -- on your decisions she
rests -- convinced that men who cut the cords of foreign legislation are
competent to framing a system of government which will embrace all interests,
call forth our resources, and establish our credit: -- But in every plan for
improvement or reformation, may an attachment to the principles of our present
government be the characteristic of an American, and may every proposition to
add kingly power to our foederal system be regarded as treason to the liberties
of our country.

Another advantage derived from our Independence consists in the expansion it
has given the human mind, and the new fields it has opened for enquiry,
especially on the interesting subjects of government. -- While only a third
part of legislation was in our hands, it is not a subject of wonder that we
were deficient in many of its principles; but since all the powers of
government have devolved upon us, how many proofs of knowledge have been given
in this science -- witness the wisdom and energy of many of our constitutions,
and witness the literary productions of those illustrious civilians, Jefferson
and Adams, whose works are not only calculated to instruct their countrymen,
but to enlighten Europe and posterity in the great science of social and
political happiness; -- nor have our studies and enquiries since the
Declaration of Independence been confined to government, science has flourished
in all its branches -- the American historian records the events of our
revolution with classical elegance, and her poets celebrate in all the harmony
of verse the glorious achievements of her sons.

By a separation from Britain we have increased our resources for knowledge: --
Witness the numerous colleges, academies and literary societies that have been
established since the peace throughout the Union. -- These institutions, so
fruitful of public and private happiness, have arisen entirely from a
conviction that knowledge is essential to the preservation of a republican form
of government.

Our separation from Great Britain has extended the empire of humanity -- no
longer shall the wretched African be torn from his peaceful habitation, to
fertilize with his tears the soil of a people professing themselves advocates
for universal freedom -- the time is not far distant when our sister States, in
imitation of our example, shall change their vassals into subjects.

Our national Independence has opened the avenues of commerce with every part
of the world, and thereby not only lessened the price of our imports, but added
to the value of our products. -- Nor is this the only advantage we have derived
from the extension of our trade: It was not less the policy than the interest
of Britain to instill into our minds national prejudices, and to teach us to
regard all mankind, except Englishmen, as our enemies; but happily this
prejudice is removed, and we now view the whole human race as members of one
great and extensive family, however much they may be distinguished from us by
the circumstances of distance, color, or religion. The Frenchman and the
American (till lately considered hereditary enemies) now embrace each other as
children of the same father -- the European Catholic and the American
Protestant review with equal horror the times when their ancestors embrued
their hands in each others blood, and now join to cancel the remembrance of
them in mutual acts of charity and benevolence. -- Nor has this intercourse
been restricted to Europe, the inhabitants of China, Bengal, and the United
States, have met together on the sands of India; and by the influence of
commerce have added the ties of interest to the obligations of universal
benevolence.

Another, and a principal advantage of our Independence, results from the
material change it has wrought on the opinions, conduct and government of the
European nations: It was by contemplating our Independence that France has
become the land of free enquiry and general toleration; Germany, from the same
cause, has shaken off an immense load of religious prejudice and bigottry;
Spain has caught our spirit of enterprise and innovation; and even Britain
herself has been taught, by our successful struggle to relax in her system of
general subjugation; hence Ireland enjoys what she had long demanded in vain;
an exercise of her natural rights to commerce, liberty and independence.
Propitious era! happy event! which has softened the rigours of tyranny, and
taught even Kings to revere the great laws of justice and equity.

Thus have I endeavored to point out some of the principal benefits of
American Independence: But methinks, I am asked, Why do we hear of such
universal discontents throughout the Continent? Why does the farmer languish
beneath the weight of taxes, and the merchant complain of the decay of trade?
Why are the bands of our Foederal Government so weak, and our credit and
character the sport of foreign nations? These things, however true, do not
militate with any proposition I have advanced: Where is the nation that ever
became suddenly wise, great and respectable? History answers, none. Greece
boasted her Amphyction, her Solon and Lycurgus, and yet we find her approaches
to order less rapid than ours. Rome had a Romulus to frame her constitution,
and yet while she conquered the world, there subsisted within her walls a civil
war; the seditions of the Gracchi were more sanguinary and not less threatening
than any we have felt; view Caesar first defending and then endeavoring to
subvert the constitution of his country; exult that the LEADER of our legions
had nobler objects in view than a scepter or a diadem. Though Russia is now a
great and happy nation, though she holds in one hand the scourge of the Turk,
and the balance of Europe in the other, yet the banks of the Neister and the
Larga will witness that her road to empire and order has been slow and
difficult. Holland did not, until after forty years struggle, attain to
independence, and frequent disorders since have taught her that national
stability is of slow growth: And how often has the British throne shook to its
center before she arrived at her present situation; her history is chequered
from the conquest by Caesar to the present day; one King exiled, another
beheaded, now a republic and then a monarchy, this reign drained of men and
treasure by an ambitious Prince smitten with a rage for foreign conquest, the
next streaming with the blood of her sons, probed in every vein by the dagger
of domestic faction; the fields of Hastings and of Bosworth lay on the road to
her present order; rebellion has more than once stalked at large through the
land, their government has been insulted by a Monmouth and trampled on by a
Cromwell; and shall we who have but just become a nation expect to meet with
nothing but tranquillity and order? To establish a new form of government, to
eradicate ancient prejudices, to remove the effects of a war, began with the
sanctions of authority, and conducted chiefly by voluntary association, and to
unite opinions and habits with new situations, must be the work of time. Our
constitutions were made upon the spur of the occasion, with a bayonet at our
breasts, and in the infancy of our knowledge of government and its principles;
it is not therefore matter of surprise that they are not more perfect, or more
generally accommodated to the temper of our citizens. The distresses, of which
we complain, are wholly artificial; an anti-republican passion for foreign
luxuries has exhausted our country of its gold and silver, a rage for paper
money has checked credit, locked up the remains of our specie, substituted
speculation for labor, and taught us to prey upon one another. The seed of
independence, like many other seeds, may for a while disappear; but it will yet
spring and flourish with strength and beauty, like the venerable oak, it may
probably require centuries to grow, in order to be centuries in flourishing and
centuries in decaying. How fallen would be the character we have acquired in
the establishment of our liberties, if we discover inability to form a suitable
government to preserve them? Is the science of government so difficult, that we
have not men among us capable of unfolding its mysteries and binding our States
together by mutual interests and obligations? Or is knowledge in legislation
confined to Kings and their Ministers? There was a time when these questions
would have kindled rage and resentment in every American bosom.

Let us for a moment compare the present situation of America with what it was
in 1775: She was then without force, without union, without an ally, and
Great Britain was her enemy; and yet, under all these disadvantages, she rose
to glory and Independence. At present she is at peace with the whole world;
France, the most powerful nation in Europe, is her faithful ally; she is in
possession of eleven years experience in government; she is united in her
objects, has, almost, no army to maintain, no enemy to oppose; who then, but a
willing infidel, can doubt her future greatness? But our present situation is
still more strongly contrasted by the gloom of 1779: Distracted in our
Councils, our money hastening to extinction, our army on the eve of
dissolution, and a powerful enemy in the bowels of our country; yet we
surmounted these difficulties, and triumphed in the peace of 1783. There are
clouds and storms in the political as well as the natural hemisphere; to weak
and timid minds only are they big with terror; the true politician views them
as the means of purifying the political atmosphere, and promoting the growth
and stability of government. These, Gentlemen of the Society, are, I am sure,
your sentiments. It was to perpetuate the remembrance of events immediately
connected with the day, of which this is the anniversary, that we united; it is
to transmit to posterity the principles of that day we continue our
association; and although we have sheathed our swords, and gone back to the
pursuits of private life, it remains for us to remember, that the same
exertions may be necessary to defend and preserve, which were so successfully
employed in establishing our Independence and peace; and that as soldiers of a
republic our work is incomplete while national dangers exist on any quarter. In
casting my eye back upon the scenes of danger and distress out of which our
Society grew, I am insensibly led to pay a tribute of respect to the memory of
such as sealed their attachment to the liberties of our country with their
lives: Though scattered from the plains of Abraham to the sands of Georgia, no
monument be raised to point their relics to the passing stranger, yet laurels
shall bloom around their graves, and while gratitude or justice shall rule the
remembrance of human action, the brilliant story of their fame will retain its
luster, and pass to posterity in the full splendour of glory.

To detail their several merits would exhaust eulogium, and far transcends my
powers of panegyric. It will not, however, be deemed a tresspass on your
indulgence should I offer the tribute of acknowledgment to an individual, whose
worth will forever endear his memory to our country. This is not the partial
praise of professional predilection; it is a sentiment to which, I am
persuaded, my audience will grant a grateful assent, when informed that it
refers to that distinguished citizen and soldier, GENERAL GREEN.

Great in the beneficent arts of peace, he was the hope of his country, and
unsurpassed in the active operations of war, he has been justly styled "her
sword, and the keen avenger of her wrongs." With a mind to counsel, and an arm
to execute the greatest purposes of public determination, he united a heart,
honest in all its intentions, and firmly prepared to sustain the rudest reverse
of fortune.

When disciplined valor had defeated our troops, and desolation marched in the
train of war; when the sword had thinned our broken ranks, and dismay
distracted the civil authority; when conquest and confidence were opposed to
defeat and despondency; in this dark crisis of southern disaster, was he called
on to stem the torrent of victory and avert the horrors of impending
subjugation.

With prompt obedience to the orders of his ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEF, he hastens to
execute the duties of his appointment, and at the head of an enfeebled though
gallant army, he displays a conduct consummate in all its objects; supported by
a courage ardent as the sword he drew, removing alarm and restoring confidence,
he grafts an emboldened militia on the stump of that war-wasted corpse, whose
bravery, under every pressure of adverse fortune, had firmly upheld the
standard of freedom; with these he advances to meet an enemy elate with
conquest, and assured of success.

Discipline having resumed its station in our ranks, the astonished Briton is
taught to respect the foe he so lately despised, and his predatory bands,
restrained to operations of collective force, no longer desolate our guarded
fields.

The exiled inhabitants return to their deserted dwellings, and separated
kindred again enjoy the blissful society of domestic peace. The anxious father
revisits his distressed family, and permitted in quiet to make provision for
their support, he returns with zeal and ardour to the service of his country;
private happiness is improved into general welfare; the husbandman, assured of
the advantages which must result from the guidance of such a LEADER, mingles
with alacrity in the ranks of war, and braves with ardour every danger of the
field; vigilance increases to enterprise, and resistance is roused to
retaliation, invasion is changed in its course, and rushes with impetuous
recoil in an opposite direction; detachments captured and garrisons reduced,
announce its rapid approach, and urge retreat to the Briton, as the last refuge
from its fury; impressed with the conviction of Eutaw, he seeks shelter within
his entrenchments, nor longer dares an opposition in the field. Alike attentive
to the duties of citizenship, as ardent in the accomplishment of his military
pursuits, the gallant GREEN devotes his talents and his leisure to the
restoration of tranquillity, and the maintenance of civil privilege; his
conquering troops indulge not in excess, nor riot in the peasant's toil;
contented to share with their CHIEF in the scanty allowance of the camp,
victory brings no other benefit to them than the reflection, that they had done
their duty. Such, my fellowcitizens, was the (...), whose actions will be
admired while (...) and military worth preserve their (...) in human
estimation, and whose service entitle him to the eternal gratitude of America.
If such was the Chief appointed to conduct the momentous duties of that
dangerous department, how much to be admired is that wisdom, whose early
penetration directed to the choice, and whose friendship maintained, through
every change of fortune, an unshaken affection and esteem: The presence of that
GREAT CHARACTER forbids encomium, and the remembrance of his merit is too
deeply engraven ever to be effaced.

Placing, then, a proper value on the blessings which the efforts of such
illustrious citizens have procured, our counselors have not planned the
happiness of their country without effect, nor have the martyrs of freedom bled
in vain. No, my fellow-citizens, from their ashes, enriched by their blood, the
tree of liberty shall yet grow and flourish among us: Methinks I already see
the stately fabric of a free and vigorous government rising out of the wisdom
of the FOEDERAL CONVENTION; I behold order and contentment pervading every part
of the United States; our forests falling before the hand of labor; our fields
doubling their increase, from the effects of well-directed industry; our
villages enlivened by useful manufactures, and our cities thriving under
foreign and (...) commerce: I behold millions of (...) covering the shores of
our rivers and (...) all the arts and enjoyments of civilized life, (...) the
Anniversary of this Day, 1887, shouting forth the praises of the HEROES and
PATRIOTS, who, in 1776, secured and extended to them all their HAPPINESS.

THE END.

