AN ORATION, ON THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE United States of America, Delivered on
the 4th of July, 1787.

By the Rev. ROBERT DAVIDSON, D. D. Pastor of the Presbyterian Congregation in
Carlisle, and Professor of History and Belles Lettres, in Dickinson College.

CARLISLE: Printed by KLINE and REYNOLDS.

On Thursday the 5th of July, the following short ADDRESS was presented to the
Rev. Dr. ROBERT DAVIDSON.
AS a Committee appointed by a number of the principal Inhabitants of Carlisle
and its vicinity, we wait on you, Sir, to signify their and our high
satisfaction on hearing your patriotic and animated Oration delivered yesterday.

We consider that the publication will be of general utility, by impressing the
minds of the public with many important truths essential to their political
welfare; and therefore request a copy for that purpose.

We are, Rev. Sir, Your affectionate friends And servants, JOHN MONTGOMERY SAM.
POSTLETHWAIT JAMES POLLOCK JOHN AGNEW ROBERT MAGAW SAM. A. M'COSKRY ALEX.
M'KEEHAN.

The Rev. ROBERT DAVIDSON, D. D.

Carlisle, 5th July, 1787.



THE Doctor, in reply, thanked the Gentlemen for their politeness and the
flattering terms in which they were pleased to speak of his performance, and
assured them that he received great pleasure in having contributed to render
the fourth of July agreeable to his friends. He considered himself very highly
rewarded for any pains he had taken* and wished his address, which was the work
of a few days, were more fit for the public eye. -- As, however, his
fellow-citizens, in whose judgment he could confide, wished it to be published,
in hopes of its being useful; and as he was confident it contained no
sentiments but what were true and just, and no encomiums but such as were fully
merited, and being ever willing to throw in his mite to serve the cause of
liberty and his country; -- he therefore consented to furnish the printers with
a copy.

ORATION, etc.
His hearers being seated under a very agreeable bower, -- consisting of a
brilliant circle of patriotic ladies, and a number of gentlemen -- no small
part of whom had signalized themselves during the late war as Generals,
Colonels, Majors, etc. and the Officers of the Light Infantry Company, and of
the Troop of Light Horse, with a number of the gentlemen who compose those
companies being also present -- He arose, and thus addressed them --
Ladies and Gentlemen,
WE are happy in seeing each other once more, in this pleasant retreat, on the
first day of a new year. -- You all understand me to mean the twelfth of our
INDEPENDENCE.

On the memorable fourth of July, in the year seventeen hundred and
seventy-six, did the Honorable Congress, composed of delegates from thirteen
commonwealths, make the solemn Declaration, -- that, in dependence on Heaven
alone, they would thenceforth bear the name, and maintain the rights, of
sovereign, free, and independent States.

And perhaps no people that ever existed, in ancient or modern times, have had
more reason than we have, to remember with gratitude the day that gave us birth
as a nation, and the great events which led us on to an independent state.

As then we have devoted this day, as in former years, to expressions of joy;
and as the observance of this as the first day of every American year, may, by
the blessing of God, be one happy mean of cherishing a spirit of liberty,
together with a spirit of gratitude and piety; you will please to favor me
with your attention, a few minutes, while I endeavor to call to our
remembrance some of the great things which God has done for us; and also
briefly point out the manner in which it is our duty to improve the blessings
of Heaven, in order to our stability, happiness, and glory, as a nation.

I promise to mention nothing but what I consider as highly interesting; and
beg for no longer time, than what is necessary, to do justice in a small
degree, to so important a subject.

I shall, however, in the first place, take the liberty of addressing a few
sentences, to those gentlemen who have been, or at present are, in the military
line.

The martial appearance which strikes the eye on this occasion, is highly
pleasing. The sound too of the drum and the trumpet, which we have heard, has
its use, as it calls to our remembrance the days of our warfare happily ended.

Your present conduct, gentlemen, and the recollection of former services, give
us sufficient reason to hope, that you will on every occasion show yourselves
the firm supporters of that freedom, for which you have so nobly contended, and
to purchase which so many thousands of our brethren have fallen a sacrifice.

There are present, those who have been, more than once, in the most trying
situations, who have beheld the storm, both when it was collecting, at a
distance, and when it had assumed its most awful forms; and who have marched
through showers of the winged instruments of death, to obtain victory. -- You
fought, -- not to make yourselves rich and independent by enslaving others; --
but, to make millions free, and to enjoy the blessings of freedom in common
with those, for whom you risqued life and all that was dear to you. Your
conduct has fully evinced, that you were actuated by the most worthy motives,
-- an ardent zeal for liberty, and love to mankind.

There are also many present, who have never yet had an opportunity of
displaying their valor in the field, but who are heartily zealous in their
country's cause, and, if called to action, would stand forth as an undaunted
band of brothers, to oppose every enemy of our peace and freedom.

To you, gentlemen, who have the honor to command the companies, we have this
day seen, and to all others who act a similar part, great praise is due, for so
much attention to discipline, and that noble and martial appearance which you
all make.

Young soldiers! many of you perhaps are yet but learning the military terms
and movements; and some may be ready to imagine, that because the great contest
is over, these exercises may be little more than parade. Believe it, however,
the day may come, when you may be called to serious action. -- So much
uncertainty is there in all human affairs! Some of you may even rise, by
superior merit, to the highest offices; and much may depend on your virtue,
prowess, and patriotic spirit. -- Prepare, then, in time, for scenes like
these. -- Many shining examples have been set before you. -- Be it your
ambition to copy them.

Having marked with an anxious mind the progress of the late war, from its rise
to its happy conclusion; and wishing on this day to call into view, not only
those events which once alarmed all our fears, but also, and more especially,
those which gave us inexpressible joy, and prepared the way for an honorable
peace; -- I scarcely know where to begin, or what facts more especially to
notice, where all are so important, and so interesting.

What has once made a deep impression on the mind is not soon forgotten: -- And
O! how various and engaging are the objects and the scenes that now present
themselves before me!

I see orators, warmed with the love of their country, rising up before their
anxious fellow-citizens, to enlighten them with just notions of liberty, and
rouse them to vigorous exertions. I hear their animated speeches, while the
listening and delighted multitudes hang upon their lips, and at the close of
each address, exclaim, -- "He has spoken well; Britain designs to oppress us;
she is preparing chains for us, her distant and suspected, but most dutiful
sons; we cannot submit; we will be free."

How the flame spreads from north to south, and from the ocean to the western
waters! Men are chosen in every place, in whom the people can confide; men
eminent for their abilities, and of known integrity and public spirit. They
assemble; -- they deliberate; -- they consider in their proper light the
oppressive acts of a British legislature; and they resolve to prepare for
battle, rather than be degraded from the rank of freemen.

But like dutiful children, they first present their loyal addresses and joint
petitions to the throne; hoping that the voice of reason and justice will yet
be heard, and earnestly beseeching the Monarch of the British isles, to view us
in the same favorable light with his other faithful subjects. But prayers, and
the most sincere professions of loyalty, avail not. The blinded rulers of a
nation, confident in arms, and assured of victory, will not allow the truth to
reach the royal ear, but advise the enacting of laws and prosecution of
measures, which soon lead to open war, and eternal separation.

O the anxiety that now takes possession of the minds of my countrymen! -- What
zeal! what unanimity! what desire to learn the art of war! not for its own
sake, but that they may be in a condition to meet their hostile brethren in the
field. What ardent cries to Heaven for assistance! Days of humiliation and
prayer are appointed. Addresses, even from the pulpit, inspire the people with
the highest confidence in the justice of their cause. -- Frugal modes of living
are adopted, and industry most earnestly recommended.

Even the daughters of America, actuated by the same spirit, and speaking the
same language, as their beloved husbands and brothers, resolve to share their
fate, whatever that may be; -- they encourage them to go forth to battle; --
undertake the management of their farms and other business, in their absence;
-- raise large sums of money among themselve and prepare garments for suffering
soldiers; -- and deny themselves many things, the produce of foreign climes,
which custom had taught them to consider as part of the necessaries of life. --
Such was the conduct of the patriotic daughters of America! and let their names
be mentioned with honor, and their praises descend, with the stream of time,
to latest ages.

See the sons of farmers, many of them not yet arrived at the years or stature
of men, bidding adieu to their fields, their friends, and all the pleasures of
a rural life; the scholar throwing aside his books, from which he was
extracting the essence of wisdom; the merchant abandoning a gainful traffic;
and even the preacher, leaving his pulpit, with his bible in one hand, and his
sword in the other; -- all marching forth to oppose the foe, and maintain their
dearest rights!

With what alacrity were the counsels of our Congress and committees followed!
With what wisdom were those counsels given! They had the force of laws; and it
was next to treason, not to do what those fathers of America advised. What
zeal, what harmony, in the most arduous undertaking* Every friend of his
country embraced another of the same spirit, wherever he saw him, and from
whatever part of the land he came; -- strangers to national or party
distinctions! Many were the illustrious com-patriots who stood forth in that
trying day, to employ their several talents for their country's good. To tell
their names, -- to specify their merits, -- to describe their toils, their
sufferings, and their gallant deeds, -- would be to compose a history, instead
of delivering a short oration. While some remain in the senate house, to devise
plans of union and the best means of defense; -- to compose addresses and
deliver speeches, in which the noblest sentiments are clothed in the sublimest
diction; -- and to frame laws and constitutions, founded on the sure basis of
natural right; -- lo! others, raised to command by the voice of their
countrymen* march forth at the head of troops, hastily collected from different
states, and strangers as yet to military duties and the perils war, -- to
oppose generals, whose fame was great among the nations, and armies, perfect in
discipline, and accustomed to scenes of danger.

As the giant of old disdained the ruddy youth, who came against him, in the
name of the Lord, with a stone and a sling; and said to him, "Come to me, and I
will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the
field;" so did British chiefs, confiding in their troops, often tried and not
seldom victorious, contemn the youthful and inexperienced bands that first
opposed them.

How mortifying, then, must have been their disappointment!

Let old commanders, trusting to numbers and experience, boast of their fancied
superiority, and promise to their royal master, that the timid sons of the
western world shall soon be humbled in the dust by British arms; and that, with
a few thousand men, they could march from one end of the continent to the
other, and bring those, whom they were pleased to style rebels, to
unconditional submission, by the terror of their name; little did they know,
what great things a whole nation, properly enlightened, determined to be free,
and confiding in the arm of omnipotence, could soon accomplish.

But who shall lead forth our armies as chief in command, and animate them to
deeds of glory by his own example? -- Where is the man to be found, whose
valor has been proved, and whose spirit shall remain unbroken, amidst the
severest trials of human virtue and human patience? Say, ye freemen, ye
patriots, ye sages of America, -- is there a man among you, in whom you can all
confide, whom all shall delight to honor, and under whom your armies shall
encamp, or march, or fight, without a murmer, whether exposed to the ardent
blaze of a summer's sun, or to the snows and chilling blasts of a winter's sky?

Yes, there is one, (the millions of America reply,) there is one, in whom we
can all confide, raised up by providence to be a chief instrument, in effecting
a most important revolution, -- whose brow the unfading laurel shall adorn.

The grand council of America, as if moved by some heavenly impulse,
unanimously appoint to the command of their armies the only man, I will not
say, in America, but in the world, to whom it was best that command should be
given.

And when he went forth to run his glorious race, these eyes beheld him
surrounded by admiring thousands, who, as with one voice, called down the
blessings of Heaven upon his head, and anticipated, in joyful hope, the
victories that were to follow.

To dwell, my fellow-citizens, on the praises of this great and good man, on
this day, would be a proper and pleasing exercise: not as if to court the
favor of the great by the language of adulation; but that we might feel as we
ought our obligations to Providence, for raising up, and preserving so long for
his country's good, so great a deliverer.

Think not, ye brave Generals and others who under the Commander in Chief nobly
acted your several parts, and without whose exertions even a WASHINGTON could
not have conquered, -- think not, I pray, that it is for want of gratitude,
your names are not mentioned at this time, together with that of America's most
highly favored son. Were I to attempt to give the names of all those, whom the
pen of the faithful historian shall hand down with honor to posterity, neither
my time nor abilities would be equal to the task. And to mention some, while
many others of equal merit were passed over in silence, would be an act of
injustice.

After many signal battles had been fought, on this great theater, extending
from Quebec to Florida and from the ocean to the wilderness, (many of whose
savage tribes were also let loose upon us); after a generous and brave nation,
with a most amiable monarch at their head, LOUIS the benevolent, had taken us
by the hand, and aided us with their fleets and armies; after the malicious
attempts of a few internal foes and traitors were disappointed, and every state
had felt less or more the ravages of war; and after Britain had tried her
strength on every quarter, and some of her best generals with their entire
armies had fallen into our hands; -- then was the important era hastened on,
when peace should once more bless our land; and our independence be
acknowledged by the powers of Europe.

It has pleased the great Disposer of events, that the contest should end, in
an entire separation of these states from what was called the parent nation.
The means and events by which this was accomplished, were so many and
wonderful, that all were constrained to cry out. "Surely that Heaven, whose aid
we have implored, is on our side!" To HIM, then, who has done great things for
us, let us, on this day, and every day, offer a tribute of sincere praise. And
while we are cheerful and happy, rememberng the Giver of all good, let us be
devout and thankful.

I have but a few words more to say; and as you have been so very indulgent, I
cannot but hope you will hear me patiently a few minutes longer.

My fellow-citizens,

Let us not leave the great work, which we have begun, unfinished. Much indeed
has been done; -- but we may be assured, much yet remains for us to do, before
we can be, in all respects, that flourishing, great, and happy nation, which we
wish and hope to be.

Exertions are necessary to be made, in order that the debt of the nation may
be honorably discharged, and those who fought our battles rewarded, as justice
demands.

A spirit of piety and genuine christianity should be more generally diffused
among all ranks of men, (for which end, seminaries of learning should be
generously encouraged,) and the greatest and best of beings adored and loved,
as he requires, for the many civil and religious privileges that we enjoy.

Righteousness and piety exalt a nation.

A spirit of industry, frugality, and temperance, more generally prevailing,
would be an inexhaustible mine of wealth to the inhabitants of this land.

A spirit of union, confidence, and brotherly love, ought also to be cherished
by every true patriot.

Our character and consequence, as a people, depend on the firm union of these
States, now called United.

If you would allow me a bold comparison, I would say, that these American
States should resemble the Solar System, where every obedient planet moves on
in its proper path, -- never seeking to fly from, nor ever approaching nearer
to, the great attractive central orb, than the wise author of nature intended.

The bonds of our union, in the opinion of many, must be drawn much closer; and
the machine in a great measure wound up anew, in order that it may perform its
operations with new vigor.

And now is the important moment come, for this great work; -- now, when the
most enlightened patriots from every state are convened in our metropolis, to
deliberate on these weighty matters.

Illustrious assembly! may the wisdom of Heaven direct you. May your prayers,
and the prayers of the millions whom you represent, be addressed to the Father
of lights, for his direction and blessing at this most important crisis! -- He,
who led your armies to victory, by his valor, now presides over you, to assist
your counsels, by his wisdom. Avoid extremes. -- Pursue a middle course. -- Let
not the bond of our union be, a rope of sand; and Oh! let it also bear as
little resemblance as possible to the heavy chain of despotism. -- Let that
liberty, which alone is worth contending for, and which lies equally remote
from licentiousness and tyranny, be ever kept steadily in view. Let every state
be wise and just. And let none imagine, that any thing less than destruction
must be the consequence, of want of faith, piety, and union.

May God bless these States, and make us long a wise, flourishing, and happy
people! And may he grant, that this year, on which we have now entered, may be
one of the most memorable in the annals of America!

FINIS.

