Mr. ANDREWS's Farewell DISCOURSE.

DISCOURSE ON St. MARK, XVI.15, 16. "AND HE SAID UNTO THEM, GO YE," etc.

BY Samuel Andrews, A. M. Late Missionary at Wallingford, from the venerable
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in foreign Parts: And now Missionary
at St. Andrews, (New-Brunswick.)

NEW HAVEN: Printed by DANIEL BOWEN, in Chapel-street, near the COLLEGE.
(M.DCC.LXXXVII.)

To the CONGREGATIONS of Wallingford, Cheshire, and North-Haven, lately under
my Care.
GENTLEMEN,
THE following Discourse was intended to have been delivered on my taking leave
of you; but, my present infirm state of health rendering that impracticable: I
take the liberty of presenting it to you in this manner, and beg you will
receive it as a testimony of my regard for you, and of my solicitude for Your
spiritual interest.

The AUTHOR.

St. Mark, XVI.15, 16. AND HE SAID UNTO THEM, GO YE INTO ALL THE WORLD, AND
PREACH THE GOSPEL TO EVERY CREATURE: HE THAT BELIEVES AND IS BAPTIZED, SHALL
BE SAVED; BUT HE THAT BELIEVES NOT, SHALL BE DAMNED.


THIS is the important commission given by the blessed Head of the Church to
the apostles, the first ministers in his kingdom; and in them to all who should
be in future authorized to publish the glad tidings of his salvation, in all
succeeding generations to the end of the world. In these words, the extent of
our mission is mentioned -- the nature of our errand unfolded, -- and the
conditions of salvation, we are to publish in the name of our blessed master,
are expressly declared. To this divine rule you are then to look, would you
know whether we deviate from our commission or not

This Discourse is not designed to prove the truth of the christian religion:
It is addressed to those only who declare themselves christians, and profess to
believe that the gospel is the only charter of hope to men: It therefore
proceeds upon christian principles, takes for granted that the bible is true,
and undertakes to show by scripture what the gospel promises to do for men,
and upon what terms we may hope for the rewards of it.

The gospel scheme is built upon a sufficient atonement, which is already made
to divine justice for sin. The bible informs, that originally God made man
upright, put him under a certain law, and declared death to be the award of
disobedience to it -- that man however transgressed, and stood exposed to the
penalty -- but that Jesus Christ, the second person in the sacred trinity,
undertook his restoration, and accomplished it by his own sufferings and death
in the place of the offender.

The generally received doctrine of the christian church is, and has been, that
Jesus Christ, having ransomed human nature by paying the price of our
redemption, steps forth in his own right, as our Proprietor, King and Judge;
enacts laws for us to observe; and offers all the rewards of his purchase upon
such terms as to his infinite wisdom seem proper. In a word, that the terms
proposed are repentance of sin, and faith in the Redeemer.

In conformity to this faith of the Church of God, judging it to be fully and
clearly supported in divine revelation: I have constantly maintained, that
there is no other name under heaven, than that of Jesus Christ, by which men
can be saved -- that HE has redeemed mankind -- paid the price of our ransom;
and is become our lawgiver and judge -- that in consequence of his dominion
over us, he has treated us as agents; enacted laws to bind us; and condescended
to make a gracious covenant with us in the gospel, in which covenant he
promises to give us his salvation, upon condition that we believe in him,
submit to his laws, and repent of our sins -- but has threatened to exclude us
from the benefits of his purchase, if we continue in impenitence and unbelief
-- and that we must therefore comply with these conditions, or submit to a
miserable eternity.

Many of you are my witnesses, that this has uniformly been the great burden of
my instructions from my youth to the present day. The doctrine has also been
universally believed in this society, where, for a course of many years, unless
I am mistaken, there has been as perfect an uniformity of religious sentiment,
as ever was in any congregation.

Happy, I sincerely believe, it had been for the town at large, and for this
society in particular, had the doctrine never been opposed: Of late, however,
there are those who deny the human race to be agents -- that the gospel is a
covenant between God and men -- or that it has any conditions of life in it --
and who assert, that Jesus Christ having paid the whole debt to divine justice,
which every human creature had contracted by sin, that a second payment cannot
be justly required; and therefore, however men may live here, the whole human
nature must and will be finally happy. This doctrine is in direct opposition to
what you have early and ever been taught. It appears to clash with the words of
our text; and it opposes the whole system of the faith, I have ever believed
and taught. Can I do less than to examine it heartily by the word of God?

I am now to take my final leave of my country, and of this my charge; upon
both which I earnestly wish and implore every divine blessing, which may
conduce to their comfort here, and their happiness forever. But how can I
expect the accomplishment of this wish, unless I leave them established in the
truth? -- rooted and grounded in the faith and order of the gospel? Should the
doctrine I oppose be found true, I should think it an honor to retract my
present mistake; and this disposition I hope to find in others. However, should
the doctrine you all have till of late received, be found supported by God's
word, it must be my duty to call upon you, to hold fast the beginning of Your
confidence and hope. My obligation to you as a spiritual instructor, and my
higher obligation to the great Head of the Church as his ambassador, conspire
to demand this of me.

"Men, Brethren and Fathers, hear ye therefore my defense, which I now make
unto you". The words of the text prove, that all men shall not be saved by
gospel, unless all men shall believe it. -- They are the very words of the
great Redeemer himself, who has ransomed us from death; and they contain the
terms upon which only HE has ordered the gospel to be published

The words are addressed to the apostles; and these first christian ministers
are directed to go into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature;
then follow the very words of the gospel they were to publish. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned. When we know the true import of these words, we shall also know what
the conditions of salvation are, which Christ has fixed.

To believe and be baptized must signify, not only to believe that Jesus is the
Christ; but to repent of our sins, and submit to his government; for so much
Christ has elsewhere expressly required. So, to be saved, 'as this is Christ's
gift,' must intend the enjoyment of his salvation.

And on the other hand, not to believe, must signify, not only to deny Christ
before men, but to reject his government: And to be damned must be, to be
rejected from the above salvation.

Let the meaning of the word damned be condemned, or judged, or however you
interpret it, it stands in direct opposition to the word saved. And if the
unbeliever is not rejected from the salvation to which the believer is
admitted, the passage if left without meaning, nor can it be reconciled with
common sense. In the passage above, Christ admits the believer to his
salvation; but he condemns, or judges the unbeliever to be unworthy of his
salvation; and this is to reject him from it. Neither does this interpretation
rest upon my authority; but upon the authority of the Redeemer himself, for
thus he has explained it. John 3d, 36th.
He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that believes not
on the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him. Christ
here declares, the unbeliever shall not see the life, which is given to the
believer. Christ's salvation is the life he has given to the believer,
therefore he has rejected the unbeliever from his salvation. He has declared he
shall not even see it. Can we have higher evidence that all men shall not be
saved by gospel, unless all men shall finally believe it, that is, fulfill the
conditions of it, than this explicit declaration of our blessed Redeemer and
final Judge? But why do I mention conditions, when it is denied, that there are
conditions in the gospel? or indeed, that men are agents? or the gospel a
covenant between God and men? We will examine these particulars, before we
proceed to the principal enquiry; which is, whether all men shall finally
believe the gospel?

The first inquiry is, whether men are agents? What we understand by an agent
is, a being capable of instruction, or able to understand, and to be governed
by laws, or to be influenced by the sanctions of law. The laws and civil
constitutions of every country prove, it is, and has been, the common consent
of mankind, that we are such beings; that is, beings capable to learn the
meaning of law, and to be governed by the precepts of it; otherwise why were
civil constitutions ever framed? To give men laws, is to treat them as agents:
that is, as beings capable of government by law, and to acknowledge it proper
to enact laws to bind us, is to grant we are agents, or proper subjects of law:
but God has given laws to bind us: he therefore has treated us as agents.

Should it be said, though we can obey the laws of men, we cannot obey the laws
of God; therefore, though we are agents under human laws, we are not agents, or
proper subjects of divine laws. This objection must suppose, either that God
has given us no laws: or that he he has not treated us properly according to
our condition* We grant (as indeed we ought to do) that in our own strength we
are unable to keep even those divine laws on which our salvation is suspended:
But Christ in the gospel has declared, that the aids of his spirit shall be of
equal extent with his laws -- that we shall not be tempted above our ability --
that his strength shall be perfected in our weakness -- and that it shall be
sufficient for us. However impotent we are in ourselves, we want no other
strength than that which is sufficient for us -- and as the gospel promises to
give us sufficient strength, though it did not find us agents, it has raised us
to that capacity. All who believe God has given a revelation to teach men their
duty, must believe them able to learn it: and they who grant that God has given
laws to regulate our lives, ought to grant that we are agents, and able to be
governed by law.

Will any men then, who acknowledge the authority of revelation, deny that God
has given laws to mankind? Who can deny that God gave a law to the first two in
innocence, and declared death to be the penalty of disobedience to it? Who can
deny the Decalogue, and the whole law of Moses, to be divine laws given to
regulate the manners of men? Who will deny that God by Moses set life and death
before the Jewish nation, and referred it to them which they would choose, as
though they really had the power of choice. Finally, who can deny that faith
and repentance are laws of the gospel, designed to bind men, when Christ
commands men to repent and believe the gospel, declares they shall be saved, if
they do, but affirms they shall not see life, if they do not? The truth is,
from the day God made man to the present time, he has uniformly given laws to
govern us: he has treated us as beings capable of government by law, or as
creatures able to choose and refuse. And this is to treat us as agents. Clearly
nothing more can be necessary to make man an agent, than to be able to be
governed by laws, enforced by rewards and punishments. God has always given
such laws to men. However long we contend therefore, it will follow, either
that we are agents, or that God has treated us improperly. Which side of the
alternative shall we take? -- we ought not, and we dare not say, God has
treated us improperly: We therefore must believe we are agents* since God has
treated us as such.

But the next point is, whether there are conditions of life in the gospel? A
condition, is any thing upon which the enjoyment of a favor is suspended. When
we do the thing required, we receive the benefit: When we do it not, we are
rejected from the favor. The thing thus required is a condition of enjoyment;
because the enjoyment is not to take effect without a compliance with the
condition. Let us examine whether such conditions of life are not to be found
in the gospel.

Our blessed Lord came to save men by the remission of their sins When he
entered upon his public ministry, he declared the approach of his kingdom, and
commanded men to repent and believe his gospel. That he requires faith and
repentance is clearly legible to every one who looks into his bible: He has
made faith and repentance the terms of his pardon and salvation, and requires
them, as the conditions of life which himself has fixed. Luke 24, 47. He has
commanded repentance and remission of sins to be preached in his name, -- not
remission of sins without repentance, but repentance first, as a condition
without which there should be no remission. As repentance is one condition of
life in the gospel; so faith is another: Our blessed Redeemer says, St. John,
3, 16, and 36. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. He
that believes on the son, has everlasting Life; and he that believes not the
son, shall not see Life. Christ, the purchaser and giver of life, has promised
it to the believer; but declared the unbeliever shall not see life, but shall
remain under the wrath of God. Is not faith then a condition of life? Without
faith, life is not promised in the gospel; -- with faith, it is promissed.
Faith is then a condition upon which the enjoyment of life is suspended by the
gospel. If we expect salvation by Christ, we must look for it in the way in
which he has promised it. Christ has not said, we shall be saved without faith:
Who dare say we shall? Christ has declared the believer shall receive his
salvation; but that the unbeliever shall not receive it: Who dare say he shall
receive it? To close the argument: -- If the believer shall enjoy life, and the
unbeliever shall not enjoy it, then faith is a condition of life. Jesus Christ
has expressly declared this to be the case: therefore Jesus Christ has made
faith a condition of life.

Having proved that there are conditions of life in the gospel, it will soon
appear that the gospel is a covenant between God and men. A covenant is an
agreement between two or more parties. In this case God is one party, and men
are the other. On his part, God promises life to men, upon the conditions of
faith and repentance: On men's part, when they take the christian profession
upon them, they promise to comply with the above conditions, as the way to
enjoy the good things promised. They who take this profession upon them, are
said to enter into covenant, -- nay, and baptism, the rite by which we complete
this agreement, is called the seal of the covenant. A covenant then there must
be, or there could be no seal to it. But who are the parties in the covenant?
Unquestionably God and men are the parties: For they are the two parties which
agree. Indeed, it is impossible the covenant should be betwixt God and Christ.
Though there might originally have been a covenant between the Father and the
Son; yet this of which we now speak, is not: For we are told, that Christ is
the mediator of this covenant. A mediator is a middle person, and an
intercessor: But Christ cannot intercede betwixt God and himself, -- nor can he
stand in the middle between God and himself: But he must mediate between God
and his people, the two parties who have entered into the agreement. In
conformity to this idea, the apostle observes, that Christ is a mediator; but
says, that Galations 3d, 20th.
a mediator is not a mediator of ONE; but God is one, -- therefore he tells us,
both that 1st Timothy, 2d, 5th.
he is the mediator betwixt God and men, and Heb. 12, 24th.
the mediator of the new covenant. I see not then why it does not follow, with
a force of evidence equally convincing with a mathematical demonstration, that
since Christ is the mediator of the new covenant -- since he cannot be a
mediator of one, nor mediator betwixt God and himself, -- but is the mediator
between God and men, that the new covenant of which he is mediator, must be a
covenant between God and men.

The above observations show, that men are agents, because God treats them as
such -- that the gospel is a covenant between God and men, that it contains
conditions of life -- and that faith and repentance are the conditions of this
covenant. It will from hence follow, that we must fulfill the conditions of the
covenant, or not expect the rewards of it. As we are agents, we are accountable
to God for the improvement of the powers he has given us. As gospel promises
are conditional, we must comply with the conditions, or not inherit the
promises. Jesus Christ has paid the price of our ransom: We are his in right of
purchase: and he has an undoubted authority to dispose of us as he shall judge
proper.

Christ has promised his salvation to the believer: he has rejected the
unbeliever from it. In the text he declares, he that believes shall be saved;
and he who believes not, shall be damned. If we disagree in the meaning of
this last word, our Lord has declared it signifies, not to see or enjoy the
life he has given to the believer. These are his words: He that believes on
the son, has everlasting Life; he that believes not the son, shall not see
Life. These are the words of our final judge, and they absolutely exclude the
unbeliever from the life which is given to the believer; they declare he shall
not see or enjoy it. The life here promised to the believer is Christ's
salvation. Christ's salvation is eternal life: For speaking of his sheep, he
says St. John 10th, 28th.
I give unto them eternal Life. The salvation then, which is given to the
believer, is eternal life; the unbeliever is rejected from the salvation given
to the believer; he therefore is rejected from eternal life; and this too by
the declaration of the judge himself.

It follows, either that we must acknowledge the final unbeliever is rejected
from eternal life, or deny the positive, clear and express declaration of our
Redeemer and Judge.

Moreover, this sentence of the judge will be executed upon the final
unbeliever in the great day of retribution. For judgment is then to proceed
according to the gospel: And the business of that important day is only to
execute the promises and threatenings of the gospel. As the unbeliever is
totally excluded from eternal life, it will follow, either that all men will
not be finally happy; or that all men will finally believe; Since without faith
no one can be happy, no one can please God, or enjoy him.

We therefore enquire whether all men shall finally believe, or fulfill the
conditions of the gospel? That all men do not fulfill these conditions in the
present life, may be thus argued. St. John observes, that without (or out of
the kingdom of Heaven) Revelations 22d, 15th
"are sorcerers, whoremongers, murderers, and idolaters." Had these men obeyed
the gospel in this life, they had not been excluded from Heaven: but would have
taken part of the inheritance given to him who overcomes.

The same thing may be argued from the case of Dives and Lazarus. Lazarus died,
and was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom -- a place of joy and comfort.
The other died, and lift up his eyes in torment. Why is this difference made
betwixt the two? The only reason which can be given is, the one had fulfiled
the conditions of life, and the other had not. The one had faith, the other had
it not. Had Dives in this life fulfiled the conditions to which Christ had
promised his salvation, we now should not find him in torment, and hear him beg
in vain for releif; but we should find him with Lazarus in a place of comfort.
These instances are a demonstration, that all men do not fulfill the conditions
of the gospel in this life, because we find some men excluded from the rewards
of it at death.

As all men do not fulfill gospel conditions in this life, it remains to be done
after death, if it is ever done. But surely it cannot be done between death and
the resurrection. For our blessed Lord (...) us, death is a St. John 9th, 4th.
night in which no man can (...). And the apostle, that we are to be judged,
for the things only which are done in the body. Soul and body are separated at
death, and will remain in a separate state till the judgment shall commence: --
then they will be reunited -- not for a second probation however; but to
receive the just award of the deeds done in the body before its separation from
the soul. Hence the apostle, 20. Corin. 5th, 10th.
we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. So in the description of the final judgment recorded by Sr.
Matthew, our blessed Redeemer awards those on his right hand to happiness,
because they had fed the hungry, etc. Things which could be done no where but
here in the body: and he also sentences those on the left to misery, for no
other reason than because they had neglected to do such good deeds upon earth.

I know it has been said, that devils only are on the left hand, and all
mankind, bad and good, on the right: But this interpretation destroys the great
design, both of this passage, and of the gospel at large. For doubtless the
design of both is, to encourage virtue, and discourage vice, by the different
awards they should receive at this grand period: But place all men, good and
bad, on the right hand, and adjudge them indiscriminately to happiness, and
this great design is totally lost. It contains no motive to virtue, or
discouragement to vice; nor can you reconcile it with the wisdom of God, or the
reason of men. Besides, the crime for which those on the left hand are
punished, does not agree with devils, but with men. Men are expected to feed
the hungry; I never knew that devils were: Nor is this the crime for which they
are to suffer. The apostle tells us, that "God spared not the angels which
sinned, but cast them down to hell" They sinned before they were cast down; and
they are reserved in chains to the judgment of the great day, because cause
they rebelled against God in Heaven; -- not because they did not visit the sick
upon earth. In the passage of scripture referred to above, it is said that all
nations shall be gathered before the Judge. The objector says, the devils are
comprehended in the words all nations. -- Matt. 28th, 19th, the apostles are
commanded to go and teach all nations, and baptize them. If impure spirits are
comprehended in the above expressions; all nations they are within the
commission given to the apostles, and should have been instructed and baptized
by them did they misunderstand their commission? or did they perversely neglect
to execute one grand part of it; or finally did they understand it better than
the objector?


From the above observations it clearly follows, that the judgment of the great
day is the award of the things done in the body, and only of the things so
done. This award is made according to the terms of the gospel. -- For the
apostle testifies, Romans 2d. 16.
that God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the
gospel. It appears further, that all men do not fulfill the terms of the gospel
in this life -- that between death and judgment they cannot fulfill them,
because in this period nothing can be done for which we are to be judged: And
it must follow, that as some men are not within the conditions of life at the
time of judgment, they must then be rejected from salvation.

The conclusion is unavoidable. The word of God is express, that the sentence
of the last judgment is given according to the gospel, for those things only
which are done in the body. The gospel has in plain words rejected the
unbeliever from salvation. Some men die unbelievers. At this period they
therefore must be rejected by the judge; because the gospel has already
rejected them, and judgment is only the execution of the gospel sentence.

We have now arrived at the period of the general judgment. We have found that
some men at this period have not fulfiled the conditions of life -- that in
consequence they are, and must be, rejected from Christ's salvation by this
judgment. It also appears that Christ's salvation is eternal; that they
therefore are rejected from eternal salvation by the last sentence of the
judge; because they have not fulfiled the conditions of life. These conditions
then remain to be fulfiled after the general judgment, when the sentence of
rejection from eternal life is passed, or they never can be fulfiled. But after
the general judgment there will be no gospel conditions; therefore there can be
none to fulfill. Judgment is the last act of gospel. It is to fix the condition
of those who have been tried by the gospel -- to reward its friends and punish
its enemies. It is to put all things in subjection to Christ. And when this is
done, gospel has accomplished its whole design, and must cease.

As judgment is the execution of gospel promises and threatenings, it cannot
take place till the end of the dispensation. It is not time to reward or punish
men by gospel, till they have been first proved by it. Therefore the judgment
of the last day cannot commence, till all those have stood their trial by
gospel, whom the wisom of God has decreed to try by it. first to inflict
gospel punishments upon men, and after this to put them under trial by the
gospel, would be like punishing a man for a breach of law which was never given
him; and after this putting him under the law, to try if his future
disobedience would not merit the unjust sentence already executed upon him:

In the nature of the thing, we must begin with probation, and end with
judgment, and thus God has represented the judgment of the great day. Matt.
13th, 49th.
So shall it be in the end of the world, says Christ; the Angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just. In the parable of the tares of
the field, our blessed Lord being the interpreter, the harvest, or judgment, is
the end of the world: And the representation is, that as the reapers do not
begin harvest till the corn is fully ripe; so judgment shall not commence till
all the subjects of it have finished their probation, and are ripe for the
award. Hence judgment is also represented as a work of the last day. St. John
12th, 48th.
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him:
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him IN THE LAST DAY. The
sentence Christ has pronounced against the unbeliever shall condemn him in the
general judgment, the last day, the winding up and conclusion of the gospel
dispensation. "The last enemy to be destroyed is death:" And this enemy is
destroyed by the resurrection: Judgment follows, and puts all enemies under
Christ's feet. Devils and wicked men receive their final doom. And then the
apostle says, the end comes: then Christ will deliver up his kingdom, as
mediator, into the hands of the father. The second death is not the last enemy
here intended. The second death must be destroyed before the final judgment, or
never -- It must be destroyed by the effect the gospel has upon our lives. If
we believe, it has no power over us. If we believe not, we shall be hurt of the
second death. For thus says God, Rev. 21, 7, 8.
He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son: But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable murderers,
etc. shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death.

Reason and revelation unitedly declare, that judgment is the last act of
gospel, the concluding scene of the dispensation. When the gospel ceases, the
conditions of it must cease. Judgment shuts up the gospel: It therefore must
shut up the conditions of the gospel. Faith is a condition or law of the
gospel. Judgment closes the gospel. After judgment therefore, faith is not
rewardable by the gospel, because it is not required by it.

The sum of all is, that there can be no probation under the gospel after the
general judgment, because gospel itself is then at an end, and ceases to
command. Between death and judgment nothing can be done to alter our state.
Nothing can be done for which we are to be judged; for judgment only takes
cognizance of the things done in the body. It follows, that if we ever fulfill
the conditions of the gospel, it must be in this life, while we are in the
body. We have adduced several instances, which prove incontestably that some
men do not fulfill these conditions in this life, and as they cannot be fulfiled
after death or judgment, it must follow, that some men, at the final judgment,
must have the sentence of rejection executed upon them; and that they being
filthy must remain filthy, and the wrath of God abide upon them. Where then is
universal salvation? It is not found in the gospel, the last act of which
excludes some men forever from a possibility of it.

We will answer a few objections, and close the subject*

The first objection is, that Jesus Christ has paid the whole debt which we had
contracted by sin; and that justice cannot demand a second payment.

Christ has indeed ransomed us from the penalty of the law of innocence. He has
paid the whole debt to this law, and redeemed us from the curse of it. If we
are condemned therefore, it will be by another law. Christ has redeemed us from
the Law; but has he redeemed us from the Gospel too? If we are under no
obligation to the law, who dare say we are under none to the gospel? The gospel
was given to us: But why was this done, if we are under no obligation to obey
it? Though the law has been fulfiled, Christ who did fulfill it, has placed us
under the gospel which is not fulfiled, and has threatened to exclude us from
his salvation, if we do not comply with the conditions of it. If we are finally
condemned then, it will be by the gospel, from the laws of which Jesus Christ
has never excused us. Our Lord could neither believe nor repent. Innocence
foreclosed him from repentance; and infinite knowledge from faith: -- These two
are the leading terms of the gospel, -- Terms adapted only to sinners, and
beings of limited knowledge -- which can be fulfiled only by such beings; --
and as they are required of us, will remain a debt upon us till we comply with
them; and if we do not comply, we may be condemned by the gospel, without the
charge of a second payment.

The next objection is, that punishment is a medicine, designed by God for the
cure of offense; and that it will have its effect either in this, or in some
future trial. We grant, the punishments of this life are designed to purge from
offense; but that this is the case with the punishments of the future state, is
not a doctrine of the gospel. In the book of God, the punishments of the future
judgment are uniformly represented, not as the cure, but the award -- the
proper wages and desert of sin, as a judicial recompense which the justice of
God is concerned to execute upon the offender. Thus the apostle Romans 6, 23d.
"The wages of sin is death." And in the last day Christ is to appear 2d These.
1, 8, 9.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Should it be said, God is not a Being of passion: The reply is, he is a Being
of justice however; and has told us, if his mercy does not reclaim us, his
vengeance or his justice shall pursue us; that there shall be no remedy or
escaping.

As the position, that future punishment is purgative, is unscriptural: so the
hope of a second trial under gospel is merely vissionary and ideal. For it has
been proved, that after judgment there can be no trial, because gospel is then
closed. Indeed, that after the separaration of soul and body there can be none
-- for judgment takes cognizance only of the things done in the body. It
therefore follows, that this life is the only time of probation under the
gospel, and that NOW only is the accepted time and day of salvation, agreeably
to the express words of scripture.

Lastly, it is objected, that we are finite beings; our crimes therefore must
be finite; but the punishment of them is represented to be infinite, and must
exceed the weight of the offense. No being knows the weight of offense so
perfectly, as he who has adjusted the punishment to it: This being has
declared that Luke 12, 47, 48th.
that servant which knew his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes -- but he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes,
for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required. -- Matt. 25,
28, ^9, 30th.
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talents, For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance; but from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he
has. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. If the offender remains an offender forever, it
is as just to continue his punishment, as it was at first to inflict it.
Whether any shall continue offenders forever is then the question. -- Were men
machines, the punishment God inflicts in this life, would infallibly reclaim
the vicious. But as we are agents, the conclusion will not follow. The
punishments inflicted upon Pharaoh were by infinite wisdom adapted to the cure
of his proud and stubborn heart; they did however prove ineffectual. Experience
teaches, and the word of God declares, that the longer habits of vice are
continued, the more inflexible they grow. The truth is, all men are not
reclaimed in this world, either by human or divine punishments. Every man must
be reclaimed in the time of his trial, or never. It has been proved, that this
life is the only time of trial: for judgment takes cognizance of the things
only which are done in this life: and after judgment there can be no time of
trial under gospel: for the gospel itself is then closed. It follows then, that
some men are not reclaimed by gospel in the only time of trial under it, and
therefore must forever remain offenders against it. And surely it is as just to
continue as to begin to punish an offender. It has been proved that judgment is
the last act of gospel. As men must be first tried, before they can be judged
by gospel, they who plead for a time of probation after judgment, plead for a
thing clearly impossible under the gospel: because at this period, there will
be no gospel to prove us.

If these future trials are supposed to be under some future dispensation of
grace, the gospel knows nothing of them: nor will I concern myself further with
the hypothesis than to observe, that though it may be ingenious, it has
nothing but conjecture to support it. To suppose gospel has told us of such
future trials, is to suppose it militates against itself, and has rendered its
own motives feeble. They therefore who build their hopes of happiness upon such
conjectures, are removed from the hope of the gospel, and place their
expectations only in cunningly devised fables, built upon mere dream and
enthusiasm.

It has been proved, that we are probationers, that faith and repentance are
conditions of the gospel -- that our redeemer and judge has excluded us from
his salvation, if we refuse to comply with them -- that judgment must proceed
according to the conditions of the gospel, that all men do not, in this life
fulfill these conditions -- that after death they cannot be fulfiled, till
gospel is finally closed -- audit therefore follows, that all men shall not be
finally saved by gospel,

After the most critical examination, in the fear of God, I sincerely believe
these conclusions are fairly drawn from undoubted principles, if the clearest
and most positive declarations of God's word are granted to be undoubted
principles. And indeed the capital arguments are founded upon the express
declarations of our blessed Redeemer and judge. Can it be denied, that our
Redeemer has rejected the unbeliever from his salvation? as judgment takes
cognizance only of the things done in the body. Can it be denied that judgment
must execute the above sentence of the Redeemer upon all who die in unbelief?
Can it be denied that we are bound to obey the conditions of the gospel, though
Christ has answered the demands of the law of innocence? Can it be denied that
judgment is the last act of gospel, as it is designed only to reward or punish
those who have had their trial under it? Can it then be denied that after
judgment all probation under gospel must be at an end? Can it be denied that
judgment takes cognizance of the things only which are done in the body, and
executes sentence according to the conditions of the gospel? And can it be
denied that Dives and others have died destitute of the conditions of life? But
if there is one person rejected from salvation by the gospel, there may be
more, and must be as many as die in impenitence and unbelief. Perhaps it may be
objected, that the instance of Dives is a parable, and therefore improperly
adduc'd. -- But the circumstance of its being a parable adds weight to the
argument^: for though D^ves and Lazarus are mentioned as particular persons,
they are designed to represent different characters; and it is clear from the
context that Lazarus represents all who obey the gospel, and Dives all who
disobey it. -- therefore the declaration is, that all they who obey the gospel,
do find themselves at death in a place of joy and comfort; and all who disobey
it, feel them selves in a place of misery and distress, nor will it do to say
there will be no such different characters at this period, for this would be to
deny there was a foundation for the parable itself.
One instance at least has been adduced. Universal Salvation must therefore be
rejected.

From the above reasons it appears, that the ancient doctrine of the Church of
God is the true doctrine -- that the doctrine we have opposed is destitute of
gospel support -- and that faith and repentance are conditions of the gospel
which we must fulfill, or be rejected from the hope of the gospel.

As the doctrine I have here attempted to maintain, is (at least in my own
judgment) founded in truth, and supported by the word of truth; but has lately,
however, been warmly opposed by some, I shall publish the arguments adduced in
support of the ancient doctrines of the Church, and leave the world to judge of
the validity of them. I do this the rather, in testimony of affection to my
country; and particularly to the respected people of my charge, to whom I shall
leave this Discourse as a legacy. Let me entreat them all, let me entreat you
in particular before whom I have walked from childhood to this day, to consider
seriously, and examine impartially the arguments here advanced. I claim this as
due for long and unremitted friendship. I claim it as your instructor for many
years, and one who has never failed to attend you, and take a part with you in
every distress; and I claim it as a messenger from God, an ambassador of the
blessed Jesus. I believe the doctrine opposed in this Discourse to be contrary
to God's holy and eternal truth, and subversive of the great design of the
gospel of Christ; and how can I bid you a final adieu, while I fear any of you,
by imbibing this doctrine, may be removed from the hope of the gospel. I am
clear in it, that faith and repentence are necessary to gospel salvation.
Imbibe this doctrine, both in theory and practice, and then I have authority in
the name of my blessed master, whose I am, and whom I serve, to promise you
complete and endless happiness. But as I expect salvation upon no other terms
myself, I dare not encourage you to hope for it in any other way.

This, probably, is the last time we shall meet in a united assembly, till we
meet before the awful tribunal of the final Judge. Let us then examine for
truth with such care and impartiality, that we all may be rooted and grounded
in the faith and order of the gospel, that when we meet again, we may adore
God, and congratulate one another, in the blessed victory and triumph we have
by the blood of Christ gained through faith.

How happy, happy should I be, my brethren, at that important hour, could I
with assurance, say to my infinite Judge, "Lo, here am I, and the spiritual
children thou have given me! Here is my whole flock; they have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb: therefore are they before
the throne of God, and stand ready to serve him day and night in his temple."
That this may be ^^or happy lot, let the clear sense, the most express
declarations of God's word, regulate your faith. Examine heartily for truth,
and embrace it when fairly found. In this way, we may "all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man;" and be
builded together, "upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner stone."

Should we meet once again upon this blessed foundation, our joy must be full.
In hope of this happy event, with the most affectionate entreaty to you to
stand with your ^^^ps burning, and earnest prayer to God to prepare you for
glory, by a steady belief of the gospel, and a faithful obedience to it, I now
deliver up my charge of your spirital concerns -- begging that God, who causes
men to be of one mind in an house, to grant you to be like minded, that you may
with one mind and one mouth glorify God -- may be established in the faith of
the gospel -- and enabled to grow up into HIM in all things who is the Head,
even Christ.

"Finally then, my Brethren, Farewell: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind, live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you" --
shall "make you perfect to do his will, and present you faultless before his
presence with exceeding and eternal joy." Which God Almighty grant may be the
happy portion of us all, through Jesus Christ.

AMEN.

