AN ADDRESS TO THE SECOND Baptist Church, In MIDDLEBOROUGH, CONCERNING THE
IMPORTANCE OF GOSPEL DISCIPLINE.

Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump.

1. COR. v. 7. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.

LUKE. xii. 1. MIDDLEBOROUGH: (COUNTY OF PLYMOUTH,) PRINTED BY NATHANIEL
COVERLY. M,DCCL,XXXVII.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
Beloved Brethren,
REASON taught the old Romans, the injustice of condemning any man before he
had his accusers face to face, with license to answer for himself; and
revelation says to Christians, In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
every word be established. 2. COR. xiii. 1. And upon personal offenses, our
Lord requires us to give each brother two opportunities to speak for himself,
before he is arraigned before the church; and then says, If he neglect to hear
the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen Man and a Publican. And he
assures us that none have a right to be in his church, who are not become as
little children. MAT. xviii. 3, 15, 18. And what holiness would soon prevail in
his church, if his laws were obeyed therein! Lordship is of the Gentiles; and
by them has the Holy City, been long trodden under foot. MARK x. 15, 42. REV.
xi. 2. The church has been laboring, like a traveling woman, for deliverance
from Antichristian Tyranny; and this labor has now come to a point among our
churches, as the following facts will show.

THE Warren association was formed as a friendly conference, without claiming
any jurisdiction over the churches. In September, 1772, they elected me their
Agent, to use my best endeavors, by the advice of their committee, to obtain
the establishment of equal religious liberty in this country: And for that end
we published these five reasons, in 1773, against complying any longer with the
certificate laws of the ruling party in New England, 1st. Because it implies an
acknowledgment, that civil rulers have a right to set one religious sect above
another, which they have not. 2d. Because they are not our representatives in
religious affairs, and therefore have no right to impose religious taxes. 3d.
Because their doing it emboldens the ruling party, to assume God's prerogative,
so as to judge the hearts of all who put not into their mouths. 4th. Because
the church is presented as a chaste virgin to Christ; and the placeing of her
trust and love upon any others for temporal support, is playing the harlot, and
so the way to destroy all religion. HOSEA ii. 5. 5th. Because this practice
tends to promote envy, hypocrisy, and confusion, and so to the ruin of civil
society, My History, vol. 2. p. 278.
But Mr. Ebenezer Hinds disliked our dropping that practice; and he was so much
offended with the language of our memorial against it, to our legislature in
1775, that he did not attend our association again in seven years. He wrote to
them in 1779, to reprove them for continuing me as their Agent: To which they
returned a respectful answer. He wrote again in like manner, in 1780, when they
made him no reply. In September 1781, Moses Thomas went to the association with
a complaint against elder Hunt's church, because they had excommunicated him
the winter before. This the association took so much notice of, as to publish a
Note in their Minutes, that they claimed no jurisdiction in points of
discipline; but recommended it to neighboring churches, that if they were
properly applied to, they would afford such assistance as was in their power.
Thus matters lay for above eight months, and then three churches were applied
to, for assistance in council upon his case, on June 11, 1782; the time when I
was obliged, by an appointment in said Minutes, to be in the county of Albany.

OUR church sent deacon Alden, and two more delegates to that council; and
elder Hunt's church chose a committee to attend upon them, and to give them
what light they could in the affair: Each of the committee were nominated, and
then were chosen by the church, by lifting up of hands; until elder Hunt was
nominated and seconded, without any objection, and he concluded it sufficient,
without putting his own choice to a formal vote. Yet because that formality was
omitted, elder Hinds was so earnest to prevent his having liberty to speak
before the council, that he accused him of injuring the truth, for saying he
was one of that committee. However, two thirds of the council obtained
satisfaction that said excommunication was just. But Hinds was so uneasy about
it, that he carried a long paper of accusations against Hunt to your church;
and Alden brought another to ours; but I refused to read it to our church. In
September 1782, elder Hinds went again to our association, to whom another
complaint was carried from Moses Thomas, but the moderator did not think proper
to read it publicly. Hinds continued so uneasy with Hunt, as to write a letter
to the association against him, in September 1783; but it was not read to them.
After which I procured a meeting at Ebenezer Nelson's; on January 13, 1784,
when Hunt gave Hinds such satisfaction upon all the points that he complained
of, that the controversy seemed to be settled betwixt them; until in the
evening Hinds again brought up his accusation against Hunt, of his injuring the
truth, in saying he was of that committee. Upon which I arose, and said, I
solemnly warn you against going on in this way, you will ruin yourself. In
March following, he came to my house, and told me, he would not take the
warning at my hands. On April 26, I wrote to him, and reminded him of the
divine rules in MAT. xviii. 4. LUKE xxii. 26, and then said, It appeared to my
conscience, that you indulged a severity toward brother Hunt, that you would
not receive as right toward you, from any man in the world. To this he wrote
an answer on May 1, wherein, after trying to justify his severity, he said,
Pray my good friend; don't let that or any other man separate us, as MARK did
greater and better men than we. To this I replied on May 31, and said, "I am
very certain that our chief danger does not lie in that place. It is exactly
here, You have from time to time laid complaints before me against your
brethren, for which you have broken fellowship with them, and, in the case in
hand, with an elder, so as to refuse to hear him preach, without ever allowing
me a hearing thereof in a gospel way." This he denied, and wrote to our church
for a hearing upon it; and they granted it, on August 11, 1784. But then he
refused to state or support any charge against me, and insisted upon my proving
the truth of what I had written, nine miles from my witnesses. This appeared so
unreasonable, that our church dismissed the case, to be settled betwixt
ourselves, and Hinds went off; upon which deacon Alden arose, and railed at our
church, at a high rate, and his holding with Hinds in that line of conduct has
moved him to forsake our meeting for above three years past.

Elder Hinds made three attempts more to crowd that case into our church,
without letting me know what it was that he denied in my letter; but not being
able to do it, he was forced to grant me a hearing in your church, April 29,
1785; when he owned that he had from time to time informed me of actions that
he was offended with in his brethren, and who were censured therefore; but he
said my words meant that he had done it before they were censured, and that his
doing it was the cause of their censure; a meaning which I never thought of
till that day. On May 4, 1785, I wrote a plain state of these facts to your
church, and then said, "the main support of Antichrist, from his first rise to
this day, has been by teachers accounting themselves so much greater than the
churches, as to unite all their influence against dissenters from their
judgments, and then calling in the ^^^ular arm to support them, and to enforce
all their measures." And I informed you, that as elder Hinds had openly broken
fellowship with me, you must not expect that I should join with him again,
until he explicitly renounced those evils. This he has never done; but in
general terms he denied that he held them, before our mutual council of Nov.
16, 178^, and then denied the truth of facts, in four particulars, without
giving a fair opportunity for supporting them by evidence, by which means the
council said in their result, that the crimes I had charged him with were not
sufficiently proved to them. At the same time they fully justified the result
of the council of March 15, 1785, in their condemning your censure upon brother
Samuel Nelson and others, because they did not allow that Hinds's confession
was equal to the offenses that he was judged to be guilty of by your mutual
council of Sept. 28, 1784. On May 24. 1786, I wrote to elder Hinds, and stated
plainly the four points wherein he denied the truth, before the council of Nov.
16, 17^5, without giving fair opportunity to prove them, and desired that these
things might be settled in a gospel way. This he has not answered; but he has
since been guilty of the followlng evils.

First, He published a pamphlet last summer, called A History of (...), wherein
are sundry things, concerning our former separation from the ruling sect in
New England, which are directly contrary to fact.

Secondly, In your church meeting October 8, 1784 he declared that he was sorry
he had reported so many that (...), and promised not to do so (...) pamphlet he
has violated that promise to a high degree.

Thirdly, Though he readily went to the council called by an excommunicated
man, June 11, 1782, and tried to debar elder Hunt from the privilege of
answering for himself, after which he brought and read accusations against him
to your (...) in his absence; yet Hinds has now accused me of being worse than
the heathen, only because I went to the council of June 15, 1784, called by
seven of your aggrieved brethren, and heard some complaints against Hinds in
his absence, and then adjourned to give him opportunity for answering thereto.
p. 8, 9.

Fourthly, In said pamphlet he has plainly manifested the same temper that he
had, when he refused to come to the council of March 15, 1785, at their earnest
request, to give them what light he could in cases that were to be laid before
them; and now he has accused them with lying, without so much as subscribing
his name to the accusation. p. 11, 12.

Fifthly, Though our church requested a free conference with yours upon the
affairs between us, on the 11th. instant, to give and receive light as God
should direct, and received a promise of that privilege; yet when we came to
the meeting, and I attempted to give the reasons why I could not retract those
former charges that I had laid against elder Hinds, he, and a party with him,
positively refused to grant me that liberty; I therefore appeal to all your
consciences, whether he ought not to be excluded from your communion until he
offers gospel satisfaction for the foregoing offenses to others, as well as to
your injured brother.

Isaac Backus.
Middleborough, Dec. 20. 1787.
THE END.

