AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH A COMMERCIAL SYSTEM FOR THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA SHOULD BE FOUNDED; TO WHICH ARE ADDED SOME POLITICAL
OBSERVATIONS CONNECTED WITH THE SUBJECT.

READ BEFORE THE SOCIETY FOR POLITICAL ENQUIRIES, CONVENED AT THE HOUSE OF HIS
EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE, IN PHILADELPHIA MAY 11th, 1787.

PRINTED AND SOLD BY ROBERT AITKEN, AT PO^^'s HEAD, IN MARKET STREET.
M.DCC.LXXXVII.

I DO certify, that on this 14th of May, 1787, a Pamphlet, entitled, An Enquiry
into the Principles on which a Commercial System for the United States of
America should be founded, etc. printed by ROBERT AITKEN, was entered by him
according to an Act of Assembly, in the Prothonotary's Office of Philadelphia
County, on behalf of Robert Aitken, the Publisher.

J. B. SMITH, Prothon.

TO THE HONORABLE THE MEMBERS OF THE CONVENTION, ASSEMBLED AT PHILADELPHIA FOR
FOEDERAL PURPOSES, THIS ESSAY IS MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED BY

THEIR OBEDIENT AND MOST HUMBLE SERVANT THE AUTHOR.
May 12th, 1787.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH A COMMERCIAL SYSTEM FOR THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA SHOULD BE FOUNDED, etc.
THERE are in every country certain important crises when exertion or neglect
must produce consequences of the utmost moment. The period at which the
inhabitants of these states have now arrived, will be admitted by every
attentive and serious mind to be clearly of this description.

Our money absorbed by a wanton consumption of imported luxuries, a fluctuating
paper medium substituting in its stead, foreign commerce extremely
circumscribed and a foederal government not only ineffective but disjointed,
tell us indeed too plainly that further negligence may ruin us forever.
Impressed with this view of our affairs, the writer of the following pages has
ventured to intrude upon the public. But as neither his time nor opportunities
will permit him to treat of all the great objects, which excite his
apprehensions or engage his wishes, he means principally to confine himself to
that part of them, which have been most subjected to his observations and
enquiries.

Just opinions on our general affairs, must necessarily precede such a wise
system of commercial regulations, as will extend our trade to the greatest
length to which it can be carried without affecting unfavorably our other
weighty interests. It may therefore be useful in the first place, to take a
comparative view of the two most important objects in the United States -- our
agriculture and commerce.

In a country blessed with a fertile soil, and a climate admitting steady labor,
where the cheapness of land tempts the European from his home, and the
manufacturer from his trade, we are led by a few moments of reflection to fix on
agriculture as the great leading interest. From this we shall find most of our
other advantages result, so far as they arise from the nature of our affairs,
and where they are not produced by the coercion of laws -- the fisheries are
the principal exception. In order to make a true estimate of the magnitude of
agriculture, we must remember that it is encouraged by few or no duties on the
importation of rival produce -- that it furnishes outward cargoes not only for
all our own ships, but those also which foreign nations send to our ports, or
in other words, that it pays for all our importations -- that it supplies a
part of the clothing of our people and the food of them and their cattle --
that what is consumed at home, including the materials for manufacturing, is
four or five times the value of what is exported -- that the number of people
employed in agriculture, is at least nine parts in ten of the inhabitants of
America -- that therefore the planters and farmers do form the body of the
militia, the bulwark of the nation -- that the value of property, occupied by
agriculture, is manifold greater than that of the property employed in every
other way -- that the settlement of our waste lands, and subdividing our
improved farms is every year increasing the pre-eminence of the agricultural
interest -- that the resources we derive from it are at all times certain and
indispensibly necessary -- and lastly, that the rural life promotes health and
morality by its active nature, and by keeping our people from the luxuries and
vices of the towns. In short, agriculture appears to be the spring of our
commerce, and the parent of our manufactures.

The commerce of America, including our exports, imports, shipping,
manufactures and fisheries, may be properly considered as forming one interest.
So uninformed or mistaken have many of us been, that it has been stated as the
great object, and I fear it is yet believed to be the most important interest
of New England. But from the best calculations I have been able to make, I
cannot raise the proportion of property or the number of men employed in
manufactures, fisheries, navigation and trade to one-eighth of the property and
people occupied by agriculture, even in that commercial quarter of the Union.
In making this estimate I have deducted something from the value and population
of the large towns for the idle and dissipated, for those who live upon their
incomes, and for supernumerary domestic servants. But the disproportion is much
greater, taking the Union at large, for several of the states have little
commerce, and no manufactures -- others have no commerce and scarcely
manufacture any thing. The timber, iron, cordage and many other articles
necessary for building ships to fish or trade -- nine parts in ten of their
cargoes -- the subsistence of the manufacturers, and much of their raw
materials are the produce of our lands. In almost all of the countries of
Europe the most judicious writers have considered commerce as the handmaid of
agriculture; and if true there, with us it must be unquestionable. We have few
manufactories to throw into the scale against the landed interest. We have in
our lands full employment for our present inhabitants, and instead of sending
colonies to new-discovered islands, we have adjoining townships and counties
whose vacant fields await the future increase of our people.

If a comparative view of the importance of our various interests should
terminate in a decided and great superiority of agriculture over all the rest
combined -- if emigration and natural increase are daily adding to the number
of our planters and farmers -- if the states are possessed of millions of
vacant acres, that court the cultivator's hand -- if the settlement of these
immense tracts will greatly and steadily increase the objects of taxation, the
resources, the powers of the country -- if they will prove an inherent treasure
of which neither folly nor chance can deprive us, let us be careful to do
nothing that can interrupt this happy progress of our affairs. Should we from a
misconception of our true interests, or from any other cause, form a system of
commercial regulations, prejudicial to this great mass of property, and to this
great body of the people, we must injure our country during the continuance of
the error. I must finally return, under the disadvantages of further changes,
to that plan, which it must be our sincere desire, as it is our serious duty at
this time to devise.

While I feel an absolute conviction that our true interests should restrain us
from burdening or impeding agriculture in any way whatever, I am not only ready
to admit, but must beg leave to urge, that sound policy requires our giving
every encouragement to commerce and its connexions, which may be found
consistent with a due regard to agriculture.

The communication between the different ports of every nation is a business
entirely in their power -- The policy of most countries has been to secure this
domestic navigation to their own people. The extensive coasts, the immense bays
and numerous rivers of the United States have already made this an important
object, and it must increase with our population The coasting vessels, entered
at the custom house of Philadelphia in the year 1785, were 567 fail; all the
other entries of sea vessels in the same year were 501.
. -- As the places at which the cargoes of coasting vessels are delivered must
be supplied with American produce from some part of the Union, and as the
merchant can always have American bottoms to transport the goods of the
producing state to the state consuming them, no interruption to the market of
the planters and farmers can be apprehended from prohibiting transportation in
foreign bottoms from port to port within the United States -- A single
exception may perhaps be proper, permitting foreign vessels to carry from port
to port, for the purpose of finishing their sales, any goods that shall be part
of the cargoes they brought into the Union, from the last foreign place at
which they loaded. The fleets of colliers on the British coast evince the
possible benefits of such a regulation

The consumption of fish, oil, whalebone and other articles obtained through
the fisheries, in the towns and counties, that are convenient to navigation,
has become much greater than is generally supposed. I am informed that no less
than five thousand barrels of mackarel, salmon and pickled cod-fish, are vended
in the city of Philadelphia annually; add to them the dried fish, oil,
spermaceti candles, whalebone, etc. and it will be found a little fleet of
sloops and schooners are employed in the business. The demand for the use of
the inhabitants of those parts of the Union to which these supplies can be
carried, is already considerable, and the increase of our towns and
manufactures will render it more so every year. In the present state of our
navigation we can be in no doubt of procuring these supplies by means of our
own vessels. The country that interferes most with us at our own market is Nova
Scotia, which also, I am informed, has had some emigrants from our fishing
towns since the decline of their business. Such encouragement to this valuable
branch of commerce, as would secure the benefits of it to our own people,
without injuring our other essential interests, is certainly worth attention.
-- The Convention will probably find on consideration of this point that a duty
or prohibition of foreign articles, such as our own fisheries supply, will be
safe and expedient.

The article in the British trade laws, which confines the importation of
foreign goods to the bottoms of the country producing them, and of their own
citizens, appears applicable to our situation. By means of those two flags we
should be certain of the necessary importations, and we should throw out of
each department of the carrying trade every competitor, except the ships of the
nation by which the goods were raised or manufactured. All trade with several
countries, such as China and India, whose vessels seldom or never make foreign
voyages, would be secured into our hands. It will be found, that an application
of this regulation in practice, will be attended with no difficulties or
inconveniences, and besides the immediate benefits already mentioned, our
merchants will be led directly to the original market for the supplies of which
we stand in need. Instead of purchasing the goods of Russia or the East Indies
in England, France or Holland, our own ships will sail directly to the fountain
from whence they have flowed to us through foreign channels. The credits given
us in Europe after the peace, kept us in the practice of going to a very few
places, for all our importations. But they have trusted us in many instances at
a dear rate indeed, and however useful credit may be as a supplement to our
means of trade in this young country, it is very certain that we should first
lay out to the best advantage our funds in hand.

These are the principal encouragements to foreign commerce, which occur to me
at present as proper to form a part of a permanent system for the United
States. Regulations for temporary purposes, such as restrictions and
prohibitions affecting particular nations, I do not mean to speak of here. I
must however observe, that they should be adopted with great prudence and
deliberation, as they may affect us very unfavorably, if they should be tried
in vain. In taking measures to promote manufactures, we must be careful that
the injuries to the general interests of commerce do not exceed the advantages
resulting from them. The circumstances of the country, as they relate to this
business, should be dispassionately and thoroughly examined. Though it is
confessed, that the United States have full employment for all their citizens
in the extensive field of agriculture, yet as we have a valuable body of
manufacturers already here, as many more will probably emigrate from Europe,
who will choose to continue at their trades, and as we have some citizens so
poor as not to be able to effect a little settlement on our waste lands, there
is a real necessity for some wholesome general regulations on this head. By
taking care not to force manufactures in those states, where the people are
fewer, tillage much more profitable, and provisions dearer than in several
others, we shall give agriculture its full scope in the former, and leave all
the benefits of manufacturing (so far as they are within our reach) to the
latter. South Carolina, for instance, must manufacture to an evident loss,
while the advancement of that business in Massachusetts will give the means of
subsistence to many, whose occupations have been rendered unprofitable by the
consequences of the revolution. A liberal policy on this subject should be
adopted, and the produce of the southern states should be exchanged for such
manufactures as can be made by the northern, free from impost.

Another inducement to some salutary regulations on this subject, will be
suggested by considering some of our means of conducting manufactures. Unless
business of this kind is carried on, certain great natural powers of the
country will remain inactive and useless. Our numerous mill seats, for example,
by which flour, oil, paper, snuff, gunpowder, ironwork, woolen cloths, boards
and scantling, and some other articles are prepared or perfected, would be
given by providence in vain. If properly improved, they will save us an immense
expense for the wages, provisions, clothing and lodging of workmen, without
diverting the people from their farms -- Fire, as well as water, affords, if I
may so speak, a fund of assistance, that cannot lie unused without an evident
neglect of our best interests. Breweries, which we cannot estimate too highly,
distilleries, sugar houses, potteries, casting and steel furnaces, and several
other works are carried on by this powerful element, and attended with the same
savings, that were particularized in speaking of water machines -- It Is
probable also that a frequent use of steam engines will add greatly to this
class of factories. In some cases where fire and water are not employed, horses
are made to serve the purpose as well and on much lower terms than men. The
cheapness and the easy increase of these serviceable animals insure us this aid
to any extent that occasion may require, which however is not likely to be very
great.

The encouragement to agriculture, afforded by some manufactories, is a reason
of solid weight in favor of pushing them with industry and spirit. Malt
liquors, if generally used, linseed oil, starch (and were they not a poison to
our morals and constitutions I might add corn, spirits) would require more
grain to make them, than has been exported in any year since the revolution --
I cannot omit to observe here, that beer strengthens the arm of the labourer
without debauching him, while the noxious drink now used enervates and corrupts
him -- The workers in leather too of every kind, in flax and hemp, in iron,
wood, stone and clay, in furs, horn, and many other articles employ either the
spontaneous productions of the earth or the fruits of cultivation.

If we are convinced by these considerations, that regular factories of many
kinds should be promoted in the most suitable parts of the Union, let us next
consider whether the encouragements now held out to them are both sufficient
and proper. The nearest rivals of our manufacturers are those of Europe, who
are subjected to the following charges in bringing their goods into our market
-- The merchant's commission for shipping and the same for selling, cost of
packages, custom house papers in Europe, and the same with a duty of 5 per
cent. here, porterages, freight, insurance, damage, interest of money, waste,
and loss on exchange -- These may be rated at 25 per cent on the least bulky of
our manufactures We have no manufacture more compact than a piece of yard wide
linen, equal to what costs 15 d. sterling in Europe. The following minute
calculation will show the charges, under which a package of 100 l. sterling
value of that article can be imported.

Currency. 64 pieces of linen of 25 yards each, will be 1600 yards, which at 15
d. amount to 100 l. sterling, 166 13 4 Outward entry, debenture certificate,
and searchers fees, porterage, wharfage, bill of lading, in Europe are 15 s.
sterling, or in currency 1 5 0 Insurance to cover charges, commission for
effecting and part policy, L. 3 3 0 sterling. or currency, 5 5 0 Cost of case,
ropes, and packing, 15 s. sterling, 1 5 0 Carried over, 174 8 4 Brought over,
174 8 4 One years interest on first cost, and European charges on the goods, L.
5 sterling. 8 15 0 183 3 4 Duty on value of goods in America estimated at 160 l.
currency for 100 l. sterling. cost at 5 per cent. 8 0 0 Commission on shipping, L.
183 4 4 in Europe, at 2 per cent. 4 11 7 Part custom house bond and permit, and
primage, 0 1 6 Commission on the sales and remitting, supposing the goods to
sell for 210 l. currency, per 100 l. sterling cost, at 7 per cent. 11 5 0
Freight of 13 1-3 feet, at 1/3 sterling per foot, 1 7 9 Porterage, 0 1 0 L. 208
^0 2 Deduct the first cost as above, 166 13 4 L. 25 2 1 sterling, being the
charges, is equal to L. 41 16 10

In this calculation, waste, which of some articles is great, damages below 5
per cent. which the underwriters do not pay, injuries not within the risque
insured, difference of exchange now 6 per cent. above par, and other losses on
remitting, postages of letters, and bad debts on sales at a long credit, as
well as the profit of the importer are not taken notice of, though several of
them really occur in every importation.


. Here is a solid premium, operating like a bounty, while it happily costs the
consumer nothing, for the charges of importation are unavoidable and the duty
being merely for the purpose of revenue, is applied to pay the public debts and
expenses of which he owes his proportion. This encouragement can only be
increased by exempting raw materials from duty, which may be very safe and
proper and by additional duties and prohibitions, which would induce the loss
of the revenue and an injury to morals from smuggling, and would throw upon the
other members of the commercial interest and the cultivators and improvers of
our lands an unnecessary burden. The manufacturers are a just and sensible body
of men, and love their country. I feel a perfect confidence therefore, that
when they see a substantial advantage of 25 per cent. in favor of their goods,
which cannot be taken from them, they will desire that government should
refrain from further duties and prohibitions. This estimate being made upon the
finest of our manufactures, it is evident that the more bulky and weighty would
show the advantages of our own workmen in a yet stronger light.

The clear air and powerful sun of America is another advantage our
manufactorers enjoy. When the linen and cotton branches shall become
considerable, a great saving of time and money will be made by the climate, and
where bleaching is effected principally by the sun and water, the quality of
the cloth is known to be more excellent. The European process by drugs and
machines impairs the strength. Ireland, I confess, with a climate very
different from ours, is remarkable for the quality of its linens, but they do
not equal the American homespun in strength. In confirmation of the above
opinion, I may mention that there was a plan formed before the revolution, by a
number of English merchants of establishing a company with a large capital, to
import the brown linens of Europe to be bleached here for the supply of our
markets.

In this country the consumer's money follows the delivery of the manufacture,
therefore less capital is required. In every part of Europe extensive credits
are given upon their goods. For though some nations have not got into the habit
of trusting us, their own merchants are known to buy on easy terms of payment.
France is perhaps as little accustomed to give these indulgencies as any other
great country in Europe, yet nothing is paid for there, in less than two
months, and the credits are extended from that time to twelve months according
to the article. At the expiration of the term an accepted bill at sixty days is
considered as prompt payment, so that the actual term of credit is from four
months to fourteen.

To these might be added several other little advantages, the joint benefits of
which are sensibly felt, but I trust enough has been said to satisfy the just
and patriotic mind, though concerned in the business, that a further addition
of duties would not promote the general interests of the country. I must here
beg leave however strenuously to recommend, that every duty on American produce
or manufactures, impoliticly and unkindly imposed by the laws of several of the
states, should be taken off, and that the justice and sound policy of the
alteration should be declared and admitted in some public instrument: And as
ships may be very properly considered as the greatest article we make, the
tonnage on our own bottoms should be equalized throughout the Union, and the
extra duties on goods importin vessels not belonging to the state in which they
are landed, should be done away -- Complaints against the trade laws of foreign
nations come not consistently from those who lay similar burdens on their
sister states.

A further encouragement to manufactures will result from improvements and
discoveries in agriculture -- There are many raw materials, that could be
produced in this country on a large scale which have hitherto been very
confined. Cotton for many years before the revolution was not worth more than
nine-pence sterling in the West India Islands. The perfection of the factories
in Europe has raised it to such a pitch, that besides the prohibition against
shipping it from the colonies to any foreign port, the price has risen fifty
per cent. The consumers in Pennsylvania have paid near two shillings sterling
for the importation of this year. This article must be worth the attention of
the southern planters.

If the facts and observations in the preceding part of this paper be admitted
to be true and just, and if we take into consideration with them the
acknowledged superiority of foreign commerce, and the fisheries over our
manufactories, we may come to the following conclusions -- That the United
States of America cannot make a proper use of the natural advantages of the
country, nor promote her agriculture and other lesser interests without
manufactures, that they cannot enjoy the attainable benefits of commerce and
the fisheries, without some general restrictions and prohibitions affecting
foreign nations, that in forming these restrictions and prohibitions, as well
as in establishing manufactories, there is occasion for great deliberation and
wisdom, that nothing may be introduced, which can interfere with the sale of
our produce, or with the settlement and improvement of our waste lands.

Among the political considerations, which must necessarily be admitted in
treating of this subject, the force that may be required for our protection is
not to be forgotten. It is certainly the greatest that attends it. America, we
may assume, can have no inducement to engage in European wars. From our local
situation we may keep ourselves long disengaged from them. The principal
European nations would find us an unprofitable and troublesome enemy. The trade
of France, Great Britain, Spain, Holland and Portugal, which passes by our
coasts, are a security against their hostilities. A war among them, in which we
should take no part, would be more beneficial to our farmers, merchants and
manufacturers than all the advantages we could obtain, if engaged in it
ourselves. Our ships would carry for them, or instead of theirs, and our lands
and manufactories would furnish the supplies of their fleets and islands in the
West Indies. To counterbalance these advantages, and to pay the expenses of a
war would require captures rich and numerous indeed, but what could compensate
us for the drain of peasantry and the lost opportunity of cultivating commerce
and the arts of peace. A war merely offensive cannot be apprehended. -- The
fortune of the British arms against America undisciplined and divided, will
instruct our enemies to beware of invasions after the military lessons taken
from that long and serious contest. Having no foreign colonies whose situation
and weakness would subject them to their attacks, and having all our resources
at hand to defend our own coasts, and cut up their trade in its passage by our
doors, no European power will be inclined to insult or molest us -- should any
of them be so insensible to their own interests, as to depart from the policy,
which evidently ought to govern them, America, by acting in concert with the
most powerful enemy of such hostile country, must commence a war, which however
inconvenient and disagreeable to us, would be ruinous to their West India
trade, and fatal to their colonies. We are not destitute of resources and
powers to injure them or defend ourselves. Our inland navigation, coasting
trade and fisheries, and the portion of foreign commerce we must inevitably
enjoy, are no inconsiderable nurseries for seamen. Good naval officers we
should not want; they have never been scarce, and one happy effect of the
revolution has certainly been to raise the reputation of the marine life and to
increase the talents and respectability of its followers. Foreign seamen too,
would find great temptations to enter on board our privateers and ships of war,
and might be hired in any numbers we could pay. The increase of the strength
and riches of the country, by filling up our vacant lands, is the infallible
method by which the necessary means may be acquired.

It will not be amiss to draw a picture of our country, as it would really
exist under the operation of a system of national laws formed upon these
principles. While we indulge ourselves in the contemplation of a subject at
once so interesting and dear, let us confine ourselves to substantial facts,
and avoid those pleasing delusions into which the spirits and feelings of our
countrymen have too long misled them.

In the foreground we should find the mass of our citizens the cultivators (and
what is happily for us in most instances the same thing) the independent
proprietors of the soil. Every wheel would appear in motion that could carry
forward the interests of this great body of our people, and bring into action
the inherent powers of the country. A portion of the produce of our lands would
be consumed in the families or employed in the business of our manufacturers --
a further portion would be applied in the sustenance of our merchants and
fishermen and other numerous assistants, and the remainder would be transported
by those that could carry it at the lowest freight (that is with the smallest
deduction from the aggregate profits of the business of the country) to the
best foreign markets. On one side we should see our manufacturers encouraging
the tillers of the earth by the consumption and employment of the fruits of
their labors, and supplying them and the rest of their fellow citizens with
the instruments of their occupations, and the necessaries and conveniences of
life, in every instance where it could be done without injuriously and
unnecessarily increasing the distress of commerce, the labors of the
husbandmen and the difficulties of changing our native wilds into scenes of
cultivation and plenty. Commerce on the other hand, attentive to the general
interests, would come forward with offers to range through foreign climates in
search of those supplies, which the manufacturers could not furnish but at too
high a price, or which nature has not given us at home, in return for the
surplus of those stores, that had been drawn from the ocean or produced by the
earth.

On a review of the preceding facts and observations there appears to me reason
to believe, that the necessary measures might be taken to render our farms
profitable and to improve our new lands, and that our manufactures, fisheries,
navigation and trade, would still be considerable. The long voyage by which all
interfering foreign articles must be brought to these markets, and the
inevitable necessity for a revenue, give us, as has been demonstrated, a
virtual bounty of 25 per cent. in favor of our own commodities, and this in the
least favorable instances. When returning occonony, and the fall of rents, and
provisions shall have reduced the expenses of living, when our increasing farms
shall have poured in their addition of raw materials, and we shall have felt
the shortness of importation produced by the suffering of our credit abroad,
and by the check which has been given to foreign adventurers in our trade, this
difference of 25 per cent. will have a sensible effect. Being rated on the
whole value of the article, that is, as well on the labor as the raw
materials, it is in fact 50 per cent. on the labor in all cases where the
workmanship is half the value of the manufactured goods, and so in proportion
where it is more. Beer, distilled liquors, potash, gunpowder, cordage, loaf
sugar, hanging and writing paper, snuff, tobacco, starch, anchors, nail rods,
and many other articles of iron, bricks, tiles, potters ware, millstones, and
other stone work, cabinet work, corn fans, Windsor chairs, carriages, saddlery,
shoes and boots, and other wearing apparel, coarse linens, hats, a few coarse
woolen articles, linseed oil, wares of gold and silver tin and copper, some
braziery, wool cards, worms and stills, and several other articles may be
considered as established. These are tending to greater perfection, and will
soon be sold so cheap as to throw foreign goods of the same kind entirely out
of the market.

Many of the same circumstances, that favor the manufacturer will render the
fisheries more profitable, and from the cheapness of vessels, they will be
carried on at less expense than in the few last years. The American market,
where the consumption (with population) is increasing fast, may be entirely
secured to them. Our manufactories and towns will annually make larger demands
for candles, oil, whalebone and pickled fish, and it may be policy, in cities
where meat is yet so dear, to introduce the consumption of the dried cod. The
Danish and French Islands, and the free ports in the West Indies, receive some
of the produce of the fisheries -- France is likely to take off a considerable
quantity, as also are the Spaniards, Portuguese and Italians, and the English
will always want certain articles for their manufactories, though not to any
great amount -- New England, the seat of the fisheries, has the great advantage
of being the cheapest and most populous part of America. Its inhabitants are
healthy, active and intelligent, and can be frugal; wherefore I am very much
disposed to believe, that many factories will in the course of a very few years
revive their declining towns.

The commercial citizens of America have for some time felt the deepest
distress -- among the principal causes of their unhappy situation were the
inconsiderate spirit of adventure to this country, which pervaded every kingdom
in Europe, and the prodigious credits from thence given to our merchants. To
these may be added the high spirits and the golden dreams that naturally
followed such a war, closed with so much honor and success. -- Triumphant over
a great enemy, courted by the most powerful nations in the world, it was not in
human nature that America should immediately comprehend her new situation --
really possessed of the means of future greatness, she anticipated the most
distant benefits of the revolution, and considered them as already in her
hands. She formed the highest expectations many of which however, serious
experience has taught her to relinquish, and now that the thoughtless
adventures and imprudent credits from foreign countries take place no more, An
application of the foregoing observations to the commercial subject, can only
be admissible into this essay.
and time has been given for cool reflection, she will see her true situation
and need not be discouraged.

Our future trade may comprehend the fisheries with the exclusive benefit of
supplying our own markets, as has been already observed. The coasting trade
will be entirely secured to us. The right of bringing the commodities of
foreign countries may be divided with the ships of the nation from whom they
come, or in those cases where they have no native ships the carrying trade may
be our own. The revolution has opened to us some new branches of valuable
commerce. The intercourse with France was next to none before the war, and with
Russia, India and China not thought of. With activity and strict economy we
may pay Europe with some of the produce of India, for a part of the goods with
which they supply us, and if we do not over-regulate trade, we shall be an
entrepot of certain commodities for their West India and south American
colonies. Besides these objects all the manufacturing countries and many free
ports will be open to us, and we may adventure in foreign ships to a
considerable extent, though it would be more desirable to employ our own. As
the proposed regulations would compel the British or Dutch merchants, to import
into the United States a part of the produce of France and Spain in American
bottoms, so may ours serve the general interests of their country by sending
tobacco to Sweden, or flour, rice and live stock to the British colonies in the
vessels of the respective nations.

The foundations of national wealth and consequence are so firmly laid in the
United States, that no foreign power can undetermine or destroy them. But the
enjoyment of these substantial blessings is rendered precarious by domestic
circumstances. Scarcely held together by a weak and half formed foederal
constitution, the powers of our national government, are unequal to the
complete execution of any salutary purpose, foreign or domestic. The evils
resulting from this unhappy state of things have again shocked our reviving
credit, produced among our people alarming instances of disobedience to the
laws, and if not remedied, must destroy our property, liberties and peace.
Foreign powers, however disposed to favor us, can expect neither satisfaction
nor benefit from treaties with congress, while they are unable to enforce them.
We can therefore hope to secure no privileges from them, if matters are thus
conducted. We must immediately remedy this defect or suffer exceedingly.
Desultory commercial acts of the legislatures, formed on the impression of the
moment, proceeding from no uniform or permanent principles, clashing with the
laws of the other states and opposing those made in the preceding year by the
enacting state, can no longer be supported, if we are to continue one people. A
system which will promote the general interests with the smallest injury to
particular ones has become indispensibly necessary. Commerce is more affected
by the distractions and evils arising from the uncertainty, opposition and
errors of our trade laws, than by the restrictions of any one power in Europe.
A negative upon all commercial acts of the legislatures, if granted to Congress
would be perfectly safe, and must have an excellent effect. If thought
expedient it should be given as well with regard to those that exist, as to
those that may be divised in future. Congress would thus be enabled to prevent
every regulation, that might oppose the general interests, and by restraining
the states from impolitic laws, would gradually bring our national commerce to
order and perfection. Such of the ideas suggested in the preceding part of this
paper, as shall be honored with the public approbation, may be better digested,
and, if they appear worthy of it, may form new articles of confederation, which
would be the foundation of the commercial system.

I have ventured to hint at prohibitory powers, but shall leave that point and
the general power of regulating trade to those who may undertake to consider
the political objects of the Convention, suggesting only the evident propriety
of enabling Congress to prevent the importation of such foreign commodities, as
are made from our own raw materials. When any article of that kind can be
supplied at home, upon as low terms as it can be imported on, a manufacture of
our own produce, so well established, ought not by any means to be sacrificed
to the interests of foreign trade, or subjected to injury by the wild
speculations of ignorant adventurers. In all cases careful provision should be
made for refunding the duties on exportation, which renders the impost a
virtual excise without being liable to the objections against an actual one,
and is a great encouragement to trade.

The restoration of public credit at home and abroad should be the first wish
of our hearts, and requires every economy -- every exertion we can make. The
wise and virtuous axioms of our political constitutions, resulting from a
lively and perfect sense of what is due from man to man, should prompt us to
the discharge of debts of such peculiar obligation. We stand bound to no common
creditors. The friendly foreigner, the widow and the orphan, the trustees of
charity and religion, the patriotic citizen, the war-worn soldier, and a
magnanimous ally -- these are the principal claimants upon the feeling and
justice of America. Let her apply all her resources to this great duty, and
wipe away the darkest stain, that has ever fallen upon her. The general impost
-- the sale of the lands and every other unnecessary article of public property
-- restraining with a firm hand every needless expense of government and
private life -- steady and patient industry, with proper dispositions in the
people, would relieve us of part of the burden, and enable Congress to commence
their payments, and with the aid of taxation, would put the sinking and funding
of our debts within the power of all the states.

The violence committed on the rights of property under the authority of tender
laws in some of the states, the familiarity with which that pernicious measure
has been recurred to, and the shameless perseverance with which it has been
persisted in after the value of the paper was confessedly gone, call aloud for
some remedy. This is not merely a matter of justice between man and man; it
dishonors our national character abroad, and the engine has been employed to
give the coup de grace to public credit. It would not be difficult perhaps to
form a new article of confederation to prevent it in future, and a question may
arise whether fellowship with any state, that would refuse to admit it, can be
satisfactory or safe. To remove difficulties it need not be retrospective. The
present state of things instead of inviting emigrants, deters all who have the
means of information, and are capable of thinking. The settlement of our lands,
and the introduction of manufactories and lines of trade yet unknown among us
or requiring a force of capital, which are to make our country rich and
powerful, are interrupted and suspended by our want of public credit and the
disorders of our government.

THE END.

