AN ORATION, DELIVERED TO THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI IN THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, July 4 th 1787.

By JOHN BROOKS, Esquire

BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDMUND FREEMAN, OPPOSITE THE NORTH DOOR OF THE STATE-HOUSE.

M,DCC,LXXXVII.

AT a Meeting of the Society of the CINCINNATI of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts held by adjournment at the Bunch of Grapes Tavern in Boston. July
5th, 1787.

VOTED unanimously that Capt. Samuel Nicholson, Brigadier General William Hull,
and Lieutenant Colonel Nathan Rice be appointed a Committee to wait upon the
Honorable Major General BROOKS and present him the Thanks of this Society for
his ORATION delivered to the Society yesterday and request a Copy thereof for
the Press.

A true Copy.

THOMAS EDWARDS, Secretary.



Medfora, July 10, 1787. GENTLEMEN,
IT would be impossible for me, after having received by your hands the Vote of
the Society of the Cincinnati of the 5th instant to decline a compliance with
their request.

With every sentiment of Respect and Esteem, I have the honor to be,
Gentlemen,

Your most obedient Servant JOHN BROOKS.
To Capt. Samuel Nicholson, Brig. Genesis William Hull, and Lt. Col. Nathan Rice,
Committee, etc.



AN ORATION.
AS illiberality is the offspring of weakness and of ignorance -- as the great
and the good are ever possessed of candid minds, the present speaker presumes
he has less to fear from the severity, than to hope from the candor, of this
enlightened and respectable auditory. He may, therefore, venture,
notwithstanding his own inability, to proceed in attempting to discharge the
duty assigned him by the society of the Cincinnati.

AGREEABLY, then, to their expectations and the dictate of the day, we shall
turn our attention to the American Independence.

THE desire of pleasing is a principle in human nature. But as this passion can
never be virtuously indulged at the expense of truth and sincerity, an attempt
to catch the popular ear, or flatter the reigning prejudices of the day, forms
no part of the present design.

THE American revolution is an event illustrious in itself, and important in
its consequences. To rear and establish an empire was an enterprise bold and
arduous. The attempt awakened all the active powers of the human mind, and
seemed to add fresh vigor to its native elasticity. America friendless and
alone, but collected within herself, setting at defiance the power of Great
Britain, presents us with a most dignified and majestic picture of true
greatness. In considering the rights of human nature, in contemplating the
respect which she owed to herself, she was elevated above the sense of danger;
and so intent was she in investigating the policy, that she seemed to forget
the power of her oppressors. While Britain, on the other hand, dazzled with the
luster of her own greatness, lost sight of one of those invaluable rights for
which she herself had often and profusely bled. To secure the rights of
property, and the safety of their persons, against the depredations and
outrages of lawless power, Englishmen had plunged their swords into the breasts
of Englishmen, and their soil had been freely watered with their choicest blood.

BUT in their conduct toward this country they were guilty of a treacherous
inversion of their own maxims, The right, not only of taxing us without our
consent, but of binding us in all cases whatsoever, though at first only
secretly whispered in their cabinet, was at length openly claimed in the face
of the world. America, at once saw the force of the principle, while as yet it
existed but in theory, and had too much wisdom and spirit to submit to the
ignominious experiment. Her (...) was not, like that of the United Netherlands,
the impulse of despair, but the result of cool deliberate reasoning. Banished
from the blessings of the British constitution, resistance became the only
alternative; and the precarious events of a war were prefered to certain
servitude.

THE situation of America for some time after the commencement of hostilities,
from opposing the power of the King of England while she recognized his
sovereignty, was extremely ungraceful. But so equivocal, though necessary line
of conduct did not comport with the dignity of her spirit and genius. As, while
she acknowledged herself to be a part of the British empire, she would have no
rational hope of foreign assistance, and was herself, indeed, contending
without an object, a formal, and an explicit assumption of sovereign power, was
the dictate of wisdom and of prudence.

ACCORDINGLY, on the auspicious day we now celebrate, the illustrious fathers
of our country, by a most solemn act, announced to the world, the claims of
America to Independence and empire. A day never to be forgotten! An act ever to
be admired! An act which for conciseness and precision, for majesty of
expression and loftiness of thought, stands unrivaled among the literary
productions of this, or any former age -- an act, it is but just to add, which
does infinite honor to those bold and generous patriots who gave it their
sanction; and which cannot fail to transmit their names with increasing
applause through all succeeding time.

As magnanimity, and boldness of mind, had thus marked the American councils,
the further prosecution of war was evincive of her persevering firmness, sound
wisdom and military prowess. From her own bosom she was able to call forth,
both for the Senate and for the field, such characters as her situation
demanded. And while she can boast the purity of her cause, she can boast also
of patriots and heroes who added luster to the cause itself. None of the
various vicissitudes of her fortune were able to shake the resolution she had
taken to establish her liberties, or to check the efforts of her freeborn soul;
but, supported by the virtue and patriotism of her sons, she persisted in the
long and arduous conflict, till, at length covered with glory, and unequalled
in fame, she rose in triumph superior to all her enemies, and effected an
honorable, a glorious peace. A peace, transcending her expectations, and equal
to her most sanguine wishes. Happy moment! when the din of arms and the toils
of war should yield to the peaceful pleasures of domestic life!

IN the full possession of peace, liberty and independence -- remote from the
seats of foreign empires -- unentangled with their politics and uncontaminated
with their vices -- masters of a grateful soil in a healthful climate, to what
heights of grandeur and felicity might she not have aspired! Could any one have
conceived that a people who had given such signal displays of fortitude and
patriotism, under circumstances the most distressing -- who for eight long
years had supported a war of virtue, should soon, very soon, so far forget
their own dignity and interest, as to abuse their liberty, and prostitute it to
the vile purposes of licentiousness? Yes: the comprehensive genius of a
WASHINGTON foresaw, and his honest patriotism pointed out, Vide circular letter.
the humiliating danger.

NOTWITHSTANDING the national spirit that discovered itself during the war, we
are now compelled to believe that the union of the states, during that period,
was the effect either of a momentary sense of danger, or, at best, of a
transient glow of patriotism. A review of the temper and manners of the people
of this Country, through the various stages of their progress from dependence
to empire, compared with the present, forces to confess that the ascent to
greatness, however hazardous, is more pleasing to the great mass of mankind,
than the practice of those virtues, which can alone secure respectability in
the calm season of peace.

As the States had one common enemy, they had one common interest; the force of
which rendered them insensible to a variety of separate, inferior interests,
which peace alone could unfold and bring into view. So soon, therefore, as the
impulse of foreign force was removed, the little politics of each state
engrossed the public attention -- federal ideas were obscured, and the
national character has been falling a victim to local prejudices. Ever since
the war the states have been receding from each other, and from their common
center, till the power of political attraction has become almost imperceptible.

How these states are to be reunited, and the unity of the national character
and government preserved, are questions already highly momentous; but are daily
becoming more interesting, as they are rapidly advancing to a practical
decision. A federal system, differently modified from the present, may probably
be adopted with a view to effectuate these immense objects. But how far a
government merely federal is calculated to answer these purposes, -- how far
such a government, is, in the present state of things, practicable, time alone
will fully determine. Reasonings founded in the nature and general principles
of government will not satisfy the mind on this subject, as coercion, the great
animating principle of every government, is, and perhaps must necessarily be
wanting.

ANCIENT Greece was divided into a great number of independent republics. They
had, however, their federal constitution, and their council of amphyctyons. But
was their confederation capable of controuling those jealous, proud, aspiring
states? The reverse is manifest from their perpetual and depopulating wars.
What, though the arms of Persia might for a time unite them, this danger
removed they cordially returned to their too common employment, the butchery of
each other. The analogy between those celebrated republics, and our own, is
strikingly obvious; and their history, painful as it is in the perusal, is
replete with instructions to this our country. They rioted in their wild
tumultuous liberty, till the enterprizing Philip put an end at once to their
convulsions and to their freedom.

THE Helvetick league in modern times, has assumed the appearance of
consistence and of union. But to their poverty, and their mountains -- the
jealousies and the continual pressure of surrounding nations, may not this be
ascribed, rather than to the efficacy of their federal constitution?

NOR can we predicate any thing more favorable from the intricate system of
the United Netherlands. Although they are surrounded by potent neighbors, by
whose arms they seem liable to be overwhelmed, their constitution is too feeble
to preserve them from those violent political agitations, which are
inconsistent with an efficacious, well-organized government. The Hollanders
themselves, indeed, by dispensing in times of danger, with their usual and
constitutional forms of legislation, implicitly acknowledge the preposterous
nature of their national system of jurisprudence.

To these instances may we not add the testimony of our own experience. We have
been witnesses of the decline, and almost utter extinction, as well as of the
rise and progress of a federal system -- sufficient, perhaps, to convince us of
the necessity of a great national constitution of government, formed with all
those powers, those checks and balances, which may be necessary to give it
energy, on the one hand, and to secure the, liberties of the people, on the
other. What indeed can preserve the public liberty but an efficient,
energetick government, founded in just principles, and dispensing equal laws?
So far is such a government from endangering the liberties of the people, that
it insures to them the highest possible degree of protection. The extremes of
almost every thing in the moral and political world are nearly allied. The
excess of virtue is vice; and the extremes of liberty border on despotism.

MONEY is the sinew of government as well as of war. To call it forth with
certainty -- in such quantities and in such only as the public exigencies
demand, and in a manner most easy to the people, is the perfection of
legislation. But to effect these important points, is it not essential that one
undivided, integral, though balanced, government should be established, the
influence of which should operate directly upon the individual constituents of
it without the intervention of local, or subordinate legislatures?

AMONG the various causes of the present distress of our country perhaps none
has been more capitally influential, than the want of a well-toned, national
government. The levity and disrespect with which many of the recommendations
and requisitions of Congress have been received, by some of the states, has had
an extensive effect on the public mind. Mankind at large do not always reason:
they are prone to imitation, are susceptible of injuries, and in their
political conduct are generally, governed by their feelings. It was impossible
therefore, for the legislature of any one state to trifle with the dignity of
the federal government, without, sooner or later, hazarding their own.

BUT whatever may have been the cause of the public distress, nothing can
justify the wild and irrational methods which have been adopted for relief. To
every honest patriot it must be highly painful, to see our free constitution,
that work of time and of blood, suffering the insults and outrage of the
profligate and abandoned. To you, Gentlemen of the society of the Cincinnati,
who have been wont to consider the honor and the happiness, the disgrace and
the infelicity of your country as your own, it must be humiliating indeed.

IT has fallen to your lot, Gentlemen, to act a dangerous, though honorable
part in the American revolution. For eight long years you have trodden together
the rugged paths of military life. The return of this anniversary must call up
to your recollection the various interesting scenes through which you have
passed, and tend still further to cement those friendships, which have been
formed under the pressure of the same distress, and while participating one
common danger. On this day it will be natural for you to recur to that period,
when the military connection of those men, who, by the united voice of their
country, had been recognized as the patriot army, was about to be dissolved.
The moment was peculiarly calculated to awaken all the generous affections of
the mind, and to excite the finer feelings of friendship and humanity. The idea
of bidding a final adieu to each other was too painful to be supported; and the
most virtuous affections that ever warmed the human heart give birth to your
institution. On this day, therefore, you will recollect that friendship, and
charity form the great basis of your association. And while you dwell with
pleasing satisfaction on the connection that now subsists among those, whose
pride and glory it is to have defended the same illustrious cause, the memory
of those of your brethren, who have sealed their patriotism with their blood
will crowd upon your sympathetic minds, and call forth fresh tears for their
early fate. Hail! Ghosts immortal, of unfading fame! Your names shall grace the
poet's verse! The historick page to latest times shall proclaim your worth!
While your memory, dear to us your friends, shall be embalmed in the bosom of
your grateful country!

By your institution, Gentlemen, it is yours to solace and support, as far as
in your power, such of your unfortunate companions, as have seen better days,
and merited a milder fate. It is yours to wipe the tear from the eye of the
widow -- to succor the fatherless -- to rescue the tender female orphan from
destruction, and to enable the son to emulate the virtues of his father.
Pleasing delightful task! To communicate happiness to others while you increase
your own.

CONSIDERING the temper of the times in which you live, the part you have to
act is confessedly difficult. For although, as a society, friendship and
benevolence are your great objects, yet, apathy in you, with regard to the
public welfare, would be construed into disaffection, and uncommon sensibility
into design. It is impossible for men, whose great ambition it has been to
deserve the approbation of their fellow citizens, to view with indifference the
reproach which has been cast upon your institution. But there is a degree of
respect due from every man to himself, as well as to others; and there are
situations from which one may not recede, without the unavoidable imputation of
weakness, or of guilt. While, therefore, a consciousness of virtuous and
laudable views will prompt you to cherish the benevolent principles which first
induced you to associate, you will be lead to respect that spirit of jealousy,
which always characterises a free government, and, when not carried to excess,
is useful in its support. Time, which places every thing in its true light,
will convince the world that your institution is founded in virtue, and leads
to patriotism.

BESIDES the motives you have in common with others, to seek the public
welfare -- a regard to the consistence of your own character -- that sense of
honor, which has raised you superior to every temptation, and to every
distress -- the reiterated testimonials you have received from your country of
their sense of your patriotism and military merit, are ties that must forever
bind you most sacredly to her interests.

PROSECUTE, then, with resolution, what you have instituted in sincerity. Make
it the great object of your ambition, as you have shone as soldiers, to excel
as citizens. Treat with just indifference the insinuations which envy may be
disposed to throw out against you. Silence the tongue of slander, by the
rectitude of your conduct, and the brilliance of your virtues. Suffer not the
affected jealousy of individuals, to abate the ardour of your patriotism. As
you have fought for liberty, convince the world you know its value. As you have
greatly contributed to establish these governments, teach the licentious
traitor, that you will support them -- and as you have particularly fought
under the banners of the union, inculcate in your several circles, the
necessity of preserving the unity of the national character. Fortify your minds
against that foe to integrity, that bane of republicanism, an immoderate thirst
for popularity.

SUPPORT the majesty of the laws of your country. Reverence the public
institutions of religion. Practice the whole circle of private virtues; and
disseminate, to the utmost of your power, the seeds of useful knowledge.

THUS, approving yourselves to heaven and your own minds, you will do honor to
your institution, to yourselves, and to your country.

ERRATUM, 5th page, 7th line from the top for resolutions read opposition.


