AN ADDRESS TO THE INHABITANTS OF New England, Concerning the present Bloody
Controversy therein.

Printed and sold by S. HALL, State-street, BOSTON. 1787.

An ADDRESS, etc.
My dear Countrymen,
OUR fathers came to this land for purity and liberty in the worship of God;
but now many have drawn their swords against each other, about the affairs of
wordly gain, whereby an exceeding dark cloud is brought over us. Instead of
being the light of the world, and the pillar and ground of the truth, as those
are that obey Him who is the fountain of light and love; what a stumbling block
are we to other nations, who have their eyes fixed upon us? Permit me therefore
to lay before you a few thoughts, which I hope may be serviceable in this dark
season. If we were as well agreed about the way of relief, as we are about the
cause of our present distress, a happy deliverance would soon appear; as the
following facts will show.

From March to July, last year, the order of lawyers in our government, was
exposed in the Boston papers, in a very striking manner; and in the two
following months many people arose in arms against our executive courts, in the
counties of Hampshire, Berkshire, Worcester, Middlesex and Bristol. Hereupon
the town of Boston met, and sent an address to all the other towns in the
Massachusetts, earnestly requesting that a redress of grievances might be
sought for in a constitutional orderly way only; and pledging themselves to
join their endeavors with the country, in that way, to obtain a redress of any
such grievances as really existed. Hereby they intended to have the people
stirred up to send in an account of their real grievances to the General Court
at Boston; and after many such accounts had been laid before them, they
published an address to the people, November 14, 1786, wherein they say,

"We feel in common with our neighbors the scarcity of money; but is not this
scarcity owing to our own folly? At the close of the war, there was no
complaint of it; since that time, our fields have yielded their increase, and
Heaven has showered its blessings on us, in uncommon abundance; but are we not
constrained to allow, that immense sums have been expended, for what is of no
value, for the gew-gaws imported from Europe, and the more pernicious produce
of the West Indies; and the dread of a paper currency impedes the circulation
of what remains: It is said however, that such a currency would give us present
relief; but like the pleasure of sin, it would be but for a season; and like
that too, it would be a reproach to the community, and would produce calamities
without end. -- Without a reformation of manners, we can have little hope to
prosper in our public or private concerns. -- As the difficulty in paying
debts increased, a disregard to honesty, justice and good faith, in public and
private transactions, became more manifest. -- Some persons have artfully
affected to make a distinction between the government and people, as though
their interest were different and even opposite; but we presume, the good sense
of our constituents will discern the deceit and falsity of those insinuations.
Within a few months the authority delegated to us will cease, and all citizens
will be equally candidates in a future election. -- Many who disapprove
insurrections against the government, neglect to afford their aid, in
suppressing them; but to stand still, inactive spectators in such case, is like
a man who when his house is in flames, should stand with folded arms, and
console himself with this, that he did not set it on fire."

This view of the cause of our distress, perhaps will not be denied by a single
person; but the measures which have been taken since, have moved many to
declare their sorrow that we ever revolted from Great Britain. But I am so far
from any such thought, that I fully agree with our General Court, that a paper
currency would produce calamities without end. For by it the Court of Britain
have been enabled to carry blood and slavery round the world, and to load the
nation with a debt of more than two hundred millions sterling, above a third of
which was in attempts to bind us in all cases whatsoever; and so to rob us both
of manhood and Christianity. For to have our choice governed by reason, is
essential to manhood; and to have it governed by revelation, is essential to
Christianity. Yet so late as Nov. 2, 1780, in a speech from the throne, they
said, "We will not submit to receive the law from any power whatsoever." So the
Jews said, We will not have this man to reign over us. Luke xix.14. Therefore
God chose their delusions, and brought their fears upon them, because they
always resisted the Holy Ghost. Isaiah lxvi.1 -- 5. Acts vii.8, 48 -- 51. Their
fear was that the Romans would come and take away their place and nation; yet
rather than to receive King Jesus, they chose Caesar, who brought that
destruction upon them. John xi.48.xix.15. Thus God's immutable plan of
government determines the choice of the worst of men, without the least excuse
for their wickedness. John xix.11. Acts ii.22, 23. And if these plain truths
were duly regarded, peace would soon take place among us. For our Legislature
truly say,

"Within a few months the authority delegated to us will cease, and all the
citizens will be equally candidates in a future election." This is the true
nature of our Constitution; and the command of God is, Submit yourselves to
every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. This ought to be a matter of
conscience with every soul. 2 Peter ii.3, 4. Romans xiii.1 -- 10. His revealed
will, enforced in the name of the Lord our righteousness, is as clear as glass,
and as powerful as fire; it being the only perfect law of liberty. And teachers
of a contrary way, are guilty of whoredom, stealing, and lying. 2 Cor. iii.5 --
18. James i.16 -- 25. Jer. xxiii.5, 6, 14, 29 -- 32. And putting away these
evils, in the valley of Achor, is our only door of hope, of deliverance and
happiness. Joshua vii.11, 12, 26. Isaiah lxv.2 -- 16. Hosea ii.5 -- 15. The
comfortable support of his ministers is as really an ordinance of God, as any
sacrifice that he ever instituted; and those who do not heartily obey him
therein, sow to the flesh, and shall of the flesh reap corruption. 1 Cor.
ix.14. Gal. vi.6 -- 9, 19 -- 23. No son of Aaron might offer any sacrifice any
where but upon God's altar, nor with any fire but that which was received from
Heaven. Two of his sons were struck dead for violating this law. Levi.
ix.24.x.1, 2. And Christ is the only altar on which all our sacrifices ought to
be offered; and none can have a right to eat thereof, who build upon the
covenant of circumcision. Heb. xiii.10 -- 18. Phil. iv.10 -- 18. For Abraham
could not admit any Gentile into it, without buying of him as a servant. And
God has expressly repealed that covenant. Genesis xvii.11 -- 14. Mat. xxiii.8. 1
Cor. vii.19 -- 23. Gal. vi.15, 16. And, instead of fire from Heaven, the
tongues of those who are for many masters are a world of iniquity, setting on
fire the whole course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell. And nothing can
quench it, but the wisdom that is from above, which is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy. And none can countenance the natural
distinctions which were in Abraham's covenant, without partiality, and
dissimulation. James iii.1, 6, 17. Gal. ii.12 -- 20.

The way wherein teachers have kept up these evils so long in the world, has
been by insisting upon it, that self-determination in the will of man is
essential to moral agency. This doctrine, and the doctrine of purgatory, is now
carried further in London and in Boston, than it is in Rome. Which is so
opposite to the doctrine of Christ, that he says* I came down from heaven, not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. If ye keep my
commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my father's
commandments, and abide in his love. John vi.38.xv.10. And in this way only can
we make our calling and election sure, and escape the error of the wicked. 2
Peter i.3 -- 11.iii.17, 18. And that all who are in authority may protect and
encourage such a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, is my
earnest prayer.

ISAAC BACKUS.
Boston, March 28, 1787.
AT Philip Freeman's, in Union-Street, and of the Printer of the foregoing
ADDRESS, may be had, the Author's HISTORY of NEW ENGLAND, -- Discourse on the
TWO WITNESSES, and his other WORKS.


