Mr. Dawes's Oration, 1787.

AN ORATION, Delivered July 4, 1787, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF The
Town of BOSTON, IN CELEBRATION OF The ANNIVERSARY OF American Independence.

BY THOMAS DAWES, jun. Esquire.

BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, in State-Street.

MDCCLXXXVII.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public town-meeting assembled, at
FaneuilHall, on Wednesday the 4 th day of July, Anno Domini 1787, ten o'clock
in the forenoon:

VOTED, That the SELECTMEN be, and hereby are, appointed a Committee to wait on
THOMAS DAWES, jun. Esquire. and, in the name of the Town, to thank him for the
pertinent and elegant Oration this day delivered by him, at the request of the
Town, upon the Anniversary of the INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;
and to request of him a copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN, BOSTON, 5 th of July, 1787.
I HAVE a sincere wish that what I delivered yesterday, to my Fellow Citizens,
might not be published any further. But as that wish cannot be gratified,
consistent with custom, I resign my Oration to the freedom of the Press --
knowing that many will censure -- hoping that some will approve.

I am, Gentlemen, Yours with esteem and much respect, THOMAS DAWES, jun,

AN ORATION.
WE are convened, my Fellow Citizens, to consider the feelings, manners and
principles which led to our Independence -- the effects which have flowed, and
the consequences that will probably follow, from that great event.

In contemplating the principles which originated, let us not confound them
with the occasions that only ripened, our Independence.

Those principles are both physical and moral. Of the physical, this is one,
that GOD himself has placed Britain and America in separate hemispheres: and of
the moral, this is not the least, that our liberties are founded on the broad
basis of everlasting justice.

That the planters of America had a right to the soil, and consequently to make
laws for its protection, is just as clear as that Abraham had a right to water,
after he had dug his well in the land of Abimelech.

A sense of this right it was that soon "opened Paradise in the wild," and
evinced that "countries are cultivated not according to their fertility, but
their liberty." But, as one half the world have always lived to maintain the
other; and as the voluptuous never lose sight of the earnings of the
industrious, a pretext was soon found for a foreign claim on part of our
substance; and Britain very gravely stated her demands upon us "because our
great grandsires were formerly acquainted."*

When once a free government exercises its claims over its colonies, the latter
are undone.

Of this position there is a plenitude of proof. We need not look back, through
the dim shades of time, to the Commonwealth of Carthage, who was herself free,
while her colonies were enslaved.

The colonies of an absolute Monarch may share equal blessings with the parent
country: because there is no representative but him who represents, equally,
all parts of the empire. But the provinces of a free nation, who are not
represented at home, are like illegitimate children, ever at work for their
brethren born in wedlock. The whole story of colonization will demonstrate this
truth, from Verres, who rioted in the Roman provinces, to Hastings, who
murdered thousands on the banks of the Ganges.

The British Senate now thunders with the recital of sons employed against
their mothers, and of the sacrifice of female dignity and distress to parricide
and plunder. One of their own orators has recently said, "We are covering with
misery upon misery a wretched people, whom Providence has subjected to the
dominion of this country."

If this picture is just -- if these principles are true, we have no need to
answer the question, whether we are now happier than perhaps we might have been
as dependents on Britain? Is it not a matter of congratulation and joy, that we
this day celebrate our emancipation? And is it not more a topic of wonder,
that we ever leaned on any foreign authority than that we declared ourselves of
age, and assumed the rights of manhood?

Whilst we were subjects of Britain, without a voice in her councils, the
sublimity of her freedom was our aggravation. For while her own happy islanders
enjoyed the mild rule of a mixed monarchy, we were subject to men who were not
responsible to us, and whose constituents at home were alleviated by the
imposition of burdens abroad. This had the same operation upon us as the
severest of all aristocracies. It was a poor consolation that the source of
oppression was a thousand leagues off, while its effects reached us with a
momentum equal to the squares of the distance.

The English Constitution was erected before America was born, and its gates
were not open to the younger offspring. Men of cold hearts could never embrace
the sentiment of Sully, that "the best way for a great empire to tax its
colonies is to confer benefits upon them." Let it be this day's joy, that such
a maxim was not comprehended in Britain. If our ancient mother had been more
kind, we, for a time, had been undone. But oppressors are often impelled to do
some rash act, which may strike opposition out of despair. When the people's
minds are once prepared, almost any accident, that can impress the senses, will
accelerate a revolution.

In this light, it may be considered, that a single instance of family abuse
drove Tarquin from his throne, and established the consulship on the ruins of
royalty.

Animated at the sight of another act of insolence and cruelty, the Swiss
Cantons broke the Austrian yoke, and rose to liberty.

A native of Uri was ordered, by a provincial governor, to be hanged, unless
he cleft an apple on his son's head, at a certain distance, with an arrow. The
boy is brought on the plain. Numerous spectators crowd the affecting scene. The
father draws his bow -- but Heaven directs the arrow's flight. The apple is
cleft in twain, and the spectators rend the skies with their acclamations. --
At this fortunate era, supported by the countenances of a multitude who had
long suffered, the father draws a second arrow from his belt. This arrow was
intended for thy heart, O Tyrant, if I had killed my son! -- Such was the voice
of fervid Freedom, who had been dumb 'till now. The bands of oppression were
snapped in a moment, and the crisis arrived of Helvetic Liberty.

In the history of nations, we shall find revolutions matured by accidents,
such as that we have just described, while the great leading principles lie
unobserved. The impositions of the British Parliament, in certain well known
instances, were among the occasional accidents which ripened, but could never
originate, the revolution of America. Without such accidents, Independence may
have been retarded, but, sooner or later, must have adorned the annals of
mankind.

Our ancestors, soon after their migration, enacted certain laws, which
inspired the whole body politic with the true spirit of republicanism. Among
the most essential of these, are our laws of Distribution and of Education. The
first operate on property, the other on knowledge.

One of the late aerostatick navigators has intimated, that, when sailing in
his balloon, through the blue climes of air, over European territories, the eye
was gratified in the accuracy with which the divisions were made between
contiguous owners of the lands below -- the circumstance suggested an idea of
firm laws. Had this philosopher made his aerial voyage over the fields of
Massachusetts, he would have enjoyed an additional sentiment: an idea of
equality would have been joined to that of certainty. The sentimentalist would
not only have discovered the justness of outlines in the bounds of property,
but he would have observed the equality of portions of the respective owners: a
species of equality how exalted above the condition of those countries where
the peasant is alienated with the soil, and the price of acres is the number of
slaves! Not indeed that perfect equality which deadens the motives of industry,
and places Demerit on a footing with Virtue: but that happy me diocrity which
soars above bondage, without aspiring to domination. Less favorable to liberty
were those agrarian laws which lifted the ancient republics into grandeur.

The other source of republicanism, which we suggested, is our laws of
Education. No dragon guards this Hesperian tree. No cherub, with his flaming
sword, denies access. The blooming fruit hangs tempting to all who would pluck
and eat. Even the Harvard Education is within the reach of a majority of
families: and this is made so by the annual benefactions of the Legislature;
the members of which, if there were no other reason, are entitled to the
character of Fathers of their Country.

That Education is one of the deepest principles of Independence, need not be
labored in this assembly. In arbitrary governments, where the people neither
make the law nor choose those who legislate, the more ignorance the more peace.
But in a government where the people fill all the branches of the sovereignty,
Intelligence is the life of Liberty. An American would resent his being denied
the use of his musket: but he would deprive himself of a stronger safeguard,
if he should want that learning which is necessary to a knowledge of his
constitution.

It is easy to see that our agrarian law and the law of education were
calculated to make republicans -- to make men. Servitude could never long
consist with the habits of such citizens. Enlightened minds and virtuous
manners lead to the gates of glory. The sentiment of Independence must have
been connatural in the bosoms of Americans; and, sooner or later, must have
blazed out into public action. Independence fits the soul of her residence for
every noble enterprise of humanity and greatness. Her radiant smile lights up
celestial ardour in poets and orators, who found her praise through all ages;
in legislators and philosophers, who fabricate wise and happy governments as
dedications to her fame -- in patriots and heroes, who shed their lives in
sacrifice to her divinity.

At this idea, do not our minds swell with the memory of those whose godlike
virtues have founded her most magnificent temple in America? It is easy for us
to maintain her doctrines, at this late day, when there is but one party on the
subject, an immense people. But what tribute shall we bestow, what sacred paean
shall we raise over the tombs of those who dared, in the face of unrivalled
power, and within the reach of Majesty, to blow the blast of freedom through a
subject continent?

Nor did those brave countrymen of ours only express the emotions of glory: the
nature of their principles inspired them with the power of practice, and they
offered their bosoms to the shafts of battle. Bunker's awful mount is the
capacious urn of their ashes -- but the flaming bounds of the universe could
not limit the flight of their minds. They fled to the union of kindred souls;
and those who fell at the streights of Thermopylae, and those who bled on the
heights of Charlestown, now reap congenial joys in the fields of the blessed.

Whatever were the accidents that hastened the event we now celebrate, its
causes are coeval with the settling of the country. And whatever degree of
excellence marks the constitution of any particular state, the origin of that
excellence may be traced back, through the manners of generations, up to the
first principles of our ancestors. The members of that Convention, which
planned the form of this Republic, owed all their genius, perhaps, for that
great work, to principles left them in legacy by their forefathers.

The construction of the Massachusetts government is a fair experiment in
politics, to what ascendancy natural liberty can rise consistent with civil
control.

But if our constitution is the perfect law of liberty, whence those mighty
animosities which have so lately distracted the bosom of peace, and stained the
first pages of our history with civil blood? "The fury of litigious war has
blown her horn on our mountains." The western woods have again ecchoed with the
tumult of arms, and deserts lost in snow have been the fields of Mars. Have the
Britons again marched in war's proud pomp to the plains of Saratoga? Or have
the Savages once more issued from Canadian wilds upon our unguarded frontiers?
Have new tribes of Saracens and Vandals risen from beyond our Apalachian hills,
** like the ancient destroyers of Rome, again to abolish the arts, and to bury
the hopes of ages in the tomb of nations? None of these: it is not the proud
Briton or rough Savage, it is not the barbarous Goth or dark Vandal, that has
arisen to dispute the life of liberty and the laws. "We have lived to see the
valuable charter of our most sacred rights daringly invaded; but we will not
live to see it destroyed. The wounds by which it falls shall first reach our
hearts, and the rich torrents of our blood be shed as a libation on the pile of
expiring freedom."

It seems incredible that men should be so lost to their own elevation above
the animals of the forest, as, knowingly, to prefer a state of nature to
political happiness. When rushing into the former, men may not consider, that,
in the unlimited dominion of natural liberty, strength is a tyrant and weakness
a slave: while the fruition of civil liberty is the patronage of united
millions, purchased at the moderate price of rational obedience.

But whether want of light, or love of sedition, was the motive of
disaffection, is a question that affords but little relief to that peace which
has been violated. It is no satisfaction to the sufferers, whether the armed
bands on Pelham heights considered themselves in the condition of those Romans
who retired to the mons sacer from motives of liberty; or whether, like the
legions of Catiline and Manlius, they premeditated malice against the laws.
That they had any grounds of complaint against the constitution, can never be
admitted. Our sufferings have arisen from a deeper fountain than the deficiency
of a single constitution. If our particular government were more perfect than
it now is, and more exalted than the republic of Plato, we should still
experience the mischiefs we have realized, should our National Independence
remain deprived of its proper federal authority. Had Continental requisitions
been answered cheerfully, by all the states; or, in other words, if those
consequences had followed which must forever flow from that great federal
ability so soon to be annexed to our Independence, Commerce, it is presumed,
had long since whitened all our seas, and the flags of all nations had
enlivened our ports. We have resources of wealth: but there must be national
authority to call them forth, and apply them to the public exigence. What
nation, however disposed, can treat with Congress, while a single state may
determine, without appeal, the law of treaty? A single town might as well make
a bye law repugnant to the general acts of the community.

If such absurdities remain, shall we not resemble the loose machinery of the
German principalities before the establishment of their Imperial chamber and
their Aulic council. The bond of union, connecting those states into the
Germanick body, was so feeble that public order and private security were not
maintained: Trade declined -- arts and manufactures failed, and Germany
resembled a country which an enemy had laid desolate.

There was a custom among the ancient Persians, upon the death of a king, to
pass five days in anarchy, in order to be convinced of its calamities, and to
learn a love of the laws. In America, we have refined upon this idea: for our
States have existed years past without national connection, and we have
experience in proportion to our adversity.

Enemies of the Revolution have taken occasion from hence to ascribe to our
Independence, to our respective forms of government, to the natural and moral
constitutions of our country, all our political evils. Alas! it is because we
have not lived up to the first principles of our Independence, and completed
its system with proper powers, that we have suffered at all. If the apparent
consequences of the Revolution have gratified enemies and disappointed friends,
it arises not from the parsimony of Nature to the physical properties of our
country. If we let our imaginations move from St. Croix to Savannah -- from
shores washed by the Atlantic sea to the wide confines of the Pacifick ocean,
we shall not only contemplate, with sublime delight, the amplitude of America,
but we shall liberally hope, that, in the vast interval stretched out between
those extreme bounds, are regions of felicity fully equal to their
corresponding latitudes in the other hemisphere. We are not like that ancient
Island, who has no new lands to improve, except a few parks and royal hunting
grounds, which her conquerors made by pulling down whole villages, and planting
oaks and elms in their place. For though the number of our inhabitants more
than twice doubles in half a century, yet the territory ceded us by treaty will
equal the demands of numerous generations.

Nor is the moral constitution of America against her. Ye, whose narrow minds
and phlegmatic affections can embrace but one half of human kind, open the
volume -- point the page that shows so young a people who are so enlightened.
It has indeed been the praise of our philosophy to be useful, rather than
splendid; and defense, rather than conquest, has been the pride of our arms. We
have deprived the lightning of its rage, and the tyrant of his power. *** Our
philosophers are not refuted -- our warriors are not conquered.

Franklin, like his own Aurora Borealis, still illumes, with new streams of
light, the sky of science.

Washington, who led a glorious train of heroes to deliver their country, now
animates an illustrious band of patriots to repair the palace of liberty, and
to six forever the sovereignty of the laws on the throne of the Union.

No. Poverty of genius is not our misfortune. The forms of free and justly
balanced polities maintain our title to legislative wisdom. Nor have we
narrowed the gates of our religious institutions. Liberality is not an exotic
that dics in our soil. Independent ground is not watered with the blood of
unbelievers. We have not contracted the worship of the Deity to a single
establishment: but we have opened an asylum to all people and kindred and
tongues and nations. -- No. Mediocrity is not the bane of independent minds.
Nature has dealt with us not on the minute scale of economy, but the broader
principles of bounty.

What remains, then, but that we improve the gratuities of Providence? --
Roused by a sense of past suffering and the dignity of Freedom, we have once
more called on venerable sages of our first Congress, on other immortal
characters, to add new strength and beauty to the fair fabric of Independence.

A legislation common, in certain cases, to all the States, will make us a
nation in reality, as well as in name. This will permit us to respect our own
station, and to treat on equal grounds with other powers -- will suffer us to
be just at home and respectable abroad -- will render property secure, and
convince us that the payment of debts is our truest policy and highest honor.
This will encourage husbandry and arts -- will settle, with numerous and happy
families, the banks of Ohio and the borders of Kennebeck. Huron's neglected
waves, Superior's wilderness of waters, now forlorn and unemployed, shall bear
the countless vessels of internal traffic. Niagara's foaming cataract, crowned
with columns of vapor and refracted fires, shall not always bar the
intercourse of mighty lakes. The mechanic arts shall find a passage from Eric
to Ontario, and Champlain shall be led in triumph to the bosom of the deep.

Hail, glorious age! -- when the potent rays of perfect liberty shall burst
upon the now benighted desert: -- when the tawny natives of America, and the
descendants of those who fled hither from the old world, shall forget their
animosities: when all parts of this immense continent shall be happy in
ceaseless communications and the mutual exchange of benefits: -- when the
cornucopia of peace shall be prefered to the waste of war; as the genial gales
of summer to the ruffian blasts of winter: -- when nations, who now hold the
same jealous relation to each other which individuals held before society was
formed, shall find some grand principle of combination, like that which rolls
the heavenly bodies round a common center.

The distinct fires of American States, which are now just rising through
broken clouds from the horizon, shall be soon blended into one bright blaze in
the zenith -- the glory of the universe.

NOTES.
NOTE *, p. 6. -- Nor will any country continue their subjection to another,
only because their great-grandmothers were acquainted. Cato's Letters, 4 th
vol. page 7.

NOTE, p. 7. -- See Mr. Sheridan's speech, introductive of a motion in the
British House of Commons to impeach Governor Hastings for his conduct in the
East Indies.

NOTE, p. 7. -- "When a people are oppressed, the more distant they are from
the seat of government the more grievous is their servitude." Anon.

NOTE, p. 10. -- I have endeavored to find the printed account which mentions
this idea of the Aerostatick, that I might quote it more exactly: but I cannot
find it, though I well remember that I read it.

NOTE, p. 10. -- Mr. Guthrie, in the last edition of his Geographical Grammar,
page 805 -- speaking of New England, says -- "The most populous and flourishing
parts of the mother country hardly make a better appearance than the cultivated
parts of New England. There are here many gentlemen of considerable landed
estates; but the greatest part of the people is composed of a substantial
yeomanry, who cultivate their own freeholds, without a dependence upon any but
Providence and their own industry. These freeholds generally pass to their
children in the way of GAVELKIND; which keeps them from being hardly ever able
to emerge out of their original happy mediocrity. In no part of the world are
the ordinary part so independent, or possess more of the conveniences of life."
This is a very just idea of the matter, except that our lands do not pass in
gavelkind, properly speaking. Gavelkind, or give -- all -- kind, -- signifies a
tenure annexed to lands in Kent, in England, whereby the lands of the father
are equally divided among all his sons. But here, the oldest son has a double
portion -- which distinction, perhaps, our Legislature will one day think
worthy of amendment.

NOTE, p. 12. -- Flammantia moenia mundi. Lucretius.

"He passed the flaming bounds of Place and Time." Gray.

NOTE **, p. 13. -- Beyond these Apalachian mountains is an immense desert,
into which some travelers have ventured as far as eight hundred leagues,
without finding an end to it. It is supposed that the rivers at the extremity
of those uncultivated regions have a communication with the South Sea. Raynal.

NOTE, p. 14. -- Vide Johnson's History of Magna Charta, 2d page.

NOTE, p. 15. -- Dr. Robertson gives a more ample account of this part of the
German history in his view of the state of Europe. Charles 5 th, 1 st vol. page
178, and on.

NOTE, p. 16. -- The Abbe Raynal, in his history of the British settlements in
America, (1 vol. page 25 and on) has made a comparison between the old and new
world, very debasing to the latter. He says, Nature has strangely neglected the
new world -- that the men have less strength and less courage -- that they are
degraded and degenerated in their natural constitution and understandings. --
The Abbe ascribes all this to the deluge, which left America much later than
the other hemisphere. So he tells us that a damper air, and a more marshy
ground, must necessarily infect the very roots and seeds both of the
subsistence and multiplication of mankind. He says, it must have required some
ages to restore population, and still a greater number before the ground could
be settled and dried, so as to be fit for tillage and the foundations of
buildings. Thus the Abbe argues: but he had much better have settled his facts
before he had proceeded to show the reasons.

NOTE, p. 16. -- Alluding to the depredations of William 1st, in the New
Forest, etc.

NOTE, p. 17. -- Alluding to the subjects of Dr. Franklin's philosophy, which
are generally relative to the affairs of common life.

NOTE ***, p. 17. -- "Under the bust of one of them has been written -- He
wrested thunder from Heaven and the scepter from tyrants." Raynal.

NOTE, p. 19. -- Guthrie, who is quoted in a preceding note, gives the
following account of Niagara Falls. "The passage between Erie and Ontario is
interrupted by a stupendous fall or cataract, which is called the Falls of
Niagara. The water here is about half a mile wide, where the rock crosses it,
not in a direct line, but in the form of a half moon. When it comes to the
perpendicular fall, which is 150 feet, no words can express the consternation
of travelers at seeing so great a body of water falling, or rather violently
thrown, from so great an height, upon the rocks below; from which it again
rebounds to a very great height, appearing as white as snow, being all
converted into foam, through those violent agitations. The noise of this fall
is often heard at the distance of 15 miles, and sometimes much further. The
vapor arising from the fall may sometimes be seen at a great distance,
appearing like a cloud or pillar of smoke, and in the appearance of a rainbow
whenever the sun and the position of the traveller favors. Lake Superior is
500 leagues in the circuit.

NOTE, p. 19. -- Critics have objected, that these expressions convey the idea
of a closer union with the natives than was intended: but I believe the passage
will be understood.


