AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE NORTH CHURCH IN HARTFORD, AT THE MEETING OF THE
CONNECTICUT SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI, JULY 4th, 1787. IN COMMEMORATION OF THE
INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES.

BY JOEL BARLOW, ESQUIRE.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, NEAR THE BRIDGE.

At a meeting of Connecticut State Society of the Cincinnati, at Hartford, 4th
July 1787.
VOTED, That Col. TRUMBULL and Col. HUMPHREYS be a Committee to wait on Mr.
BARLOW, to return the thanks of this Society for his Oration delivered this day
-- And to desire a copy that it may be printed.

A true copy, J. TRUMBULL, Sec'ry.

AN ORATION, etc.
Mr. PRESIDENT, Gentlemen of the Society, And Fellow Citizens,
ON the Anniversary of so great an event as the birth of the Empire in which we
live, none will question the propriety of passing a few moments in
contemplating the various objects suggested to the mind by the important
occasion. But at the present period, while the blessings, claimed by the sword
of victory and promised in the voice of peace, remain to be confirmed by our
future exertions -- while the nourishment, the growth, and even the existence
of our empire depend upon the united efforts of an extensive and divided people
-- the duties of this day ascend from amusement and congratulation to a serious
patriotic employment.

WE are assembled, my friends, not to boast, but to realize -- not to inflate
our national vanity by a pompous relation of past achievements in the council
or in the field; but, from a modest retrospect of the truly dignified part
already acted by our countrymen, from an accurate view of our present
situation, and from an anticipation of the scenes that remain to be unfolded --
to discern and familiarize the duties that still await us, as citizens, as
soldiers and as men.

REVOLUTIONS in other countries have been effected by accident. The faculties
of human reason and the rights of human nature have been the sport of chance
and the prey of ambition. And when indignation has burst the bands of slavery,
to the destruction of one tyrant, it was only to impose the manacles of
another. This arose from the imperfection of that early stage of society, which
necessarily occasioned the foundation of empires on the eastern continent to be
laid in ignorance, and which induced a total inability of foreseeing the
improvements of civilization, or of adapting the government to a state of
social refinement.

I SHALL but repeat a common observation when I remark, that on the western
continent the scene was entirely different; and a new task, totally unknown to
the legislators of other nations, was imposed upon the fathers of the American
Empire.

HERE was a people thinly scattered over an extensive territory, lords of the
soil on which they trod, commanding a prodigious length of coast and an equal
breadth of frontier -- a people habituated to liberty, professing a mild and
benevolent religion, and highly advanced in science and civilization. To
conduct such a people in a revolution, the address must be made to reason as
well as to the passions. And to reason, to the clear understanding of these
variously affected colonies the solemn address was made.

A PEOPLE thus enlightened, and capable of discerning the connection of causes
with their remotest effects, waited not the experience of oppression in their
own persons; which they well knew would render them less able to conduct a
regular opposition. But in the moment of their greatest prosperity, when every
heart expanded with the increasing opulence of the BritishAmerican dominions,
and every tongue united in the praises of the parent State and her patriot
king, when many circumstances concurred which would have rendered an ignorant
people secure and inattentive to their future interests -- at this moment the
eyes of the American Argus were opened to the first and most plausible invasion
of the colonial rights.

IN vain were we told, and perhaps with the greatest truth and sincerity, that
the moneys levied in America were all to be expended within the country, and
for our benefit: Equally idle was the policy of Great Britain in commencing
their new system by a small and almost imperceptible duty, and that upon very
few articles. It was not the quantity of the tax, it was not the mode of
appropriation, but it was the right of the demand, which was called in
question. Upon this the people deliberated, this they discussed in a cool and
dispassionate manner, and this they opposed, in every shape that an artful and
systematic ministry could devise, for more than ten years, before they assumed
the sword.

THIS single circumstance, aside from the magnitude of the object or the event
of the contest, will stamp a peculiar glory on the American revolution, and
mark it as a distinguished era in the history of mankind; that sober reason
and reflection have done the work of enthusiasm and performed the miracles of
gods. In what other age or nation has a laborious agricultural people, at ease
upon their own farms, secure and distant from the approach of fleets and
armies, tide-waiters and stamp-masters, reasoned before they have felt, and
from the dictates of duty and conscience, encountered dangers, distress and
poverty, for the sake of securing to posterity a government of independence and
peace? The toils of ages and the fate of millions were to be sustained by a few
hands. The voice of unborn nations called upon them for safety; but it was a
still small voice, the voice of rational reflection. Here was no Cromwell to
inflame the people with bigotry and zeal, no Caesar to reward his followers
with the spoils of vanquished foes, and no territory to acquire by conquest.
Ambition, Superstition and Avarice, those universal torches of war, never
illumined an American field of battle. But the permanent principles of sober
policy spread through the colonies, roused the people to assert their rights,
and conducted the revolution.

IT would be wandering from the objects which ought to occupy our present
attention, This Oration was preceded by the lecture of the Act of Independence;
which, by an order of this State Society, is in future to make part of their
public exercises at every annual meeting.
again to recount the numerous acts of the British Parliament which compose
that system of tyranny designed for the subjugation of America: Neither can we
indulge in the detail of those memorable events which marked our various stages
of resistance, from the glooms of unsuccessful supplication, to the splendour of
victory and acknowledged sovereignty. The former were the theme of senatorial
eloquence, producing miracles of union and exertion in every part of the
continent, till we find them preserved for everlasting remembrance in that
declaratory Act of Independence, which gave being to an empire and dignified
the day we now commemorate; the latter are fresh in the memory of every person
of the least information. It would be impertinence, if not a breach of
delicacy, to attempt a recital of those glorious achievements, especially
before an audience, part of whom have been distinguished actors in the scene,
others the anxious and applauding spectators. To the faithful historian we
resign the task; the historian, whom it is hoped the present age will deem it
their duty as well as their interest, to furnish, encourage and support.

WHATEVER praise is due for the task already performed, it is certain that much
remains to be done. The revolution is but half completed. Independence and
Government were the two objects contended for, and but one is yet obtained. To
the glory of the present age and the admiration of the future, our severance
from the British empire was conducted upon principles as noble as they were
new, and unprecedented in the history of human actions. Could the same generous
principles, the same wisdom and unanimity be exerted in effecting the
establishment of a permanent foederal system, what an additional luster would
it pour upon the present age! a luster hitherto unequalled; a display of
magnanimity, for which mankind may never behold another opportunity.

WITHOUT an efficient government our Independence will cease to be a blessing.
Shall that glow of patriotism and unshaken perseverance, which have been so
long conspicuous in the American character, desert us at our utmost need? Shall
we lose sight of our own happiness, because it has grown familiar by a near
approach? Shall thy labors, O Washington, be bestowed in vain? Have thou
conducted us to independence and peace, and shall we not receive the blessings
at thy hands? Where are the shades of our fallen friends? and what is their
language on this occasion? Warren, Montgomery, Mercer, Wooster, Scammel and
Laurens, all ye hosts of departed heroes! rich is the treasure you have
lavished in the cause, and prevalent the price you have paid for our freedom.
Shall the purchase be neglected? the fair inheritance lie without improvement,
exposed to every daring invader? Forbid it, honor, forbid it, gratitude; and
oh, may Heaven avert the impending evil.

IN contemplating the price of our Independence, it will never be forgotten
that it was not entirely the work of our own hands; nor could it probably have
been established, in the same term of time, by all the blood and treasure, that
America unassisted was able to furnish for the contest. Much of the merit is
due, and our warmest acknowledgments will ever flow to that illustrious
Monarch, the father of nations and friend of the distressed; that Monarch, who by
his early assistance taught us not to despair, and, when we had given a
sufficient proof of our military virtue and perseverance, who joined us in
alliance upon terms of equality, gave us a rank and credit among the maritime
nations of Europe, and furnished fleets and armies, money and military stores,
to put a splendid period to the important conflict.

WHERE shall we find language to express a nation's gratitude for such
unexampled goodness and magnanimity? my friends, it is not to be done with
language. Our sense of obligation for favors received from Heaven is best
expressed by a wise improvement. Does LOUIS ask for more? and can duty be
satisfied with less? Unite in a permanent foederal government, put your
commerce upon a respectable footing; your arts and manufactures, your
population, your wealth and glory will increase: and when an hundred millions
of people are comprised within your territory and made happy by your sway, then
shall it be known that the hand of that monarch assisted in planting the vine
from which so great a harvest is produced. His generous heart shall exult in
the prospect, his royal descendants, fired by the great example, shall imitate
his virtues, and the world shall unite in his praise.

HERE shall that pride of the military character, the gallant Fayette, find his
compensation for a life of disinterested service; whose toils have not ceased
with the termination of the war, and whose successful endeavors to promote our
interest, in commercial and political arrangements, can only be equalled by his
achievements in the field. How will the posterity of that nobleman, and that of
the other brave officers of his nation who have fought by your sides, on
reviewing the American history, rejoice in the fame of their fathers; nor ever
regret the fate of those who bled in so glorious a field!

AN acknowledgement of the merits of Rochambeau and Chastellux, D Estaing, De
Graff and De Barras, and the other heroes of the French army and navy --
affection to the memory of our brethren and companions who have bled in our
battles -- reverence to the advice of our illustrious Commander in Chief, and
of all those sages and patriots who have composed our councils, from the time
of the first Congress to the present moment -- honor to our worthy creditors
in Europe -- a regard to the conduct of the Imperial Sovereigns of Russia and
Germany, who evince to the world that they revere the cause of liberality and
human happiness in which we drew the sword -- a respect to the memory of the
venerable Frederick of Prussia, whose dying hand put the signature to a treaty
of commerce with the United States upon the most liberal principles that ever
originated in a diplomatic council -- a sacred regard to ourselves and to all
posterity -- and, above all, a religious gratitude to our heavenly Benefactor,
who has hitherto smiled upon our endeavors -- call upon us, in the language
of a thousand tongues, for firmness, unanimity and perseverence, in completing
the revolution and establishing the empire.

THE present is justly considered an alarming crisis; perhaps the most alarming
that America ever saw. We have contended with the most powerful nation and
subdued the bravest and best appointed armies; but now we have to contend with
ourselves, and encounter passions and prejudices more powerful than armies and
more dangerous to our peace. It is not for glory, it is for existence that we
contend.

MUCH is expected from the Foederal Convention now sitting at Philadelphia; and
it is a happy circumstance that so general a confidence from all parts of the
country is centred in that respectable Body. Their former services as
individuals command it, and our situation requires it. But although much is
expected from them, yet more is demanded from ourselves.

THE first great object is to convince the people of the importance of their
present situation; for the majority of a great people, on a subject which they
understand, will never act wrong. If ever there was a time, in any age or
nation, when the fate of millions depended on the voice of one, it is the
present period in these states. Every free citizen of the American Empire ought
now to consider himself as the legislator of half mankind. When he views the
amazing extent of territory, settled and to be settled under the operation of
his laws -- when, like a wise politician, he contemplates the population of
future ages; the changes to be wrought by the possible progress of arts, in
agriculture, commerce and manufactures, the increasing connection and
intercourse of nations, and the effect of one rational political system upon
the general happiness of mankind -- his mind, dilated with the great idea, will
realize a liberality of feeling which leads to a rectitude of conduct. He will
see that the system to be established by his suffrage is calculated for the
great benevolent purposes of extending peace, happiness and progressive
improvement to a large proportion of his fellow creatures. As there is a
probability that the system to be proposed by the Convention may answer this
description there is some reason to hope it will be viewed by the people with
that candor and dispassionate respect which is due to the importance of the
subject.

WHILE the anxiety of the feeling heart is breathing the perpetual sigh for the
attainment of so great an object, it becomes the strongest duty of the social
connection, to enlighten and harmonize the minds of our fellow citizens, and
point them to a knowledge of their interests, as an extensive foederal people
and fathers of increasing nations. The price put into their hands is great,
beyond all comparison; and, as they improve it, they will entail happiness or
misery upon a larger proportion of human beings, than could be affected by the
conduct of all the nations of Europe united.

THOSE who are possessed of abilities or information in any degree above the
common rank of their fellow citizens are called upon by every principle of
humanity, to diffuse a spirit of candor and rational enquiry upon these
important subjects.

ADAMS, to his immortal honor and the timely assistance of his country, has
set the great example. His treatise in defense of the constitutions, though
confined to the State Republics, is calculated to do infinite service, by
correcting thousands of erroneous sentiments arising from our inexperience;
sentiments, which if uncorrected in this early stage of our political
existence, will be the source of calamities without measure and without end.
Should that venerable philosopher and statesman be induced to continue his
enquiries, by tracing the history of Confederacies, and, with his usual energy
and perspicuity, delineate and defend a system adapted to the circumstances of
the United States -- I will not say he could deserve more from his distressed
country, but he would crown a life of patriotic labors and render an essential
additional service to the world.

WHILE America enjoys the peculiar felicity of seeing those who have conducted
her councils and her battles retire like Cincinnatus to the humble labors of
the plough, it must be remembered, that she there expects a continuance of
their patriotic exertions. The Society of the Cincinnati, established upon the
most benevolent principles, will never lose sight of their duty, in rendering
every possible aid, as citizens, to that community which they have defended as
soldiers. They will rejoice, that, although Independence was the result of
force, yet Government is the child of reason. As they are themselves an example
of the noblest effort of human nature, the conquest of self, in obeying the
voice of their country and exchanging the habits, the splendour and importance
of military life, for domestic labor and poverty; they will readily inculcate
on others the propriety of sacrificing private and territorial advantages to
the good of the great majority, the salvation of the United States.

SLAVES to no party, but servants of the whole, they have wielded the sword of
every State in the Union and bled by the side of her sons. Their attachments
are as extensive as their labors. FRIENDSHIP and CHARITY the great pillars of
their Institution will find their proper objects through the extended
territory, and seek the happiness of all.

WHILE we contemplate the endearing objects of our association, and indulge in
the gloomy pleasure of recollecting that variety of suffering which prompted
the sympathetic soldier to institute this memorial of his friendship, fraternal
affection recalls the scene of parting, and enquires with solicitude the fate
of our beloved companions.

SINCE the last anniversary, the death of General How has diminished the
number of our brethren and called for the tribute of a tear. With some of the
foibles incident to human nature, he possessed many valuable accomplishments.
His natural good understanding he had imbellished with considerable attention
to polite literature. As a soldier, he was brave; as an officer, attentive to
discipline; he commanded with dignity and obeyed with alacrity, and whatever
talents he possessed were uniformly and cheerfully devoted to the service of
his country.

BUT a few weeks previous to that period, the much lamented deaths of Tilghman
and M'Dougall were successively announced, and the tidings received with a
peculiar poignancy of grief. What citizen of the American empire does not join
the general voice of gratitude, when contemplating the merits of those
distinguished officers; and swell the tide of sympathy with his bereaved
country, when deprived of their future assistance? They were ornaments to the
States in which they lived, as well as to the profession in which they acquired
their glory.

AMIABLE and heroic Tilghman! short was the career of thy fame, but much have
thou performed for thy country. Of thee shall it ever be remembered, that no
social virtue was a stranger to thy breast, and no military achievement too
daring for thy sword. While we condole with thy afflicted father for the loss
of so dear a son, permit the tear of friendship to flow for its own
bereavement. And as of as the anniversary of this day shall assemble the
companions of thy life to rejoice in the freedom of their country, they shall
mingle a sigh to thy lasting memory and bewail thy untimely fate.

UNTIMELY also was the death of the brave and the patriotic M'Dougall. Though
many years were worn away in his unremitted labors for the public safety --
though his early and decided exertions against the claims of Great Britain had
an essential influence in determining the conduct of the Province in which he
resided -- though he was the nerve of war, the wisdom of council and one of our
principal supporters in the acquest of Independence -- yet these but show us
the necessity of such characters in establishing the blessings of the
acquisition. While it shall require the same wisdom and unshaken fortitude, the
same patience and perseverence to rear the fabric of our empire, as it did to
lay the foundation, Patriotism and Valor in sympathetic affection will bemoan
the loss of M'Dougall.

HAPPY would it be for America, thrice happy for the feelings of sorrowing
friendship, could the list of our deceased companions be closed even with the
names of those worthy heroes. But Heaven had bestowed too much glory upon the
life of the favorite Green, to allow it a long duration.

MY affectionate Auditory will anticipate more than can be uttered, in the
melancholy duty of contemplating his distinguished excellence. To any Assembly
that could be collected in America, vain would be the attempt, to illustrate
his character or embellish the scene of his exploits. It is a subject to be
felt, but not to be described. To posterity indeed it may be told, as an
incentive to the most exalted virtue and astonishing enterprise, that the man,
who carried in his native genius all the resources of war, and the balance of
every extreme of fortune -- who knew the advantages to be derived from defeat,
the vigilance of military arrangement, the rapidity and happy moment of
assault, the deliberate activity of battle, and the various important uses of
victory -- that the man who possessed every conceivable quality of a warrior,
was, in his public and private character, without a foible or a fault: That all
the amiable as well as heroic virtues were assembled in his soul, and that it
was the love of a rational and enlightened age, and not the stupid stare of
barbarity, that expressed his praise.

THE map of America may designate the vast extent of conquered country
recovered by his sword: The future traveller in the Southern States may be
pointed by the peasant to the various regions containing monuments of his
valor and his skill; where, amid his marches and countermarches, his studied
retreats and his rapid approaches, every advantage given to the enemy was
resumed with tenfold utility and certain conquest: The historic Muse, as a
legacy to future ages, may transmit with heroic dignity the feats of her
favorite Chief: But who shall transmit the feelings of the heart, or give the
more interesting representation of his worth? The hero will remain, but the man
must be lost.

THE grief of his bereaved consort, aggravated by the universal testimony of
his merit, we hope will receive some alleviation from the ardent sympathy of
thousands, whose hearts were penetrated with his virtues, and whose tears would
have flowed upon his hearse.

BUT we will not open afresh the wounds, which we cannot close. The best
eulogium of the good and great is expressed by an emulation of their virtues.
As those of the illustrious Green were equally useful in every department in
which human society can call a man to act, every friend to America must feel
the want of his assistance in the duties that remain to be performed. Yet, as
these duties are of the rational and pacific kind, the performance is more
attainable and emulation the better encouraged. In military operations, none
but the soldier can be distinguished, nor any but the fortunate are sure of
rendering service: but here is a theater of action for every citizen of a great
country; in which the smallest circumstance will have its weight, and on which
infinite consequences will depend.

THE present is an age of philosophy; and America, the empire of reason. Here,
neither the pageantry of courts nor the glooms of superstition have dazzled or
beclouded the mind. Our duty calls us to act worthy of the age and the country
which gave us birth. Though inexperience may have betrayed us into errors; yet
these have not been fatal; and our own discernment will point us to their
proper remedy.

HOWEVER defective the present confederated system may appear; yet a due
consideration of the circumstances under which it was framed, will teach us
rather to admire its wisdom than to murmur at its faults. The same political
abilities which were displayed in that institution, united with the experience
we have had of its opperation, will doubtless produce a system, which will
stand the test of ages, in forming a powerful and happy people.

ELEVATED with this extensive prospect, we may consider present inconveniences
as unworthy of regret. At the close of the war, an uncommon plenty of
circulating specie and a universal passion for trade tempted many individuals
to involve themselves in ruin and injure the credit of their country. But these
are evils which work their own remedy. The paroxism is already over; industry
is increasing faster than ever it declined; and, with some exceptions where
legislative authority has sanctified fraud, the people are honestly discharging
their private debts and increasing the resources of their wealth.

EVERY possible encouragement for great and generous exertions, is now
presented before us. Under the idea of a permanent and happy government, every
point of view, in which the future situation of America can be placed, fills
the mind with a peculiar dignity, and opens an unbounded field of thought. The
natural resources of the country are inconceivably various and great; the
enterprising genius of the people promises a most rapid improvement in all the
arts that embellish human nature; the blessings of a rational government will
invite emigrations from the rest of the world, and fill the empire with the
worthiest and happiest of mankind; while the example of political wisdom and
felicity here to be displayed will excite emulation through the kingdoms of the
earth, and meliorate the condition of the human race.

IN the pleasing contemplation of such glorious events, and comparing the
scenes of action that adorn the western hemisphere, with what has taken place
in the east, may we not apply to our country the language of the prophet of
Israel, though spoken on a different occasion The glory of this latter house
shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of hosts; and in this place
will I give peace, says the Lord of hosts: peace to any disorders that may at
present subsist among us, peace to the contending passions of nations, peace to
this empire, to future ages, and through the extended world.


