AN ADDRESS TO AN ASSEMBLY OF THE FRIENDS OF AMERICAN MANUFACTURES,

CONVENED FOR THE PURPOSE OF ESTABLISHING A SOCIETY FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF
MANUFACTURES AND THE USEFUL ARTS. READ IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON
THURSDAY THE 9th OF AUGUST 1787, BY TENCH COXE, ESQUIRE. AND PUBLISHED AT THEIR
REQUEST.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. AITKEN and SON, AT POPE'S HEAD IN MARKET STREET.

M,DCC,LXXXVII.

AT a numerous meeting of THE FRIENDS OF AMERICAN MANUFACTURES, at the
University, on Thursday evening the 9th of Aug. 1787 --
The HON. THOMAS MIFFLIN, ESQUIRE, in the Chair.

RESOLVED,

THAT the thanks of this meeting be presented to TENCH COXE, ESQUIRE, for his
ingenious and excellent discourse, delivered before them, preparatory to the
establishment of a society FOR THE ENCOURAGEMENT OF MANUFACTURES AND THE USEFUL
ARTS: And that he be requested to furnish the secretary with a copy, for
publication.

Extract from the Minutes,

W. BARTON, SECRETARY.

I DO certify that on this eleventh day of August 1787, a pamphlet, entitled,
"An address to an assembly of the friends of American manufactures," printed by
Robert Aitken and Son, at Philadelphia, was entered by them, according to an
act of assembly, in the office of the Prothonotary of Philadelphia county, as
the property of said Robert Aitken and Son.

J. B. SMITH, Prothon.

AN ADDRESS TO AN Assembly of the Friends of American Manufactures.
GENTLEMEN,
WHILE I obey with sincere pleasure the commands of the respectable assembly
whom I have now the honor to address, I feel the most trying emotions of
anxiety and apprehension in attempting to perform so difficult and serious a
duty, as that prescribed to me at our last meeting. The importance and novelty
of the subject, the injurious consequences of mistaken opinions on it and your
presence necessarily excite feelings such as these. They are lessened however,
by the hope of some benefit to that part of my fellow citizens, who depend for
comfort on our native manufactures and by an ardent wish to promote every
measure, that will give to our newborn states the strength of manhood.
Supported by these considerations and relying on the kind indulgence, which is
ever shown to well meant endeavors, however unsuccessful, I shall venture to
proceed.

PROVIDENCE has bestowed upon the United States of America means of happiness,
as great and numerous, as are enjoyed by any country in the world. A soil
fruitful and diversified -- a healthful climate -- mighty rivers and adjacent
seas abounding with fish are the great advantages for which we are indebted to
a beneficent creator. Agriculture, manufactures and commerce, naturally arising
from these sources, afford to our industrious citizens certain subsistence and
innumerable opportunities of acquiring wealth. To arrange our affairs in
salutary and well digested systems, by which the fruits of industry, in every
line, may be most easily attained, and the possession of property and the
blessings of liberty may be completely secured -- these are the important
objects, that should engross our present attention. The interests of commerce
and the establishment of a just and effective government are already committed
to the care of THE AUGUST BODY now sitting in our capital. -- The importance of
agriculture has long since recommended it to the patronage of numerous
associations, and the attention of all the legislatures -- but manufactures, at
least in Pennsylvania, have had but a few unconnected friends, till sound
policy and public spirit gave a late, but auspicious birth, to this Society.

THE situation of America before the revolution was very unfavourable to the
objects of this institution. The prohibition of most foreign raw materials --
considerable bounties in England for carrying away the unwrought productions of
this country to that, as well as on exporting British goods from their markets
-- the preference for those goods, which habit carried much beyond what their
excellence would justify, and many other circumstances created artificial
impediments, that appeared almost insuperable. Several branches however were
carried on to good advantage. But as long as we remained in our colonial
situation, our progress was very slow, and indeed the necessity of attention to
manufactures was not so urgent, as it has become since our assuming an
independent station. The employment of those, whom the decline of navigation
has deprived of their usual occupations -- the consumption of the increasing
produce of our lands and fisheries, and the certainty of supplies in the time
of war are weighty reasons for establishing new manufactories now, which
existed but in a small degree, or not at all, before the revolution.

WHILE we readily admit, that in taking measures to promote the objects of this
Society, nothing should be attempted, which may injure our agricultural
interests, they being undoubtedly the most important, we must observe in
justice to ourselves, that very many of our citizens, who are expert at
manufactures and the useful arts, are entirely unacquainted with rural affairs,
or unequal to the expenses of a new settlement; and many we may believe, will
come among us invited to our shores from foreign countries, by the blessings of
liberty, civil and religious. We may venture to assert too, that more profit to
the individual and riches to the nation will be derived from some manufactures,
which promote agriculture, than from any species of cultivation whatever. The
truth of this remark however, will be better determined, when the subject shall
be further considered.

LET us endeavor first to disencumber manufactures of the objections, that
appear against them, the principal of which are, the high rate of labor, which
involves the price of provisions -- the want of a sufficient number of hands on
any terms, -- the scarcity and dearness of raw materials -- want of skill in
the business itself and its unfavorable effects on the health of the people.

FACTORIES, which can be carried on by watermills, windmills, fire, horses and
machines ingeniously contrived, are not burdened with any heavy expense of
boarding, lodging, clothing and paying workmen, and they multiply the force of
hands to a great extent without taking our people from agriculture. By wind and
water machines we can make pig and bar iron, nail rods, tire, sheet-iron,
sheet-copper and sheet-brass, anchors, meal of all kinds, gunpowder, writing,
printing and hanging paper, snuff, linseed oil, boards, plank and scantling;
and they assist us in finishing scythes, sickles and woolen cloths. Strange as
it may appear they also card, spin and weave by water in the European
factories. Bleaching and tanning must not be omitted, while we are speaking of
the usefulness of water.

BY FIRE we conduct our breweries, distilleries, salt and potash works, sugar
houses, potteries, casting and steel furnaces, works for animal and vegetable
oils and refining drugs. Steam mills have not yet been adopted in America, but
we shall probably see them after a short time in New England and other places,
where there are few mill seats and in this and other great towns of the United
States. The city of Philadelphia, by adopting the use of them, might make a
saving of above five per cent. on all the grain brought hither by water, which
is afterward manufactured into meal, and they might be usefully applied to
many other valuable purposes.

HORSES give us, in some instances, a relief from the difficulties we are
endeavoring to obviate. They grind the tanners bark and potters clay; they
work the brewers and distillers pumps, and might be applied, by an inventive
mind, as the moving principle of many kinds of mills.

MACHINES ingeniously constructed, will give us immense assistance. -- The
cotton and silk manufacturers in Europe are possessed of some, that are
invaluable to them. One instance I have had precisely ascertained, which
employs a few hundreds of women and children, and performs the work of 12000
carders, spinners and winders. They have been so curiously improved of late
years, as to weave the most complicated manufactures. In short, combinations of
machines with fire and water have already performed much more than was formerly
expected from them by the most visionary enthusiast on the subject. Perhaps I
may be too sanguine, but they appear to me fraught with immense advantages to
us, and full of danger to the manufacturing nations of Europe; for should they
continue to use and improve them, as they have heretofore done, their people
must be driven to us for want of employment, and if, on the other hand, they
should return to manual labor, we shall underwork them by these invaluable
engines. We may certainly borrow some of their inventions and others of the
same nature we may strike out ourselves; for on the subject of mechanism
America may justly pride herself. Every combination of machinery may be
expected from a country, A NATIVE SON of which, reaching this inestimable
object at its highest point, has epitomized the motions of the spheres, that
roll throughout the universe David Rittenhouse, Esquire. of Pennsylvania.
.

THE lovers of mankind, supported by experienced physicians, and the opinions
of enlightened politicians, have objected to manufactures as unfavorable to the
health of the people. Giving to this humane and important consideration its
full weight, it furnishes an equal argument against several other occupations,
by which we obtain our comforts and promote our agriculture. The painting
business for instance -- reclaiming marshes -- clearing swamps -- the culture
of rice and indigo and some other employments, are even more fatal to those,
who are engaged in them. But this objection is urged principally against
carding, spinning and weaving, which were formerly manual and sedentary
occupations. Our plan, as we have already shown, is not to pursue those modes,
unless in cases particularly circumstanced, for we are sensible, that our
people must not be diverted from their farms. Horses, and the potent elements
of fire and water, aided by the faculties of the human mind ( except in a few
healthful instances) are to be our daily laborers. After giving immediate
relief to the industrious poor, these unhurtful means will be pursued and will
procure us private wealth and national prosperity.

EMIGRATION from Europe will also relieve and assist us. The blessings of civil
and religious liberty in America, and the oppressions of most foreign
governments, the want of employment at home and the expectations of profit
here, curiosity, domestic unhappiness, civil wars and various other
circumstances will bring many manufacturers to this asylum for mankind. Ours
will be their industry, and what is of still more consequence ours will be
their skill. Interest and necessity, with such instructors, will teach us
quickly. In the last century the manufactures of France were next to none; they
are now worth millions to her yearly. Those of England have been more improved
within the last twelve years, than in the preceding fifty. At the peace of
1762, the useful arts and manufactures were scarcely known in America. How
great has been their progress since, unaided, undirected and discouraged.
Countenanced by your patronage and promoted by your assistance, what may they
not be 'ere such another space of time shall elapse.

WONDERFUL as it must appear, the manufacturers of beer, that best of all our
commodities, have lately been obliged to import malt from England. Here must be
inexcusable neglect, or a strange blindness to our most obvious interests. The
cultivation of barley should certainly be more attended to, and if I mistake
not exceedingly, the present abundant crop of wheat will so fill our markets,
that the farmer, who shall reap barley the ensuing year, will find it the most
profitable of all grains. We cannot, however, have any permanent difficulty on
this article.

OF flax and hemp little need be said, but that we can increase them as we
please, which we shall do according to the demand.

WOOL must become much more abundant as our country populates. Mutton is the
best meat for cities, manufactories, seminaries of learning, and poor houses,
and should be given by rule as in England. The settlement of our new lands,
remote from water carriage, must introduce much more pasturage and grazing,
than has been heretofore necessary, as sheep, horses and horned cattle will
carry themselves to market through roads impassable by wagons. The
restrictions of our trade will also tend to increase the number of sheep,
horses and horned cattle, used to form a great part of the New England cargoes
for the English West India islands. These animals are exported to those places
now in very small numbers, as our vessels are excluded from their ports. -- The
farms, capital and men, which were formerly employed in raising them, will want
a market for their usual quantity, and the nature of that country being unfit
for grain, sheep must occupy a great proportion of their lands.

COTTON thrives as well in the southern states, as in any part of the world.
The West India islands and those states raised it formerly, when the price was
not half what it has been for years past in Europe. It is also worth double the
money in America, which it sold for before the revolution, all the European
nations having prohibited the exportation of it from their respective colonies
to any foreign country. It is much to be desired, that the southern planters
would adopt the cultivation of an article from which the best informed
manufacturers calculate the greatest profits, and on which some established
factories depend.

SILK has long been a profitable production of Georgia and other parts of the
United States, and may be increased, I presume, as fast as the demand will
rise. This is the strongest of all raw materials and the great empire of China,
though abounding with cotton, finds it the cheapest clothing for her people.

IRON we have in great abundance, and a sufficiency of lead and copper, were
labor low enough to extract them from the bowels of the earth.

MADDER has scarcely been attempted, but this and many other dye stuffs may be
cultivated to advantage, or found in America.

UNDER all the disadvantages which have attended manufactures and the useful
arts, it must afford the most comfortable reflection to every patriotic mind to
observe their progress in the United States and particularly in Pennsylvania.
For a long time after our forefathers sought an establishment in this place,
then a dreary wilderness, every thing necessary for their simple wants was the
work of European hands. How great -- how happy is the change. The list of
articles we now make ourselves, if particularly enumerated would fatigue the
ear, and waste your valuable time. Permit me however to mention them under
their general heads: meal of all kinds, ships and boats, malt and distilled
liquors, potash, gunpowder, cordage, loaf-sugar, pasteboard, cards and paper of
every kind, books in various languages, snuff, tobacco, starch, cannon,
muskets, anchors, nails, and very many other articles of iron, bricks, tiles,
potters ware, millstones, and other stone work, cabinet work, trunks and
Windsor chairs, carriages and harness of all kinds, corn-fans, ploughs and many
other implements of husbandry, sadlery and whips, shoes and boots, leather of
various kinds, hosiery, hats and gloves, wearing apparel, coarse linens, and
woolens, and some cotton goods, linseed and fish-oil, wares of gold, silver,
tin, pewter, lead, brass and copper, clocks and watches, wool and cotton cards,
printing types, glass and stone ware, candles, soap and several other valuable
articles with which the memory cannot furnish us at once.

IF the nations of Europe possess some great advantages over us in
manufacturing for the rest of the world, it is however clear, that there are
some capital circumstances in our favor, when they meet us in our own markets.
The expenses of importing raw materials, which in some instances they labor
under, while we do not -- the same charges in bringing their commodities hither
-- the duties we must lay on their goods for the purposes of revenue -- the
additional duties, though small, which we may venture to impose without
risquing the corruption of morals or the loss of the revenue by smuggling --
the prompt payment our workmen receive -- the long credits they give on their
goods -- the sale of our articles by the piece to the consumer, while they sell
theirs by the invoice to an intermediate purchaser -- the durable nature of
some American manufactures, especially of linens -- the injuries theirs often
sustain from their mode of bleaching -- these things taken together will give
us an advantage of twenty-five to fifty percent. on many articles, and must
work the total exclusion of several others.

BESIDES the difference in the qualities of American and European linens,
arising from the mode of bleaching, there is a very considerable saving of
expense from the same cause. So much and so powerful a sunshine saves a great
loss of time and expense of bleaching-drugs and preparations, and this will be
sensibly felt in our factories of linen and cotton.

WE must carefully examine the conduct of other countries in order to possess
ourselves of their methods of encouraging manufactories and pursue such of
them, as apply to our own situation, so far as it may be in our power --
Exempting raw materials, dyestuffs, and certain implements for manufacturing
from duty on importation is a very proper measure. Premiums for useful
inventions and improvements, whether Foreign or American, for the best
experiments in any unknown matter, and for the largest quantity of any valuable
raw material must have an excellent effect. They would assist the efforts of
industry, and hold out the noble incentive of honorable distinction to merit
and genius. The state might with great convenience enable an enlightened
Society, established for the purpose, to offer liberal rewards in land for a
number of objects of this nature. Our funds of that kind are considerable and
almost dormant. An unsettled tract of a thousand acres, as it may be paid for
at this time, yields very little money to the state. By offering these premiums
for useful inventions to any citizen of the Union, or to any foreigner, who
would become a citizen, we might often acquire in the man a compensation for
the land, independent of the merit which gave it to him. If he should be
induced to settle among us with a family and property, it would be of more
consequence to the state than all the purchase money.

IT might answer an useful purpose, if a committee of this society should have
it in charge to visit every ship arriving with passengers from any foreign
country, in order to enquire what persons they may have on board capable of
constructing useful machines, qualified to carry on manufactures, or coming
among us with a view to that kind of employment. It would be a great relief and
encouragement to those friendless people in a land of strangers, and would fix
many among us whom little difficulties might incline to return.

EXTREME poverty and idleness in the citizens of a free government will ever
produce vicious habits and disobedience to the laws, and must render the people
fit instruments for the dangerous purposes of ambitious men. In this light the
employment of our poor in manufactures, who cannot find other honest means of a
subsistence, is of the utmost consequence. A man oppressed by extreme want is
prepared for all evil, and the idler is ever prone to wickedness, while the
habits of industry, filling the mind with honest thoughts, and requiring the
time for better purposes, do not leave leisure for meditating or executing
mischief.

AN extravagant and wasteful use of foreign manufactures, has been too just a
charge against the people of America, since the close of the war. They have
been so cheap, so plenty and so easily obtained on credit, that the consumption
of them has been absolutely wanton. To such an excess has it been carried, that
the importation of the finer kinds of coat, vest and sleeve buttons, buckles,
broaches, breastpins, and other trinkets into this port only, is supposed to
have amounted in a single year to ten thousand pounds sterling, which cost the
wearers above 60,000 dollars. This lamentable evil has suggested to many
enlightened minds a wish for sumptuary regulations, and even for an unchanging
national dress suitable to the climate, and the other circumstances of the
country. A more general use of such manufactures as we can make ourselves,
would wean us from the folly we have just now spoken of and would produce, in a
safe way, some of the best effects of sumptuary laws. Our dresses, furniture
and carriages would be fashionable, because they were American and proper in
our situation, not because they were foreign, shewy or expensive. Our farmers,
to their great honor and advantage, have been long in the excellent oeconomical
practice of domestic manufactures for their own use, at least in many parts of
the union. It is chiefly in the towns that this madness for foreign finery
rages and destroys -- There unfortunately the disorder is epidemical. It
behooves us to consider our untimely passion for European luxuries as a
malignant and alarming symptom, threatening convulsions and dissolution to the
political body. Let us hasten then to apply the most effectual remedies, ere
the disease becomes inveterate, lest unhappily we should find it incurable.

I cannot conclude this address, gentlemen, without taking notice of the very
favorable and prodigious effects upon the landed interest, which may result
from manufactures. The breweries of Philadelphia in their present infant state
require forty thousand bushels of barley annually, and when the stock on hand
of English beer shall be consumed, will call for a much larger quantity. Could
the use of malt liquors be more generally introduced, it would be, for many
reasons, a most fortunate circumstance. Without insisting on the pernicious
effects of distilled liquors, it is sufficient for our present purpose to
observe, that a thousand hogsheads of rum and brandy, mixed with water for
common use, will make as much strong drink as will require 120,000 bushels of
grain to make an equivalent quantity of beer, besides the horses, fuel, hops,
and other articles of the country, which a brewery employs. The fruits of the
earth and the productions of nature in America are also required by various
other manufacturers, whom you will remember without enumeration. But it is not
in their occupations only, that these valuable citizens call for our native
commodities. They and their brethren who work in foreign articles, with their
wives, children and servants necessarily consume in food and raiment a
prodigious quantity of our produce, and the buildings for the accommodation of
their families and business are principally drawn from our lands. Their effects
upon agriculture are of more consequence than has ever been supposed by those,
who have not made the necessary estimates. So great are the benefits to the
landed interest, which are derived from them, that we may venture to assert
without apprehension of mistake, that the value of American productions
annually applied to their various uses, as just now stated, without including
the manufacturers of flour, lumber and bar-iron, is double the aggregate amount
of all our exports in the most plentiful year with which Providence has ever
blessed this fruitful country. -- How valuable is this market for our
increasing produce -- How clearly does it evince the importance of our present
plan. But we may venture to proceed a step further -- Without manufactures the
progress of agriculture must be arrested on the frontiers of Pennsylvania.
Though we have a country practicable for roads, our western counties are yet
unable to support them, and too remote perhaps to use land carriage of the most
easy kind. Providence has given them, in certain prospect, a passage by water;
but the natural impediments, though very inconsiderable, and the more cruel
obstructions arising from political circumstances, are yet to be removed. The
inhabitants of the fertile tracts adjacent to the waters of the Ohio, Potowmack
and Susquehannah, besides the cultivation of grain must extend their views
immediately to pasturage and grazing and even to manufactures. Foreign trade
will never take off the fruits of their labor in their native state. They must
manufacture first for their own consumption, and when the advantages of their
mighty waters shall be no longer suspended, they must become the great factory
of American raw materials for the United States. Their resources in wood and
water are very great, their treasures in coal are almost peculiar, As they
cannot sell their grain but for home consumption and must propagate sheep and
cattle for the reasons above stated, their country will in a short time be the
cheapest upon earth. Let us observe the reduction of provisions and raw
materials, which even the present year will produce among them, and thence
judge, with the necessary considerations, of the time to come.

How numerous and important then, do the benefits appear, which may be expected
from this salutary design! It will consume our native productions now
increasing to superabundance -- it will improve our agriculture and teach us to
explore the fossil and vegetable kingdoms, into which few researches have
heretofore been made -- it will accelerate the improvement of our internal
navigation and bring into action the dormant powers of nature and the elements
-- it will lead us once more into the paths of virtue by restoring frugality
and industry, those potent antidotes to the vices of mankind and will give us
real independence by rescuing us from the tyranny of foreign fashions, and the
destructive torrent of luxury.

SHOULD these blessed consequences ensue, those severe restrictions of the
European nations, which have already impelled us to visit the distant regions
of the eastern hemisphere, defeating the schemes of short-sighted politicians
will prove, through the wisdom and goodness of Providence, the means of our
POLITICAL SALVATION.

THE END.

