Thoughts concerning THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA, with some facts relating to
such establishments in other countries, respectfully submitted to the honorable
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA, by one of their Constituents.
THE debates and publications, concerning the Bank of North America, have
already been so numerous and extended, that, were the subject of less
importance further investigation would be an inexcuseable trespass on the
public time. But as these institutions were generally unknown among us before
the revolution, and as they are universally admitted to be objects of the first
consequence, it is confided, that a decent endeavor to bring before the
government and people of Pennsylvania some matters connected with the subject,
which are not yet sufficiently known and understood, will be favored with an
indulgent reception. As it will be seen that the writer of these reflections has
departed from the line, which those who are charged with party friendship or
enmity have chosen to pursue, he trusts it will be believed that it is only
intended respectfully to attempt to contribute as far as may be in his power to
that information, which will be necessary to enable the legislature to place
the bank upon so prudent and just a footing as to preclude hereafter all
reasonable coffeehouse,

The existence of public banks in most trading countries and especially in two
of the most commercial and opulent nations of Europe, whose constitutions are
as favorable to liberty as any but those of America; the great majority of wise
and honest statesmen, who have approved of them from experience, and the
benefits, which it has been proved, may be reasonably expected from one here,
with many other reasons not necessary to be repealed at this time, appear to
have convinced the greater part of the community, that a bank, wisely and
justly constituted, would be a public good. How much soever, therefore, it
might be argued, from the practice of legislatures, and the nature of free
governments, that the Assembly of Pennsylvania did possess the power to
restrain and terminate the bank, it appears, that it would have been most
advisable to regulate rather than to destroy it. The minds of many in the two
parties were manifestly heated, and to strongly impressed with certain ideas,
to which they were respectively attached, and thus we see one side determined
to annul, and the other not to modify. A repetition of these contentions is
much to be deprecated. They are the bane of happiness at home, and credit
abroad. The precautions, restrictions and regulations, which may be prescribed
by the present legislature in the charter about to be granted, will prevent
them, it is believed, in a great degree hereafter.

Though a part of the opposition to the bank of North America may have arisen
from party spirit, "a consequential ill which freedom draws," yet an
examination into the foundations of other institutions of the same kind, and a
candid and dispassionate consideration of the constitution of that bank will
convince us, that the necessities and nature of the times and the perfect
novelty of the business occasioned several extreme dangers to be overlooked in
its formation.

BANKS had their origin in the Italian states, whose people have long been
distinguished for their science in political economy. They appear, in most of
the great cases, to have arisen out of national distress. The funding of the
public debts has generally given them birth, and we find their existence has
often been originally restricted to the period when the public debt should be
discharged. One of the oldest of these establishments was that of Genoa. Being
too little restrained in regard to the emission of paper* and incautiously
taking a part in the politics of Europe, this bank soon involved itself in
ruin. The injuries to public credit, and the melancholy interruptions of
private happiness resulting from so lamentable a catastrophe need not be
repeated. From such confusion and distress it behooves the guardians of the
people carefully to secure them.

The bank of Venice, which arose some time after, was placed immediately in the
hands of the state, and the republic was security for its conduct. It were to
be wished that public credit were so far restored amongst us as to render it
prudent to put our bank on such a footing The great litigated question
concerning the want of checks in our state constitution, makes it advisable at
least at present rather to pursue some other mode: and were our public credit
as perfect, at it is presumed it will be in a few years, it might not be proper
to place the bank immediately in the hands of a government, whose form itself
declares it to be only a seven years experiment

The bank of Hamburg presents its citizens and the government of the city,
which is imperial, as securities to all who deal with it. The directors are
chosen, like other officers of their government, by a majority of the freemens'
votes, out of the number of their most respectable citizens. Foreigners are not
permitted to be interested in it, least the wealth, power, or ambition of their
neighbors might interrupt their repose, or sap the foundations of their
government. Though the use of the money of foreigners appears to be a
sufficient reason for permitting them to be interested in our banks in this
young country, yet a most important question is naturally suggested by the
prudence of the Hamburgers, whether they ought to have a share in the
government of those institutions. For, however respectable Pennsylvania finds
herself in the American union, it is an inconsiderable state, as to numbers or
wealth, compared with several of the nations of Europe; and the facilities of
commerce bring Philadelphia as near to Paris, London, or Amsterdam, as Hamburg
to Vienna or Berlin.

The banks of Holland, that is those of Amsterdam and Rotterdam, are
immediately in the hands and under the direction of the regency of their
respective cities, who are securities for their faithful and prudent
administration, by which foreigners are of course, excluded from the management
They do not issue any notes; and the operations in general of these banks, are
not of a nature to be very useful in such a country as this. Their caution as
to foreigners however will deserve our attention, for the reasons stated under
the foregoing head.

The bank of England is better worth our attention, than any which has ever
existed* whether we consider it with regard to the prodigious aids it has
afforded to the government, or its usefulness to the commercial and
manufacturing interests and, through these, to the cultivators of the soil. In
the reign of William III. that institution was produced by the apprehensions of
the nation for their public credit. It was a moment of as great danger and
necessity as that wherein the bank of North America was established. The
celebrated Bolingbroke declares, that the revenues of the nation, which could
be applied to carry on the war, (which was at once civil and foreign,) were at
that time insufficient to pay a common guard. At this period too, when their
affairs were in that miserable situation, James II. supported by great numbers
of the people of Britain and assisted by the most powerful nation in Europe,
with a sagacious and enterprising prince at their head, was asserting his claim
to the crown. ^^t that awful crisis when necessity would have palliated almost
any oversights, it is as pleasing as it is curious, to observe the deliberation
caution and wisdom of the parliament, in making their first experiment of a
national bank. A short detail will instruct and serve us in our present
situation, when we are about to organize a similar institution, under no
circumstance of immediate danger, or momentuous difficulty.

They previously restrained the king, who could grant any charter, not a
monopoly, from making this corporation, of an unlimited or excessive duration,
by confining him to eleven years This omission in our Assembly having been very
judiciously and heartily pointed out by the committee of the present House, the
contentions which have arisen from it will subside of course.

They also restrained the king from granting a charter, which admitted too
powerful a capital. Though the revenues of the kingdom were two millions of
pounds sterling, exclusively of the land tax in that highly improved country,
it was limited to twelve hundred thousand pounds. If we make an accurate
comparison of wealth, numbers, and trade, between the two countries, we shall
concur again with the committee of the present house, in thinking that the
capital permitted by the charter was in effect unlimited. The feeds of danger
contained in this article are not yet ripened. Had the matter continued as at
first, it would have been difficult to remove the evil, when it should have
been felt. It is not easy to overcome the influence of such mighty wealth.

They restrained the bank from contracting debts as a corporation, for more
than the amount of their capital; an honest and judicious restriction; and they
enacted, that the private fortunes of the stockholders should be liable to make
good all such debts as were beyond the amount of their capital, or in other
words, beyond the amount of what they were worth as a corporation. It has been
truly affirmed, that it is highly dangerous in any government to issue bills of
credit, but upon certain and substantial funds. The wisdom of the legislature
will find the same danger in constituting a corporation with power to issue
without control, notes (or bills of credit) for sums beyond what they are able
to pay, in case of the ruin of the institution. The banks of Paris, Genoa, and
other places afford melancholy instances of the possibility of these fatal
events. The public happiness and common justice, which require that no man
should be empowered to ruin his neighbor while he is safe, will recommend this
article to the particular attention of government.

They guarded against unlimited votes being in the hands of one man* or set of
men, by giving each proprietor of five hundred pounds a vote, and by not
permitting any man to have more. How incautious was our charter, when it
allowed every man to have as many votes as he holds shares. Let us examine this
important article. It is urged that every person should have an influence,
according to what he has at stake. But mere property is not the measure of
fitness in these cases. The free but wary spirit of that time rejected that
idea, and, it is believed, that it is equally disapproved now. It does not
agree with the nature of any government, wherein there is a principle of
liberty. It is absolutely opposed to the spirit of every constitution in the
union. The great corporations in England, such as the bank, whose stock is now
above eleven millions sterling, the East India Company, which is immensely
rich, and powerful in several ways, and indeed all others that we know of, are
founded in opposite principles. We alone, the members of a free and equal
government, have endowed a wealthy corporation with powers and privileges
opposed to freedom and equality, and to all examples among ourselves and in
other nations. The bank of Paris, established under an absolute monarchy, was
founded in a small degree in the same mistake, but it went to ruin, miserably
distracted the nation, and annihilated the public credit. Our habits in private
business of the utmost consequence, oppose this regulation. It must have crept
in from want of attention in the founders of the institution, and it is
confided, that they will not on consideration urge its continuance. When
mercantile houses are established, many of which in Europe continue longer than
the limitation of the bank of North America will probably be extended, and some
of which are more wealthy than our bank, no article of this nature is ever
entered into Young men, with little property, are often joined to persons of
great estates and extensive connections, and have the entire management of the
business. In cases where three are connected, we find no stipulation, that the
richest partner shall govern. Since then it is, and has been an almost
invariable fact, that corporations instituted for purposes of religion, policy
or gain, have been founded in principles of equality, let us be careful how we
depart from a practice out of which no evil has resulted, and adopt another
from which dangers are apprehended and indeed are evident, discontents have
arisen, and which is opposed by the experience of all former times and the
prudence of the wisest nations.

We see that the regencies of Venice, Hamburg, Rotterdam and Amsterdam, have
not permitted the influences arising from these institutions to be in the hands
even of their private citizens. They have considered them as branches of
political economy, so interwoven with the safety and administration of
government, that they have kept them in their own hands. These suggestions are
not novelties. They have occurred before. The friends of the bank of England
brought them forward in the infancy of that corporation, and admitting the
possibility of influence* they urged that their institution could not be
dangerous to the people on account of the equality of its constitution. A
publication, written by Michael Godfrey* esquire, one of the founders of the
English bank, to remove the fears of the people about the commercial and
political advantages, which the gentlemen who ruled it might derive in
consequence, tells the nation, that "though it cannot be imagined, but that
those, who established the bank, intended to be largely concerned, yet it is so
settled, that those who have but five hundred pounds, have one vote, and those
who have never so much can have no more; and any nine members having each five
hundred pounds stock, may call a general court, (or meeting) and turn out the
governor and deputy governor and all or any of the directors, (but by a
majority of the stock holders votes in course) and choose others in their
places; which are provisions so wise and effectual to prevent fraud in some to
the prejudice of the rest, that it hardly leaves room for any doubt of that
nature." It appears however that the parliament was still apprehensive of some
disadvantages from so momentous and untried a business, and therefore, a few
years after, and before the expiration of the eleven years grant, restrained
one third of the twenty-four directors of every year from serving for the next,
though the governor and deputy governor might always be re-elected, for the
sake of keeping up the train of information necessary in so important and
extensive a scene of business, both public and private. Though the discretion
and candor of the members of our bank led them to reduce the unlimited right
of voting for directors to twenty, so that still some have one and some have
twenty votes in the business of elections, this is very different from the
footing on which the precedents of all other nations and corporations, appear
to recommend its being placed. By the original constitution of the bank of
North America, the right of voting for all purposes, but the election of
directors, was equal in all the members, notwithstanding any inequality in the
numbers of their respective shares. This regulation was done away by general
consent, apparently without due consideration, and has made a very material
alteration in the institution, rendering it still more unlike all other banks,
still more unsafe than it was at first. Great mistakes have arisen on this
subject from considering the bank as a mere trading company. Though it is in a
great degree of that nature, it is most an object of legislative attention as a
branch of the political economy, important in its magnitude and in its
operations and effects. All writers have viewed the subject in that light, and
facts show their ideas to be just. Incorporated banks, as before observed,
arose from the public occasions, and have been instituted to answer public
ends. Private men and private property have been used as the means, as must of
necessity be the case in all the arrangements of civil society. The bank of
North America is itself an happy example. It was established to enable
government to prosecute the war against Britain, and had a great share in the
merit of completing the revolution. It has been proposed since the peace to
center in it the funds of the state; and its capital is worth more than the
amount of all the annual imposts excise, land tax, and other revenues of
Pennsylvania summed up together It is a mighty machine, and by its present
constitution all its powers are vested in a few hands. Were it not for great
public purposes, a number of private banks with moderate capitals, would
perhaps be as useful. There are no less than fifty-one of them in the city of
London, the amount of whose capitals must be greater than that of the bank of
England. These form an excellent and powerful check, which, from the situation
of this country, we may be long without. The English legislature have given an
unequivocal proof of their viewing the direction of the bank in the light of a
public employment, for they required by their act that the directors should be
regularly sworn into office, and permitted them to serve in parliament by a
special dispensation, which on account of the statute against placemen, it was
thought they could not otherwise have done.

We moreover see, that the parliament of England restrained any person from
subscribing more than twenty thousand pounds, that is, the sixtieth part of the
allowed capital, and for a certain time did not permit more than ten thousand
pounds, or the one hundred and twentieth part, to be subscribed. The entire sum
being taken before that period the restriction operated to prevent any person
from holding more than the one hundred and twentieth part of the whole stock.
Our bank stock is 870,000 dollars, and there are several stockholders that hold
from 100 to 130 shares; so that some individuals hold a twenty-second part, and
some even a seventeenth part of its capital

The bank of England was likewise restrained from trading in any thing, but
bills of exchange or bullion, but the ch^^ter from the assembly of Pennsylvania
did not prohibit a trade in any thing whatever.

The subscriptions to the bank of England were to be taken by no persons
whatever, but certain commissioners appointed by the crown under the authority
of the parliament, to whom a return was to be made of all persons, whether
natives or foreigners, and of all bodies politic and corporate, which should
subscribe any part of the stock, that the government might know all things,
which the secrecy or delicacy, necessary in regard to private affairs, did not
make it proper to reserve This was very useful, in order to be forewarned in
due time of the dangers, which might arise from too large subscriptions of the
wealthy corporations and of foreigners, or from any other cause.

The parliament of England granted its charter for eleven years: ours, as above
observed, was in effect unlimited. The last regulation which will be mentioned
is very important -- It is that whereby the parliament provided that all future
elections of governors, deputy governors and directors should be made by a
majority of the members actually assembled. By the operation of this rule, the
management of the bank was completely and not indelicately kept out of the
hands of foreigners, who would seldom be there, but who might be if they chose.
The most respectable natural born subject and the foreigner, in case of
absence, were equally prevented from voting by proxy. The dangers arising from
foreigners having a share in the direction of so important a part of the
internal economy of the state are too obvious to require any arguments. As
they confide to us the largest sums by way of consignment, and employ us
otherwise in the most important agencies, so it is not to be doubted that they
will acquiesce in a regulation from us, which they meet every where in Europe.
The government of England alone gives them opportunity of voting, if they choose
to attend, but those of Amsterdam Rotterdam, Hamburg, Venice and of all other
places and countries, of which we know, either prevent their even holding a
share of the stock, or restrain them from voting for those who are to govern an
institution, which may be considered as the reservoir of the vital blood of
their civil constitutions.

This paper has already been extended to a greater length than it was
originally proposed. Wherefore, though a few more observations occur, which
appear of some weight, they will be at present omitted. What has been said, is
submitted with the most respectful deference, to the wisdom and virtue of our
representatives, in full confidence, that from their hands we shall receive
nothing which can give occasion to disturb the public tranquillity, or abridge
the rights of the people.

December 6 th, 1786.
Further Thoughts concerning the BANK, respectfully submitted to the Honorable
THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA, by one of their Constituents.
IN the close of the former publication, it was mentioned, that although a few
more observations, apparently of some weight, had occurred at that time, it
seemed best to defer them. It is intended to offer them in this paper, with
some other things, which have presented since.

The approbation of the principles contained in that essay, which several
judicious and worthy men have expressed, have a tendency to strengthen the
opinions, that a bank, wisely and justly constituted, would be a public good --
that it would have been beneficial to Pennsylvania, if the late honorable House
had determined to regulate rather than destroy the institution -- and that good
men of all descriptions and parties will think themselves and their property
perfectly secure, if the wisdom of the present House should adopt a plan for
our bank substantially the same as that of the bank of England It will however
be proper to mention, that there are two more regulations of the bank of
England, hitherto unnoticed, which are of consequence to the prudent and fair
administration of its affairs. The first requires, that a director shall be
possessed of four shares of stock, and the governor and deputy governor of more
The other prevents any person from voting as a stockholder, if he has not held
his shares six months.

Those who approve these general ideas on this interesting subject, must feel
an earnest desire to remove any improper opinions and impressions, which may
prevent a harmony of measures. One great circumstance, which has embittered
this contest, is an idea prevailing among many, that the interference of the
legislature in the business of existing corporations is totally unprecedented,
and unwarrantable. I acknowledge myself to have formerly entertained this idea,
and therefore think it the more my duty to say something to remove an error
which I have assisted, in whatever degree, to promote. If we can show that this
opinion, however sincerely entertained by many sensible and honest men, is
really erroneous, it must produce the happiest effects in every candid and
dispassionate mind. Let us remember however, that although it should be proved
from legislative practice and the nature of free governments, that the assembly
did possess the power to restrain and terminate the bank, we shall continue at
liberty to believe, that it might have been most advisable to regulate rather
than to destroy it.

As the origin of corporations in Great Britain has been already shown in the
debates and publications concerning the bank, we may pass on from that point
after a single observation, which may keep in our minds, the principles and
causes from which they took their rise. They were actually devised to restore
to those, who were, and those who should become members, their equal natural
rights, and not to destroy them. We cannot therefore apprehend, that the
guardians of our equal rights forgetting the generous and wise design of these
institutions, and the practice of all other nations, will repeat the deviation
from a fundamental principle of our free government, by reviving the charter of
the bank in its original form.

An inspection into the history of bodies corporate in Britain, will show us
the powers actually exercised by parliament to extinguish and restrain them.

In the reign of James I. we find that the people of England had become
extremely dissatisfied with the very numerous charters and letters patent,
which had been granted to particular men and bodies of men, from time to time.
The parliament, judging that the public good required their interference, and
that it was within their constitutional powers and duties to interpose, passed
an act, (21 James I. chapter 3,) the first section of which takes away from all
bodies politic or corporate whatsoever, the various monopolies to which they
were entitled by their respective charters. It then proceeds to save to certain
corporations, a continuance of the rights and privileges, which they had before
the passing of that act, and of which such corporations would have been
deprived, if the saving clause had been omitted. This statute appears to have
originated with the House of Commons.

On the restoration of Charles II. to the throne of England, it was again
thought, though for a different reason (the confusion of those times) that the
interference of parliament in these matters was proper and necessary. We
therefore see that they passed an act (13 Charles II. st. 2 c. 1.) entitled an
act for the well governing and regulating of corporations. By this statute,
officers of all corporations, who should omit or refuse to qualify themselves
by a day therein mentioned, were to be removed from their offices by
commissioners to be appointed under the authority of the legislature, and their
places were to be filled by such persons as the commissioners should choose,
although they might have been duly elected in the first instance, and the
charters generally required that all officers should be elected by the members
of the respective corporations: and further, the commissioners were empowered
to remove from offices, places and trusts in corporations, all such as in their
opinions, the public safety should require to be removed, although such persons
were interested in the stock, and had duly qualified themselves, or should
offer so to do.

In the 4th or 5th year of William and Mary, a new charter was granted to the
East India Company, with the exclusive privilege of trading in and to those
countries, which they had enjoyed for a very long time. It was to continue for
twenty years, that is till the year 1715. We find however, that the parliament
again judged themselves authorized to interfere in the business of
corporations, for by an act passed in School, seventeen years before the
exclusive privilege expired, they erected another East India Company, and
prohibited that which was chartered for the exclusive trade in 1694, from
trading at all in 1701.

The case of the South Sea Company affords us a remarkable instance of the
interference of the parliament in the regulation of corporations. That great
national bubble called for the attention of every honest and humane member of
the legislature, and gave rise to many statutes. One of the acts (7th George I.
c. 2) restrained the three corporations (the bank, the East India Company and
the South Sea Company) from re-electing the sub and deputy governors and
directors of the South Sea Company of that time into any office, place or
employment in those institutions, although by their respective charters it
might have been done before. It also restrained the same persons from
exercising their right of voting at the elections of the South Sea Company,
although they were of course stock-holders and members of the corporation. Some
time after, the South Sea company differed among themselves about the division
of a part of their funds. Then again the parliament exercised their right to
interfere and by their act (7 George I. st. 2) made the necessary distribution.
There are several other instances of parliamentary interposition, but a further
detail might be tedious, and these may be sufficient to remove the
misconceptions that have taken place. Though we must be sensible of the
delicate nature of this power of the legislature, and though we must
exceedingly condemn a wanton or even an inconsiderate exercise of it, yet it is
necessary to make great allowances for those, who transported by the jealous
but honest spirit of republicans, and alarmed by the extreme dangers existing
on its constitution, thought there was no safety, but in withdrawing the
charter of the bank So far, however, as the measure proceeded from the mere
spirit of party, all good men will join to reprobate it. Perhaps, in order to
form a just opinion on the subject, it may be necessary to compare the conduct
of the house that granted this unprecedented charter, with that of the house,
who took it away. The various errors of human nature are a sort of apology for
each other.

In estimating the injury, or rather the injustice done to the bank, by
withdrawing the charter, it seems necessary to be very careful; for the
abolition of its franchises, so far as they interfered with the peace, liberty
or safety of the community, was surely a duty and not a crime. The happiness of
the people being the end of all society, any thing that interferes with it
should be restrained or prohibited. The sanctity of charters can therefore mean
only, that it is dangerous and wicked to trifle with them, not that they are to
remain in their original form in all events, at the expense of the more sacred
natural rights of mankind, which, we have seen, they were invented to promote.
The continual duration of bodies corporate, was to enable them to receive
property, and exercise their respective functions, as long as the public good
might require, or permit

Let us for a moment suppose a charter in exist, in which there were extreme
acknowledged evils. The courts of law could not afford any remedy, because they
can only take cognizance of transgressions of charters. The legislature, it is
affirmed by some cannot interfere, and their constituents, if that doctrine be
admitted, must foresee impending ruin and meet it without the hope of relief.
Can then the temporary representatives of a free people erect a corporation
within the body of a state to continue an irremediable evil through all future
ages? No: those, who have been called for their wisdom and virtue, to dispense
through a single year the blessings of government, cannot have a right to
misapply their transitory powers to destroy it for ever. Such a doctrine would
render our frequent elections vain, and goes to invest the assembly with powers
to legislate in every matter, that can be wrought into a corporation, for all
times to come, contrary to the letter and spirit of our constitution, and the
peace and dignity of the commonwealth.

In the preceding part of this paper, it was observed that the majority of the
late house should be judged of, with allowance for the excess, which, it is
thought by many, they were led into by the jealous but honest spirit of
republicans. The serious part of the community must have recourse to some such
extraordinary cause to account for their measures in regard to the penal law
relating to the bank. It is the peculiar duty of government to guard the morals
of the people from temptations to vices and crimes, especially such as are
extensively injurious to society. In the warmth of the moment, matters were
left on such a footing, that the dangerous crimes of forgery, and
counterfeiting, to which the wicked are allured by extraordinary profit, may be
committed almost without punishment.

And now, having before us the examples of other nations, and having taken a
free, though it is hoped a respectful view of the conduct of our own governors,
let us collect into a narrower compass the result of the whole. It appears
then, that a former assembly, influenced by wise and patriotic considerations,
did, from the nature and necessity of the times and the novelty of the subject,
grant a charter to the bank of North America, differing from all precedents --
that it contained many extreme dangers -- that however, the institution so
constituted, retained its monopoly, (with all its other privileges) during the
time for which the Assembly had granted it -- that another Assembly,
discovering the dangers it contained, determined to destroy it when the public
good would, perhaps, have been better consulted in restraining it; -- that
however clear it may be that they had a lawful power so to do, it is equally
true, that measures taken for the public happiness, should not be carried so
far as to produce opposite effects: -- that a part of the same house which
annulled the charter of the bank, promoted the evil by declining any
modification: -- that on a presumption, that the public interests will be
served by a bank, an equality of votes, an exclusion of foreign proxies, an
actual limitation of capital, and of duration, and greater circumspection as to
the foundation on which notes (or bank bills of credit) shall be hereafter
emitted, seem to be indispensibly necessary: -- that all the benefits which
have been derived from the most flourishing and useful institutions of this
nature in other countries having been attended with these cautions regulations,
a charter on different principles cannot be desired from any views of public
good, and lastly, that a prudent, wise and faithful legislature cannot expect
to give satisfaction to a free and intelligent people by an unnecessary
departure from all precedent, and from the essential principles of our
republican constitutions.

December 13 th, 1786.
MAXIMS.
THE world is a great wilderness, where mankind have wandered and jostled one
another about from the beginning of the creation. Some have removed by
necessity, and others by choice. One nation has been fond of seizing what
another was tired of possessing: and it will be difficult to point out the
country which is to this day in the hands of its original inhabitants.

A free people may be sometimes betrayed; but no people will betray themselves,
and sacrifice their liberty, unless they fall into a state of universal
corruption; and, when they are once fallen into such a state, they will be sure
to lose what they deserve no longer to enjoy.


