The TRIAL of ALICE CLIFTON, FOR THE Murder Of her Bastard-Child, At the Court
of Oyer and Terminer and General Gaol Delivery, held at Philadelphia, on
Wednesday the 18th day of April, 1787.
ALICE CLIFTON, late of the county of Philadelphia, slave of John Bartholomew,
was indicted for the murder of her female child, on the 5th instant, which was
born a bastard; and that she, with a certain razor, of the value of one
shilling, did, in, upon, and across the throat of the said child, feloniously,
wilfully, and of malice afore-thought, did penetrate, and cut, with the razor
aforesaid, one mortal wound, of the length of four inches, and of the depth of
one inch; of which said mortal wound, the said female child then and there
instantly did die.

The Attorney General managed the trial on behalf of the state, and Messrs.
Sergeant and Todd were employed for the prisoner. The following witnesses
appeared, and deposed.

John Leacock, Coroner, sworn.
Court. -- Well, Mr. Leacock, what do you know of this affair? I know very
little more, than that while the inquest were examining the child, I discovered
that its throat had been cut. Court. -- Did you say any thing to her, or ask
her any questions? She was asked, how she come to kill her child? and answered,
that it was in order to keep it from crying. I was informed by Mr. Bartholomew,
that the body was discovered, under some clothes, in a chest. Court. -- Did she
say, that she was the mother? I did not ask her. Court. -- You say, that she
said she cut the child's throat to prevent its crying, when you discovered that
it had been cut? It was not me who found it out; it was one of the jury, while
they were examining it. Council. -- Did she say she cut its throat to prevent
its crying, or for fear it should cry? I am not positive, but believe it was to
keep it from crying: she said too, that she had done it by the order or express
command of the father of the child. She was then asked, who the father was? and
she mentioned his name. Court -- Who did she say was the father? She mentioned
his name. Court. -- What name did she mention? She said it was John Shaffer.
Court. -- What else happened? That is all I know. What child was it, male or
female? It was a female child. Did it appear to be a likely child? Yes. Was the
hair and nails grown, and did it look as if it had come to its full time? The
hair and nails were grown, but I did not examine it particularly, as I made no
question but it had gone the full time. Is the prisoner at the bar the same
woman that you then saw? Yes. Did you ask her if it was born-alive? Yes: she
was asked several times, but always said it was born dead. And was she not then
asked, if it was born dead, what was her reason for cutting its throat, and she
answered it was to prevent its crying? I believe that question was asked, and
she might have answered so; but I could not hear, as there were a great number
of people in the room, so that I was crowded up in a corner, as the room was
but small. Attorney General. -- If the room was so small you could hear the
better, I should think. Council. -- Did she say whether the child cried or not?
No: she said it was born dead. Was the child cold or warm, when you was there?
I did not feel it. Did she say she cut its throat for fear it would cry? Yes, I
think she did. Did she mention any arguments which the father had used to
induce her to commit such a crime? I know nothing further: Captain Bullfinch
was there, and he heard what she said on that subject. Did you take any
examination in writing, at the time? No. Well but you should on such important
occasion. I did not know it was necessary.

Mrs. Mary Bartholomew sworn.
Court. -- Are you the mistress of that woman? Yes, Sir. Court. -- Look, and
see if it is the same. She is, Sir. When did you discover her to be with child?
About five or six months ago. Did you charge her with it? Yes, Sir. Did she own
it? No: she said she was not. Did you charge her more than once? Yes; but she
constantly denied it. What happened the morning that she was delivered? I don't
know, for I did not see her till twelve o'clock, when I went up to her, and she
complained of being unwell. Had she not been up that morning? Yes: she got up
and made the fire in the parlour, and afterward she went and laid down. What
did you say to her, when you went up? I asked her what was the matter? and she
said she was poorly. I told her that I suspected she was with child, but she
denied it. Well, what further? I then left her, Sir: I thought she was in that
situation, and seemed to suspect she was in labor. Was she laying in the bed,
or on the bed? She was lying under the clothes; in about an hour I went up
again. What did you discover then? She seemed much the same: I asked her the
same question, and she told me again, that she was not with child: I went down
directly, and in about a quarter of an hour I went up again, and she asked me
for some old clothes to put on: she told me that she felt better. Where was she
when you came up? She was walking about the room: I told her I suspected she
had a child, but she denied it still; but I searched about in the closet, and
in the chimney. Council. -- Did she appear disturbed while you was searching?
No: she said nothing. Where was the child found? My sister-in-law found it in a
trunk in another room. Did she bring the child to the mother? Yes; she brought
it herself. Well, what more? I retired from the room. Did you see the child? I
just cast my eye on it. Court. -- Did you see any wound upon it? No: I saw
none. Well, what further? [Mr. Bartholomew said they were all so affected, that
they could not bear to remain in the room. Mrs. Bartholomew was also much
indisposed.] Did you discover any blood about the clothes? No. Council. -- When
you said she asked you for clothes, did you understand clothes for herself, or
for the child? For herself. Sergeant, being council for the prisoner. -- When
she asked you for old clothes, did she not let you know that she had a child?
No, Sir. Sergeant. -- Had she sufficient clothes always before? Yes, Sir.
Sergeant. -- Pray, did you know of her having received any hurt, previous to
her delivery? Yes; about a month. Sergeant. -- You Will please, Madam, to relate
the circumstances to the Court and Jury. About a month or so before, she fell
down the cellar-stairs, with a log of wood in her arms. Sergeant. -- Was she
much bruised by the accident? Yes, Sir, a good deal on her hip. Sergeant. -- Do
you know of any other hurt she received? She was hurt a few days before. Court.
-- Did she complain much of the bruise? Yes, Sir, she complained for a week or
two after. Did she keep her bed? No, Sir. Todd, being also council for the
prisoner. -- Pray, Madam, where was the girl, when you went up to see her,
about twelve o'clock? -- Was she in the garret or second story? She was lying
on a bed, in a room on the second story. Is that the usual room where she
sleeps? No, Sir. Who sleeps in that room? My brother, and the boys of the shop.
Sergeant. -- Where was you about the time she was delivered? We were eating
dinner in the parlour. How far is that room from where the girl lay? The room
was exactly overhead; we were in the room under her. Todd. -- Is the ceiling of
the room high or low? It is middling. Is it not one of those old-fashioned
houses, where the ceilings are built much lower than is common now? Yes, Sir.
Were the doors open? Yes; the room-door was open. Sergeant. -- Did you hear the
child cry? No: I heard no noise at all. Sergeant. -- Don't you think you could
have heard the child, had it cried? I believe I could. Sergeant. -- Was she
ever in bed in that room before? No. Attorney General. -- Where was the room in
which the child was found? It was opposite to this, and on the same floor. Did
you hear her when she carried it there, and put it into the chest? No.
Sergeant. -- Did she appear very ill, when you first saw her? Yes; she was very
poorly. Todd. -- This is the room, you say, where the boys usually lodged? Yes.
Sergeant. -- Did you know whether their razors were lying about? Yes; they were
in the window: there were two razors laying there. Sergeant. -- How came she to
go into that room? After she had made a fire in the morning, I suppose she
found herself unwell, and went in there to lay down: I know no other reason.
Attorney General. -- You say it is about five or six months ago that you first
suspected her to be with child: pray, from what symptoms was it that you
suspected? From her appearance. Was there no particular symptom, or something
in her conduct, which led you to suspect? Nothing but her being a little sick,
and from appearance. Attorney General. -- What, sick at her stomach? Yes.
Attorney General. -- Did you employ a Doctor for her, when she fell down
stairs? No: she was not confined. Attorney General. -- She went about as usual,
and did middling well? She kept up and went about all the time, but still
complained. Attorney General. -- And how has she been since she was delivered,
pretty hearty? I don't know; she went from our house shortly after.
Attorney General. -- At the time you first suspected her being with child, you
said you founded your opinion upon her appearance; do you mean by that, that
you discovered it by her bulk? Yes. Sergeant. -- Her bulk, Madam, was not the
first cause of your suspicion, but her sickness, and afterward her bulk? Yes,
Sir. Sergeant. -- Can you set the time, when you first observed this? Not
exactly. Attorney General. -- When you perceived her sickness, did you not also
observe her increase of bulk? No; not then.

Miss Mary Bartholomew sworn.
Court. -- You found the child? Yes, Sir. Where? In a trunk in the room
opposite to where she was: it was wrapped up in a petticoat belonging to her.
How did the child get in the trunk? I suppose she must have carried it there
herself: when I was searching about in the trunk, I asked her what was in the
petticoat? when I laid my hand upon it; but she said nothing. Was the petticoat
at the top of the trunk? No; it was under a large roll of linen. Did she say
any thing, when you asked her what was in the petticoat? No. Whether did she
desire you to open the petticoat or not? No: she opened it herself, and laid it
upon the bed aside of her: I asked her if she had killed the child? and she
said, Yes: I asked her how? and she said she had laid on it, but could not help
it. Council. -- Did you discover any marks of violence upon the body? No. You
saw the child? Yes: she opened the petticoat, and laid the child with it on the
bed, and sat by its side. Did nothing further happen? The Jury was sent for,
and came in, and I retired from the room. Attorney General. -- Did it appear a
fine, plump child? I am not a judge: I cannot say any thing of it. Todd. -- Can
you recollect the time the child was brought out of the trunk? It was about two
o'clock. Todd. -- After you discovered the child, was not she left alone with
it? Yes: I went down to speak to my sister. What length of time was you absent?
I believe about ten minutes. Court. -- When you put your hand upon it in the
trunk, did it feel warm? Council. -- If your Honor pleases, she says it was
wrapped up in a petticoat. Well, did you feel it warm through the petticoat? Yes,
Sir, I believe it was. She took the child in the petticoat into the other room?
I believe she did. How long did you stay with her? About ten minutes. Todd. --
And then went down for ten minutes? Yes. Did you see any blood about the child?
(After some hesitation) No: none. I mean about the throat? I did not examine.
Did you think it was dead, when it lay on the bed? Yes. Court. -- Had it hair
and nails perfect? I cannot say: I believe it had nails. Sergeant. -- Pray,
Ma'am, do you know any thing of a hurt she received? Yes: she received a hurt
in fetching up a log of wood about two months before. Council. -- Was it one or
two? I cannot tell exactly. Attorney General. -- She went about though as usual?
Yes; but still complained. How long? For a few days.

Samuel Bullfinch sworn.
When I went up into the room, I found her sitting on the floor, with the child
leaning over her arm; she kept its head close down on its breast. The Inquest
asked her, if she had used no violence to the child? and she said, No. It was
the first time she had ever had a child, and she believed she had overlaid it.
At this time there appeared no marks of violence, or they were not discovered.
Mr. Naglee, or Norgrove, (we don't know which he named) was the first, who, on
examining the child, discovered that the throat was cut. He asked her, how the
throat came to be cut? and she said she did it herself with a razor. She was
asked, where the razor was? and I understood that one Bryan O'Connor, and some
other, had been there, and taken it away. However, the razor was produced, and
she was asked, if that was the razor? She said, Yes. We asked her, how she came
to cut its throat? and she said, for fear it should cry, and the family would
hear it. I observed to her, that if the child was born dead, as she said it
was, that there was no occasion to cut its throat. Sergeant. -- Did the child
appear bloody? No; it appeared as if it had been washed. Sergeant. -- Did she
say the child was born dead? Yes: she persisted in it, that it was born dead;
that is, that she overlaid it. Sergeant. -- Had it the appearance of having
come to maturity? Why, I thought it appeared plump and hearty. Sergeant. -- Do
you recollect, whether she said any thing further? Yes; she said she was told
to do it. Court. -- Did she say by whom? Yes. Sergeant. -- Did she mention any
promises that had been made her? She said some were made. What were they? She
said that he promised her, if she made away with the child, she should have her
time purchased, and he would set her at liberty. Sergeant. -- Did she say she
was to be provided for? Yes: she was to have fine clothes, and to live like a
lady. Jury. -- Whose name did she mention as the father who had promised this?
John Shaffer, and said it was him who had desired her to cut the child's
throat, or make away with it.

Doctor Jones sworn.
What I have to declare in the present case, is merely matter of opinion
founded on observation, and what my profession teaches me to decide. I saw the
mother a few minutes after the Inquest had been held, and she informed me it
was born dead. Attorney General. -- You are not to relate what she said
afterward, as that cannot be received as evidence. Well then, Sir, from the
size and appearance of the child, I saw enough to convince me that it was not
born alive: it is true its throat was cut, and it had been taken away from the
mother, and preserved in spirits by Dr. Foulke. Attorney-gen. -- Doctor, pray
when did you see the child first? The day after the Inquest. Attorney-gen. --
If that is the case, it can have little to do with the subject. Why, Sir, an
opinion is as well to be formed from the size of the child then, as at the
first minute -- And I am convinced it was not a full grown child; for it was
too small, and there was little hair on its head, not near so much as when an
infant has come to its full time of birth. Attorney General. -- But is not the
mother a very little woman? No: she is not very little; she is about the
middling size. She is very young though? (Her age, Mr. Milne who brought her up,
said, was seventeen, wanting two months.) Attorney General. -- Is this a
subject on which you can form an opinion perfectly satisfactory to yourself?
Yes, Sir; and of which I have no doubt. Was the windpipe cut through from side
to side? Yes, it was, and the other large vessels were separated; and it must
have killed the child, had it been alive at the time; but I am of opinion it
was dead, and born dead from the accident which had happened to its mother, and
from the size and appearance of the child. Attorney General. -- Can you, from
appearances or such circumstances, determine whether the child was born dead or
alive? Yes: I can determine for myself, and am perfectly satisfied of the
conclusion. This child had not the appearance of a full grown child; it was of
too small a size, and had not the usual quantity of hair on its head, and the
inferior limbs were much too small, if compared with the nobler. How long may
the infant remain in the womb after it is dead? I have known instances of their
being retained a long time. Could it be a month? Yes; more than a month or six
weeks either. Sergeant. -- Suppose, Doctor, a child to be born dead, would it
bleed on cutting its throat? Yes; and many persons do bleed after they are
dead, on opening a small vein only. Attorney General. -- But, Doctor, not after
having lain so long as a month or six weeks in the womb? No; I don't say that:
much depends on the habit of body, and there are various constitutions. This
child does not appear to be within two months at least of its full time. Court.
-- But did you never see a seven months child make a good man? I don't say so:
there are certainly such, but they are to be found very seldom. Sergeant. --
Can you judge better from the comparative size of the limbs than from the
length of the infant? Court. -- Did the child appear to have fallen away much,
when you saw it? No. What was the cause of its premature birth? The mother told
me, that she had received a very severe fall in lifting a log.
Attorney General. -- You must not repeat what she told you. Well but, Sir, it
was confirmed to me by the testimony of her master; and soon after she said she
was seized with the pains of labor. Attorney General. -- Did this conversation
happen on the same day she was delivered? It did? Attorney General. -- But we
have nothing of this second hurt in testimony. If you have not, I suppose you
will; for I understood she had received two falls, and the Jury will be
satisfied in this point, when they come to hear her master; and I understood
she had a fall, or severe strain, the very morning of her delivery.

Doctor Foulke affirmed.
I was called upon by the Coroner and the Inquest, to examine the dead body of
a child supposed to have been murdered. Before I got there, several persons on
the inquest had examined and found the throat cut. The murder of the child was
no longer with me a question, at least so far as the efforts of the mother had
been able to effect it; and I left the Coroner and Jury to do their duty in an
affair which appeared so clear and plain. But after they had left the room, I
returned to examine the mother, and to explain to her, her dangerous situation;
but I was induced to doubt the validity of my first opinion, when she informed
me with respect to the time of conception, the time of delivery, the
circumstances which prematurely brought on the birth of the child, and from the
appearance of the child afterward; from all of which considerations I believe
myself absolutely justifiable in declaring that the child must have been born
dead: the delicacy necessary to be observed, will make me say as little as is
possible on this occasion. With regard to the time of conception, it must have
been about the latter end of the month of September. Attorney General. -- How
do you know that? The girl told me so. Attorney General. -- But you are not to
repeat what she told you. Then, from the appearance of the child, I believe it
to be only a six or seven months conception, which brings it to about that
time. I keep the child for the purpose of examining it fully, and of showing it
to Doctor Jones: the Honorable Court, and the Jury may see it also if the Court
pleases; and by referring to it, they will be able to judge for themselves in
some degree from its size. Attorney General. -- Does it not lessen by being
kept in spirits? It does not grow bigger. Attorney General. -- But does it not
lessen? Yes, something. Attorney General. -- Does it much or little? But
little: when Doctor Jones saw it, it had not lessened, for I was obliged to
extract it with forceps from the jar in which I put it. Sergeant. -- From all
the circumstances you have mentioned, do you say you are justifiable in
concluding that it was born dead? I do. Pray, when was you called in? About two
hours after the child was born. Attorney General. -- But you then was not of
opinion, that it was born dead? Whent I went, and saw, and heard that she had
cut the child's throat, I formed my opinion on that circumstance only, and I
believe the Inquest did the same without enquiring whether it was likely to
have been born dead or not. Court. -- You say from its size, that it was not a
full grown child; are not some children smaller than others? Clearly, Sir, this
is not a child that ought to be produced by its mother, after nine months
gestation. Court. -- Do not children live who are born at seven months?
Children have lived who were born at six months; but such examples are very
rare, and seldom happen, and cannot affect the present question: they are like
monsters -- I don't mean that they are deformed, but they are not perfect, and
are extraordinary things, rarely to be met with, not one in a hundred. -- I
have compared this child with several others which I have preserved, (as I have
them of almost every period of conception) and I find that it is not the child
by two or three months, which ought to be released after nine months gestation.
Sergeant. -- Do you believe a dead child might bleed on having its throat cut?
I do: the blood of children is much finer and more fluid than that of men. Such
are the dispositions of nature, in accommodating the cause to the effect; the
blood of infants circulate through innumerable subtle canals, which a more
gross fluid would obstruct: but it is not only the throat of a child that would
bleed on being cut after it was dead, but also of a man, or indeed of any
animal. Attorney General. -- Did you discover any blood about the child, when
you first saw it? I did a little, not more than is customary; for it is well
known that more or less is always discharged by the mother on these occasions
-- This is a subject that delicacy and respect makes it difficult to speak of
-- but the Honorable Court will excuse me. Court. -- It is necessary to be
explicit, and relate things as they are, so that you stand in need of no
excuse. Sergeant. -- Did she say the child was born dead? Yes.
Attorney General. -- You are not to say any thing she said, after the Inquest
had sat. I believe the gentlemen have related that they heard her say so. The
reason why I did not, was, the woman was then in such a situation of body and
mind, that humanity and every generous feeling for an unhappy creature forbid
to add to her pain and care, and therefore made it expedient to leave the room:
but afterward when the poignancy of her distress might be alleviated, I called
and attended to her narration, which I am not, you say, to relate. Sergeant. --
Did she appear very feeble? She was setting up, but then it was necessary she
should, as the room was much crowded, and the people pressing about her. When I
had heard her relate the particulars of her situation, I went home, and made
notes of it, from which I could explain my several reasons for concluding, that
the child could not be born alive. [Mr. Bullfinch was called, and asked if she
said it was born dead? He answered, Yes; and that she had lifted up the lid of
its eye, but it fell down again -- This she said before it was discovered that
the throat was cut.] Sergeant. -- Did you observe, Doctor, that the limbs of
the child were not proportioned? Yes: the hands, arms, legs, and other inferior
limbs, were too small when compared with the others. There are too, many
circumstances of evidence, which would confirm the justness of the conclusion
drawn by Doctor Jones and myself, with respect to the child's having been born
dead: there are also other matters which I could mention, but from the delicacy
and tenderness with which it is requisite to speak on this subject. Court. --
Our great object is information, and nothing should prevent our obtaining the
fullest. Well, then, as this woman was delivered alone of a feeble and
imperfect child, and as she informs me, she lay upon her back at the time of
its birth, then had the child been alive, but come in the common or ordinary
way into the world. You know that it is necessary that its eyes, its nose and
mouth, in short its face, must have been toward the posterior parts of the
mother, and in this situation of release -- it is more than probable that the
child might have been smothered in the birth; nay, it is a certainty, that it
must have been smothered from the want of assistance to extricate it, and from
its long continuance in that situation* Court. -- Did she seem to be affected
for the loss of her child? She seemed to me to have lost herself much; she
stroaked it, and looked at it, but I thought not with that maternal tenderness,
which she should have discovered on such an occasion: she shed no tears for her
loss; not that I esteem the shedding tears an essential to constitute
tenderness. She began to appear sorry, when I was about to take the infant from
her. Court. -- Did she say why she cut its throat? Yes: she said that John
Shaffer, the fat Shaffer, was the father of it, and he had persuaded her to
kill it; if she did, he would purchase her freedom, and that he was to marry a
fine woman, and that he would make her then as happy and as fine as his wife,
and that if she did not do it, she should suffer immensely -- but if she did,
she had nothing to fear, for there was no heaven or hell, no God or devil that
he knew better than any body else, as he possessed more learning than any other
man, and had traveled in Europe; and to encourage her, he said that it was no
harm, and he had persuaded a milk-girl to do the like once before. I examined
her to know the time of her conception, and she told me that it was sometime
after her master went to live in Church-alley. She remembered* it was sometime
in the latter end of September, when she first was debauched by him on their
lot, and that she soon discovered her situation; that she went on as women
usually do, until about three weeks before her delivery, when she was helping
in with a cord of wood, she received a considerable injury by the fall of a log
upon her hip; that two or three days before she was delivered, she
unfortunately met with a fall down stairs, when her master saw her; that she
found herself indisposed in the morning, and strained herself in getting up a
large backlog, which immediately hastened on the labour-pains, and an abortion
came on about two o'clock; that she was in great agony until then, and she
after that laid quiet half an hour, when she took it up in her arms, and lifted
its right eyelid, but which fell down instantly: she therefore suspecting that
it might be dead, and recollecting the promised reward offered by Shaffer, and
her promise to him, and fearing that it might cry and alarm the family, she
took up a razor laying by accident in the window by the bedside, and cut its
throat through, and cut even the very bone; but the blood that discharged, was
very small, and there must have been some mistake about its being washed -- for
when I saw it, it was as is usual with children after their birth; but perhaps
the rags, or things it had been wrapped up in, might have absorbed some, and
given the appearance of wiping or washing. She said she laid still half an hour
after the birth; if so, there can be no doubt but it was dead, and she declared
that it neither breathed or or cried. Court. -- You say you have the child yet;
how is it preserved? In a glass jar, and I Will send it, if you please, to the
Jury. Cannot it be brought to Court? Yes, Sir. Todd. -- If your Honors please,
it can be sent to the jury-room. Court. -- If we please to see, why may we not?
Well, Sir, I will send it.

Accordingly the child was brought into Court, in a large glass jar, and Doctor
Foulke had sent with it a pair of forceps to extract it, if it should be deemed
necessary.

Nathaniel Norgrave sworn.
I went up stairs and found the girl setting up, and the Jury were there; I was
on the Inquest also. When I saw the child was dead, I asked her if she knew who
was the father? She answered, Yes. And asked her what his name was? She told me
John Shaffer. I told her that she should be careful in what she said, and not
charge any body unless she was certain of them. Council. -- Did you ask her how
she was delivered? Yes; and she said she was delivered upon her back. I asked
her if she heard the child cry? and she said No. I asked her if she had told
her master, that she was with child? and she told me No. I said she ought, and
not have concealed it. I left her a little while, when I returned, and examined
the child, but could discover no marks of violence upon it, until I happened to
lift up its head, and then I perceived its throat was cut from here to here,
[making a motion with his hand across his throat.] I then told her, that she
had murdered the child, and deserved to be punished. I asked her how she did
it? and she confessed she did it with a razor. I asked her where it was? and
was informed that one O'Bryan, or O'Conner, or some such name, had taken it
away; but the razor was got, and I looked at it, and saw it had been wiped, but
still there was some little blood left on the point. I asked her how she came
to destroy the child in that cruel manner? and she said that she was directed
by the father, and told to pinch its throat, which would effectually destroy
it. She told me, that he was concerned with her in Church-alley. I asked her
when she had seen him last? She said she had not seen him lately. I asked her
if she had seen him since he was concerned with her in the alley? and she said
she had several times, but not lately; she believed he was not in town. I asked
her particularly what Shaffer it was? and she told me the one that married
Chavilier's daughter. Sergeant. -- Did you ask her if the child was born dead?
No: she said it was dead, and I asked her why she cut its throat when it was
dead? It seemed as if nature had helped the birth, for it came very plain. What
do you mean by its coming very plain, that it was come to its full time? I
believe it was very near about that. Did she say she was delivered on her back?
Yes; but I know it could not be so, and I told Doctor Jones, that it could not
be born in that way without help. Attorney General. -- And what did Doctor
Jones say? He could not say much, because he knows it is so very well.
Sergeant. -- Do you know any thing of these matters? Yes, a little: I served my
time to it. Sergeant. -- Very well, then you can tell me; do not children cry,
when they are born into this world? Yes; they generally do. Attorney General.
-- What time do you suppose this child to have been conceived? Was it come to
its full time? I believe that it was a child of about seven months or so.
Sergeant. -- When the girl said the child was born dead, was it before or after
you found its throat to be cut? I did not say that she said it was born dead.
Sergeant. -- We understood it so. But I did not say so. Attorney General. --
Are not women generally worse, and more feeble, after a miscarriage than after
a natural birth? Yes; they commonly are.

Mr. Bartholomew sworn.
Court. -- Where do you live? At the corner of Market and Second-street. Was it
in your house this unfortunate accident happened? Yes. How long have you lived
there? It is near nine months. Did you bring up the girl? No, Sir: I have had
her about three years; she was brought up by Mr. Milne, my wife's father. Did
you not live in Church-alley? Yes: I moved in there about eight or nine months
ago. How long did you live there? Three months. Sergeant. -- Do you know any
thing of any hurt the girl received before this accident? Yes; somewhere about
a month before she was delivered, it could not be a week under or over, she
fell down with a stick of wood in my hearing, and when I went to see what was
the matter, she was sitting crying, and complained she was hurt much. Again,
about three nights before this happened. Court. -- What, before the other
accident, or before her delivery? Before her delivery, Sir. We had moving
narrow steps to go into the cellar, and I went myself, and held the candle to
light her down to bring up a stick of wood; and in lifting or getting up the
stick, she fell down, and the stick fell upon her: she cried, and sat several
minutes before she got up. She said no more afterward, nor I heard no more
about it. Court. -- Did you see the child? Yes: I saw it, but did not examine
it. Did you ever enquire of her, if she was not with child? Yes: I have charged
her often with it. Attorney General. -- Did you discover she was with child
from her bulk? Yes. When did you discover it by her bulk? Before we left
Church-alley. Attorney General. -- And how long have you lived where you now
reside? Near nine months. How long did you live in Church-alley? Three months.
Sergeant. -- What, Sir, is it nine months since you left Church-alley? No; it
is about seven months. I had both houses at once -- the one at Market-street I
occupied for a store -- the one in Church-alley was my dwelling house. Court.
-- And how long is it since you moved into the shop? About nine months.
Sergeant. -- The Court mean to ask you, how long since you moved your family
into the shop? It is somewhere about six or seven months. Attorney General. --
Cannot you tell exactly? It is somewhere thereabouts -- but I could tell
exactly, if I had my receipt-book here; because I paid my rent in Church-alley
to the day I removed. Attorney General. -- Cannot you get that receipt? Yes; if
I go home. Attorney General. -- You had better go and fetch it.

Whereupon Mr. Bartholomew went to fetch it; but before he returned, the
Council had gone through much of their pleadings, and he was only examined
touching the time; when it appeared he had went into Church-alley the 2d of
August, and left it the beginning of November.

The Council and Attorney General having finished their pleadings, his Honor
the Chief Justice gave a charge to the Jury.

Murder, Gentlemen, is the highest and most heinous crime against the law of
nature, and it is greatly aggravated when the parent destroys its own
offspring; but it is denied that the child was murdered by its mother, because
it was already dead: yet you find so far as her efforts could effect its
destruction, she exerted them unpitying, and void of maternal affection.

This case, which has been ably discussed, was heretofore described by the laws
in this manner -- That whenever a single or unmarried woman was delivered of a
child, and attempted to conceal it, the bare concealment was made conclusive
evidence against the mother, that she murdered it, unless she could make it
appear by one evidence at least, that the child so concealed was born dead: so
that when this probable proof was in evidence, it was incumbent on the prisoner
to prove positively that the child was born dead, or did not die through her
means or procurement; otherwise she was adjudged guilty, and suffered the
penalty affixed to murder. This act of James -- was recognized by the Assembly
of the State; and had the prisoner been tried under that, there could not be
the least doubt but your verdict would determine her guilty. But now, by a late
act of Assembly, passed last September, a further kind of proof is required,
and the bare concealment is not sufficient, unless there is a probable
presumption offered, that the child was born alive. You have heard this kind of
proof already explained -- That there are two kinds of evidence. The first is
positive proof, where the witness can swear to the commission of the fact: this
sometimes is attainable, yet but seldom in cases like the present. The second
division is circumstantial proof -- This you have heard divided into three
kinds. First, Violent presumption, which is the stronger kind, and such as
amounts to nearly full conviction, or of which the mind can enntertain no
doubt. As in a case, where you see a man greatly confused, endeavoring to make
his escape out of a house, with his naked sword bloody in his hand, and a body
lying on the floor newly slain -- This I say amounts to a violent presumption
that the man endeavoring to escape, is the slayer. Second, There is probable
presumption, which is not so conclusive, or satisfactory as the former. And
thirdly* There is slight presumption, but which, in capital cases, is seldom
allowed, if by itself, any weight in criminating the prisoner, or much regarded
by the Court or Jury. Beside the case I have mentioned, you have heard others
adduced by the Council; but among the rest there is this kind of evidence --
the confession of the party upon being apprehended, and this, when other
circumstances are strong in its support, amounts to as full a conviction; I say
it is so strong that no doubt can be had of the criminality, or hesitation left
upon the mind, than would had you heard a witness come forward, and have sworn
that he saw the perpetration. The evidence, I say, would be strong and
conclusive in the instance which was mentioned by the Council, where a man
should be robbed of twenty guineas, and that exact sum be found upon a man with
two pistols, the one loaded the other discharged -- This, I say, would leave no
doubt on your minds with respect to the criminal. But this is not the
circumstantial proof required in this case. The law would not require this
kind, because it is not to be had; for people determined upon the commission of
the crime of infanticide, always are silent and alone for the purpose of
concealment, as they would hardly be so callous or fool-hardened, as to commit
it in public -- Therefore positive proof can rarely be come at in such cases.
The concealment of the child, as I have already remarked, was deemed sufficient
evidence of its being murdered, though the Courts and Juries in England and
here, for this many years, have always required some circumstantial evidence
beside, or they acquitted the prisoners; and this law has long been deemed to
savor of severity. Therefore the Legislature have altered the law in this
respect, so as to make it correspond with the already established practice of
their Courts of Justice, and have required the second degree of circumstantial
evidence to convict the prisoner.

It was observed by the Attorney General, that her persisting in the denial of
her being with child, even when she was in labor, and her having made not the
least provision of clothes for the infant, and as she chose to be delivered
alone, when she might have had the assistance of her mistress and other women
who were by -- These, with the further circumstance of her cutting its throat,
(and as you are informed by one of the witnesses, from ear to ear) with her
endeavor to conceal it, by placing it wrapped up under a large roll of linen
in a trunk -- I say, if when you take and weigh all the circumstances together,
you are of opinion, that it amounts to a probable presumption that the child
was born alive, you can be at no loss to decide that she was guilty in the
manner and form in which she stands indicted; and as it is incumbent, as I
observed before, upon her to prove it was born dead, you will examine what
testimony relates to this particular. There is her own relation of the story;
she several times said it was born dead, but then added also that she had
overlaid it, and on the Inquest's finding the throat cut, she owned having done
that, but it was to prevent its crying. Again, there is the deposition of the
Doctors, who, as professional men, and as gentlemen eminent in their
profession, declare, that they are convinced the child was born dead from the
circumstances of its appearance, and from a consideration of the hurts which
the mother had received, the one about a month before, another three days
before, and a strain the very morning of the day she was delivered, as well as
the circumstance of her being delivered on her back. I say, if you are
satisfied that the child was killed by any of these accidents, then you must
acquit, as the cutting of the infant's throat, already dead, cannot be
accounted murder in the mother. It is for you, gentlemen, to weigh and consider
the matter of fact; but I would observe to you, that when you are sworn to give
a true verdict from the evidence which shall be laid before you, you are not
bound to give that verdict upon the opinion or judgment of any man however
eminent.

The Jury, after an absence of about three hours, returned, and brought in
their verdict guilty.

On the morning of Saturday, when she was brought up to receive sentence of
death, a motion was made by Mr. Todd, and supported by Mr. Sergeant, that the
Court would be pleased to grant a new trial, as an affidavit was produced, in
which Mr. Edward Pole, one of the Jurors, had said the day preceding the trial,
that he did not see how any person could bring in a verdict otherwise than
guilty, (or words of like import.) This it was contended, would have been good
cause of challenge, had it been known at the time; and if cause of challenge
then, it should be allowed of weight now. Some law-cases were adduced, wherein
new trials had been granted for similar reasons. The Attorney General contended
it ought not to be allowed for three reasons: the first was, that no new trial
was ever permitted in capital cases like the present: 2d. That a person's
giving his opinion, was not cause of challenge; so that if not cause of
challenge, no pretense could be set up for a new trial: and 3d. If it had been
cause of challenge then, it was now too late. This was replied to by Mr.
Sergeant, and the point conceded, that though no new trial had yet been had in
capital cases, yet the Court had power to grant one, if it saw good cause. To
the second point he replied, it was cause of challenge, and no doubt could be
received into the breast of the Court and Jury, but what if it had been known
in time, they would have challenged him; if not for cause, they would without
cause, (as every person has a right to challenge twenty of the 48 Jurors
peremptorily, and as many more as he can show cause for.) Of the third point he
observed, that as the Court had the power to allow a new trial, it could not be
too late.

The Court gave it as their opinion, that the expressions used by Mr. Edward
Pole were not sufficient cause for the court to grant a new trial, and the girl
then received sentence of DEATH; but since has been respired by the Honorable
Supreme Executive Council.

The TRIAL of James M'Glochlin, for feloniously entering the dwelling house of
James Byrne, in the night of the 14th of November last, at the Court and City
aforesaid.
JAMES M'GLOCHLIN, late of the county of Philadelphia, was indicted that for
he, with others, did, on the 14th of November last, burglariously and
feloniously break and enter the dwelling house of James Byrne, about the hour
of twelve at night, and stealing therein six pair of stockings, two silk and
two linen handkerchiefs, and one nankeen vest, together of the value of forty
shillings.

James Byrne sworn.
About the middle of November my house was broke open, or rather entered, by
opening the padlock of the cellar-door with a false key. The goods mentioned in
the indictment were taken away; some of which were got again, as next morning I
got a search-warrant; and on searching a cellar in the neighborhood, we found
them. A man was in the cellar at the time, who seemed anxious to get away; but
whether it was the prisoner or not, I cannot positively say. After we were
searching about sometime, O'Neil came down, and as soon as he saw we had
discovered the goods, he ran away: I followed him with a great number of
others; and when we returned, I found that this man had also gone off, but I
cannot swear to the person.

John Goss, Constable, sworn.
I went with Mr. Burns to Coleman's cellar, and there we found this man: I am
sure of the fellow, I know him well enough sure -- they call him Jem Long
Splice, Elias Long Jem. When we came in, we looked about for the clothes; up
the chimney there was a hole, which came down again, and I went to examine it
-- But Mr. Burns thought it not worth while; he said it was not his first loss,
for he had been robbed twice before; but I did not care, I would do my duty: so
I hunted about, and I went toward a tub that was turned over, and this Jem --
aye I know you well enough -- this fellow -- your Honor -- was standing with
his back against them. After finding them this same jockey wanted to be off --
but I would not let him out of the cellar. Council. -- Did not this Elias, or
Long Jem, go out of the cellar? Yes, your Honor, Yes -- but that was
afterward, when we went to pursue O'Neil. Council. -- Did not you intend to
seize this man, before you discovered any part of the property? Yes; for I knew
he was a great rogue as any from Ireland. This O'Neil, when he came in, shook
hands with him, and run away as soon as he discovered we had found the goods. I
seized this one by the collar, and told him not to stir; but he did not heed
me, and sprung up the cellar-steps, I believe he touched nothing, for he can
run as fast as any man I ever saw. Council. -- Did he struggle with you when
you seized him? No I coaxed him, and told him not to go. Council. -- Did you
find any part of the property upon this man? No: but he was standing so, with
his backside to the tub, hiding it. [He turned round to show the Jury.] --
Court. -- You need not turn yours upon us. Council. -- You say this man is a
rogue, because he shook hands with O'Neil; is it not usual for Irishmen to
shake hands, or to kiss, when they meet? No: the Irishmen don't kiss, that is
the French outlandish way, but they shake hands.

George Elton sworn.
He went with Mr. Burns to the cellar, and saw two or three men there, and
believed the prisoner at the bar to be one of them. He did not hear him say any
thing; when O'Neil run off, he followed him, and knew nothing more of this man.

He^^^ Fenner sworn.
Last November as he came along Front-street, he heard a terrible crackling of
fire, and observed a light in Coleman's cellar-window: he looked down, and saw
Coleman and his wife, and some other man; they were counting wet clothes -- and
the man asked Coleman's wife, where she would put them? and she said down the
hole in the chimney, but they should drink first; they had a bottle, he
thought, of rum, out of which they took a dram a-piece; they then tied up the
clothes in a bundle, and seeing one of them coming toward the door, I went
away. Council. -- Did you see the prisoner in the cellar? No, Sir, but next day
the goods were found.

The prisoner delared himself innocent, that he had only been a short time in
this city, whence he came from Baltimore, and that it appeared to him as if
Goss would swear any man's life away.

The Jury brought in their verdict not guilty.

After being advised by his Honor the Chief Justice, of the dangers to which
men are exposed, who keep bad company, and cautioned to be more careful in
future, in the choice of his associates, he was ordered to be discharged upon
the payment of his fees.

FREDERICK ERDMAN was indicted for committing a Burglary with others, on the
night of the 16th of March, in the dwelling house of Sarah Fisher, and for
feloniously stealing therein 234 yards of calico, of the value of L62.

This man was proved to be only a servant to C. Pryor, (who also stands
indicted for this Burglary, but has fled) and having otherwise a good character
upon the testimony of several creditable witnesses, his Honor the Judge
observed to the Jury, that there was not evidence to convict him, and that
therefore without leaving the Court, they perhaps might agree -- Whereupon they
immediately agreed, and declared him not guilty, and he was discharged.


