THE ATONEMENT OF CHRIST, EXPLAINED and VINDICATED, AGAINST Late ATTEMPTS to
exclude it out of the WORLD. By ISAAC BACKUS, PREACHER OF THE GOSPEL.

Lift up a Standard for the People.

Isaiah lxii. 10. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood.

Rev. v. 9. BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, in State-street, and sold by PHILIP
FREEMAN, in Union-street. MDCCLXXXVII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TO enjoy safety and happiness is the desire of all nations; and the great
shakings now among them, will undoubtedly introduce this unspeakable enjoyment,
under the Government of THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Jer. xxiii. 5, 6. This he
could not be, if he had not suffered the full penalty of the law of God for his
people. Therefore when it is openly denied that he did any such thing, we are
loudly called upon to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered unto the
saints. How far this duty is attended to, in the following discourse, the
Reader will judge.

Middleborough, Nov. 13, 1787.
THE ATONEMENT of CHRIST, EXPLAINED and VINDICATED.
EVIDENCE of the infinite wisdom, goodness and power of God, has appeared in
all his works from the beginning; but none of the children of Adam were ever
willing to glorify him as God, until they were renewed by his grace. And where
his grace has been clearly revealed, they have always discovered a disposition
to neglect it, and to abuse its precious privileges. His law is holy, just and
good; and his gospel reveals the way wherein it is magnified and made honorable
in the salvation of sinners, even the chief of them. This salvation is from
sin, as well as from misery; and the nature of sin is worshipping and serving
the creature more than the Creator, or loving of pleasures more than God.
Therefore the gospel, the best of news, has ever been offensive to mankind
while in their natural blindness. Yea, this blindness cannot be plainly spoken
of, without danger of an angry inquiry, Are we blind also? Yet none of them
would think it equal, in their temporal affairs, to have interested men set up
as their judges, however capable they were to discern what was right, in cases
wherein they were not biassed. Felix found a vast difference, betwixt hearing
of the faith in Christ as a curiosity, and his being arrested thereby as a
criminal before God. Acts xxiv. 24, 25. When freemen have fairly discharged all
their debts, they ever claim a right to bestow gifts on whom they please; and
gifts cannot be bestowed with honor upon any who claim them as debts. Neither
can debts be forgiven by a creditor, nor crimes by authority, while the debtor
or the criminal denies the justice of the charge or sentence against him,
without giving up the nature of all government; the end of which, is the safety
and happiness of the faithful, relief to the poor and needy, and infliction of
just punishment upon the wicked. And the infliction of such punishment is as
much a debt to the universe, as any thing can be a debt to individuals; For the
wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And every child of Adam is a servant of sin, until he obeys
this form of doctrine from the heart. Romans vi. 16 -- 23.

But men have wracked their inventions, from age to age, to avoid this heart
obedience, and yet to grasp the honors and profits of religion to themselves.
And they have now gone so far in this way, as openly to set up their reason
above revelation, and their feelings above reason. Our Lord says to all, If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and
follow me; for whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; but whosoever will
lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it. Luke ix. 23, 24. But a noted
minister in Boston lately said, " Self-determination in us men, is the only
basis of moral obligation. To go about to prove this, by a long train of
reasoning, would be very like holding a candle to the sun, in its meridian
luster, for light that we might be able to see. It is a first, and fundamental
principle in morals, and to be evidenced, not by arguing, but by an appeal to
common sense; or, in other words, to the perceptions of mankind universally. We
feel the existence, and operation of this power every day we live." And if it
is not so, he says, "Religion, whether natural or revealed, is a senseless
pretense, suited only to serve the purposes of politicians and priests."
Chauncy on God's benevolence, 1784, p. 128, 130, 137.


Thus he set up reason above revelation, and feelings above reason; for
self-determination is so far from being the only basis of moral obligation,
that all are rebellious children, who take counsel, but not of God, and that
cover with a covering, but not of his spirit. Isai. xxx. 1, 9. From such
counsel, multitudes are now carried away with the doctrine of universal
salvation. Others oppose that doctrine, who yet act upon the principle from
whence it came; as we may see in a book published last year, by Mr. John
Remmele, of Newport in New Hampshire, to prove that atonement consisted wholly
in the excellency of Christ's teaching and example, in his life and death, and
not at all in his suffering the penalty of the law for sinners. This book was
sent to me from thence, with a request of my remarks upon this most important
subject. His arguments are as follow.

"1. Nothing could merit favor for sinners, which was not in itself agreeable
to the divine mind. Christ is sometimes represented in scripture as paying a
price, by which he purchased his people. Acts xx. 28. 1 Cor. vi. 20. 2 Pet. ii.
1. Whatever that price was, it is self-evidently true, that it was simply in
itself pleasing to God; therefore the sufferings, the misery, which he endured,
could not be the price. -- I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies,
says the Lord God. Ezekiel. xviii. 23, 32. If God can have no pleasure in the
misery and just sufferings of a sinful disobedient creature, reason forbids the
conclusion, that he should have any pleasure in the sufferings of his dutiful
well-beloved Son." P. 19.

Answer, He can have no pleasure in the ruin and misery of any creature, simply
considered; but all the punishments that ever came upon fallen angels, or
fallen men, were for iniquity, transgression and sin; and if Christ did not
suffer for the sins of men, justice could not have been honored by his
sufferings, nor in saving any sinner from hell. For by the deeds of the law,
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. -- God has set forth Jesus
Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God -- that he might be just, and the justifier of him who believes in
Jesus. Romans iii. 20 -- 26. We are warned against glorying in the wisdom, might
or riches of men; because in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory. Jer. ix. 23, 24. Isaiah xlv. 22 -- 25. From whence
the apostle proved, that the preaching of Christ crucified, was unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them who were called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor. i.
23 -- 31. And also that we should ever keep to the line of things made ready to
our hand, and not have our minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, as the serpent beguiled Eve. The word line in this text, has been
applied to the lines which men have drawn around dioceses and parishes, by
teachers who have measured themselves by themselves. 2 Cor. x. 12 -- 17. xi. 3.
And they have been so much beguiled by the adversary, as to claim all the power
for themselves and earthly rulers, that Abraham, Moses, Aaron and David ever
had, over the bodies and souls of men. Yea, much more; for the whole of their
power, was to command their children and their household after them, to keep
the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. Genesis xviii. 19. But the old
dragon has ever been at war with the seed of the true church, who keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, wherein the merits
of his blood is the first article. Rev. xii. 11, 17. He is established as our
prophet, priest and king, by the oath of God, in an order above Abraham, Moses,
Aaron or David. Romans xiv. 10 -- 12. Heb. iii. 3. vii. 4 -- 22. And the gospel
says, Loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion; for
thus says the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for naught; and ye shall be
redeemed without money. -- Thy God reigns. -- He made his grave with the
wicked, and with the rich in his death, because he had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth; yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he
has put him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities. And to believe this report with the heart, and to
confess it with the mouth, is the only way of salvation. Isai. lii. 3, 7. liii.
1, 9 -- 11. Romans x. 4, 10, 15, 16. He said, They who hate me without a cause,
are more than the hairs of mine head, then I restored that which I took not
away. Psalm. lxix. 4. John xv. 25. Yet it is now said,

"2. If Christ appeared in the place of sinners, to ward off the stroke of
vengeance, by giving it an opportunity to alight on him -- the consequence is
unavoidable, that he in a very short season endured the same quantity of misery
which would have born sinners down to eternity. A thought which exceeds all
rules of computation, and departs from all principles of just reasoning." P. 21.

Answer, Here is the root of all the evils in the world. Angels and men have
erred, because their knowledge was limited; and the only certain security
against all error, is obedience to the revealed will of the Father of lights,
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. It is the only perfect
law of liberty. James i. 16 -- 25. Before our glorious Shepherd, all nations
are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. And
he says, I lay down my life for the sheep; a chosen number, and not for all
mankind. Isaiah xi. 10, 11, 17. John x. 15, 26 -- 29. And when he was going to
do it, he said, If they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done
in the dry? Luke xxiii. 31. Nothing is more unreasonable, than for us to
imagine, that finite can comprehend infinite, or that debtors and criminals are
adequate judges of their own causes. Yet it is now said,

"3. Those animals made use of in ancient rites are never said to make
atonement, but this is often acknowledged of the priests who were active in the
matter. Therefore, so far as sufferings were inflicted on Christ, and so far as
atonement consists in sufferings, he can only be considered as the medium by
which atonement was made, and not the person who made it. What Christ did, and
not what was done to him, was the matter of atonement." P. 22, 23.

Answer, Those animals were innocent, while the priests who offered them were
guilty; and were daily to offer, first for their own sins, and then for the
sins of the people; therefore Jesus was Surety of a better testament. For if
the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the
unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot
to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God. This is
the only way for any soul to draw nigh unto God. Heb. vii. 17 -- 27. ix. 13,
14. This is the Rock of which David prophesied. Psalm xl. 2 -- 10. Heb. x. 5 --
14. This is the Stone which the builders refused. Psalm cxviii. 19 -- 23. Mat.
xxi. 42. And how many do so in our day! If the sins of the elect were not
imputed to Christ as their Surety, he never could have made any atonement for
them, nor they be saved by him; yet our author says, "Some have secured
themselves under the vapory idea that Christ was by imputation sinful, and
sustaining this imputative sinful character, he was the object of divine
displeasure." P. 24. But he ought to know, that believers do not hold that
Christ was ever made a sinful person; or that the Father was ever angry with
him; but that he made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. v. 21. When Aaron and his sons put
their hands upon the head of the bullock, and it was killed before the Lord,
and its inwards were burnt upon the altar, and its body without the camp, for a
sin-offering, the bullock was not made a sinner thereby; neither was Jesus,
when he suffered without the gate. Exodus xxix. 10 -- 14. Heb. xiii. 11, 12. And
though Aaron was to lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and to
confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the goat, which
was to bear upon him all their iniquities, unto a land not inhabited, the goat
was not made a sinner thereby, any more than Christ was, when the Lord laid on
him the iniquity of us all. Levi. xvi. 21, 22. Isaiah liii. 6. And we are
solemnly warned against laying again the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on
of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. How
terrible will be the case of those who fall away from this foundation! The word
baptisms in this text, is the same Greek word that is translated washings in
another chapter, wherein it is said, Without shedding of blood is no remission.
Heb. vi. 1 -- 6. ix. 10, 22. Life was forfeited by sin, and could only be
recovered by blood, the life of the flesh; for which reason Israel were never
to eat blood; and says God, I have given it to you upon the altar, to make
atonement for your souls. Levi. iii. 17. xvii. 11. Abel was accepted in this
way; and all that dwell upon the earth worship the beast, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
Rev. xiii. 8. Their cry has been, Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to
make war with him? His number is the number of a man. Rev. xiii. 4, 8, 18.
Nothing must be allowed of in religion, but what can be comprehended and
supported by man. Our author says,

"4. That in all God's works one object is attended to as his great and last
end. -- The feelings of God toward himself are fully expressed in scripture. I
wrought for my name's sake. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God.
Ezekiel. xx. 9. xxxvi. 32. He had himself in view as his chief object, when he
caused creation to rise into existence, and the same he will pursue to the
grand conclusion of all things. Thus he makes himself the beginning and end. --
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the GLORY OF GOD IN THE FACE OF
JESUS CHRIST. 2 Cor. iv. 6." P. 25. 26.

Answer, It is indeed so; but the god of this world blinds the minds of
unbelievers, lest this glory should shine unto them, as the apostle had just
before observed. For God to be manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received
up into glory, is the great mystery of godliness; whereon the church is built
as the pillar and ground of the truth. But seducing spirits, and doctrines of
devils have long since fixed an opposite notion of godliness in the minds of
multitudes, even a supposal that gain is godliness. 1 Timothy iii. 15, 16. iv. 1.
vi. 5, Satan declared that the penalty of the law was not true; but Christ bare
witness unto the truth, and destroyed the power of the devil, through death.
John xviii. 37. Heb. ii. 14, 15. And those who believe the contrary, are left
to strong delusion to believe a lie. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 12. Refraining from the
forbidden fruit, was the pledge of Adam's allegiance to God, as the great
proprietor and governor of the world; and by eating of it he became a robber
and a rebel; and we are all born in this state of revolt, as the best of men
have confessed. Psalm li. 5. Ephesians. ii. 3. And God will be justified in his
sayings, and will overcome when he is judged. Romans iii. 4, 9 -- 19. Men have
arraigned his sayings at their bar. He says, If the wicked restore the pledge,
give again that he had robbed, walk in the statutes of life, without committing
iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not die. But the ways of men have been
so unequal, as with their mouth to show much love, while their heart went after
their covetousness. They have ruled God's people with force and cruelty, and
have used every art to prevent their having any good pasture, or clear water.
But he who is the root and offspring of David, will cause these evil beasts to
cease out of the land; and he says, Whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely. A righteous father cannot save a wicked child, nor a wicked father
hinder the salvation of his child that repents; neither can any child of Adam
be saved without a perfect righteousness, and perseverance therein. Ezekiel. xiv.
20. xviii. 20. xxxiii. 10 -- 15, 31. xxxiv. 4, 17 -- 25. Rev. xxii. 16, 17. And
the violation of these plain truths, is the cause of all the blood, slavery and
confusion in the world. The gospel proclaims abundance of grace, and the gift
of righteousness, as freely as ever water flowed. Romans v. 17. But men have
invented another language; and it is now said,

"5. The plan of reconciliation left mankind in such a condition, as that they
might be the objects of the just displeasure of God. -- If it be only granted,
that men have universally rejected the offers of salvation, and are criminal
for such rejection, there can be no reasonable objections against God's
justice, if all men should be excluded from that salvation." It is also said,
"The gospel-offers should be as limited as the premises from which they grow:
for if the offers are more extensive than the provision offered, there is an
appearance at least of something little better than deception." P. 22, 27.

Answer, It is most certain, that the justice of God will ever shine clear in
the condemnation of mankind, even in countries where they have not the written
word. Romans i. 18 -- 21. And much more where they have it; but gospel-offers, is
the language of deceitful men, and not of the word of God; who sent his Son to
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;
to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God, to comfort all that mourn. And when he made this proclamation, many
wondered at his gracious words, until he let them know, that he had a good
right to save whom he pleased, even among the Sidonians or Syrians, and to
leave many in Israel to perish in their sins; and then they were filled with
wrath. Isaiah lxi. 1, 2. Luke iv. 17 -- 29. And natural men discover the same
disposition to this day. God never proclaimed atonement for presumptuous
sinners; but such were to die without mercy, by the sentence of the priest and
judge in Israel; and of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of grace! Number. xv. 30, 31. Deuteronomy. xvii. 1 -- 12. Heb. x. 26 --
29. His person never could be trodden under foot by any; but his laws and
authority are so, to an amazing degree; and his blood, which purges believers
from all sin, (1 John i. 7.) is now made use of to harden multitudes in
iniquity, who would not dare to act as they do, if he had not died for sinners;
and he only knows how many have done despite to the Spirit of grace. His grace
has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world,
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ. Titus ii. 11 -- 14. His proclamation of grace ever
contained fixed characters, and a limited time. He says, Behold, now is the
accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation. And they who hold the
contrary are unbelievers and idolators, with whom we ought not to be yoked. 2
Cor. vi. 1, 2, 14 -- 18. The Son of God is infinitely above Moses; and the Holy
Ghost says, Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Heb.
iii. 1 -- 9. Yet these hearts are now appealed to, as our rule; and it is said,
"Let no one be alarmed, if we positively deny, that he suffered any of that
divine wrath which sinners justly deserve; for there can no such contradictory
idea exist, that a being should be angry with an object with which he is at the
same time well pleased." P. 33.

Here our sinful passions are set up against the eternal truth of God, who
assures us, that he who spares his rod hates his son; but he that loves him,
chastneth him betimes. Prove. xiii. 24. Hence hatred and love are directly
opposite to the carnal feelings of parents and children; and the conduct of the
Son of God under sufferings, ought to raise all our souls above the folly of
babes. Prove. iii. 11, 12. Heb. v. 8 -- 14. xii. 5 -- 10. And to deny that God
can do more than men, is infinitely worse than babes. Men readily admit of
sureties for debt, and for the faithful discharge of promises and covenants;
and when a surety freely and fairly enters into bonds in such cases, justice as
clearly exacts the bonds of the surety, as of the first contractor. Neither can
justice be done to debtor or surety, if the judge is angry with them, or has
any person in admiration because of advantage. Men cannot justly admit of a
surety in capital cases, because they cannot raise the dead, nor change the
heart of the living; but God can do both, and the whole plan of revelation, and
of salvation by Jesus Christ, is built upon this truth. Hence he said to the
disputers of that day, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of
God. Mat. xxii. 29. And this error was so deeply rooted in the minds of his
disciples, that one of them plainly says, As yet they knew not the scripture,
that he must rise again from the dead. John xx. 9. And this point was disputed
in the church of Corinth, which made the apostle say, If Christ be not raised,
your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. But he boldly says, Now is Christ
risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept. For since
by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead: for as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. And the belief of this
is openly declared by every person who is rightly baptized. 1 Cor. xv. 20 --
23, 29.

As by union with Adam, our natural head, we all die, so all believers will
hereafter be raised by their union with Christ, their spiritual head. It is by
his voice that any soul is now raised to spiritual life; and by his voice all
will hereafter be raised from their graves; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation. And says he, Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. I
receive not honor from men; but I know you, that ye have not the love of God in
you. John v. 25, 28, 29, 40 -- 42. Yet these hearts, which have not the love of
God in them, are now set up as our rule, instead of his revealed will. And our
author says, "Let what scheme of atonement be invented that may, the whole
weight of the arguments must depend on one of three general principles, either
that atonement was made for only a part of mankind, while the other part are
excluded even from a possibility of salvation by the plan; or, for all mankind,
in such a sense, that none can be lost and the divine design be accomplished;
or for all mankind, in the sense of a general principle upon which
reconciliation may take place, and even millions lost, and the design be
completely executed." P. 38.

Here all may see that the whole weight of his arguments turns upon invented
schemes, and not upon what God has revealed. And we may discover the following
errors in his inventions.

1. A want of distinguishing betwixt sin, the only object of God's anger, and
the person who bears it. Of the best of his saints it was truly said, Thou wast
a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
Psalm xcix. 8. He pardoned many in the wilderness, whose carcases he doomed to
fall therein, for their unbelief. Yea, Aaron and Moses must openly know his
displeasure, because they sanctified him not in the midst of the children of
Israel. Number. xiv. 11, 20, 21. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 51. David's sin of adultery and
murder were put away; and yet God requited him with the same evils in his
family. One son defiled his daughter; another murdered him; and then drove his
father from the throne, and lay with his wives in the sight of the sun. 2 Samuel
xii. 7 -- 14. xiii. 14, 29. xvi. 22. And though Solomon built the temple, and
was greatly owned by God therein; yet ten tribes were rent away from his son,
for his sin of sitting up the high places. And though immediate war betwixt the
two kingdoms was prevented, yet it broke out afterward; and half a million
were slain in one day; the greatest slaughter that ever happened among mankind
in any one day, since Adam fell. 2 Chronicles. xiii. 17, 18. How great then is God's
anger against sin, even in his own people!

2. Our author appears to be strangely blinded, by the practice of taking the
shadows of the law, to draw a vail over the truth and glory of the gospel. The
word sin, is used in the law for a sin-offering; from whence many have tried to
prove, that the words sinned and sinners in the gospel, mean suffered and
sufferers. Romans v. 12, 19. That is, they would prove from thence, that all
mankind are sufferers, before they are sinners. But as the wages of sin is
death, none can hold that he pays those wages where they are not due, without
implicitly denying the justice of God, in his government of the world. Our
author takes the same truth in the law, and says from thence concerning Christ,
"For him to be made sin therefore, is for him to become a sacrifice, or an
offering for sin." Yet, because actions are sometimes ascribed to God, which
are performed by the devil and his children, and God said, Thou shall bruise
his heel, Remmele says, "Let no one then be alarmed, if we positively deny,
that he suffered any of that divine wrath which sinners justly deserve." P. 32,
33. Hence,

3. He denies the essence of atonement. The infinite excellency of Christ's
teaching and example, was so far from making any atonement for sin, that it
enhanced the guilt of those who despised and rejected him, above the guilt of
the Sodomites, who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Luke x. 12. Jude 7.
Blood upon God's altar, offered by his priest, by fire from heaven, is the only
thing which could make an atonement for the soul, as we have before proved. And
two sons of Aaron were struck dead, because they offered strange fire before
the Lord, which he commanded them not. Levi. ix. 15 -- 24. x. 1 -- 3. And how
terrible must it be for any to imagine, that Christ was sacrificed by the devil
or his children, with fire from hell! Yet this is the natural effect of holding
that the covenant of circumcision is the covenant of grace. For Abraham had no
warrant to circumcise any person, who was not born in his house, until he had
bought him as a servant with money. And since the death of Christ, by which he
purchased his people, the tongues of them who are for many masters, defile the
whole body, and set on fire the whole course of nature, and it is set on fire
of hell. The wisdom of men who have bitter envying and strife in their hearts,
is earthly, sensual, devilish. But the wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. James iii. 1, 6, 14 -- 18.
And the use of secular force to support religious teachers, was always full of
partiality and hypocrisy; and this appears by their own account of how it was
first introduced under the Christian name.

The Holy Ghost gave loud warnings to Christians, against observing days,
months and years, in imitation of the shadows under the law. Gal. iv. 9 -- 11.
And against being spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit, so as to be
subjected to ordinances, after the commandments and doctrines of men; which is
will worship, and has only a show of humility. Col. ii. 8, 19 -- 23. But the
mystery of iniquity was carried so far, in the second and third centuries, as
to call religious teachers priests, in distinction from other saints; and at
length to set some teachers above the rest, under the name of bishops, with an
imagination that they could make times, places and persons holy, by their
decrees and administrations. This led on to the calling of wooden buildings
churches, and baptism regeneration; as well as to the holding that office power
in the church is derived by succession from other officers, and not from the
community as a body. In the mean time, heathen persecution was become very
odious, and the doctrine of a crucified Savior very honorable; therefore, in
the beginning of the fourth century, by a pretended revelation from heaven, the
cross was erected as a military standard, to gratify, and not to crucify the
flesh. And then each bishop was set up as a high priest, to whom Constantine
wrote, and said, "You, and other bishops, priests and deacons, ought to look
unto the repairing of such churches as are under your government and
jurisdiction; that those which are yet standing, may be repaired and enlarged;
or new built if occasion so require. And both you, and others in your name, may
will and require the magistrates and governors of provinces to furnish you with
materials necessary to the building or repairing thereof; for we have signified
unto them by our royal letters, that they shall willingly and cheerfully
furnish you with whatsover your holiness shall think necessary thereunto." This
was his language to each bishop; and "He confirmed with his royal authority,
the canons and determinations of the bishops, which they had decreed in their
public consistories, that so the princes of other nations might not abrogate
their decrees. For the judgments of the priesthood in ecclesiastical matters,
is to be preferred before the opinion of a secular judge." And when he had gone
on in this way until the thirtieth year of his reign, the historian said, "His
empire resembles the celestial empire, so that lifting up his eyes to heaven,
he governs his subjects in this inferior empire, according to the pattern and
form of the heavenly empire. For Law, which is the King of all, has prescribed
a Monarchy to be a government most suitable to prince and people; for a
monarchy does exceed all other kinds of commonwealths and manners of
government; for that government is various which consists in an Aristocracy,
or government of men equal in riches and dignity; also a Democracy, or
government of the people, which is opposed to a Monarchy, is rather a seditious
confusion than a government." Yet in all this time Constantine never submitted
to the yoke of Christ. But when he found his health to fail, in the sixty-fifth
year of his age, he set off for the place where Jesus was baptized; but when he
came to Nicomedia, he perceived that he should not reach there; and then he
assembled a number of bishops, and said to them, "Brethren, the salvation which
I have earnestly desired of God these many years, I do now this day expect; it
is time therefore that we should be sealed and signed with the badge of
immortality. And though I purposed to receive it in the river Jordan, in which
our Savior, for our example, was baptized; yet God, knowing what is fittest
for me, has appointed that I shall receive it in this place, therefore let me
not be delayed. And if he in whose power life and death are, will permit me to
live any longer amongst you, and to join my prayers in the church, with the
prayers of the congregation of God's people, I will live in such a regular
manner, as may become a servant of God." After which, says the bishop, "The
service of baptism was read, and they baptized him with all the ceremonies
belonging to this mysterious sacrament. So that Constantine was the first of
all the Emperors that was regenerated by the new birth of baptism, and that was
signed with the sign of the cross, so that his spirit rejoiced, and being thus
regenerated, his mind was illuminated, and by the raptures of faith so
transported, that he admired in himself the wonderful work of God. After this
sacred ceremony was performed, being clothed now in robes of light, instead of
his robes of regality, he went home, and rested upon his royal bed, putting off
his royal robes, which he would not any more endure to touch. -- Afterward he
made his last will and testament, and hereby gave honorable annual pensions to
the citizens of Rome. He left unto his children the inheritance of his empire
for their patrimony, and disposed of other matters in express words as he
thought convenient. These things were performed in the time of the holy feast
of Pentecost, beginning on the seventh Sunday after Ester, in a holy
remembrance of the confirmation of the scriptures, by the ascending of Christ
into heaven, and the descending of the Holy Ghost upon men. On the last day of
this festival, the Emperor having thus disposed of all matters, died about
noontide, leaving his mortal part to the earth; but his intelligible and divine
part went to God. -- The priests and people, with tears and lamentations,
prayed unto God for the Emperor's soul; which prayers, though they were not
much available, yet God so blessed his servant Constantine, that his sons
succeeded him in his Empire; and as he desired, he had his tomb in the Apostles
Church; and enjoyed the benefit of the masses and prayers read therein."
Eusebius's life of Constantine; London edition, 1663, p. 3, 9, 29, 61, 70, 71,
73, 96.


This is the account of how a form of godliness was then adopted as an engine
of state policy; given by a bishop who was very active therein, and who also
wrote the history of the church, from the birth of Christ, unto the death of
Constantine, with raised expectations of glorious effects that would follow.
But what were the effects? By removing the seat of the Empire to
Constantinople, and dividing it among his three sons, Constantine prepared the
way for its being rent and torn to pieces, and for the bishop of Rome to
advance himself above all men upon earth, and above the God of heaven, whose
Son came into the world to bear witness unto the truth, and to destroy the
works of the devil, which are lying and murder. John viii. 44. xviii. 36, 37. 1
John iii. 7 -- 14. And these evils were carried so far, before England was
subjected to the Pope of Rome, that because the first archbishop of Canterbury
could not effect it by fair means, he said to a synod of ministers, "Since you
refuse peace from your brethren, you shall have wars from your enemies; and
since you will not join with us in preaching the word of eternal life to your
neighbors, you shall receive death from their hands;" as some thousands of
them did soon after. And they pursued this bloody way until 1533, when the
parliament of England forbid any more appeals to Rome, and set up their King as
the head of the church. Rapin's history of England, vol. 1. p. 47, 68, 797.


America had been discovered forty years before, and it was granted to the
crown of Spain, by the Pope of Rome. But the crown of England soon after
claimed the same power, and has exercised all the power of the first beast
therein, even down to our times. For God himself never claimed any higher
power, than to bind us in all cases whatsoever. And the Son of God refused to
make use of the sword to set up his kingdom, John xviii. 36, 37. Therefore the
heads of the churches, both of Rome and England, have exalted themselves above
the eternal God, who never could be guilty of lying nor perjury, nor of
enticing any into sin. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 12. Heb. vi. 17, 18. James i. 13 --
15. No wonder then that their worshippers are given to a strong delusion to
believe a lie.

In 1602 a number of Christians in the joining borders of Nottinghamshire,
Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire, obtained so much light from the word of God, as
openly to withdraw from the church of England, "And as the Lord's free people,
joined themselves by covenant into a church state, to walk in all his ways,
made known, or to be made known to them, according to their best endeavors,
whatever it cost them." New England Chronology, p. 4.
For this they were cruelly persecuted in England, which caused their flight
into Holland, where they were pursued with injurious publications, under the
name of Separatists and Independents, because they held that the church ought
to be independent of the world, and to be governed wholly by the laws and
Spirit of Christ. It was held in England, that the commanding power of the
civil authority took away the offense, that men might otherwise give to weak
brethren, in their use of indifferent things. Upon which it was said, "What
more was ever given to the Pope, than that he might dispense with the moral
law? And what less is given to the King, when by his authority I use things
indifferent with offense to my weak brother? Is not love the fulfilling of the
law? and is it not against the law of love to use things indifferent with
offense? 1 Cor. viii. 11. Romans xiii. 8. xiv. 4, 5, 13, 20." Robinson's answer
to Bernard, 1610, p. 39.


Ten years after, those Independents came over and planted New England; where
their foundation principles now loudly call for the attention of their
posterity, without which our INDEPENDENCE can never be maintained. For if we
believe not, yet God abides faithful; he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy ii. 13.
And not to condemn ourselves in the things which we allow, is the only way of
happiness. Romans xiv. 22. Every man who violates the universal rule of equity,
exalts himself above the eternal God, who never could do any such thing, and
never will let the violation of it escape without punishment in any one
instance. It is therefore impossible that sin can ever escape without
punishment, either in the guilty person, or in his Surety. And we may now see
that reviling and lying is the most dangerous persecution in the world, as it
has obscured the light more than corporal tortures ever did. Mat. v. 10 -- 16.
Natural men have always persecuted those who were born after the Spirit. Gal.
iv. 29. First, because their pride was against allowing that others knew more
than themselves; therefore they spoke evil of those things which they knew not.
Jude 10. Secondly, because the light of holiness is directly against
coveteousness which is idolatry; and the command of God is, Be not ye partakers
with them. Ephesians. v. 1 -- 7, 11. Thirdly, because it is also against luxury, even
the walking in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings,
and abominable idolatries; against which the gospel arms the minds of the
saints. But says the apostle, They think it strange that you run not with them
to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you. 1 Peter iv. 1 -- 4. Paul
says, Necessity is laid upon me -- lest that by any means when I have preached
to others, I myself should be a castaway. 1 Cor. ix. 16 -- 27. He also says,
The end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Faith in Christ, who saves the chief of
sinners, who had sinned ignorantly, and not presumptuously. But some had put
away a good conscience, and concerning faith had made shipwreck. 1 Timothy i. 5,
13 -- 16, 19. They were presumptuous and self-willed, under the name of
liberty. 2 Pet. ii. 10, 19. Saints who shine as lights in the world expose the
crooked ways of a perverse nation. Phil. ii. 15. God's two witnesses have
therefore tormented them that dwelt on the earth. Men who have acted as lords
over God's heritage are of the Gentiles, and they shall tread the holy city
under foot forty and two months; and the last article of their victory appears
to be the temple of God, and the altar. Rev. xi. 1 -- 10. Mark x. 42. The world
have long trampled upon the government which Christ appointed in his church;
and when the merits of his blood are rejected, what have we more?

The Hebrew and Christian churches are his two candlesticks, into which he
poured the oil of his grace, by his law and his gospel, the two olive trees;
the one revealing duty plainly, the other how it is performed acceptably, in
his kingdom which cannot be moved. And every thing which can be shaken, is
evidently now shaking, that the desire of all nations may come, and his house
be filled with glory. Hag. ii. 6 -- 9. Zech. iv. 2 -- 12. Heb. xii. 18 -- 29.
Safety and happiness is the desire of all nations; and this will be gloriously
enjoyed when the witnesses shall be raised above all earthly powers, and the
kingdoms of the world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ.
And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the ark of his testament. Rev. xi. 11 -- 19. The first tables of the law were
broken by man, but the second tables were kept whole in the ark; and the
mercy-seat was above upon it, just as long and just as broad as the ark. Over
it was the cloud of glory, and none but the high priest might go into the holy
place where it was, and that but once a year, with the holy garments on, to
sprinkle blood upon it, and to offer incense, by fire which came from heaven,
and was kept alive upon the altar for burnt-offerings. And the people were to
afflict their souls without, while the priest made atonement within. Levi. xvi.
13, 14, 24, 29, 34. After the Babylonian captivity, the Jews lamented the want
of the ark, the cloud of glory, the holy garments, and the fire from heaven;
but Christ has them all to perfection, and we are most solemnly called to go
on unto perfection. And nothing has done more to obstruct it, than the
imagination, that an external succession of baptism, and laying on of hands, is
essential to any true church power in this world. Heb. vi. 1 -- 6. Aaron and
his sons were washed before their holy garments were put upon them, and then
they laid their hands upon the head of the bullock for the sin-offering. Levi.
viii. 6 -- 8, 14. And persons who were unclean, were to be sprinkled with the
ashes of a burnt heifer, and then each one was to wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and so be clean. Number. xix. 19. Which diverse baptisms were a
figure of what Christ has done to purge our conscience from dead works to
serve the living God. He is light, and he is love; and if we say we have no
sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. This is he that came by water and blood. 1 John i. 5 -- 10.
iv. 8. v. 6. And as God is light and love, every rational soul is under
indispensable obligation to believe all his revealed will, and to obey all his
commandments.

All the light that ever was enjoyed by fallen men, came from the Lamb of God,
who takes away the sin of the world. But every one that does evil hates the
light; and this is the condemnation. They hate him without a cause. And he says
the Spirit reproves of sin, because they believe not on me. John i. 9, 29.
iii. 14 -- 21. xv. 25. xvi. 9. He was within the Jewish church, when he warned
them against looking any where else for his kingdom. Luke xvii. 21. But he is
now at the right hand of the Father, making his people willing in the day of
his power, to serve him in the beauties of holiness. And he will yet strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath, and wound the heads over many countries.
Psalm cx. 1 -- 3, 5, 6. Rev. xix. 11 -- 21. But many have been in such
blindness, as to bring these scriptures to prove that God had set up a light
within them, above his written word. Well therefore did he say, If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Mat. vi. 23. Had it
not been for such darkness, men would not have told of God's excluding any from
his free salvation; nor of his designing atonement for any who are finally
lost. No, nor of any want of sincerity, in his proclaiming free grace to all,
because he did not design to exert the exceeding greatness of his power, to
bring all to believe therein. Ephesians. i. 19. Neither would men have denied the
plain truth of God, who says, As by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. The one by a
just sentence of law; the other by a free gift of grace. The first man, by one
offense ruined all his race; the second man, delivers from many offenses unto
the justification of life. Romans v. 12 -- 19. The sin which we derive from Adam,
is loving the creature more than the Creator, or loving of pleasures more than
God. Romans i. 25. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 5. This is to be dead while we live. 1 Timothy
v. 6. Ephesians. ii. 1, 2. Hence to be taught of God, is the only way wherein any can
come to Jesus Christ; and every man who has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto him. John vi 44, 45. The excellency which this knowledge brings
them, is, gladly to quit all confidence in the flesh, and to place their trust
and affections upon things above, where God is, and Christ at his right hand.

Each regenerate soul has obtained like precious faith with the apostles; and
by giving all diligence, in the pur^^^ of virtue, knowledge, temperance,
patience, godliness, brotherly kindness, and charity, they make their calling
and election sure; and find the holy scriptures to be a more sure word of
prophecy than an audible voice from heaven. For the voice which Peter and John
heard was external and transient; but he who believes on the Son of God, has
the witness in himself, of the eternal truth and excellency of the record that
God gave of his Son; and those who charge him with lying, only confirm the
truth of prophecy. 2 Peter i. 1 -- 10, 19. 1 John v. 3, 10. And the salvation
of God is nigh them who fear him, that glory may dwell in our land.

With this Pamphlet may be had, THE Author's late History of New England,
Discourse of the Two Witnesses, and his other Works.


