This print describes a good man's heart,
Who meant to take the orphan's part;
And may distress forever find,
A friend like him to be so kind.


THE REMARKABLE HISTORY OF TOM JONES, A FOUNDLING.
THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

PRINTED AT WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, By ISAIAH THOMAS, AND SOLD AT HIS BOOK
STORE, MDCCLXXXVII.

THE REMARKABLE HISTORY, etc.
THIS very fortunate young Man, when only a few days old, was put fast asleep
into Mr. Allworthy's bed, on the same night that gentleman returned from
London, to his Country House, which was about a mile from Bath -- Mr. Allworthy
came home late in the evening, and after a short supper with his sister,
retired, much fatigued to his chamber: Here, after having spent some Minutes on
his knees, a custom which he never broke through on any account, he was preparing
to step into bed, when, on opening the clothes, to his great surprise, he
beheld the Infant, wrapped up in some coarse linen, in a sweet and profound
sleep, between his sheets; he stood some time lost in astonishment at the
sight, but as good nature had always an ascendancy in his mind, he was soon
touched with sentiments of compassion for the little wretch before him, and
rang the bell, which called up his housekeeper, Mrs. Deborah Wilkins. -- She
being a strict observer of decency, was exceedingly alarmed, on entering her
master's room, to find him undressed, but more so on his presenting her with
the child, which he ordered immediately to be taken care of; although she took
the liberty to advise him to have it placed at the Church-Warden's door; "It is
a goodly night, says she, only a little rainy and windy, but if it is well
wrapped up, and put into a warm basket, it is two to one but he lives until he is
found in the morning." This goodly advice of his housekeeper, it is most
probable Mr Allworthy did not hear, for by this time he had got one of his
fingers in the infant's hand, which by its gentle pressure, seemed to implore
his assistance. Some months after, his sister, Mrs. Blifill, brought him a
nephew, and Mr. Allworthy gave the nurse strict orders to bring them up
together, and not make the least distinction between the two boys; and was
often heard to say, if Tommy turned out good, he would be as a father to him,
and as he was very rich it was greatly in his power to be so. But though his
goodness preserved the poor orphan, he was exceeding angry with the person who
placed him in his bed, and caused the most diligent search to be made, in order
to find the party; declaring, if he found them out he would immediately commit
them to prison, which, as a justice of the peace, it was in his power to do;
but the search was fruitless.

Nothing material happened respecting Master Blifill and Master Jones, of
consequence sufficient for a place in this history, until they were about eight
years of age. But before I proceed, it is, I think, necessary to inform the
reader, why he took upon him the name of Jones, it was caused, I am told, from
a strong suspicion, that one Molly Jones (servant to Mr. Partridge, a
schoolmaster in the neighborhood) was the person who put him into Mr.
Allworthy's bed; she left her place about that time and making nobody
acquainted where she was gone to, was in most people's opinion, grounds
sufficient to conclude her the person; so all agreed, that Jones should be the
name of the boy. I wish it was in my power as clearly to account for his
christian name, there history is shamefully deficient. But I will detain you no
longer with digressions, for in my opinion it is but of little moment; though
some very learned men have taken the pains to write folio volumes on subjects
more trivial than even what caused Jones to be named Tom.

I observed, that nothing material happened till they were eight years old, at
that time 'Squire Western, a Gentleman who lived about a mile distant, invited
Mr. Allworthy to take a dinner with him, and bring along his two nephews (for
by that name did he suffer the poor helpless orphan to be called) they all had
made a hearty dinner, and Mr. Western returned thanks to Almighty God for the
same, when he told Master Blifill and Master Jones, they might go and play
together, if it was agreeable to Mr. Allworthy; the good man readily consented.
They had been but a very little time at play, when Miss Sophy, Mr. Western's
only child, a girl about their own age, made a third, and she being willing,
like a good soul, to divert them all in her power, said, she had a Goldfinch in
the house quite tame, which she had brought up herself from a week old, and was
very fond of, and if they chose she would bring it into the garden, to show
them. Here she is with a bit of string tied round the bird's leg.



The two lads were mightily pleased with the bird; and after admiring him some
time, Master Blifil begged Sophy would let him hold the string himself; she
was, however, very unwilling to part with it, but as he pledged his word and
honor, he would return the bird to her as safe as he received it, she could
then no longer object; but the instant she put the bird in his hands he slipped
the string from his leg and away he flew. Little Jones was extremely angry with
Master Blifill for behaving so, and sorry for poor little Sophy, who stood
crying for the loss of her favorite bird. Tom observed where he flew, off goes
his clothes, he climbs the tree, and puts his hand on the poor little trembling
tame creature, and presents it to Miss Sophy.



You cannot imagine how much little Jones gained Sophy's good will for
recovering her bird, and how much Master Blifill had displeased her by his
behavior. The moment Mr. Western was informed how Blifill had served his
little darling's bird, he said that if Blifill was not flogged for it on his
return home, he would never speak to Mr. Allworthy again; to this Mr. Allworthy
readily agreed, for he was as much displeased with Master Blifill as Mr.
Western could be.

Tom's generous disposition in recovering the bird, made a deep impression on
Sophy, and as they grew up together, and continued neighbors, he had frequent
opportunities of exerting himself in the assistance of Miss Western. One time
she had been taking a ride on a young spirited horse, who threw her off, and,
if Jones had not been near and caught her in his arms, it is most likely the
fall would have broke her neck; by saving her, he broke his own arm, "but, said
he, if I have preserved you, Miss Sophy, I am sufficiently repaid, for I
promise you, I would have secured you from the least harm at the expense of a
much greater misfortune to myself than I have suffered on the occasion."

When Mr. Western was informed that Mr. Jones had saved his daughter's life, he
was in raptures, and positively declared, that if both the parties were
willing, they should go through the world together, and that he would give
Sophy to him in marriage with twenty thousand pounds. They both cheerfully
consented to this offer, and a day was fixed for the wedding: This was joy
indeed to Mr. Allworthy, for you must recollect his usual saying, "I will be as
a father to him, if he turns out a good boy;" and so he was, for on the wedding
day, he gave Mr. Jones exactly the same sum of money, as Mr. Western gave to
Sophy, so that their fortunes were equal. They now ride about the country in
their coach and six, the happiest couple I believe, in the world, and often
joke with each other about the recovery of the Goldfinch. They take pleasure in
assisting the distressed, and have the prayers of all the poor folks in the
country; on the contrary, Blifill having offended his uncle a great many times,
and made every person he was acquainted with, dislike him, was at last turned
out of Mr. Allworthy's house, and on the point of inlisting as a common soldier
for Africa. When Mr. Jones hearing of his distress, generously insisted on his
accepting Fifty Pounds a year for his Life; for although Mr. Jones was
intimately acquainted with the many falsehoods Blifill had told his uncle, with
an intent to injure him in that good man's opinion, yet he was of so good and
forgiving a disposition, that it was impossible for him to see a person in
distress and not afford him some assistance; especially one he had been brought
up with from a child, and who would have been heir to Mr. Allworthy's great
estate, had not his own unhappy vicious disposition prevented it.

For vice will always be detected,
And virtue ever be protected.
If this true History, my little friends, makes the impression on your minds
which I intend it should, I shall then have no reason to lament the pains I
have taken to collect the materials which form it. I was born and brought up in
the same parish with both the lads, Jones's heart was generous and good, and
glad was I to find Mr. Allworthy had understanding enough to discover it through
the clouds of imprudence with which it was surrounded; but believe me, let your
disposition be ever so good, it is a thousand to one you meet with such a
friend to protect you, as Jones found in Mr. Allworthy. Therefore in a word,
reader, let me advise you to be particularly careful, that none of your games
at play be such as will injure or offend any of your neighbors.

FINIS.

