A PLAN of the several Villages in the ILLINOIS COUNTRY, with Part of the River
Mississippi etc. by Tho. Hutchins.


A TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA, PENNSYLVANIA. MARYLAND, AND NORTH
CAROLINA, COMPREHENDING THE RIVERS OHIO, KENHAWA, SIOTO, CHEROKEE, WABASH,
ILLINOIS, MISSISIPPI, etc.

THE CLIMATE, SOIL and PRODUCE, WHETHER ANIMAL, VEGETABLE, OR MINERAL; THE
Mountains, Creeks, Roads, Distances, Latitudes, etc. and of every Part, laid
down in the annexed MAP. Published by THOMAS HUTCHINS, CAPTAIN in the 60th
Regiment of Foot.

WITH A PLAN of the RAPIDS of the OHIO, a PLAN of the several VILLAGES in the
ILLINOIS COUNTRY, a TABLE of the DISTANCES between FORT PIT and the Mouth of
the OHIO, all Engraved upon Copper.

AND An APPENDIX, containing Mr. PATRICK KENNEDY'S JOURNAL up the ILLINOIS
RIVER, and a correct List of the different NATIONS and TRIBES of INDIANS, with
the Number of FIGHTING MEN, etc.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by JOHN NORMAN, in Marshall's Lane near the Boston
Stone. MDCCLXXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Map, which the following sheets are intended to explain, comprehends
almost the whole of the country, lying between the 34th and 44th degrees of
latitude, and the 79th and 93d degrees of longitude, and describes an extent of
territory, of about 850 miles in length, and 700 miles in breadth; and one,
which, for healthfulness, fertility of soil, and variety of productions, is
not, prehaps, surpassed by any on the habitable globe.

Those parts of the country lying westward of the Allegheny mountain, and upon
the rivers Ohio and Missisippi, and upon most of the other rivers; and the
lakes (laid down in my Map) were done from my own surveys, and corrected by my
own Observations of latitudes, made at different periods preceding, and during
all the campaigns of the last war (in several of which I acted as an Engineer)
and since in many reconnoitring tours. which I made through various parts of
the country, between the years 1764 and 1775.

I have compared my own Observations, and Surveys, respecting the lakes, with
those made by Captain Brehm, of the 60th Regiment of Foot (who was for many
years employed as an Engineer in North America) and I find, that they
correspond with more exactness than Surveys usually do, which are made by
different persons, at different times; -- and I am happy in this opportunity,
of expressing my obligations to this Gentleman, for the cheerfulness with which
he furnished me with his Surveys and Remarks.

It is fit also, that I should take notice, that in the account which I have
given of several of the branches of the Ohio, and Alleghany rivers, I have
adopted the words of the late ingenious Mr. Lewis Evans, as I found he had
properly described them in the Analysis to his Map of the Middle Colonies. --
And as to that portion of my Map, which represents the country lying on the
eastern side of the Alleghony mountain, -- I take the liberty of informing my
Readers, that my reason for inserting it, was to show the several
communications that are now made, and others which may be hereafter, easily,
made, between the navigable branches of the Ohio and Allegheny rivers, and the
rivers in Virginia and Pennsylvania, which fall into the Atlantic ocean, from
the west and north-west.

A TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION, etc.
THE lands lying on the westerdly line, between the Laurel Mountain and the
Allegheny River, and thence northerly up that River for 150 miles, on both
sides of the same, though not much broken with high mountains, are not of the
same excellent quality with the lands to the southward of Fort Pit. They
consist chiefly of White Oak, and Chestnut ridges; and in many places of poor
Pitch Pines, inte^^persed with tracts of good land; and low meadow grounds.

The lands comprehended between the River Ohio, at Fort Pit, and the Laurel
mountain, and thence continuing the same breadth from Fort Pit to the Great
Kanhawa River, may, according to my own observations, and those of the late Mr.
Gist, of Virginia, be generally, and justly described as follows.

The valleys adjoining to the branches of springs of the middle forks of
Youghiogeny, are narrow toward its source, but there is a considerable
quantity of good farming grounds on the hills, near the largest branch of that
River. The lands within a small distance of the Laurel Mountain (through which
the Youghiogeny runs) are in many places broken and stony, but rich and well
timbered; and in some places, and particularly on Laurel Creek, they are rocky
and mountainous.

From the Laurel Mountain, to Monongahela, the first seven miles are good,
level farming grounds, with fine meadows; the timber, white Oak, Chestnut,
Hickory, etc. The same kind of land continues southerly (12 miles) to the upper
branches or forks of this River, and about 15 miles notherly to the place where
the Youghiogeny falls into the Monongahela -- The lands, for about 18 miles in
the same Course of the last mentioned River, on each side of it* though hilly,
are rich and well timbered -- The trees are Walnut, L^cust* Chestnut, Poplar,
and Sugar or sweet Maple. -- The low lands, near the River, are about a mile,
and in several places two miles wide. -- For a considerable way down the River,
on the eastern side of it, the intervals are extremely rich, and about a mile
wide. The Upland for about 12 miles eastwardly, are uncommonly fertile, and
well timbered; -- the low lands, on the western side, a^ narrow; but the
Uplands, on the eastern side of the River, both up and down, are excellent, and
covered with Sugar trees, etc.

Such parts of the country which lie on some of the branches of the
Monongabela, and across the heads of several Rivers, that run into the Ohio,
though in general hilly, are exceedingly fruitful and well watered -- The timber
is Walnut, Chestnut, Ash, Oak, Sugar trees, etc. -- and the interval or meadow
lands are from 250 yards to a quarter of a mile wide.

The lands lying nearly in a north-westerdly direction from the Great Kanbawa
River to the Ohio, and thence north-easterdly, and also upon Le Tort's Creek,
Little Kanhawa River, Buffaloe, Fishing, Weeling, and the two upper and two
lower, and several other very considerable Creeks (or what, in Europe would be
called large Rivers,) and thence east, and south east to the River Monongabela,
are, in point of quality, as follows.

The borders or meadow lands, are a mile, and in some places near two miles
wide; and the Uplands are in common of a most fertile soil, capable of
abundantly producing Wheat, Hemp, F^ax, etc.

The lands which lie upon the Ohio, at the mouths of, and between the above
Creeks, also consist of rich intervals and very fine farming grounds. -- The
whole country abounds in Bears, Elks, Buffaloe, Deer, Turkies, etc. -- An
unquestionable proof of the extraordinary goodness of its soil! India^^, as may
be seen in my Map* lies within the teritory ^ere describ^d. ^t contains about
three millions and an half of Acres, and was granted to Sa^u^l Warton, William
Trent and George M^rgan Esquires, and a few other persons, in the year 176^.


Fort Pit stands at the confluence of the Allegheny and Monongabela Rivers; in
latitude 40 31 44; and about five degrees westward of Philadelphia. In the year
1760, a small town, called Pittsburgh, was b^ilt near Fort Pit, and about 200
families resided in it; but upon the Indian war breaking out (in the month of
May 1763.) They abandoned their houses, and retired into the fort.

In the year 1765 the present town of Pittsburgh was laid out. It is built on
the eastern bank of the River Monongahela, about 200 yards from Fort Pit.

The junction of the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers, form^ the River Ohio,
and this discharges itself into the Missisippi, (in latitude 36 43) about 1188
computed miles from Fort Pit. The Ohio in its passage to the Missisippi,
glides through a pleasant, fruitful and healthy country; -- and carries a great
uniformity of breadth, from 400 to 600 yards, except at its confluence with the
Missisippi, and for 100 miles above it, where it is 1000 yards wide. The Ohi^
for the greater part of the way to the Missisippi, has many meanders, or
windings, and rising grounds upon both sides of it.

The reaches in the Ohio are in some parts from two to four miles in length,
and one of them, above the Muskingum River, called the Long Reach, is sixteen
miles and a half long. The Ohio, about 100 miles above, or notherly of the
Rapids, (formerly called the Falls) is in many places 700 yards wide; and as it
approaches them, the high grounds on its borders gradually diminish, and the
country becomes more level. Some of the banks, or heights of this River, are at
times overflowed by great freshes, yet there is scarce a place between Fort
Pit and the Rapids (a distance of 705 computed miles) where a good road may
not be made; and horses employed in drawing up large barges (as is done on the
margin of the River Thames in England, and the Seine in France) against a
stream remarkably gentle, except in high freshes. The heights of the banks of
the Ohio admit them every where to be settled, as they are not liable to
crumble away. And to these Remarks, it may be proper to add the following
observations of the ingenio^s Mr. Lewis Evans, as published in the Analysis to
his Map of the Middle Colonies of North Ame^ica, in the year 1755. -- He says,
that the Ohio River, as the winter snows are thawed, by the warmth or rains in
the spring, rises in vast floods, in some places. exceeding 20 feet in height,
but scarce any where overflowing its high and upright banks. These floods, Mr.
Evans adds, continue of some heigh^ for at least a month or two, according to
the ^ate or early breaking up of the winter. -- Vessels from 100 to 200 tons
burden, by taking the advantage of these floods, may go from Pittsburg to the
Sea with safety, as then the Falls, Rifts, and Shoals are covered to an
equality with the rest of the River; -- and though the distance is upwards of
2000 miles from Fort Pit to ^he sea, yet as there are no obstructions, to
prevent vessels from proceeding both day and night, -- I am persuaded, that
this extraordinary (...) Voyage may be performed, during the season of the
floods, by ^owing, in sixteen or seventeen days.

The Navigation of the Ohio in a dry season, is rather troublesome from Fort
Pit to the Mingo town, (about seventy five miles) but from thence to the
Missisippi, there is always a sufficient depth of water for barges, carrying
from 100 to 200 tons burden, built in the manner as those are which are used
on the River Thames, between London and Oxford; -- to wit, from 100 to 120 feet
in keel, sixteen to eighteen feet in breadth, and four feet in depth, and when
loaded, drawing about three feet water.

The Rapids in a dry season, are difficult to descend with loaded boats or
b^rges, without a good Pilot; -- it would be advisable therefore for the
Bargemen, in such season, rather than run any risk in passing them, to unload
part of their cargoes, and reship it when the barges have got through the
Rapids. It may, however* be proper to observe, that loaded boats in freshes,
have been easily rowed against the stream, ( up the Rapids) and that others, by
means, only, of a large sail, have ascended them.

In a dry season, the descent of the Rapids, in the distance of a mile, is
about 12, or 15 feet, and the passage down, would not be difficult, except,
prehaps, for the following reasons. Two miles above them, the River is deep,
and three quarters of a mile broad; -- but the channel is much contracted, and
does not exceed 250 yards in breadth; (near three-fourths of the bed of the
River, on the south eastern side of it -- being filled with a flat Limestone
rock, so that in a dry season, there is seldom more than 6 or 8 inches water)
it is upon the ^^thern side of the River and being confined, as above
mentioned; the descending waters tumble over the Rapids with a considerable
degree of celerity and force. The channel is of different depths, but no where,
I think, less than 5 feet; -- It is clear, and upon each side of it are large
broken rocks, a few inches under water Colonel GORDON, in his Journal down the
Ohio mentions, that these Falls do not deserve that Name as the Stream on the
north side, has no sudden pitch, but only runs rapid over the ledge of a flat
rock; -- several boats, he says, passed it in the dryest season of the year;
unloading one third of their freight. They passed on the north side, where the
carrying-place is three quarters of a mile long. On the south-east side, it is
about half that distance, and is reckoned the safest passage for those, who are
unacquainted with it, but it is the most tedious, as during part of the summer,
and Fall, the Battomen drag their boats over the flat rock. The Fall is about
half a mile rapid water, which however is passible, by wading and draging the
boat against the stream, when lowest, and with still greater ease, when the
water is raised a little. --

See the annexed Plan. It is a correct Description of these Rapids, made by the
Editor, on the spot in the year 1766.


. The Rapids are nearly in Latitude 38 8; -- and the only Indian village (1766)
on the banks of the Ohio River between them and Fort Pit, was on the
north-west side, 75 miles below Pittsburgh, called the Mingo town; it contained
60 families.

Most of the Hills on both sides of the Ohio are filled with excellent coal,
and a coal mine was in the year 1760 opened opposite to Fort Pit on the River
Monongahela, for the use of that Garrison. Salt springs, as well as Iron Ore,
and rich Lead Mines, are found bordering upon the River Ohio. One of the
latter, is opened upon a branch of the Sioto, River, and there, the Indian
natives supply themselves with a considerable part of the lead, which they use
in their wars, and hunting.

About 584 miles below Fort Pit, and on the eastern side of the Ohio River,
about three miles from it, at the head of a small Creek or Run, where are
several large and miry Salt Springs, are found numbers of large bones, teeth
and tusk^, commonly supposed to be those of Elephants: -- but the celebrated
Doctor Hunter of London, in his ingenious and curious Observations on these
bones, etc. has supposed them to belong to some Carnivorous animal, larger than
an ordinary Elephant See Philosophical Transactions, 1768
.

On the North-Western side of Ohio, about 11 miles below the Cherokee River, on
a high bank, are the remains of Fort Massac, built by the French, and intended
as a check to the Southern Indians. It was destroyed by them in the year 1763.
This is a high, healthy and delightful situation. A great variety of Game; --
Buf^^loe. Bear, Deer, etc. as well as Ducks, Geese, Swans, Turkies, Pheasants,
Partriges, etc. abounds in every part of this country.

The Ohio, and the Rivers emptying into it, afford green, and other Turtle, and
fish of various sorts; -- particularly Carp, Sturgeon, Perch, and Cats; the two
latter of an uncommon size, viz. Perch, from 8 to 12 pounds weight, and Cats
from 50 to 100 pounds weight.

The lands upon the Ohio, and its branches, are differently timbered according
to their quality and situation. The high, and dry lands, are covered with Red,
White and Black Oak, Hickory, Walnut, Red and White Mulberry and Ash Trees. --
Grape Vines, etc. The low and meadow lands are filled with Sycamore, Poplar,
Red and White Mulberry, Cherry, Beech, Elm, Asp^n, Maple, or Sugar Trees, Grape
Vines, etc. And below, or southwardly of the Rapids, are several large Cedar
and Cypress swamps, where the Cedar and Cypress trees grow to a remarkable
size, and where also is a great abundance of Canes, such as grow in South
Carolina, The country on both sides of the Ohio, extending South-easterdly, and
South-westerdly from Fort Pit to the Missisippi, and watered by the Ohio
River, and its branches, contains at least a million of square miles, and it
may, with truth, be affirmed, that no part of the globe is blessed with a more
healthful air, or climate; -- Colonel GORDON, in his Journal, gives the
following Description of the soil and climate. The country on the Ohio, etc. is
every where pleasant, with large level spots of rich land, remarkably healthy*
-- One general remark of this nature may serve for the whole tract of the
Globe, comprehended between the Western skirts of the Allegheny mountains,
beginning at Fort LECONIER, thence bearing South-westerdly to the distance of
500 miles opposite to the Ohio Falls then crossing them Northerly to the heads
of the Rivers, that empty themselves into the OHIO: thence East along the
ridge, that separates the Lakes and OHIO'S Streams to FRENCH CREEK, which is
opposite to the abovementioned Fort LECONIER, Northerly. -- This country may,
from a proper knowledge, be affirmed to be the most healthy, the most pleasant,
the most commodious, and most fertile spot of earth, known to EUROPEAN people.
watered with more navigable rivers and branches communicating with the
Atlantic Ocean, by the rivers Potowmack, Jamas, Rappahannock, Missisippi, and
St. Lawrence, or capable of producing with less labor and expense Wheat,
Indian Corn, Buck-wheat, Rye, Oats, Barley, Flax, Hemp, Tobacco, Rice, Silk,
Pot-ash, etc. than the country under consideration. And although there are
considerable quantities of high lands for about 250 miles (on both sides of the
river Ohio) southwardly from Fort Pit, yet even the summits of most of the
Hills are covered with a deep rich soil, fit for the culture of Flax and Hemp,
and it may also be added, that no soil can possibly yield larger crops of red
and white Clover, and other useful grass, than this does.

On the North-west and South-east sides of the Ohio, below the Great Kanhawa
River, at a little distance from it, are extensive natural meadows, or
Savannahs. These meadows are from 20 to 50 miles in circuit. They have many
beautiful groves of trees interspersed, as if by art in them, and which serve
as a shelter for the innumerable ^erds of Buffaloe, Deer, etc. with which they
abound I am obliged to a worthy Friend, and Countryman, for the following just,
and judicious observations. They were addressed to the Earl of Hillsborough, in
the year 1770, -- When Secretary of State for the North-American department.

No part of North America, he says, will require less encouragement for the
production of naval stores, and raw materials for manufactories in Europe; and
for supplying the West India island^ with Lumber, Provisions, etc. than the
country of the Ohio; -- and for the following reasons:

First, The lands are excellent, the climate temperate, the native grapes, silk
worms, and mulberry trees, abound every where: hemp, hops, and rye, grow
spontaneously in the valleys and low lands, lead, and iron ore are plenty in
the hills, salt springs are innumerable; and no Soil is better adapted to the
culture of Tobacco, Flax and Cotton, than that of the Ohio.

Second, The country is well watered by several navigable Rivers, communicating
with each other; by which, and a short land carriage, the produce of the Lands
of the Ohio can, even now, (in the year 1772) be sent cheaper to the Seaport
Town of Alexandria, on the River Potoma^k in Virginia (where General ^raddock's
Transports landed his troop^) than any kind of Merchandise, i^ sent from
Northampton to London.

Third, The River Ohio is, at all seasons of the year, navigable with large
boats, like the West Country Barges, rowed only by four or five men; and from
the month of February to April large Ships may be built on the Ohio, and sent
to Sea laden with Hemp, Iron, Flax, Silk, Tobacco, Cotton, Pot-^sh, etc.

Fourth, Flour, Corn, Beef Sh^^-P^ank, and other useful articles, can be sent
down the Stream of Ohio to West-Florida, and from thence to the West India
islands* much cheaper, and in better order, than from New York or Philadelphia,
to these Islands.

Fifth, Hemp, Tobacco, Iron, and such bulky articles, may also be sent down the
stream of the Ohio to the sea, at least 50 per cent cheaper than these articles
were ever carried by a Land Carriage, of only 60 miles, in Pennsylvania; --
where waggonage is cheaper, than in any other part of North America.

Sixth, The Expense of transporting European Manufactories from the Sea to the
Ohio, will not be so much, as is now paid, and must ever be paid, to a great
part of the Counties of Pennsylvania, Virginia* and Maryland. Whenever the
Farmers or Merchants of Ohio, shall properly understand the busine^s of
transportation, they will build Schooners, Sloops, etc. on the Ohio, suitable
for the West India* or European Markets: or, by having Black-Walnut,
Cherry-tree* Oak, etc. properly sawed for foreign Markets, and formed into
raf^^^ in the manner, that is now done by the Settlers near the upper part of
Delaware River in Pennsylvania, and thereon stow their Hemp Iron, Tobacco, etc.
and proceed with them to New Orleans.

It may not, prehaps, be amis^, to observe, that large quantities (...) Flour
are made in the distant ( western) Counties of Pennsylvania an^ sent by an
expensive Land Carriage to the City of Philadelphia, an^ from thence shipped to
South Carolina, and to East and West Florida there being little, or no Wheat
raised in these Provinces. The Riv^^ Ohio seems kindly designed by nature a^
the Channel through which the two Florida: may be supplied with Flour, not only
for their (...) C^nsumption, but also for the carrying on an extensive Commerce
with Jamaica and the Spanish Settlements in the Bay of Mexico. (...) in
abundance are to be obtained in the Hills near the Ohio, and the coun^ry is
every where well watered with large, and constant Springs and Streams, for
Grift, and other Mills.

The passage from Philadelphia to Pensacola, is seldom made in less than a
Month, and sixty shillings sterling per ton, freight (consisting of sixteen
barrels) is usually paid for Flour, etc. thither. Boats carrying ^co or (...)
barrels of Flour, may go in about the same time from the Ohio, ( Pittsburgh) as
from Philadelphia to Pennsacola, and for half the above freight, the Ohio
Merchants would be able to deliver Flour, etc. the^e, in much better order,
than from Philadelphia, and without incurring the damage and delay of the sea,
and charges of insurance, etc. as from thence to Pennsacola.

This is not mere Speculation; for it is a fact, that about the year 1^46 there
was a great scarcity of provisions at New Orleans, and the French Settlements,
at the Illinois, small as they then were, sent thither in one winter, upwards
of eight hundred thousand weight of Flour.


.

Having made these Observations, -- I proceed to give a brief Account of the
several Rivers and Creeks which fall into the River Ohio.

Canawagy, when raised by freshes, is passable with small Battoes, to a little
Lake at its head; -- from thence there is a portage of 20 miles to Lake Erie,
at the mouth of Jadaghque. This portage is seldom used, because Canawagy has
scarcely any water in it in a dry season.

Bughaloons, is not navigable; but is remarkable for extensive meadows
bordering upon it.

Frecnh Creek affords the nearest passage to Lake Erie. It is navigable with
small boats to Le Beuf, by a very crooked Channel; the portage thence to
Presquile, from an adjoining peninsula, is 15 miles. This is the usual Route
from Quebec to Ohio.

Licking and Lacomic Creeks do not afford any Navigation; but there is plenty
of coals, and stones for building in the Hills, which adjoin them.

A PLAN of the RAPIDS, in the River Ohio, by Those. Hutchins.


From A to B is the Carrying Place on the Nothern Side of the Ohio. From C to D
is the safest and shortest Carrying Place. The dotted line represents the
Channel of the River.

Toby's Creek is deep enough for Battoes for a considerable way up, thence by a
short portage to the West branch of Susquehannah, a good communication is
carried on between Ohio and the eastern parts of Pennsylvania.

M^ghulbug^^^^tum, is passable also by flat bottom boats in the same manner as
Toby's Creek is to Susquehannah, and from thence to all the Settlements in
Northumberland county, etc. in Pennsylvania.

Kishkeminetas, is navigable in like manner as the preceding Creeks, for
between 40 and 50 mile^, and good portages are found b^tween Kishkeminetas,
Juniatta, and Potom^^ Rivers. -- Coal and Salt are discovered in the
neighborhood of these Rivers.

M^n^ngahela is a large River. and at its junction with the All^g^^ny River
stands Fort Pit. It is deep, and gentle, and naviga^le with Battoes and
Barges, beyond Red Stone Creek, and still farther with lighter craft. At
sixteen miles from its mouth, is Y^ughiog^^y; This River is n^vigable with
Bat^eaux or Ba^ges to the foot of Laurel Hill.

B^aver Cre^k has water sufficient for flat bottom boats. At Kishkuskes (about
16 miles up) are two branches of this Creek, which spread opposite ways; one
interlocks with French Creek and C^erage, -- ^he other with Muskingum and
Cayahoga; on this branch, about thirty-five miles above the Forks, are many
Salt springs. -- It is practicable with Canoes about twenty miles farther.

Muskingum is a fine gentle River, confined by high banks, which prevent its
floods from overflowing the surrounding Land. It is 250 yards wide at its
confluence with the Ohio, and navigable, without any obstr^ctions, by large
Battoes or Barges, to the three L^g's and by small ones to a little Lake at its
head.

From thence to Cayahoga, (the Creek that leads to Lak^ Erie). The Cayahoga is
muddy, and not very swift, but no where obstructed with falls or Rifts. Here
are fine Uplands, extensive meadows, oak and mulberry trees fit for Ship
building, and Walnut, Chestnut, and P^plar trees suitable for domestic
services. -- Cayahoga furnishes the be^^ portage between Ohio and Lake Erie; at
its mouth it is wide and deep enough to receive large Sloops from the Lake. It
will hereafter be a place of great importance.

Muskingum in all its wide extended branches, is surrounded by most excellent
land, and abounds in Springs, and conveniences particularly adapted to
settlements remote from Sea Navigation; -- such as Salt springs, Coal, Clay and
Free stone. -- In 1748 a Coal mine opposite to Lame^shicola mouth took fire,
and continued burning above twelve months, but great quantities of coal still
remain in it. Near the same place are excellent Wh^tst^nes, and about 8 miles
higher up the River, is plenty of White and Blue Clay for Glass works and
Pottery.

Hock^ocking is navigable with large flat bottom boats between seventy and
eighty miles; it has fine meadows with high banks, which seldom overflow, and
rich Uplands (...) its borders. Coal, and quarries of Freestone are found about
15 miles up this Creek.

Big K^^hawa falls into the Ohio upon its south ea^ters side, and is so
considerable a branch of this River, that it may be mistaken for the Ohio
itself by persons ascending it. It is slow for ten miles, to little broken
Hills, -- the low land is very rich, and of about the same breadth (from the
Pipe Hills to the Falls) as upon the Ohio. After going 10 miles up Ka^hawa the
land is hilly, and the water a little rapid for ^0 or 60 miles further to the
Falls, yet Batteau^ or Barges may be easily rowed thither. These Falls were
formerly thought impassible,; but late discoveries have proved, that a wagon
road may be made through the mountain, which occasions the Falls, and that by a
portage of a few miles only, a communication may be had between the waters of
Great Kanhawa and Ohio, and those of James River in Virginia.

Tottery lies upon the south-eastern side of the Ohio, and is navigable with
Batteaux to the Ouasioto mountains. It is a long River, has few branches, and
interlocks with Red Creek, or Clinche'^ River (a branch of the Cherokee) -- And
has below the mountains, especially for 15 miles from its mouth, very good
land. Here is a preceptible difference of Climate between the upper and this
part of the Ohio. Here the large Red or Carolina Cane grows in plenty, even
upon the Upland, and the winter is so moderate as not to destroy it. The same
moderation of climate continues down Ohio, especially on the south-east side to
the Rapids, and thence on both sides of that River to the Missisippi.

Great Salt Lick Creek, is remarkable for fine land, plenty of Buffaloes, Salt
springs, White Clay, and Limestone. Small boats may go to the crossing of the
war Path without any impediment. The Salt Springs render the waters ^nfit for
drinking, but the plenty of fresh springs in their vicinity, make sufficient
amends for this inconvenience.

Kentucke is larger than the preceding Creek; it is surrounded with high clay
banks, fertile lands, and large salt springs. Its Navigation is interrupted by
shoals, but pas^^ble with small boats to the gap, where the war Path goes
through the Ouasio^o mountains.

Sioto, is a large gentle River bordered with rich (...), or Meadows. It
overflows in the spring, and then spread^ about half a mile, though when confined
within its banks it is scarce a furlong wide.

If it floods early, it seldom retires within its banks in less than a month,
and is not fordable frequently in les^ than two months,

The Sioto, besides having a great extent of most excellent land on both sides
of the River, is furnished with Salt on an eastern branch, and Red Bole on
Necunsia Skeintat.

The Stream of Sioto is gentle and passable with large ^attoes or Barges for a
considerable way, and with smaller boats, near 200 miles to a portage, of only
four miles to Sandusky.

Sandusky is a considerable River abounding in level land its Stream gentle all
the way to the mouth, where it is large enough to receive Sloops. The Northern
Indians cross Lake Erie here from Island to Island, land at Sandusky and go by
a direct path to the lower Shawanoe town, and thence to the gap of the Ousaoto
Mountain, in their way to the Cuttawa country,

Little Mineami River is too small to navigate with Batteaux. It has much fine
land and several Salt Springs, its high banks and gentle current prevent its
much overflowing the surrounding lands in freshes.

Great Mineami, Assenereniet or rocky River, has a very stony channel; a swift
Stream, but no Falls. It has several large branches, passable with boats a
great way; one extending westward toward the Wabash River, another toward a
branch of Mineami River (which runs into Lake Erie) to which there is a
portage, and a third has a portage to the west branch of Sandusky, besides Mad
Creek where the French formerly established themselves. Rising ground here and
there a little story, which begins in the northern part of the Peninsula,
between the Lakes Erie Huron and Michigan, and extend across little Mineami
River below the Forks, and southwardly along the rocky River, to Ohio.

Buffalo^ River falls into the Ohio on the eastern side of it, at the distance
of 925 computed miles from Fort Pit. It is a very considerable branch of the
Ohio; is 200 yards wide, navigable upwards of 150 miles for Battoes or Barges,
of 30 feet long, 5 feet broad, and 3 feet deep, carrying about 7 tons, and can
be navigated much farther, with (...) canoes. The Stream is moderate. The Lands
on both sides of this River are of a most luxuriant quality, for the production
of Hemp, Flax, Wheat, Tobacco, etc. They are covered with a great variety of
lofty and useful timber; as Oak, Hick^ry, Mulberry, Elm, etc. Several persons
who have ascended this River, say, that salt springs, Coal, Lime and Freestone,
etc. are to be found in a variety of places.

The Wabash, is a beautiful River, with high and upright banks, less subject to
overflow* than any other River (the Ohio excepted) in this part of America. It
discharges itself into the Ohio, one thousand and twenty two miles below Fort
Pit, in latitude 37 41 l. -- at its mouth, it is 270 yards wide; is navigable
to Ouitanon (412 miles) in the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, with Battoes or
Barges, drawing about three feet wa^^^ From thence, on account of a rocky
bottom, and shoal water, large canoes are chiefly employed, except when the
River is swelled with rains, at which time it may be ascended with boats, such
as I have just described, (197 miles further to the Miami carrying-place, which
is nine miles from the Miami village, and this is situated on a River of the
same name, that runs into the south-south-west part of Lake Erie. The Stream of
the Wabash, is generally gentle to Fort O^iatanon, and no where obstructed with
Falls, but is by several Rapids* both above and below that Fort, some of which
are pretty considerable. There is also a part of the River for about three
miles, and 30 miles from the carrying-place, where the Channel is so narrow,
that it is necessary to make use of setting poles, instead of oars. The land on
this River is remarkably fe^tile, and several parts of it are natural meadows,
of great extent, covered with fine long grass. -- The timber is large and high,
and in such variety, that almost all the different kinds growing upon the Ohio,
and its branches (but with a greater proportion of black and white
mulberry-trees) may be found here. A silver mine has been discovered about 28
miles above Ouitanon, on the nothorn side of the Wabash, and probably others
may be found hereafter. The Wabash abounds with Salt Springs, and any quantity
of salt may be made from them, in the manner now done at the S^li^e in the
Illinois country: -- the hills are replenished with the b^st coal, and there is
plenty of Lime and Free Stone, Blu^ Yeloe and White Clay, for Glass Works and
Pottery. Two French settlement^ are established on the Wabash, called Post
Vincient and Ouiatanon; the first is 150 miles, and the other 262 miles from
its mouth. The former is on the eastern side of the River, and consists of 60
settlers and their families. They raise Indian Corn, -- Wheat; and Tobacco of
an extraordinary good quality; -- superior, it is said, to that produced in
Virginia. They have a fine breed of horses (brought originally by the Indians
from the Spanish settlements on the western side of the River Missisippi) and
large stocks of Swine, and Black Cattle.

The settlers deal with the natives for Furrs and Deer skins, to the amount of
about 5000 l. annually. Hemp of a good texture grows spontaneously in the low
lands of the Wabash, as do Grapes in the greatest abundance, having a black,
thin skin and of which the inhabitants in the Autumn, make a sufficient
quantity (for their own consumption) of well-tasted Red Wine. Hops large and
good, are found in many places, and the lands are particularly adapted to the
culture of Rice. All European fruits: -- Apples, Peaches, Pears, Cherries,
Currants, Goosberrys, Melons, etc. thrive well, both here, and in the country
bordering on the River Ohio

Ouiatanon, is a small stockaded sort on the western side of the Wabash, in
which about a dozen families reside. The neighboring Indians are the
Kickapoo^, Musquitons, Pya^kis^aws, and a principle part of the Ouiatanons, The
whole of these tribes consists, it is supposed, of about one thousand warriors.
The fertility of soil, and diversity of timber in this country, are the same as
in the vicinity of Post Vincient. The annual amount of Skins and Furrs,
obtained at Ouiatanon is about 8000 l. By the River Wabash, the inhabitants of
Detroit move to the so^thern parts of Ohio, and the Illinois country, Their
rout is by the Miami River to a carrying-place, which, as before ^^ated, is
nine miles to the Wabash, when this River is raised with Freshes; but at other
seasons, the distance is from 1^ to 30 miles including the portage. The whole
of the latter is through a level country. Carts are usually employed in
transporting boats and merchandise, from the Miami to the Wabash River.

The Shawanoe River empties itself on the eastern side of Ohio, about 95 miles
southwardly of the Wabash River. It is 250 yards wide at its mouth, has been
navigated ^180 miles in Battoes of the construction of those mentioned in the
preceding article, and from the depth of water, at that distance from its
mouth* it is presumed, it may be navigated much further. The soil and timber of
the lands, upon this River, are exactly the same as those upon Buffaloe River.

The Cherokee River discharges itself into the Ohio on the same side, that the
Shawanoe River does, that is, -- 1^ miles below or southerly of it, and 11
miles above, or northerly of the place where Fort Massac formerly stood, and 57
miles from the confluence of the Ohio with the River Missippi. -- The Cherokee
River has been navigated 900 miles from its mouth. At the distance of 220 miles
from thence, it widens from 400 yards (its general width) to between two or
three miles, and continues this breadth for near thirty miles, farther. The
whole of this distance, is called the Muscle Shoals. Here the Channel is
obstructed with a number of Islands, formed by trees and drifted wood, brought
hither, at different seasons of the year, in freshes and floods. In passing
these islands, the middle of the widest intermediate water, is to be navigated,
as there it is deepest. From the mouth of the Cherokee River to Muscle Shoals
the current is moderate, and both the high and low land^ are rich, and
abundantly covered with Oaks, Walnut, Sugartrees, Hickory, etc. -- About 200
miles above these shoals, is, what is called, the Whirl, or Suck, occasioned, I
imagine, by the high mountain, which there confines the River (supposed to be
the Laurel mountain,) The Whirl, or Suck continues rapid for about three miles.
Its width about 50 yards. Ascending the Cherokee River, and at about 100 miles
from the Suck, and upon the south eastern side of that River, is Highwasee
River. Vast tracts of level and rich land border on this River; but at a small
distance from it, the country is much broken, and some part of it produce only
Pine Trees. Forty miles higher up the Cherokee River on the north western side,
is Clinche's River. It is 150 yards wide, and about 50 miles up it several
families are settled. From Clinche's to Tenesee River is 100 miles. It comes in
on the eastern side, and is 250 yards wide. About 10 miles up thi^ River is a
Cheerokee town called Cho^a, and further up this branch, are several other
Indian towns, possessed by Indians, called, the ^ver hill Cherokees. The
navigation of this branch* is much interrupted by rocks, as is also the River,
called, French Br^ad, which comes into the Cherokee River 50 miles ^bove the
Tene^^^ and on the same side. 150 miles above ^rench Br^ad is Long Island
(three miles in length) and from thence to the source of the Cherokee River is
60 miles* and the whole distance is so rocky, as to be scarcely navigable with
a canoe.

By the Cherokee River, the emigrants from the frontier counties of Virginia
and North Carolina, pass to the settlements in West Florida upon the River
Missisippi. They embark at Long Island.

I now proceed to give a Description of that part of my Map called the Illinois
country, lying between the Mssisippi westerly, the Illinois River northerly,
the Wabash easter^y, and the Ohio southerly.

The land at the confluence, or Fork of the Rivers M^ssisippi and Ohio, is
above 20 feet higher than the common surface of these Rivers; yet so
considerable are the Spring floods, that it is generally overflowed for about a
week, as are the lands for several miles back in the country. -- The soil at
the Fork is composed of Mud, Earth and Sand, accumulated from the Ohio and
Missisippi Rivers. It is exceedingly fertile, and in its natural state, yields
Hemp, Pea-Vines, Grass, etc. and a great variety of trees, and in particular,
the Aspen Tree of an unusual height and thickness.

For 25 miles up the Missisippi (from the Ohio) the country is rich, level and
well timbered; -- and then several gentle rising grounds appear, which
gradually diminish at the distance of between four or five miles eastward from
the River. From thence to the Kaskaskias River is 65 miles. The country is a
mixture of hills and valleys; some of the former are rocky and steep; -- but
they, as well as the valleys, are shaded with fine Oaks, Hickory, Walnut, Ash
and Mulberry trees, etc. Some of the high grounds afford the most pleasant
situations for settlements. Their elevated, and airy positions, together with
the great luxuriance of the Soil, every where yielding plenty of Grass, and
useful plants, promise health, and ample returns to industrious settlers.

Many quarries of Lime, Freestone, and Marble have been discovered in this part
of the country.

Several Creeks, and Riv^rs fall into the Missisippi, in the above distance (of
65 mi^es) but no remarkable ones, except the Rivers a V^se and K^skaskias; --
the former is navigable for Battoes of about 60, and the latter for about 130
miles; -- both these Rivers run through a rich country^ abounding in extensive,
natural m^adows, and numberless herds of Buffaloe, Deer, etc.

The high grounds, just mentioned, continue along the eastern side of the
Kaskaskias River at a small distance from it, for the space of five miles and a
half, to the K^skaskias village; then they incline more toward that river, and
run nearly parallel with the eastern bank of the M^ssisippi, at the distance of
about three miles in some parts, and four miles in other parts from it. These
principally composed of Lime and Free stone, and are from 100 to 130 feet high,
divided in several places by deep cavities, through which many small rivulets
pass before they fall into the Missisippi. The sides of these hills fronting
this River, are in many places perpendicular, -- and appear like solid pieces
of stone Masonry, of various colors, figures and sizes.

The low land between the Hills and the Missisippi, begins on the north side of
the Kaskaskias River, and continues for three miles above the River, Misouri,
where a high ridge terminates it, and forms the eastern bank of the Missisippi.
-- This interval land is level, has few trees, and is of a very rich soil,
yielding shrubs and most fragrant flowers, which added to the number and extent
of meadows and ponds dispersed through this charming valey, render it exceedingly
beautiful and agreeable.

In this vale stand the following villages, viz. Kaskaskias, which, as already
mentioned, is five miles and a half up a River of the same name, running
northerly and southerly. This village contains 80 houses, many of them well
built; several of stone, with gardens, and large lots adjoining. It consists of
about 500 white inhabitants, and between four and five hundred negroes. The
former have large ^^ocks of Black Cattle, Swine, etc.

Three miles northerly of Kaskaskias, is a village of Illinois Indians, (of the
Kaskaskias tribe) containing about 210 persons and 60 warriors. They were
formerly brave and warlike, but are degenerated into a drunken, and debauched
tribe, and so indolent, as scarcely to procure a sufficiency of Skins and Furrs
to barter for clothing.

Nine miles further northward, than the last mentioned village, is another,
called La prairie du Rocher, or (the Rock meadows.) It consists of 100 white
inhabitants and 80 negroes.

Three miles northerly of this place, on the banks of the Missisippi stood Fort
Chartres. It was abandoned in the year 1772, as it was rendered untenable by
the constant washings of the River Missisippi in high floods. -- The village of
Fort Chartres, a little southward of the Fort, -- contained so few inhabitants,
as not to deserve my notice.

One mile higher up the Missisippi than Fort Chartres, is a village settled by
170 warriors of the Piorias and Mitchigamias (two other tribes of the Illinois
Indians.) They are as idle and debauched, as the tribe of Kaskaskias, which I
have just described.

Four miles higher than the preceding village, is St. Philips. It was formerly
inhabited by about a dozen families, but at present, is possessed only by two
or three. -- The others have retired to the western side of the Missisippi. --
Forty-five miles further northward, than St. Philips (and one mile up a small
River, on the southern side of it) stands the village of Cahokia. It has 50
houses* many of them well built, and 300 inhabitants, possessing 80 negroes,
and large stocks of black Cattle, Swine, etc.

Four miles above Cahokia, on the western, or Spanish side of the Missisippi,
stands the village of St. Louis on a high piece of ground. It is the most
healthy and pleasurable situation of any known in this part of the country.
Here the Spanish Commandant, and the principal Indian Traders reside; who by
concilating the affections of the natives, have drawn all the Indian trade of
the Misouri, part of that of the Missisippi, and of the tribes of Indians
residing near the Ouisconsing, and Illinoi^ Rivers, to this village. In St.
Louis are 120 houses, mostly built of stone. They are large and commodious.
This village has 800 inhabitants, chiefly French; some of them have had a
liberal education, are polite and hospitable. They have about 150 negroes, and
large stocks of black cattle, etc.

Twelve miles below, or southerly of Fort Chartres on the Western bank of the
Missisippi, and nearly opposite to the village of Kaskaskias, is the village St
Genevieve or Miss^re. It contains upwards of 100 houses, and 460 inhabitants,
besides Negroes. This and St. Louis are all the villages that are upon the
western, or Spanish side of the Missisippi.

Four miles below St. Genevieve (on the western bank of Missisippi) at the
mouth of a Creek, is a Hamlet, called the Saline. Here all the sal^ is made,
which is used in the Illinois country, from a salt spring, that is at this
place. In the several villages on, and near the Missisippi; which I have just
described, (and which are delineated in the annexed plan) there were in the
year 1771, twelve hundred and sev^nty three ^encible (...)* To wit. --

On the Eastern side of the Missisippi, French 300 Negroes 230


On the Western side of the Missisippi.

At St. Genevieve,
French 203 Negroes 10
At St. Louis,
French 415 Negroes ^0 12^^

The Ridge which form, the eastern bank of the Missisippi, above the Misouri
River, continues northerly to the Illinois River, and then directs its course
along the eastern side of that River, for about 220 miles, when it declines, in
gentle slopes, and ends in extensive rich savannahs. On the top of this Ridge,
at the mouth of the Illinois River, is an agreeable and commanding situation,
for a fo^t, and though the Ridge is high and steep (about 130 feet high) and
rather difficult to ascend; yet when ascended, it affords a most delightful
prospect. The Missisippi is distinctly seen from its summit for more than
twenty miles, as are the beautiful meanderings of the Illinois River, for many
leagues; next a level, fruitful meadow presents itself, of at least one hundred
miles in circuit on the western side of the M^ssisippi, watered by several
lakes, and shaded by small groves of copses of trees, scattered in different
parts of it, and then the eye, with rapture, surveys, as well the high lands
bordering upon the River Misouri, as those at a greater distance up the
Missisippi, -- In fine, this charming ridge is covered with excellent Grass,
large Oak, Walnut trees, etc. and at the distance of about nine miles from the
Missisippi, up the Illinois River, are seen many large savannahs, or meadows
abounding in Buffaloe, Deer, etc.

In ascending the Missisippi, Cape au Gres, particularly attracted my
attention. It is about 8 leagues above the Illinois River, on the eastern side
of the Missisippi, and continues above five leagues on that River. There is a
gradual descent back to delightful meadows, and to beautiful and frrtile
uplands watered by several Rivule^s, which fall into the Illinois River between
30 and 40 miles from its entrance into the Missisippi, and into the latter at
Cape au G^es. The distance from the Missisippi, to the River Illinois across
the country, is lessened or increased, according to the windings of the former
River; the smallest distance is at Cape au Gres, and there it is between four
and five miles. The lands in this intermediate space between the above two
Rivers are rich, almost beyond parallel, covered with large Oaks, Walnut etc.
and not a stone is ^o be seen, except upon the sides of the River. It is even
acknowle^ged by the French inhabitants, that if settlements were only begun at
Gape au Gres, those upon the Spanish side of the Missisippi, would be
abandoned, as the former would excite a constant succession of settlers, and
intercept all the trade of the upper M^ssisippi.

The Illinois River furnishes a communication with Lake Michigan, by the
Chicago River, and by two portages between the latter and the Illinois River;
the longest of which does not exceed four miles.

The Illinois country is in general of a superior soil to any other part of
North America that I have seen. It produces fine Oak, Hickory, Cedar, Mulberry
trees, etc. some Dying roots and medecinal Plants; Hops, and excellent wild
grapes, and in the year 1769, one hundred and ten hogsheads of well tasted and
strong Wine, were made by the French settlers, from these Grapes.

A large quantity of Sugar is also annually made from the juce of the Maple
tree; and as the Mulberry trees are large and numerous, I presume the making of
Silk will employ the attention and industry of the settlers, when the country
is more fully inhabited than at present, and especially ^ the winters are much
more moderate, and favorable for the breed of Silk Worms, than they are in
many of the sea coast provinces. Indigo may likewise be successfully
cultivated, (but not more than two cuttings in Wheat, Peace, and Indian Corn
thrive well, as does every sort of Grain and Pulse, that is produced in any of
the old Colonies. Great quantities of Tobacco are also yearly raised by the
inhabitants of the Illinois, both for their own consumption, and that of the
Indians; -- but little has hitherto been exported to Europe. Hemp grows
spontaneously, and is of a good texture; -- Its common height i^ 10 feet, and
its thickness three inches (the latter reckoned within about a foot of the
root) and with little labor any quantity may be cultivated. Flax seed has
hitherto been only raised in small quantities. There has however been enough
produced to show, that it may be sown to the greatest advantage. Apples, Pears,
Peaches, and all other European fruits succeed admirably. Iron, Copper, and
Lead Mines, as also Salt Springs, have been discovered in different parts of
this territory. The two latter are worked on the Spanish side of the
Missisippi, with considerable advantage to their owners. There is plenty of
fish in the Rivers, particularly Cat, Carp, and Perch, of an uncommon size. --
Savannahs, or natural meadows, are both numerous and extensive; yielding
excellent grass, and feeding great herds of Buffaloe, Deer, etc. Ducks, Teal,
Geese, Swans, Cranes, Pelicans, Turkies, Pheasants, Partridges, etc. such as
are seen in the Sea coast Colonies, are in the greatest variety and abundance.
-- In short, every thing, that a reason (...) mind can desire, is to be found,
or may, with little pains, be produced here See the annexed Plan of the
villages in the Illinois country etc. and see Appendix, No. 1. for a farther
account thereof.
.

Niagara Fort is a most important post, It secures a greater number of
communications, through a large country, than probably any other pass in
interior America; -- it stands at the entrance of a straight, by which Lake
Ontario, is joined to Lake Erie, and the latter is connected with the three
great Lakes Huron, Michegan, and Superior. About nine miles above Fort Niagara,
the carrying place begins. It is occasioned by the stupendous cataract of that
name. The quantity of water which tumbles over this Fall is unparralleled in
America; -- its height, is not less than 137 feet This Fall would interrupt
the communication between the Lakes Ontario and Erie; if a road was not made up
the hilly country; that borders upon the straight. This road extend^ to ^ small
post eighteen miles from the Fort Niagara He^^ the traveller embarks in a
battoe or canoe, and proceeds eighteen miles to a small fort at Lake Erie.
(...) may be proper also to add, that (...) the end of the first two miles, in
the last mentioned distance of 18 miles, the Stream of the River is divided by
a large Island, above nine miles in length,; and at the upper end of it, about
a (...) from Lake Erie, are three or four islands, not far from ^^ch other;
these islands by interrupting and con^ining the waters discharged from the
Lake, greatly increase the rapidity of the stream; which indeed is so violent,
that the stiffest gale is scarcely sufficient to enable a large vessel to stem
it, but it is successfully resisted in small battoes or canoes, that are rowed
near the shore.

Lake Erie, is about 225 miles in length, and upon a medium about 40 miles in
breadth. It affords a good navigation for shipping of any burden. The coast on
both sides of the Lake is generally favorable for the passage of battoes and
canoes. Its banks in many places have a flat sandy shore, particularly to the
eastward of the Peninsula, called Long Point, which extends into the Lake, in a
south eastern direction for upwards of 18 miles, and is not more than five
miles wide in the broadest part, but the Isthmus, by which it joins the
continent, is scarcely 200 yards wide. The Peninsula is composed of Sand, and
is very convenient to haul boats out of the su^f upon, (as is also almost every
other part of the shore) when the Lake is too rough for ^owing or sailing; yet
there are some places, where, in ^oisterous weather (on account of their great
perpendicular height) it would be dangerous to approach, and impossible to
land: most of these places are marked in my Map with the letter X.

Lake Erie has a great varety of fine fish, such as Sturgeon, Eel, White Fish,
Trout, Perch* etc.

The country northward of this Lake, is in many parts ^^elled with moderate
hills, but no high mountains. The climate is temperate, and the air healthful.
The lands are well timbered, (but not generally so rich, as those upon the
southern side of the lake) and for a considerable distance from it, and for
several miles eastward of Cayahoga River, they appear quite level, and
e^^remely fertile; and except where extensive savannahs, or natural meadows
intervene, are covered with large Oaks, Walnut, Ash, Hickory, Mulberry,
Sassafras, etc. etc. and produce a great variety of Shrubs and Medic^nal roots.
-- Here also is great plenty of Buffaloe Deer Turkies Partriges, etc.

Fort Detroit is of an oblong figure, built with stockades, and advantageously
situated, with one entire side commanding the river, called Detroit. This fort
is near ^ mile in circumference, and encloses about one hundred houses, built
in a regular manner, with parallel street^, crossing each other at right
angles. Its situation is delightful, and in the center of a pleasant fruitful,
country.

The strait St. Clair (commonly called the Detroit River) is at its entrance
more than three miles wide, but in ascending it, it^ width perceptibly
diminishes, so that opposite to the Fort, (which is 18 miles from Lake Erie) it
does not exceed half a mile in width. From thence to Lake St. Clair, it widens
more than a mile. The channel of the straight is gentle and wide, and deep
enough for shipping of great burden, although it is incommoded by several
islands; one of which is more than seven miles in length. These Islands are of
a fertile soil, and from their situation afford a very agreeable appearance.
For eight miles below, and the same distance above Fort Detr^it, on both sides
of the River, the country is divided into well cultivated plantations, and from
the contiguity of the farmers houses to each other, they appear as two long
extended villages. The inhabitants, who are mostly French, are about 2000 in
number: 500 of whom are as good marksmen, and as well accustomed to the woods,
as the Indian natives themselves. They raise large stocks of black cattle, and
great quantities of corn, which they grind by wind mills, and manufacture into
excellent Flour. The chief trade of Detroit consists in a barter of course
European goods with the natives for Furrs, Deer-s^ins, Tallow, etc.

The rout from Lake St. Clair to Lake Huron, is up a straight or River, about
400 yards wide. This river de^ives itself from Lake Huron, and at the distance
of 33 miles ^oses itself in Lake St. Clair. It is in general rapid but
particularly so near its source; -- its channel, and also that of Lake St
Clair, are sufficiently deep for shipping of very considerable burden. This
strait has several mouths, and the lands lying between them are fine meadows.
The country on both sides of it, for 15 miles, has a very level appearance, but
from thence to Lake Huron, it is in many places broken, and covered with white
Pines, Oaks, Maple, Birch and Beech.

APPENDIX, No. I. Mr. PATRICK KENNEDY'S Journal of an Expedition undertaken by
himself and several Coureurs de Bois in the year 1773, -- from Kaskaskias
Village in the Illinois County to the Head W^ters of the Illinois River N. B.
This Journal was never printed before.
.
JULY 23, 1773. We set out form Kaskaskias in search of a Copper mine, and on
the 31st reached the Illinois River; it is 84 miles from Kaskaskias. The same
day we entered the Illinois River which is 18 miles above that of the Missouri.
The water was so low, and the sides of the river so full of weeds, that our
progress was much interrupted, being obliged to row our boat in the deep water,
and strong current. The chain of rocks, and high hills which begin at the
Piasas about three miles above the Missouri, extend to the mouth of the
Illinois River, and continue along the south-eastern side of the same in an
east-north-east course. About eighteen miles up this river, on the eastern
side, is a little river called by the natives Macopin or White Potato River; it
is 20 yards wide, and navigable nine miles to the hills. The shore is low on
both sides; the timber, Bois connu, or Paccan, Maple, Ash, Button wood, etc.
The course of the Illinois River here, is N. N, E; the land is well timbered,
and covered with high weeds. There are fine meadows at a little distance from
the river; the banks of which do not crumble away as those of the Missisippi
do: we passed numbers of Islands, some of them between nine and twelve miles in
length, and three miles in bre^dth. -- The general width of the River in this
day's journey, was about 400 yards.

August 1, about 12 o'clock, we stopped at the Piorias wintering ground. About
a quarter of a mile from the River, on the eastern side of it, is a meadow of
many miles long, and five or six miles broad. In this meadow are many small
lakes, communicating with each other, and by which there are passages for small
boats or canoes and one in particular, leads to the Illinois River. The ^^mber
in general very tall Oaks. We met with some beautiful islands in this part of
the River (48 miles from the Missisippi) and great plenty of Buffaloe and Deer.

August 2, At ^ne o'clock we passed an island called Piere. A Fleech^, or arrow
stone is gotten by the Indians from a high ^ill on the western side of the
River, near the above island; with this stone, the natives make their gun
flints, and point their arrows. Half a league above this ^sland, on the eastern
side of it, the meadows border on the river, and continue several miles; the
land is remarkably rich, and well watered with small Rivulets from the
neighboring hills. The banks of the River are high, the water clear, and at
the bottom of the River are while Marl and Sand.

August 3, Passed the Mine River. It comes into the Illinois River on the
northwestern side of it, 120 miles from the Missisippi. It is 50 yards wide and
very rapid.

August 4, Here the land on both sides of the Illinois River is low, but rises
gradually. The Prairie* or meadow ground on the eastern side, is at least
twenty miles wide; it is fine land for tillage, or for grazing cattle, and is
well watered with a number of springs. About 12 o'clock we passed the River
Sag^mond, 13^ miles from the Missisippi. It is a River 100 ya^ds wide, and
navigable for small boats or canoes upwards of 180 miles, and about sunset, we
passed the River Demi-Quian It comes in on the western side of the Illinos,
River; (165 miles from the M^ssisippi;) is 50 yards wide, and navigable 120
miles. We encamped on the south eastern side of the Illinois river, opposite to
a very large savannah, belonging to and called, the Demi-Quian swamp. The lands
on the south-eastern side are high and thinly timbered; but at the place of our
encampment are fine meadows, extending farthe^ than the eye can reach, and
affording a delightful prospect. The low lands on the western side of the
Illinois River, extend so far back from it that no high grounds can be seen.
Here is plenty of Buffaloe, Deer, Elk, Turkies, etc.

August 5, It rained all day, which detained us till the evening, when we
embarked, and rowed till dark; in our way we passed the Lake Demi-Quian, 200
yards west from the river of that name, it is a circular figure, six miles
across, and discharges itself by a small passage, four feet deep into the
Illinois River. This Lake is 171 miles from the Missisippi. The general course
of the Illinois River varies very little; it rather however inclines to the
eastward. The lands are much the same as before described, only the Prairies
(Meadows) extend further from the river by our reckoning, we are 177 miles from
the M^ssisippi.

August 6. Set out early, and at 11 o'Clock we passed the Seseme Quian river,
it is on the western si^e of the Illinois river; is 40 yards wide, and
navigable 60 miles; the land bordering on this river is very good. About four
o'clock we passed the river De la March, (on the western side also of the
Illinois river;) it is 30 yards wide, and navigable about eight or nine miles
only. Though the De la March is not so long as the Seseme Quian, yet it is much
hansomer. These rivers are about nine miles distant from each other. Here the
land begins to rise gradually on the western bank. At sun set we passed a river
called Michilimackinac. It is on the south-eastern side of the Illinois River;
is 50 yards wide, navigable for about 90 miles, and has betw^^n 30 and 40 small
islands at its mouth; which at a distance appear like a small v^llage. On the
banks of this river is plenty of good timber, viz. Red and white Cedar, Pine,
Maple, Walnut, etc. and finding some pieces of coal, I was induced to walk up
the river a few miles, though not far enough to reach a coal mine. In ma^^ places
I (...) fo^nd cli^kers, ^^ich inclined me to think that a coal mine, not far
distant, was on fire, and I have since heard, there was. -- The land is high on
the eastern bank of the river, but on the western are large plains or meadows,
extending as far as can be seen, covered with fine grass. This river is 195
(...) from the Missippi.

August 7, The morning being very foggy, and the River overgrown with weeds
along its sides, we could make but little way. About 12 o'clock we got to the
old Pioria Fort and village on the western shore of the River, and at the
southern end of the lake called the Illinois Lake; which is 19 miles and a half
in length, and three miles in breadth. It has no Rocks, Shoals or perceivable
Current. We found the stockades of this Pioria Fort destroyed by fire, but the
houses standing. The summit on which the Fort stood, commands a fine prospect
of the country to the eastward, and up the lake to the point, where the River
comes in at the north end; to the westward are large meadows. In the lake is
great plenty of fish, and in particular, Sturgeon, and Picannau. On the eastern
side of the lake, about the middle of it, the chain of Rocks, that extends from
the back of Kaskaskias, to Cahokia Piasa, the mouth of the Illinois River, etc.
terminates. The Country to the westward, is low and very level, covered with
Grass, Weeds, Flags, etc. Here is abundance of Cherry, P^umb and other fruit
trees. This lake is 210 miles from the Missisippi.

August 8, The wind being fair we made a sail of our tent, and reached the
upper end of the lake by sun set; and the wind continuing fair we ascended the
River, and about 4 o'clock passed Crows Meadows River, which comes from the
eastward, and over against it, on the west side, are the meadows just
mentioned, 240 miles from the Missisippi. This River is twenty yards wide, and
navigable between 15 and 18 miles. The land on both sides of the Illinois
River, for 27 or 30 miles above the lake, is generally low and full of Swamps,
some a mile wide, bordered with fine meadows, and in some places, the high land
comes to the River in points, or narrow necks.

August 9, At 10 (...), we passed the Riviere de l' Isle de Pl^ye* ^r (...)
Island River, on the south-east side it is ^5 ^^rds w^de, and navigable nine
miles to the rocks. After passing this River, which is 255 miles from the
Missisippi, we found the water very shallow, and it was with difficulty that we
got forward, though we employed seven oars, and our boat drew only three feet
water. The grass which grows in the interval or meadow ground, between the
Illinois River and the Rocks, is finer than any we have seen, and is thicker
and higher and more clear from weeds, than in any of the meadows about
Kaskaskias or Fort Chartres. The timber is generally Birch, Button, and Paccan.
-- The wind continuing fair, about 10 o'clock we passed the Vermillion River,
267 miles from the Missisippi. It is 30 yards wide, but so rocky as not to be
navigable. At the distance of a mile further, we arrived at the little rocks,
which are 60 miles from the (...) 270 miles from the Missisippi. The water
being very low, we could get no further with our boat, and therefore we
proceeded by land to the Forks. We set out about two o'clock on the western
side of the River, but the grass and weeds were so high, that we could make but
little way.

August 10, We crossed the high land, at ten o'clock we came to the Fox River
(or a branch of it) after walking twenty-four miles. It falls into the Illinois
River, thirty miles beyond the place where we left our boat. The Fox River is
25 yards wide, and has about five feet water; its course is from the westward
by many windings through large meadows. At three miles distance, after crossing
this river, we fell in with the Illinois River again, and kept along its bank;
here we found a path. About six o'clock we arrived, after walking about 12
miles, at an old encampment, fifteen miles from the Fork. The land is stoney,
and the meadows not so good as some which we formerly passed; -- from hence we
went to an island, where several French traders were e^camp'd, but we could get
no intelligence from them about the copper mine which we had set out in search
of. At this island we hired one of the French hunters to cond^ct us in a canoe
to our boat.

August 11, We set off about three o'clock, and at night got within nine miles
of our boat. We computed it to be 45 miles from the island we last departed
from, to the place where we left our boat.

August 12, We embarked early, and proceeded three miles down the Illinois
River. On the north-western side of this river is a coal mine, that extends for
half a mile along the middle of the bank of the river, which is high. On the
eastern side, about half a mile from it, and about the same distance below the
coal mine, are two salt ponds, 100 yards in circumference, and several feet in
depth; the water is stagnant, and of a yellowish color; but the French, and
natives make good salt from it. We tasted the water, and though^ it salter than
that which the French make salt from at the saline near St. Genevie^^. At nine
o'clock we arrived at our boat. From the island, where we found the French
traders, and from whence we embarked in a canoe to go to our boat, there is a
considerable descent and Rapid all the way. Here it is, that the French
settlers cut their mill stones. The land along the banks of the river is much
better than what we meet with, when we crossed the country on the 10th of this
month. On the high lands, and particularly those on the south-eastern side,
there is abundance of red and white Cedar, Pine trees, etc. We embarked about
two o'clock, and proceeded till nine at night.

August 13, We lay by half this day, on account of wet weather.

August 14, Embarked early, and after crossing the Illinois lake arrived late
in the evening, at the Pi^ri^ Fort.

August 15, Rowed very constantly all day, and arrived at the Mine River in the
evening. Here I met with Mr. Janiste a French gentleman, and prevailed on him
to accompany me, in an attempt up this River, to discover the Copper-Mine.

August 16, Embarked early, and ascended the Mine River in a small canoe, about
6 miles, but could get no further, as the river was quite dry a little higher
up. It runs the above distance, through very high grounds, is rocky and very
crooked; the banks of the river are much broken, and the passage choked with
timber; -- Mr. Janiste says, that the current is so strong in flood^, nothing
can resist it. The bottom is sand, green in some places, and red in others; it
is said, that there is an alum hill on this river; -- As I thought it was
impossible to get to the mine by land at this season of the year, on account of
the rocky mountains, weeds, briars, etc. I determined to return to Kaskaskias,
and accordingly we went back to our boat, embarked about one o'clock, and
continued rowing day and night until 12 o'clock the 18th, when we entered the
river Missisippi on our way to Kaskaskias village.

APPENDIX No. III. A List of the different Nations and Tribes of Indians in the
Northern District of North America, with the number of their fighting Men, etc.
etc.
Names. Numb^^ Their dwelling grounds. Their hunting ground^ Mohocks 1^0 Mohock
river Between the Mohock river and lake George. Oneida^ 300 East side of Onida
lake, and on the head waters of the east branch of Susquehannah. In the country
where they live. Tuscaror^^ 200 Between the Onidas and Onandagoes. Between
Oneida Lake and Lake Ontario. ^nondagoes 260 Near the Onondago Lake. Between
the Onondago Lake, and the mouth of the Seneca river, near Oswego. Cayugas. 200
On two small lakes called Cayugas near the north branch of ^usquehannah Near
the north bran^h of Susquehannah. Senecas 1000 ^eneca country, on the waters of
Susquehannah, the waters of lake Ontario, and on the heads of Ohio River. Their
chief hunting country, where they live. Aughquaga^ 150 East branch of
Susquehannah River, and on Aughquaga On the east branch of Susquehannah, and on
Aughquaga. Manticokes Mohickons Conoya
100 100 30
Utsanango, Chagh net. Oswego, and on the east branch of Susquehannah Where
they respectively reside. Munsay^ ^apoon^^ Delawares
150 30 1^0
At Dia^ago and other villages up the north branch of Susquehannah. Where they
respectively reside* Delawares 600 Between the Ohio and Lake Erie and on the
Branches of Beaver Creek, Muskingum, and Guyehago. Between the Ohio River and
Lake Erie. ^hawanoes 300 On Sioto and a branch of Muskingum. Between the Ohio
River and Lake Erie. ^ayondott^ Mohickons Coghuawagas
300 ^n villages near Sandusky On the head branche^ of Sioto. Twightwees 250
Miami River near (...) Mi^^i. On the ground where ^hey reside Kickap^os
Pyankeshaws Musquitons Ouiatanons
1000 On the Wabash and its branc^es. Between the mouth of the W^bash and the
Miami Rivers. Kask^^kias ^iorias Mitchigamas
300 Near the settlements in Illinois country. ^n the Illinois country.
Wayondott^ Ottaw^s Put^watimes
250 400 1^0
Near Fort Detroit. About Lake Erie. Chepawas and Ottawas 100 On Sagurnam bay,
a part of Lake Huron ^n Saguinan, bay, and Lake Huron. Kickapoos 400 Near the
entrance of Lake Superior, and not far from -- St Mary's. about Lake Superior.
Chepawas Mynomanies Saukeys
550 Near bay Puan, a part of Lake Michigan. about bay Puan, and Lake Michigan.
Putawatimes Ottawas
200 1^0
Near Fort St. Joseph's. The country between Lake Michigan and the Miami Fort.
Kickapooses O^ttagomies Musquatons Miscotins Outtamacks Musquakeys
^,000 On Lake Michigan an^ be^w^en it, and the M^ssisippi. Where they
respective^y reside. Oswegatches 100 At Swagatchey in Canada and on the River
St. Lawrence Near where they live Connesedagoes Coghnawagoes
300 Near Mont^e^l. Near where they live. Orondocks Abonakies Alagonkins
100 ^50 100
Near Trois Reviers. Near where they live. La Sue 1000^ Westward of Lake
Superior and the Missisippi. In the country where they reside. Ottawas 200 On
the east side of Lake Michig^n, 2^ miles from Michilimackinac. ^n the country
betwee^ the Lak^s Michiga^ and Huron. Ch^pawas 1000 On Lake Superior, and the
Islands in that Lake. Round Lake Superior.

A TABLE OF DISTANCES, between FORT PIT, and the Mouth of the RIVER OHIO.
Fort Pit Logs Town 18 Big Beaver Creek 10 29 1/^ Little Beaver Creek 13 24 42
^/4 Yellow Creek 11 25 36 54 1/^ Two Creeks 21 33 47 57 76 Long Reach 53 75 87
100 111 130 End Long Reach 16 70 92 103 117 128 146 Muskingum 25 42 95 117 ^/2
129 142 153 ^/2; 172 Little Kanhawa 12 ^/2 38 54 108 130 141 155 166 184
Hockhocking 16 28 54 70 124 146 157 171 182 200 Big Kanhaw^ 82 98 111 136 153
206 228 240 253 264 283 Guyunda 43 126 142 154 180 196 250 2^2 284 297 308 ^26
Sandy Creek 14 58 140 156 169 194 ^/4 211 265 286 298 312 322 341 Sioto 48 63
107 189 205 218 243 260 313 335 347 360 371 1/^ 390 (...) Miam^ 126 175 189 233
315 ^31 344 369 386 440 461 ^73 487 497 ^/4 ^16 (...) ^reek 8 ^34 183 197 1/^
241 323 33^ 352 377 394 448 469 481 495 505 524 (...) 26 34 161 209 224 268 350
366 379 404 421 474 ^/4 496 508 521 ^/4 532 551 (...) (...) 59 67 193 242 256
^/4 300 383 399 411 437 453 1/^ 507 529 540 ^54 565 583 Ke^ts (...) (...) ^03
111 237 286 301 344 427 443 455 481 497 551 573 585 ^98 609 627 Rapids (...)
(...) (...) 181 189 315 364 378 422 504 520 533 558 ^/4 575 629 ^50 662 676 686
^05 Low Country ^55 (...) (...) (...) ^36 ^/4 344 471 519 ^/4 ^34 578 660 676
689 714 731 784 ^/^ 806 818 ^31 842 861 Buffaloe River 64 220 (...) (...) (...)
^01 409 535 584 598 642 725 741 753 779 795 849 871 882 ^96 90^ 925 Wabash 97
161 ^/4 317 (...) (...) (...) ^98 ^/2 ^06 632 ^/4 681 696 739 822 838 850 876
892 946 ^68 980 ^93 1004 ^/^ 1022 3/^ Big Cave 42 140 204 360 (...) (...) (...)
^41 549 675 1/^ 724 738 ^/4 782 865 881 893 919 935 989 1011 1022 1036 104^
1065 ^/2 Shawano ^ River 52 ^/^ 95 ^92 25^ 412 (...) (...) (...) ^93 ^/4 601
^/4 728 776 1/^ 791 835 ^17 933 946 971 988 1041 ^/^ 1063^ 1075 ^/^ 1088 1099
1/^ 1118 Cherokee River 13 65 108 ^/4 20^ 2^^ 425 ^/4 (...) (...) (...) ^06 614
741 789 804 848 930 946 959 984 1001 1054 ^/^ 1076 1088 ^/^ 1101 1112 ^/^ 1231
Massac 11 24 76 119 216 281 ^36 ^/4 (...) (...) (...) ^17 4/^ 625 ^/^ 752 800
^/4 81^ ^/4 8^^ ^41 1/^ ^57 970 995 1012 1065 ^/^ 1087 1099 ^/^ 1112 1123 1/^
1142 Missisippi 4^ 5^ (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 10^^ 10^^ (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)


