AN ORATION DELIVERED BEFORE THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI OF THE STATE OF
NEW YORK; IN COMMEMORATION OF THE FOURTH DAY of JULY.

BY THE HONORABLE ROBERT R. LIVINGSTON, ESQUIRE; CHANCELLOR OF THE STATE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S. M, DCC, LXXXVII.

ON the Fourth of July, instant, being the Anniversary of the declaration of
the Independence of the United States, the following Oration, at the previous
Request of the Society of the Cincinnati of this State, was, in Commemoration
of the Day, delivered to the Society, assembled on the Occasion, at the
City-Hall of the City of New York.

New York, July 25, 1787.
AN ORATION, etc.
I COULD have wished, Gentlemen, that the task I am now about to perform, had
been assigned to some abler speaker; and, in that view, I long since tendered
my apology for declining it, and hoped, till lately, that it had been accepted.
Disappointed in this hope, and unwilling to treat any mark of your favor with
neglect, I determined to obey your commands; although I was satisfied, that, in
the execution of them, I should not answer your expectations. There is a style
of eloquence adapted to occasions of this kind, to which I feel myself unequal;
-- a style which requires the glowing imagination of younger speakers, who
coming recently from the schools of rhetoric, know how to dress their
sentiments in all its flowery ornaments. The turbulence of the times, since I
first entered upon public life, and the necessity they imposed upon those who
engaged in them, of attending rather to things than words, will, I fear, render
me, if not an useless, at least an unpolished speaker.

If the mind dwells with pleasure on interesting events -- if the soul pants to
emulate the noble deeds it contemplates -- if virtue derives new force from the
successful struggles of the virtuous, it is wise to set apart certain seasons,
when, freed from meaner cares, we commemorate events, which have contributed to
the happiness of mankind, or afford examples worthy their imitation. What are
we this day called upon to commemorate? -- Some signal victory, in which the
victor weeps the loss of friends, and humanity mourns over the graves of the
vanquished? -- The birth of some prince, whom force, fraud, or accident, has
entitled to a throne? -- Or even that of some patriot who has raised the
reputation, and defended the rights of his country? No, gentlemen, a nobler
subject than the splendour of victories, or the birth of princes, demands our
attention. We are called upon to commemorate the successful battles of freedom,
and the birth of nations!

It may be expected, and indeed I believe it is usual on such occasions, that I
should tread the steps we have taken, from the dawn of oppression to the bright
sunshine of independence; that I should celebrate the praise of patriots who
have been actors in the glorious scene, and more particularly that I should
lead you to the shrines of those that have offered up their lives in support of
their principles, and sealed with their blood your charters of freedom. Had I
no other object in view than to amuse you and indulge my own feelings, I should
take this path -- For what task more delightful, than to contemplate the
successful struggles of virtue; to see it at one moment panting under the grasp
of oppression, and rising in the next with renewed strength; as if, like the
giant son of earth, she had acquired vigor from the fall; to see hope and
disappointment, plenty and want, defeats and victories, following each other in
rapid succession, and contributing, like ^^ght and shade to the embellishment
of the piece! What more soothing to the soft and delicate emotions of humanity,
than to wander with folded arms, and slow and pensive step, amidst the graves
of departed heroes, to indulge the mingled emotions of grief and admiration: at
one moment giving way to private sorrow, and lamenting the loss of a friend, a
relation, a brother; in the next, glowing with patriot warmth, gazing with
ardor on their wounds, and invoking their spirits, while we ask of heaven to
inspire us with equal fortitude! But, however pleasing this task, the desire of
being useful impels me, at this interesting moment, to forego this pleasure --
to call you from this tender scene -- to remind you that you are the citizens
of a free state -- to bid you rejoice with Roman pride, that those you love
have done their duty -- to exhort you to crown the glorious work which they
have begun. For, alas! my friends, though they have nobly performed the part
assigned them, the work is still unfinished, and much remains for us to do. It
may not, therefore, be improper, amidst the congratulations I make you on this
day -- this day, distinguished in the annals of fame, for the triumph of
freedom and the birth of nations, to enquire how far it has been productive of
the advantages we might reasonably have expected, and where they have fallen
short of our expectations.

To investigate the causes that have conduced to our disappointment, two
objects demand our attention -- our internal and federal governments: Either,
to those who are disposed to view only the gloomy side of the picture, will
afford sufficient matter for censure, and too much cause of uneasiness. Many
desponding spirits, misled by these reflections, have ceased to rejoice in
independence, and to doubt whether it is to be considered as a blessing. God
forbid that there should be any such among us: For, whatever may be the
pressure of our present evils, they will cease to operate, when we resolve to
remove them; the remedy is within our reach, and I have sufficient confidence
in our own fortitude to hope that it will be applied.

Let those, however, who know not the value of our present situation, contrast
it with the state of servitude, to which we should have been reduced, had we
patiently submitted to the yoke of Britain. She had long since seen our ease
with envy, and our strength with jealousy. Loaded with debt, she wished to
share that affluence, which she attributed to her protection, rather than to
our industry. Tenacious of her supposed supremacy, she could not be indifferent
to those increasing numbers which threatened its subversion.

Avarice and timidity concurred in framing a system of despotism, which, but
for our resistance, would have reduced us to the vilest subjection. Having
resisted, accommodation was vain; pretenses would not have been wanting to ruin
those that had been active in opposition. Disputes among ourselves would have
been encouraged; and advantages derived from our disunion would have enabled
her ultimately to obtain her object. No alternative was left, but heaven-born
independence, or abject submission. We have chosen as became a wise and
generous people. Let slaves, or cowards, disapprove the choice!

Our constitutions are formed to ensure the happiness of a virtuous nation.
They guard against the tumult and confusion of unwieldy popular assemblies,
while they yield to every citizen his due share of power. They preserve the
administration of justice pure and unbiassed, by the independence of the
judges. -- They prevent abuses in the execution of the laws, by committing the
care of enforcing them to magistrates who have no share in making, nor voice in
expounding them. In these circumstances, they excel the boasted models of
Greece, or Rome, and those of all other nations, in having precisely marked out
the power of the government, and the rights of the people -- With us the law is
written: no party can justify their errors under former abuses or doubtful
precedents. With these constitutions, I shall be asked, how it has happened
that the evils hinted at continue to exist? I shall endeavor to answer this
enquiry, since my object in treating of this subject is to impress upon you the
obligations we are under as citizens, as men whose past services entitle us to
some weight in the community, zealously to unite in promoting a constitutional
reform of every abuse, that affects the government.

Our constitutions being purely democratic, the people are sovereign and
absolute. The faults of absolute governments are to be charged to the
sovereign: -- in ours they must be traced back to the people.

If our executive has sufficient energy, if the judicial is competent to the
administration of justice, if our legislative is so formed as that no law can
pass without due deliberation, all the ends of government are answered, so far
as they depend upon the constitution. If still it falls short of expectation,
the evils must be sought in the administration: and, since every person
concerned in that is either mediately or immediately chosen by the people, they
may change it at pleasure. What can be devised more perfect than that
constitution, which puts in the power of those, who experience the effects of a
mal-administration, to prevent their continuance; not by mad, tumultuous and
irregular acts, as in the ancient republics, but by such as are cool,
deliberate and constitutional. If they still exist, they must be charged to the
negligence of the people, who, after violent agitation, have sunk into such a
state of torpor and indifference, with respect to government, as to be careless
into what hands they trust their dearest rights. When we choose an agent to
manage our private affairs, an executor to distribute our estate, we are
solicitous about the integrity and abilities of those we entrust: we consult
our friends: we make the choice after due deliberation. -- Is it not
astonishing, that when we are to elect men, whose power extends to our liberty,
our property and our lives, that we should be so totally indifferent, that not
one in ten of us tenders his vote? -- Can it be thought that an enlightened
people believe the science of government level to the meanest capacity? That
experience, application, genius and education are unnecessary to those, who are
to frame laws for the government of the state? And yet, are instances wanting
in which these have been proscribed, and their place supplied by those
insidious arts, which have rendered them suspected? Are past services the
passport to future honors? Or have you yourselves, gentlemen, escaped the
general obloquy? Are you not calumniated by those you deem unworthy of your
society? Are you not even shunned by some who should wear with pride and
pleasure this badge of former services?

You have learned in the school of adversity, to appreciate characters. You are
not formed, whoever may direct, to promote measures you disapprove. Men, used
to command and to obey, are sensible of the value of government, and will not
consent to its debasement. Your services entitle you to the respect and favor
of a grateful people. Envy, and the ambition of the unworthy, concur to rob you
of the rank you merit.

To these causes, we owe the cloud that obscures our internal governments. But
let us not despair: the sun of science is beginning to rise; and, as new light
breaks in upon the minds of our fellow citizens, that cloud will be dispelled.

Having observed that our internal constitutions are adequate to the purposes
for which they were formed; and that the inconveniences we have some time felt
under them, were imputable to causes which it was in our power to remove: I
might perhaps add, that the continuance of those evils, were proofs of the
happiness these governments impart; since, had they not been more than balanced
by advantages, they would have pressed with such weight, as to have compelled
the people to apply the remedy the constitution affords -- But, when I turn my
eyes to the other great object of a patriot's attention, -- our federal
government, I confess to you, my friends, I sicken at the sight. Nothing
presents itself to my view, but a nerveless council, united by imaginary ties,
brooding over ideal decrees, which caprice, or fancy, is at pleasure to annul,
or execute! I see trade languish, -- public credit expire, -- and that glory,
which is not less necessary to the prosperity of a nation, than reputation to
individuals, a victim to opprobrium and disgrace. Here, my friends, you are
particularly interested; for, I believe, I should do little justice to the
motives that induced you to brave the dangers and hardships of a ten years war,
if I supposed you had nothing more in view, than humble peace, and ignominious
obscurity. Brave souls are influenced by nobler motives; and, I persuade
myself, that the rank and glory of the nation you have established, were among
the strongest that nerved your arms, and invigorated your hearts. Let us not
then, my friends, lose sight of this splendid object; having pursued it through
fields of blood, let us not relinquish the chase, when nothing is necessary to
its attainment, but union, firmness, and temperate deliberation.

In times of extreme danger, whoever has the courage to seize the helm, may
command the ship: each mariner, distrusting his own skill, is ready to repose
upon that of others. Congress, not attending to this reflection, were misled by
the implicit respect, that during the war was paid to their recommendations;
and without looking forward to times, when the circumstances which made the
basis of their authority, should no longer exist, they formed a constitution
adapted only to such circumstances. Weak in itself, a variety of causes have
conspired to render it weaker. Some states have totally neglected their
representation in Congress; while some others have been inattentive, in their
choice of delegates, to those qualities, which are essential to the support of
its reputation: objects of some moment, where authority is founded on opinion
only. To these, I am sorry, gentlemen, to add a third, which operates with
peculiar force in some states, -- the love of power, of which the least worthy
are always the most tenacious. To deal out a portion of it to Congress, would
be to share that which some, among those who are elected by popular favor,
already find too little for their own ambition. -- To preserve it, rulers of
free states practice a lesson they have received from eastern tyrants: and as
these, to preserve the succession, put out the eyes of all, that may approach
the seat of power: so those strive to blind the people, whose discernment, they
fear, may expel them from it.

I will not wear your patience and my own, by contending with those chimeras
they have raised, to fright the people from remedying the only real defect of
this government: nor will I dwell upon that wretched system of policy, which
has sunk the interest and reputation of such states in the great council of
America, and drawn upon them the hatred and contempt of their neighbors. --
Who will deny that the most serious evils daily flow from the debility of our
federal constitution? Who but owns, that we are at this moment colonies, for
every purpose but that of internal taxation, to the nation from which we vainly
hoped our sword had freed us? Who but sees, with indignation, British ministers
daily dictating laws for the destruction of our commerce? Who but laments the
ruin of that brave, hardy and generous race of men, who are necessary for its
support? Who but feels, that we are degraded from the rank we ought to hold
among the nations of the earth? Despised by some, maltreated by others, and
unable to defend ourselves against the cruel depredations of the most
contemptible pirates. At this moment; yes, great God, at this moment, some
among those, perhaps, who have labored for the establishment of our freedom,
are groaning in Barbarian bondage. Hands, that may have wielded the sword in
our defense, are loaded with chains. Toilsome tasks, gloomy prisons, whips and
tortures, are the portion of men, who have triumphed with us, and exulted in
the idea of giving being to nations, and freedom to unnumbered generations!

These, sirs; -- these are a few of the many evils that result from the want of
a federal government. Our internal constitutions may make us happy at home, but
nothing short of a federal one can render us safe or respectable abroad. Let us
not, however, in our eagerness to attain one, forget to preserve the other
inviolate; for better is distress abroad, than tyranny or anarchy at home. A
precious deposit is given into our keeping: we hold in our hands the fate of
future generations. While we acknowledge that no government can exist, without
confidence in the governing power, let us also remember, that none can remain
free, where that confidence is incautiously bestowed.

How, gentlemen, shall I apologize for having obtruded this serious address
upon the gaieties of this happy day? -- I told you, and told you truly, that I
was ill qualified to play the holiday orator; and I might have added, that the
joy of this day is ever attended, in my mind, with a thousand mingled emotions.
Reflection on the past, brings to memory a variety of tender and interesting
events; while hope and fear, anxiety and pleasure, alternately possess me, when
I endeavor to pierce the veil of futurity. But never, never before, have they
pressed upon me with the weight they do at present. I feel that some change is
necessary; and yet I dread, lest the demon of jealousy should prevent such
change; or, the restless spirit of innovation, should carry us beyond what is
necessary. I look round for aid; -- I see in you a band of patriots, -- the
supporters of your country's rights: I feel myself indebted to you for the
freedom we enjoy: I know, that your emotions cannot be very different from my
own; and I strive, by giving you the same views on these important subjects, to
unite your efforts in the common cause. Let us, then, preserve, pure and
perfect, those principles of friendship for each other, of love for our
country, of respect for the union, which supported us in our past difficulties.
Let us reject the trammels of party; and, as far as our efforts will go, call
every man to the post, his virtues and abilities entitle him to occupy. Let us
watch with vigilant attention over the conduct of those in power; but let us
not, with coward caution, restrain their efforts to be useful: and let us
implore that omnipotent Being, who gave us strength and wisdom in the hour of
danger, to direct our great council to that happy mean, which may afford us
respect and security abroad, and peace, liberty, and prosperity at home.

After the ORATION was pronounced, Colonel MORGAN LEWIS addressed the newly
admitted MEMBERS as follows:

GENTLEMEN,

PREVIOUS to your reception into this society, permit us to call to your
remembrance the circumstances which gave birth to our institution, and the
principal objects which its founders had in view: -- the reflection will not
fail to add to the transports which each patriotic bosom must feel on this
auspicious day.

At the close of that war, which emancipated the inhabitants of this vast
continent, and confirmed a revolution greater than any the world had ever been
presented with, a gallant band of patriots, who, for eight years had lived
together in habits of the strictest friendship, -- together borne the numerous
hardships incident to the soldiers' life -- together braved the various dangers
of the field -- together fought, bled, and conquered, saw themselves on the eve
of separation, and could not bear the thought that it should be forever. -- A
general anxiety took place, which was heightened by the reflection, that new
plans of life, new connections, were to be formed, by men who had devoted
themselves to their country, spent their fortunes in her service, and were
about to return to the peaceful walks of private life* -- many of them
perfectly destitute, and all without the well-earned wages of their toils. The
families too of many a departed brother, whom the adverse fortunes of the field
had snatched untimely from them, claimed their assistance -- under these
impressions this institution was formed, Friendship the motive, and the great
object Charity; cherished however, by this sentiment, that, in order to
preserve that freedom we had fought for, it became essential to maintain that
union which had acquired it.

Envy, notwithstanding, has sometimes ascribed to us improper views; and a too
quick apprehension of danger, prompted by lively imaginations, has frequently
suggested the possibility, that a set of men who had fought the battles of
their country, and obtained her an honorable and advantageous peace, were, at
the instant of resigning their arms and retiring from the field, meditating
combinations dangerous to that liberty which they themselves had secured.

For vindication from such misrepresentations we appeal to facts, our own
hearts bearing honest testimony to the rectitude of our intentions.

Our assuming the name of an illustrious Roman, whose virtues we wish to
emulate, and our having pursued, as far as possible, his noble example, must
convince the candid of (...) of our professions when we declare, that our
designs are pure and disinterested. Nor have we a wish to confine the election
of our members to the military line alone; -- the choice of this day affords a
proof to the world, that distinguished merit, whether it has shone conspicuous
in the cabinet or field, has an equal claim to the honors of our Society.

Accept, gentlemen, our warmest congratulations on the joyful occasion of our
present meeting: -- may each return of this happy day revive in our minds the
memory of past achievements -- may it enliven our former friendships -- may it
animate our future exertions in the cause of our country, and may it inspire
our national councils with wisdom and patriotism, that our posterity, to the
latest period of time, may have reason to respect it as the greatest blessing
which Heaven ever poured in mercy on them.


