A COLLECTION OF Voyages and Travels CONTAINING I. The Voyage of Peter Kolben,
to the Cape of Good Hope. II. A Voyage of China, by Lewis Le Compte. III.
Anecdotes of the Elephant, (...) Travels.


PHILADELPHIA.

A Collection of Voyages and Travels.
The Voyage of Peter Kolben, A. M. to the Cape of Good Hope; with an account of
the Manners and Customs of its Inhabitants.
I EARLY felt an ardent desire to travel; and, embracing an opportunity that
offered, I embarked on board the Union, one of the Dutch East India ships that
lay in the Texel.

On the 8th of January, 1705, the Union set sail, with eight more of the
company's ships, bound to the East Indies; and, on the 15th of March, steering
round St. Jago, one of the Cape de Verd islands, we had a distinct view of the
rocks and mountains, and of the situation and extent of the city of the same
name.

On the 10th of June we discovered the Cape of Good Hope; and the next day
arrived safe in the harbor. Being introduced to the governor, that gentleman,
on sight of my recommendatory letters, treated me in a very friendly and
affable manner; and soon assig^ me a very commodious abode.

The Cape of Good Hope was discovered so early by the Portuguese, as the year
1493. They attempted a settlement in 1498, but a party of them being cut off,
they abandoned the place.

It does not appear that any Europeans afterward landed at the Cape, 'till the
year 1600, when it began to be visited by the English, French and Dutch, in
their voyages to and from the East Indies. But in 1650, a Dutch fleet anchoring
before it, mr. Van Riebeek, a surgeon on board, observing that the country was
well stocked with cattle, the soil rich, the harbor commodious, and the people
tractable, digested his observations; and, on his return to Holland, laid them
before the directors of the India company, who, after a grand consultation,
resolved to attempt a settlement at the Cape, without loss of time.
Accordingly, four ships were immediately ordered out on that design, with all
the materials, instruments, artificers and other hands necessary for such an
expedition. The surgeon Van Riebeek was appointed governor and commander in
chief of the intended settlement, with power to treat with the Hottentots, in
what manner he should think fit.

With these four ships, Van Riebeek arrived safe at the Cape; and so captivated
the natives by his address and good humor, and with the presents he brought
them of brass toys, beads, tobacco, brandy, etc. that a ^reaty was instantly
concluded: and on his giving them toys and commodities to the va^ue of fifty
thousand guilders, they granted the Dutch full liberty to settle there,
resigned to them a part of the country, and a trade was established with them,
on a good and solid foundation.

After these wise regulations, in which so just a regard was paid to the
natural rights of the inhabitants, mr. Van Riebeek raised a square fort; and
built in it, dwelling-houses, warehouses, and an hospital for the reception of
the sick. To this fort he added proper outworks, to secure himself from any
attacks of the Europeans.

Every thing prospering i^ such a surprising manner, the company offered sixty
acres of land to every man who would settle at the Cape; provided he could not
only maintain himself upon it within three years, but also contribute at a
certain rate to the support of the garrison: but every one was left at liberty
at the end of that term, to sell or make over his land, and to leave the
settlement* Encouraged by these proposals, and by (...) ^stance given to those
who could not (...) ^selves provide utensils, tools, and instrument (...)
agriculture, great numbers went to the Cape, (...) the settlement soon began to
make a considerable figure: but all this while there was a growing evil,
against which no provision had been made. European women were very scarce; and
those they had, were wives, who had settled there with their husbands: while
the plantation swarmed with young fellows, each settled upon his farm, and in a
way of thriving, but wanting wives as much for the sake of issue and domestic
help, as for sensual gratifications; and yet they had not the least inclination
to marry the Hottentot women. But an account of this grievance being dispatched
to Amsterdam, a fine troop of young women were levied, who, on their arrival at
the Cape, were bestowed by the governor on such as wanted wives, with all the
indulgence that could be shown on such an occasion, to their several fancies
and inclinations.

The settlement being thus firmly established, it increased to such a degree,
that being still joined by other settlers, the Dutch, in a few years, extended
themselves in new colonies along the coast.

The greatest part of the country about the Cape is full of rocks and
mountains, which, long after the discovery, being only viewed at a distance,
were considered as barren: but their spacious tops are covered with rich
meadows, every where enamelled with a variety of flowers, of uncommon beauty
and fragrance, and abound with delicious springs, running in many streams into
the valleys. These mountains are in clear weather seen at sea at the distance
of fifteen leagues. On their skirts are interspersed groves, that afford
excellent wood for the joiners and turners. The plains and valleys are all
delightful meadow lands, where nature appears with such a profusion of charms
as to ravish the eye of the beholder. They every where smile, and are adorned
with beautiful trees, plants and flowers, that fill the air with the sweetest
odours, among these are the aloe, and other curious trees and herbs.

The soil is so rich, as to be capable of every kind of culture; it bears all
sorts of grain, and every kind of fruit trees. The country abounds with salt
and hot baths of mineral waters, that have been found salutary in many
diseases. The regions about the Cape are, however, subject to boisterous winds,
that generally blow from the southeast, while the sun is in the southern signs,
and from the northwest while in the nor^he^n signs. These winds, however,
though they frequently do much damage to the trees and corn, are of service in
purging the air, and contributing to the health of the inhabitants; who, after
a calm of a week or ten days, generally complain of the headache, and other
disorders, which vanish, when the winds blow again.

Some authors have said, that the Hottentots are so brutal, as to be in a
manner, incapable of reflection, having no sense of religion, nor any notion of
order or decency, and scarcely possessing the least glimpse of reason or
humanity: but this is far from being true. I have known many of them who
understood Dutch, French, and Portuguese to a degree of perfection; and one I
knew, who learned English and Portuguese in a very short time. and having
conquered the habit of pronunciation contracted from his native language, was
said by good judges to understand and speak them with a surprising readiness
and propriety.

They are, perhaps, the most faithful servants in the world. The Europeans, at
the Cape, are so fond of them in this capacity, that they are loath to part with
them. Though they are infinitely fond of wine, brandy, and tobacco, and will,
at any time, part with the most valuable things they have, to purchase them,
yet they will neither diminish, nor suffer any one else to diminish the least
drop or part of those commodities, when they are committed to their trust. It
is surprising to see the care and fidelity with which they acquit themselves on
these occasions. They are even employed by the Europeans in affairs that
require judgment and capacity.

Notwithstanding what has been said, the Ho^tentots seem to place their whole
earthly happiness in sloth and indolence. They can think to the purpose, if
they please: but they hate the trouble of thought, and look upon every degree
of reasoning as a tormenting agitation of the mind: they therefore never reason
but in case of necessity; that is when it is requisite to remove some pressing
want of their own or their friends. If the Hottentot is not roused by some
present appetite or necessity; he is as deaf both to thought and action, as a
log; when urged by these, he is all activity; but when these are gratified, and
his obligation to serve is at an end, he retires to enjoy again his beloved
idleness.

Some authors have said, that all the Hottentots devour the entrails of beasts,
uncleansed of their filth and excrements, half broiled; and that, whether sound
or rotten, they consider them as the greatest delicacies in the word: but this
is not true. I have always found, that when they had entrails to eat, they
turned and stripped them of their filth, and washed them in clean water. They
then boiled them in blood of the beast, if they had any; if not, they gave them
a thorough broiling. This, however, is done in so nasty a manner as to make an
European loath their victuals.

But, uncleanly as their manner of dressing their provisions is, those of them
who keep to the diet of their country, have few diseases, are seldom sick, and
live to an extreme old age. But those who drink wine, brandy, or other strong
liquors, suffer diseases before unknown to them, and shorten their days: even
the meat dressed and seasoned after the European manner, is very pernicious,
with respect to them.

What chiefly renders the Hottentots a nasty generation is a custom, observed
from their infancy, of besmearing their bodies and apparel, (which is only a
skin thrown over their shoulders, and another round their waist) with mutton
fat, marrow, or butter, mixed with the foot that gathers round their boiling
pots, they being naturally of a nut or olive color. This custom is repeated as
often as the grease is dried by the sun or dust, if they are able to get either
fat or butter. The meaner sort are mostly obliged to make use of that which is
rank; but the more wealthy always besmear themselves with the freshest and
choicest that can be had. No part of the body, from the crown of the head to
the sole of the foot, escapes this paint; their skins are thoroughly daubed
with it. The richer they are, the more fat and butter they employ; for this is
the grand distinction between the rich and poor; but they abominate the fat of
fish.

This rubbing and greasing promotes the suppleness of the body; and the
Hottentots though a lazy race, are, perhaps, the swiftest of foot in the world;
for they not only dart away from the swiftest European, but frequently outrun
a very fleet horse. Besides, living almost naked in a region where the sun's
heat is very great all the year round, by closing their pores with grease, they
prevent that excessive perspiration which would, in all probability, exhaust
and destroy them.

What renders them most disagreeable, is their suffering their woolly hair to
be matted together with fat and dirt; their offensive smell, arising from these
uncleanly customs; and their abominable lousiness. Add to this, their language
is a composition of the strangest sounds that ever were uttered by any people,
and their pronunciation depends upon such collisions of the tongue against the
palate, and upon such strange vibrations and inflections of that member, as a
stranger cannot easily imitate, and neither they themselves, nor hardly any one
else, can describe.

These people are, however, neither so small of stature, nor so deformed and
wrinkled as they have been described by some authors: for most of the men are
from five to six feet high; but the women are a great deal less. Both sexes are
very erect and well made, keeping a due medium between being fat and lean.
There is not a crooked limb, or other piece of deformity to be seen among them;
which is the more remarkable, as they do not take near so much care of their
children as the European women. Their heads being generally large, their eyes
are so in proportion. Their general mien is so far from being wild and
terrible, that it is sweet and composed, and declarative of the highest
benevolence and good nature. The worst features they have are their large flat
noses, and their thick lips, especially the uppermost; however, the flatness of
their noses is not natural, but caused by art. Their teeth are as white as
ivory, and their cheeks have something of the cherry; but from their continual
daubings, it is not easily discerned. The men have large broad feet: but those
of the women are small and tender. Neither the men nor the women cut the nails
of their fingers or toes. But what is very extraordinary, all the Hottentot
women are distinguished by having a broad callous kind of flap growing to their
bellies, which seems intended by nature to hide, what other nations are taught
most carefully to conceal; and some of them have it so large, that it can
hardly be covered by the piece of sheepskin they wear before them, it being
often seen below it. This no Hottentot considers as a deformity; but through
their nastiness and daubings, it is always in such a condition as to make an
European loath the sight of it: yet for a little tobacco they will suffer you
to handle and examine it. Thevenot in his travels, says, the negro, Egyptian,
and the women of some other nations, are subject to the like excrescence; but
that they stop the growth of it very early by searing: this may probably be
done from their considering it as a deformity.

In hot weather, the men constantly go without any other covering on their
heads, than the composition of fat, soot and dirt, with which their hair is
matted together: for they say, that the fat keeps their heads cool under the
fiercest sun beams; but in the cold seasons, and in wet weather, they wear caps
made of cat or lamb skins, which they tie on with two strings; but the face and
forepart of the neck of the men are always uncovered. About the man's neck
hangs a little greasy bag, in which he carries his pipe and tobacco, with a
little piece of wood of a finger's length, burnt at both ends, as an amulet
against witchcraft.

Their krosses, as they term them, or the mantles they hang over their
shoulders, are worn open or closed according to the season. The krosses of the
most wealthy are of tiger or wild cat-skins: and those of the common people of
sheepskins: in winter they tur^ them outward. They lie upon them in the
night, and when they die, they are tied up and interred in them.

Three rings of ivory they generally wea^ upon the left arm; these they form
from the elephants teeth they find in the woods, which they cut into rings, and
finish with such art and exactness as would surprise the ablest turner in
Europe. These rings, or bracelets, serve as guards when they fight against an
enemy, and when they travel, they fasten a bag to them for the conveyance of
their viaticum, which they fix so cleverly, that it is hardly any encumbrance.
Round their waists hang what they call a kull-cross, a square piece of the skin
of a wild beast, generally of a wild cat, tied o^ with the hairy side outward.
When they drive their herds to pasture, they put on a kind of leather stockings
to secure their legs from being scratched by briers and thorns. When they are
to pass over rocks and sands, they put on a kind of sandals, cut out of the raw
hide of an ox or elephant, each consisting of only one piece turning up about
half an inch quite round the foot, with the hairy side outward, and fastened on
with strings.

The women wear caps all the year round, made of the skins of wild beasts, that
point up spirally from the crown of the head. They generally wear two krosses
round their shoulders, which, like those of the men, cover their backs, and
sometimes reach down to their hams. Between these krosses, they fasten a
sucking child, if they have one, with the head just peeping over their
shoulders. The under krosse serves to prevent their bodies being hurt by the
children at their backs. About their neck is tied a string, to which is
fastened a leather bag, which they constantly wear, from morning till night,
both at home and abroad; it contains some kind of food, a pipe, tobacco, etc.
The girls, from their infancy to twelve years of age, wear bulrushes tied in
rings round their legs, from their knees down to their ancles. These bulrush
rings are then laid aside, and their place is supplied with rings of the
thickness of a little finger made of slips of sheep or calf-skins, from which
the hair is singed; for the Hottentot sheep have nothing like wool. Some of the
women have above an hundred of these rings upon each leg so curiously joined,
and so nicely fitted to the leg, and to each other, that they seem like curious
pieces of turnery. They are smooth, and as hard as wood, and make a clattering
noise in dancing. These rings are kept from slipping over their heels, by
wrappers of leather or rushes about their ancles; and as the women are obliged
every day to walk through bushes and brambles to gather roots and other things
for food, they preserve their legs from being torn by the thorns and briers.
These rings are one great distinction of their sex, and are considered as very
ornamental; for the more rings they wear, the finer they are reckoned: but this
is not all, they are provisions against an hour of hunger and great scarcity;
for when that arrives, they pull them off and eat them.

But the principal part of the finery of both sexes, among the Hottentots, are
brass buttons, and plates of the same metal, which they buy of the Dutch, and
then polish to an amazing luster; these dangle in the men's hair. They are also
extremely fond of bits of looking-glass, which they likewise fix in their hair,
and consider as very splendid ornaments. Diamonds are not more admired in
Europe, than these trinkets in the Hottentot nations. They wear small earrings,
made of brass wire, which they always polish very neatly, and to these rings
the most wealthy and eminent hang bits of mother of pearl, to which they have
the art of giving a curious shape and polish. These are advantages in point of
ornament, of which they are extremely proud; for they imagine they draw upon
them the admiration of all who behold them.

To their commerce with the Europeans they owe likewise several other ornaments
for the body, as brass and glass beads, of which they are extravagantly fond.
Hardly a Hottentot of either sex can be met with, who is not adorned with some
of them. But the preference is universally given to beads of brass, because
they are not so liable to break as those of glass. They wear them in necklaces,
bracelets, and girdles; of which every one has more or less according to his
ability. They choose the smallest beads they can meet with for the neck and
arms. The large ones they wear about their waists. Some wear half a dozen
necklaces together, and others more, so large that they fall very gracefully to
their navels. They likewise cover their arms with bracelets from their elbows
to their wrists, which are the largest they can get, and stained with various
colors. For these ornaments the Hottentots part with their cattle very freely.
If they serve the Europeans, they always stipulate for some earrings, if they
are not already provided: and whenever one of them serves a European, though it
be but for a week or a day, he hardly ever fails in the bargain to article for
beads.

It is an invariable custom among the men, to wear the bladders of the wild
beasts they have slain, blown up and fastened to their hair, where they hang as
honorable trophies of their prowess.

But with all this finery, the men do not reckon themselves completely dressed,
unless their hair be also lavishly powdered with a pulverized herb called
Buchu; and this being done, they are beaux and grandees, and appear in their
utmost magnificence. As the hair of the women is constantly hid under their
caps, they lay this powder as thick as they can upon their foreheads, where,
being rubbed into the grease, it sticks very firmly. The women also paint their
faces with a red earth, with which they make a spot over each eye, one upon the
nose, one upon each cheek, and one upon the chin. These red spots they consider
as striking beauties, and therefore this is their constant practice, when they
are called to mirthful assemblies, o^ intend to make a conquest: but whatever
the Hottentot men may think of women thus painted, they appear frightful to an
European.

Each of their nations has a chief, whose office it is to command the army, and
without whose consent, they neither make peace nor war. His office is
hereditary; but he i^ not permitted to enter upon it, till he ha^ solemnly
engaged in a national assembly, no^ to attempt the subversion of the old form
o^ government. He was anciently distinguished only by the beauty of the skins
of which his krosses were composed: but the Dutch, soon after their
establishment at the Cape, made a present of a brass crown to the chief of
every nation in alliance with them, which they wear upon solemn occasions.
However, in time of peace, the chief has little else to do but to govern the
kraal or village where he resides.

The captain of a kraal preserves the peace, and administers justice; and in
time of war has, under the chief of the nation, the command of the troops
furnished by his kraal. His office is also hereditary, though he cannot execute
it till he has solemnly engaged before the people not to alter or deviate from
the ancient laws and customs of the kraal. These kraal captains were likewise
anciently distinguished only by the fineness of the skins they wore, which were
those of tigers, or of wild cats: but all of them have now a cane with a brass
head, given them by the Dutch, which descends along with the office. But
neither the chiefs of the nations, nor these captains, have any revenue from
the public, or any perquisite attending the execution of their office.

The captain of a kraal decides all disputes of right and property, and tries
and punishes for murder, theft, adultery, and other crimes committed within his
jurisdiction, being assisted by all the men of the kraal; and from his sentence
there lies no appeal: but state criminals are tried by a chief, assisted by all
the captains of kraals.

Whenever a dispute about property arise, the captain summons all the men of
the kraal into the open field, who squat down in a circle. The plaintiff and
defendant plead their own causes, and the witnesses on both sides are heard.
The depositions being finished, the captain, after some debate, collects the
voices, and immediately pronounces the decree according to the majority; when
full and quiet possession is instantly secured to the party in whose favor the
decree passes.

The criminal matters which employ the kraal courts are murder, adultery, and
robbery: for adultery is punished with death. When a Hottentot is known or
suspected to have committed any of these crimes, notice is given to all the men
of the kraal to which he belongs; who, considering themselves as officers of
justice, look out sharply in order to seize the suspected party; and it is in
vain for him to think of finding sanctuary in any other Hottentot nation, for
he would be taken up as a fugitive or a spy. The criminal being apprehended, he
is secured till the men of the kraal can assemble, which is done the very day
he is brought back to the kraal. The court sitting squat upon their hams in a
circle, the prisoner is placed in the middle; because the Hottentots say, that
in an affair in which a man's life is at stake, he ought to have the best
situation for hearing and being heard. The prisoner being in this place, the
charge against him is pronounced by the prosecutor, and the prosecutor's
witnesses give their evidence. Next the prisoner makes his defense, calling his
own witnesses, who are heard with the greatest indulgence. Then the captain,
after some debates on the evidence, collects the voices, a majority of which
acquits or condemns him. If he is acquitted, the court assigns him damages out
of the prosecutor's cattle. If he is convicted, and judged worthy of death,
sentence is immediately pronounced: the court rises, while the prisoner stirs
not a limb: for a minute or two, all is silent; when suddenly the captain flies
at the prisoner, and with one blow on the head with his stick lays him
sprawling on the ground. This is followed by all the rest, who rush forwards,
and striking him with all their might, he in a moment expires. They then
bending the corpse neck and heels, wrap it up in his krosse, and bury it with
every thing they find about it, except his earrings, and other ornaments of
copper or brass, which are given to his family or his heir, who suffer nothing
either in name, privilege, or property. His family, relations, and friends are
treated with the same respect as before: and every thing proceeds as if no such
misfortune had happened. Even the memory of the criminal is so far from being
insulted, that his corpse is interred with the same ceremonies, and as much
pomp as is shown at the funerals of the richest and most virtuous among them.

All the riches of the Hottentots descend to the eldest son, or, when a son is
wanting, to the next male relation; and the youngest sons of a Hottentot, who
are at home and unprovided for at the death of their father, are at the
courtesy of the eldest, both with respect to their fortune and their liberty.
Marriage with first and second cousins is forbidden, and punished by being
cudgelled to death: but yet a Hottentot may have as many wives as he can
maintain though the richest seldom exceed three. A man may be divorced from his
wife, and a woman from her husband, upon showing such cause as shall be
satisfactory to the men of the kraal. But one of the most extraordinary of
their laws is, that a widow, for every husband she marries after the first, is
obliged to cut off a joint of a finger, which she presents to her husband on
the wedding day, beginning at one of the little fingers.

The Hottentots have no lawyers; and the only public officers, besides those
already mentioned, are the physician and the priest. In every kraal there is a
physician, and the large ones have two, who have some skill in botany, surgery,
and medicine. They are chosen out of the sages of each kraal, and appointed to
watch over the health of the inhabitants. This they perform without fee or
reward, the honor of the employment being judged a sufficient recompense for
their trouble. They suffer none to see them gather and prepare their remedies,
for all their preparations are kept a profound secret; and if a patient dies
under their hands, they constantly assert that all their medicines were
rendered ineffectual by witchcraft.

The priest is, at the Cape, inferior to the physician. His office is also
elective; but he is neither to pray for the people, nor to instruct them in
religious matters. He presides at their offerings, and has the ordering of all
ceremonies.

As the chief of a Hottentot nation presides over the captains of the kraals,
so the Hottentots call the supreme being the great or supreme captain, whom
they believe to be the creator of all things and the governor of the world, and
that he is endowed with unsearchable perfections. They commonly call him Gounja
Gounja, or Gounja Tiquoa, the God of all Gods; and say that he is a good man,
who does nobody any hurt; and that he dwells far above the moon: but it does
not appear that they address any act of devotion immediately to the supreme
God. Their adorations are paid to what they call inferior deities, dependent
upon him; for the most sensible of them, when they are in the humor to answer
the questions asked them on this subject, say, their first parents so
grievously offended the God of all Gods, that he cursed them with hardness of
heart; therefore they know little of him, and have still less inclination to
serve him.

The moon with them is an inferior visible God. They call this planet Gounja,
or God; and say that it is the subject and representative of the high and
invisible. They assemble for the celebration of its worship at the change and
full, and no inclemency of the weather prevents them: they then throw their
bodies into a thousand different postures, scream, prostrate themselves on the
ground, suddenly jump up, stamp like mad creatures, and cry aloud, "I salute
thee; thou art welcome: grant us fodder for our cattle, and milk in abundance."
These and other addresses to the moon they repeat over and over, singing ho,
ho, ho, many times over, with a variation of notes, accompanied with clapping
of hands. Thus in shout^ng, screaming, singing, jumping, stamp^ng, dancing, and
prostration, they spend ^he whole night in worshipping this planet, which they
consider as the distributer of the weather.

They likewise adore as a benign deity a ^ertain insect, said to be peculiar to
the Hottentot countries. It is of the size of a ^hild's little finger; the back
is green, and ^he belly speckled with red and white: it has ^wo wings, and on
its head are two horns. Whenever this insect appears in sight, they ^ay it the
highest tokens of veneration; and ^f it honors a kraal with a visit, the
inhabi^ants assemble about it with transports of de^otion. They sing and dance
round it, troop after troop, in the highest raptures, throw^ng to it the powder
of buchu, with which ^hey cover the area of the kraal, and the ^ops of the
cots. They likewise kill two fat ^heep as a thank-offering for this high
ho^our, and fancy all their past offenses are ^uried in oblivion. If this
insect happens ^o alight upon a Hottentot, he is looked upon as a man without
guilt, and ever after ^evered as a saint. The fattest ox is imme^iately killed
for a thank-offering, and is ^ten in honor of the deity and the saint, ^ho
feasts alone on the en^ails, which are ^oiled, while the men devour the meat
dressed the same way, and the women are regaled only with the broth. He is
obliged to be very careful of the fat, and to anoint his body and apparel with
that alone, while any of it remains. But the most extraordinary part of the
ceremony is that the caul well powdered with buchu, and twisted like a rope, is
put in the manner of a collar about his neck; and he is obliged to wear it day
and night, till it rots off, or till the insect at another visit, lights upon
another inhabitant of the kraal, when he is at liberty to remove it. The case
is the same if the insect settles upon a woman: she commences a saint with the
same ceremonies; only he^ the women feast upon the meat, while the men are only
regaled with the broth.

The Hottentots will run every hazard t^ procure the safety of this animal. A
German, who had a country seat about six mile^ from the fort, having given
leave to some Hottentots to turn their cattle for a while upon his land there,
they removed to the place with their kraal. A son of this German was amusing
himself in this kraal, when the deified insect appeared. The Hottentots flew
tumultuously to adore it, while the young gentleman went to catch it, in ord^^
to see the effects such a capture would pr^duce. He seized it in the midst of
them but how great was the general cry and agon^ when they saw it in his hand!
They stared at him, and at each other, with looks of distraction. See, see,
see, cried they; What is he going to do? Will he kill it? Will he kill it? Mean
while every limb shook with fear. He asked them why they were in such agonies
for that paltry insect. Ah, Sir, (they replied with the utmost concern) it is a
Divinity. It Is come from heaven: it is come on a good design. Ah! do not hurt
it; do not offend it. We shall be the most miserable wretches upon earth if you
do. This ground will lie under a curse, and the crime will never be forgiven.
He appeared unmoved by their petitions, but seemed as if he intended to maim or
destroy it. On which they started, and ran about like people frantic, asking
where was his conscience? and how he dared to think of perpetrating a crime
that would bring upon his head all the curses and thunders of heaven? But this
not prevailing, they all fell prostrate on the ground, and, with streaming eyes
and the loudest cries, besought him to spare the creature, and give it liberty.
The young man now yielded, and let the insect fly, on which they capered and
shouted in a transport of joy, and, running after it rendered it the customary
honors.

The Hottentots also pay a religious veneration to their deceased saint^ and
men of renown, whom they honor, not with tombs, statues or inscriptions, but
consecrate woods, mountains, fields and rivers, to their memory. On passing by
one of these places, they stop to contemplate the virtues of the deceased, to
whose memory it was dedicated, and to implore his protection for them and their
cattle. Mean while they stand with their heads muffled up in their krosses or
mantles; and sometimes they also dance round these places, singing and clapping
their hands.

The Hottentots likewise worship an evil Deity, whom they consider as the
father of mischief; the source of all their afflictions, and the instructor of
the wicked Hottentots in the cursed arts of witchcraft, by which they believe
that innumerable mischiefs are done to the persons and cattle of those who are
good. They call him Touquoa, and say he is a little crabbed inferior captain,
whose malice will seldom let him rest, and therefore they woshrip him in order
to avert it, and wheedle him by the offering of an ox or a sheep.

The Hottentots believe that the soul survives the body, and therefore upon the
death of any man, woman, or child, remove their kr^als to a new settlement;
from the opinion the dead never haunt any place but that in which they died,
unless any thing that belongs to them is carried out of it, and then they
apprehend the departed souls will follow a kraal, and be very troublesome: they
therefore leave the huts they died in standing, and in them all the utensils
belonging to the deceased.

This is the absurd system of the Hottentot religion, of which those people are
so fond, that I never heard of one of them dying a christian. Though the Dutch
have sent missionaries among them, who have undergone numberless fatigues, and
taken the greatest pains to make proselytes, it has been without effect, and
they have been compelled with sorrow to abandon the generous design, without
leaving the least trace of it on the minds of the Hottentots. Of this the
following incident may serve for a proof. Mr. Vander Stel, governor of the
Cape, took an infant Hottentot, whom he educated in the knowledge of the
christian religion, and after the genteel manners of the Europeans, allowing
him little or no conversation or intercourse with the Hottentots. He became
well versed in the mysteries of religion, and in several languages; he was
always richly dressed, and his manners were formed after the best European
models at the Cape. The governor seeing him thus qualified, entertained great
hopes of him, and sent him with a commissary general to the Indies: he remained
employed in the commissary's affairs, till the death of that gentleman, when he
returned to the Cape. A few days after, at a visit among his relations, he
stripped himself of his European apparel, and equipped himself in the manner of
his country, in a sheep-skin. This done, he packed up his cast-off clothes, ran
with them to the governor's, and presenting himself before his patron, laid the
bundle at his feet, and addressed his excellency to the following purport: Be
pleased, sir, to take notice, that I for ever renounce this apparel. I likewise
for ever renounce the christian religion. It is my design to live and die in
the religion, manners, and customs of our ancestors. I shall only beg you will
grant me (and I am persuaded you will grant me) the collar and hanger I wear. I
will keep them for your sake. Here he stopped, and turning his back, fled
swiftly away, and was never more seen in that quarter. This man I frequently
conversed with, up in the country, and found, to my great amazement, that he
had a surprising stock of christian knowledge. But though I made use of the
most persuasive and endearing language, to call him back into the fold of
Christ, he continued deaf to all my reasoning and remonstrances.

We shall now take a view of those ceremonies that are generally considered as
of a religious nature, and begin with the marriages of the Hottentots. If a
bachelor or widower has a mind to marry, he discovers his views to his father,
and if he is dead, to the next authority of kindred; who if he consents,
attends him to the woman's relations, whom they regale with a pipe or two of
tobacco, or of dachu, which they all smoke. The father of the lover then opens
the business to the woman's father, who having heard it, generally retires to
consult his wife, and soon returns with a final answer, which is generally
favorable. If the lover's father receives a denial, which rarely happens,
nothing more is said about it, and the lover at once tears his choice from his
heart, and looks out for another. If it be complied with, the lover chooses two
or three fat oxen from his own herd, or his father's, and drives them to the
house from whence he is to take his destined bride, accompanied by all his
relations of both sexes who live near him: they are received with caresses by
the woman ^ kindred; the oxen are immediately slain; and the whole company
besmear their bodies with the fat, and then powder themselves all over with
buchu; while the woman spot their faces as already described, with a kind of
red chalk. The men then squat on the ground in a circle, the bridegroom
squatting in the center; the women at some distance also squat in a circle
about the bride. At length the priest who lives at the bride's kraal, enters
the circle of the men, and coming up to the bridegroom pisses a little upon
him. The bridegroom receiving the stream with eagerness, rubs it all over his
body, and makes furrows with his long nails, that the urine may penetrate the
farther. The priest then goes to the other circle, and evacuates a little upon
the bride, who rubs it in with the same eagerness as the bridegroom. To him the
priest then returns, and having streamed a little more, goes again to the
bride, and again scatters his water upon her. Thus he proceeds from one to the
other till he has exhausted his whole stock, uttering from time to time to each
of them the following wishes, till he has pronounced the whole upon both: "may
you live long and happily together. May you have a son before the end of the
year. May this son live to be a comfort to you in your old age. May this son
prove a man of courage, and a good huntsman."

The nuptial ceremony being thus over, the oxen are cut into many pieces, and
the whole dressed; some pieces being boiled, and the rest roasted in the
following manner. A large flat stone is fastened in the ground in the manner of
a hearth, and a brisk fire made upon it, which burns till the stone is
thoroughly heated. The fire is then removed, the stone cleaned from the ashes,
and the meat placed upon it. It is then covered with a flat stone, as large as
that upon which the meat lies; round which a fire is kindled, as well as upon
the upper stone, by which the meat is soon roasted, or rather baked. The
provisions being thus dressed, the men and women sit in different circles, the
bridegroom alone eating in company of the women. They are all so nasty as to
use the lappets of their greasy krosses or mantles for plates; but their spoons
are sea shells. Dinner being over, what is left, is set by, and they go to
smoking; each company having one tobacco-pipe. The person who fills it, after
taking two or three whiffs, gives it to his or her neighbor, and thus it goes
round: the best part of the night is spent in smoking and merriment, till the
bridegroom retires to the arms of his bride, and the company separate. The next
day they again assemble, and feast and smoke as before; and this is continued
every day, till the pro^isions dressed on the day of marriage, are consumed.
Upon these occasions, they have neither music nor dancing; and they have only
their ordinary drink, which is milk and water.

A Hottentot never has a hut of his own, till after his marriage: and then his
wife assists him, not only in erecting it, but in getting the materials, which
are all new, and in providing the furniture. This being done, he abandons to
her the care and toil of seeking and dressing the family provision, except when
he goes a hunting or fishing: she also bears a part in attending the cattle.

At the birth of a child, the parents have a solemn feast by way of
thanksgiving, of which all the inhabitants of the kraal partake. But upon the
birth of the first son, the rejoicings are far superior to those attending any
other birth. The parents slay cattle very liberally for the entertainment of
the whole kraal; and every one, on such an occasion, is particularly zealous to
congratulate them on obtaining an heir. If, at any time, a woman has twins, and
they are both boys, they kill two fat bullocks, and all their neighbors, men,
women, and children, rejoice at their birth, as a great blessing. The mother
alone is excluded from the entertainment, and has only some fat sent her, to
anoint herself and her infants. However, if the twins are girls, there is
little or no rejoicing, and all the sacrifice they make is at most a couple of
sheep. On these occasions, they often give the lie to those thanksgivings by a
cruel custom, practiced indeed by other nations, but contrary to every
sentiment of reason and humanity. If the parents are poor, or the mother
pretends that she has not milk for both the twin girls, the worst featured of
the two is either buried alive at a distance from the kraal, cast among the
bushes, or tied on its back to the under bough of a tree, where it is left to
starve, or to be devoured by the birds or beasts of prey.

An exposed female infant is sometimes found by an European, when, if it be
dead, he generally stays to bury it: but, if it be alive, he always takes it
home; and, if he is not willing to breed it up, he easily finds those that are.
These children always receive a good education; and great care is taken to
instruct them thoroughly in the knowledge of christianity, and to secure them
from falling off to the Hottentot nastiness and idolatries; but these generous
labors have never produced any lasting effect. Not once has it appeared that a
Hottentot mind is to be deprived of its native bias: for those unhappy females
no sooner come to years of maturity, than, flying to their own people, they
constantly renounce the christian religion, with the European manners and
apparel, embrace the religion and customs of their ancestors, and remain with
the Hottentots ever after.

At eight or nine years of age, the young Hottentot is with great ceremony,
deprived of his left testicle; but the poverty of the parent sometimes makes it
be deferred till the youth is eighteen years of age; this cruel ceremony being
attended with some expense. This is supposed to contribute to the agility of
the Hottentots: they have also a prevailing opinion, that a man with two
testicles constantly begets two children; and was a young man to try the
experiment, both he and the woman would lie at the mercy of the rulers, and the
woman would, for so great a crime, be perhaps torn to pieces by her own sex.

This is one act of legitimation for the marriage of the males; but is not the
only one. Till they are about eighteen years of age, they are confined to the
tuition of their mothers, and live and ramble about with them: there is
therefore a second act of legitimation, by which they are made men. When the
father, or the generality of the men of a kraal, resolve to call a young man
into their society, all the inhabitants assemble in the middle of the kraal,
and sit upon the ground in a circle. The young fellow to be admitted, being
without the circle, is ordered to squat down upon his hams, and then the oldest
man of the kraal rises, and asks, whether the youth without shall be admitted
into their society, and made a man? To this all answering "yes, yes," he leaves
the circle, and stepping up to the youth, informs him, that the men having
thought him worthy of being admit^ed into their society, he is now to take an
^^ernal farewell of his mother, the nursery, and all his puerile employments:
that if he ^ but once seen talking to his mother, and ^oes not always carefully
avoid her compa^y, he will be considered as a child, and ^nworthy of the
conversation of the men, from which he will be banished: that all his ^houghts,
words, and actions must now be ^anly. This he repeats, till he judges that ^e
has fixed these admonitions on his mind. The youth having before well daubed
himself with fat and soot, the old man bedews ^im plentifully, in the manner
before men^ioned, in the account of their marriages. The youth receives the
stream with eagerness and joy, and making furrows with his long ^ails in the
fat upon his body, rubs in the ^riny fluid with the quickest action. The ^ld
man after he has done, utters aloud the ^ollowing benediction: "Good fortune
at^end thee. Live to old age. Increase and multiply. May thy beard grow soon."
The ^outh is then solemnly proclaimed a man, and all the men feast upon a
sheep, part ^asted, and part boiled.

If after this the young man is seen eating ^r drinking with the women, he is
treated ^ith the utmost contempt; he becomes the ^est and derision of the whole
kraal, and is excluded from the conversation of the men, till the ceremony is
performed over again.

A Hottentot, thus freed from the care of his mother, may be so brutish and
unnatural as to cudgel her, to show his independence; and it is common for a
young fellow on his being admitted into the society of the men, to go and abuse
his mother, and, as a testimony of the sincerity of his intentions to follow
the admonitions given him, to insult and triumph over her, on his being
discharged from her tuition.

I have already observed, that some of the Hottentots have a kind of honorable
distinction in wearing bladders tied to their hair as trophies of their valor.
He who has singly encountered and slain a lion, tiger, leopard, elephant,
rhinoceros or elk, is considered as a hero. Such a person o^ his return home,
squats down; but is soo^ visited by an old man deputed by the rest o^ the
kraal, to thank and congratulate him upon so beneficial an exploit, and to
acquain^ him that the men of the kraal expect him immediately to receive from
them the honors that are his due. The hero instantly rises, and attends the
messenger to the middle of the kraal, where all the men wait for him, and
squatting down on a mat sprea^ for him, all the men squat round him while the
hero's face is flushed with joy* The deputy then marches up to the hero and
sprinkles him plentifully as already related, pronouncing over him certain
terms, which I could never get explained. The hero, as in other cases, rubs in
the stream upon his face and every other part with the greatest eagerness. This
done, the deputy lights his pipe, and having taken two or three whiffs, gives
it to whoever he pleases in the circle; who, having taken the same solace,
gives it to another; and thus it goes round, till only ashes remain, which the
deputy shakes upon the hero, who rubs them into the fat on his body with an
eager motion, as if he would not lose one particle of it. The circle then
rises; he does so too; and every one congratulates him on the high honor he
has received, thanking him for the service he has done his country. The hero
now considers himself as raised to the highest summit of human glory; and by
the bladder of the beast he has killed, which he wears fastened to his hair,
and the majestic port he ever after assumes, demands the homage and respect
which Hottentot custom assigns to his high dignity, and which all his
countrymen constantly pay him.

The death of no wild beast gives such joy to a kraal, as that of a ^yger. The
Hottentots are infinitely fond of the flesh, which, indeed, I found to be most
delicious food, and much superior to the finest veal.

I now come to the last ceremonies, that have a reference to a private person;
those that attend and succeed his departure out of life. A Hottentot man, woman
or child, being in the agony of death, the friends and relations assemble and
set up a terrible howling: but the breath is no sooner out of the body, than
they join in so dreadful a chorus of screaming, howling, yelling, roaring, and
clapping of hands, that it is impossible for an European to stay in the kraal
with safety to his brains. The corpse is instantly wrapped up neck and hee^s
together, much in the posture of a child in the womb, in the krosse of the
deceased, so close that not the least part of it is to be seen. The grave is
almost always either a cleft in a rock, or a hole made by a wild beast; for the
Hottentots never dig one when either of these is to be found at a convenient
distance. About six hours after the death, the burial is performed. When the
corpse is ready to be brought out, all the men and women of the kraal, but such
as are employed about the corpse, assemble before the door of the hut, and
squatting in two circles, the men in one, and the women in another, they clap
their hands, crying in doleful accents, bo, bo, bo, or father, father. The
bearers are named by the captain of the kraal, or by the relations of the
deceased, and carry the body in their arms. When it is brought out, the circles
before the door rise and follow it to the grave, the men and women in separate
bodies, all the way wringing their hands; howling out bo, bo, bo, and putting
themselves in such ridiculous postures, that it is difficult for an European to
be present and forbear laughing. Having put the corpse into the hole, they fill
it up with the mould of ant-hills, that it may be the sooner consumed, and cram
stones and pieces of wood into the grave to prevent its being devoured by wild
beasts. This being done, they return to the kraal, squat again in two circles
before the door, and for about an hour longer continue their lamentations, till
the word being given for silence, two old men, the friends or relations of the
deceased, enter into each circle, and sparingly dispense their stream upon each
person, so that all may have some: all the company receive it with much
eagerness and veneration. This being done, each steps into the hut, and taking
up a handful of ashes from the hearth, comes out by the passage made for the
corpse, and (...) the ashes by little and little, upon the whole company. This,
say they, is done to humble their pride; to banish all notions of distinction;
and show them, that old and young, rich and poor, the weak and the strong, the
beautiful and the ugly, will all be alike, and reduced to dust and ashes. If
the deceased left any cattle, the heir now kills a sheep, and some of his
nearest relations, if they are able, do the same, for the entertainment of the
kraal. The caul of the sheep killed by the heir, is well powdered with buchu,
and put about his neck, and he is obliged to wear it till it rots off. The
other relations wear likewise about their necks the cauls of the sheep they
kill on this occasion. These cauls are the mourning the rich Hottentots put on
for the dead. But if the relations are so poor, that they cannot afford to kill
any cattle for the entertainment of the kraal, they shave their heads in narrow
stripes, alternately leaving a stripe of hair, and another shaved.

But they have a most horrid custom with regard to those of both sexes who are
grown superannuated. So long as an old man or woman is able to fetch in a stick
a day, or can perform an office of kindness, care is taken to render their
lives as easy as possible: but when they can be of no manner of service, they
are by the consent of the kraal placed in a solitary hut at a considerable
distance, with a small stock of provisions without any one to assist them, to
die of hunger, or to be devoured by the wild beasts. Cruel as this custom is,
they consider it as an act of mercy; and are filled w^^h amazement at hearing
the Europeans speak of it with horror.

It may here be proper to describe the manner of building their huts, and
disposing of their kraals. The huts are all oval, about fourteen feet the
longest way, formed of sticks; one end of which is fixed in the ground, and the
other bent over the top so as to make an arch: but they are rarely so high as
for a man to stand upright within them. The arches being fixed by tying bent
sticks with a kind of rope made of rushes, the whole is covered with mats,
which are made so fast to each other and the sticks, as not to be removed by
the wind or rain. Those of the wealthy Hottentots have also a covering of
skins: they have no other opening but at the entrance, which is also arched,
and o^^y about three feet high; on the top of which is fixed a skin to be taken
up and let down, in order to keep out the wind; and this is the only passage
for the smoke. Their furniture consists, of earthen pots for dressing their
victuals, and several other vessels for holding water, milk, and butter. Their
fireplace is a hole made in the middle of the hut, and their bed a skin spread
in a hole sunk a little below the surface of the ground. A kraal consists of
twenty or more of these huts, placed near each other in a circle, leaving an
area in the middle; each kraal containing from one to three or four hundred
souls. The huts of the wealthy are often hung with beautiful skins: and a
variety of trinkets: but though all the Hottentots huts are narrow, dark, and
filthy, harmony reigns continually in almost every one of them; that heavenly
charm, so rarely to be found in the palaces of Europe. When a difference
happens between a man and his wife, it is soon accommodated. All their
neighbors instantly interpose, and the quarrel is speedily made up. The
Hottentots run to the suppression of strife, when it has seized a family, as we
do to put out a fire that has seized a house, and allow themselves no rest till
every matter of dispute is adjusted.

The cattle of a kraal run all together, and the meanest inhabitant, who has
but a single sheep, has the privilege of turning it into the flock, where as
much care is taken of it, as of the sheep of the richest and most powerful of
the kraal. They have no particular herdsmen or shepherds, for driving their
cattle to the pasture, and guarding them from wild beasts. This office they
take upon them by turns, three or four of them together; the women milking the
cows morning and evening. Between five and six in the evening, they generally
drive them home. In the area of the kraal they lodge the calves and all the
small cattle, and on the outside range their great cattle, tying two and two
together by the feet. These are in the night guarded by the dogs, of which
every hut has one or two.

The Hottentots have what they call backeleyers, or fighting oxen, which they
use in their wars, as some nations do elephants: those gore, kick, and trample
the enemy to death with incredible fury. Each army has a drove of them, which
they take an opportunity to turn upon their foe^* The courage of these
creatures is amazing, and the discipline upon which they are formed, does not a
little honor to the Hottentot genius and dexterity. They are also of great use
to them in the government of their herds at pasture, for upon a signal they
will fetch in stragglers Every kraall has at least half a dozen of these oxen,
and when one of them dies, or grows so old as to be unfit for service, the most
stately young ox is chose^ out of the herd, and taught to succeed him. The
backeleyers know every inhabitant of the kraal; but if a stranger, especially
an Eu^^pean, approaches the herd, without having with him a Hottentot of the
kraal to which they belong, they make at him full gallop; and if he is not
within hearing of any of the Hottentots who keep the herds, if there is not a
free which he can immediately climb, or if he has not a light pair of heels, or
a piece of firearms, he is certainly demolished. But they no sooner hear the
whistling of the keepers through their fingers, or the report of a pistol, than
they return to the herd.

The Hottentots, have likewise great numbers of oxen for carriage, whom they
break with such art that they render them as obedient to their drivers, as a
taught dog in Europe is to the commands of his master.

The Hotttentots are very expert at several arts. They point their weapons with
iron, which they even draw from the ore: for this purpose they make a hole in a
raised piece of ground, and about a foot and a half on the descent make another
of less extent, to receive the melted iron, which is to run into it by a
channel made from one hole to the other. They then kindle a fire in the upper
hole, and when the earth about it, is thoroughly heated, put in the iron
stones, and make a large fire over them, which they supply with fuel, till the
iron runs into the receiver. When the iron is cold, they take it out, heat it
in other fires, and with no other implement but stones, beat it out, and shape
it into weapons, after which they grind and polish it so nicely, upon a flat
stone, as to render it a valuable piece of work, both for use and beauty. This
ingenuity is not inconsistent with their habitual laziness: for a poor
Hottentot having made a set of arms for his own use, and another for sale to a
rich one, by which he has got two or three heads of cattle, can hardly ever be
induced to set his hand to the same labor a third time.

The-dexterity of the Hottentots in discharging an arrow, and throwing what
they call the hassagaye and rackum-stick, is very astonishing. A Hottentot
arrow consists of a small tapering stick, or cane of about a foot and a half in
length, pointed with a small thin piece of iron bearded, and joined to the
stick or cane by a barrel. Their bows are made of olive or iron wood, and the
string of the sinews or guts of beasts, fastened to a strong wooden or iron
Look at each end of the bow. The quiver is a long narrow bag, made of the skin
of an ox, elk, or elephant, and slung over the shoulder by a strap fastened to
it; but to the upper end of the quiver is fixed a hook, on which the bow is
hung, when they go to war, or to the chase. The hassagaye is a kind of a half
pipe; the shaft is a taper stick the length and thickness of a rake handle,
armed at the thickest end with a little thin iron plate tapering to a point,
and very sharp on the edges. The rackum-stick is a kind of dart, little more
than a foot long, made of hard wood. In the use of these weapons, the
Hottentots show such quickness of eye, and sureness of hand, as I believe no
people upon earth have besides themselves. If a Hottentot sees a hare, deer, or
wild goat within 30 or 40 yards of him, away flies the rackum-stick, and down
falls the animal, generally pierced through the body. They are not less expert
in the use of the bow and arrow, for if there be no wind, they will hit a mark
no bigger than a silver penny, at a considerable distance. They are equally
expert in throwing the hassagaye, and slinging a stone. In all these cases they
stand not, as the Europeans, like statues, to take their aim, but while they
gather it, which they are not long in doing, they skip from side to side, and
brandish and whirl the weapon about in such a manner, that you would take the
whole for idle flourish; but on a sudden away it flies to the mark. Their
dexterity on these occasions is quite incredible, and can hardly be conceived.

When all the men of a kraal are out upon a chase, and discover a wild beast of
any considerable size, they endeavor to surround him, which they generally do
very soon, though the beast, of whatever kind, betakes himself to his heels. If
thus they encompass an elephant, or rhinoceros, they attack him with
hassagayes, the hardness and thickness of his hide fortifying him against a
shower of arrows. If they do not lay him dead upon the spot, and he is able to
return the attack upon the Hottentots, they form as large a ring as they can
make, so as to reach him with their hassagayes. The creature being wounded,
runs with great noise and fury at the person who threw the weapon. Then others
attack him in the rear. He turns about, to attack the last assailants, and is
again attacked in the rear. Again he turns about, and is again attacked. The
hassagayes multiply upon his body. He roars, tears up the ground, and has
sometimes as it were a forest of hassagayes upon his back before he falls.

When a lion, tiger, or leo^ard is thus encompassed, they attack him both with
hassagayes and arrows. With flaming eyes and the wildest rage he flies upon
those who discharged them. He is nimble, they are nimbler: and avoid him with
astonishing dexterity till they are relieved by others. He leaps toward one so
quick, and, as you would think, with so sure a paw, that you shuddder for the
fellow, expecting to see him in an i^ ^orn to pieces: but the man in danger^
away in the twinkling of an eye, and (...) beast spends all his rage upon the
ground. He turns and leaps toward another, and another, and another; but still
in vain: they avoid him with equal quickness, and still he fights only with the
air. All this time the arrows and hassagayes are showering upon him in the
rear. He grows mad with pain, and running and leaping from one party of his
enemies to another, and tumbling from time to time to break the arrows and
hassagayes that are fastened in him, he foams, yells, and roars in the most
terrible manner. Nothing in the world can be more admirable than the activity
and address with which the Hottentots escape the paws of the beast, and
incredible speed and resolution with which they relieve each other. If he is
not quickly slain, he is soon convinced that there is no dealing with so nimble
an enemy; and then he makes off with his ut^ost speed; but having by this time
a multitude of arrows and hassagayes on his back, some of which are commonly
poisoned, he soon falls.

But the Hottentots do not often engage an elephant, a rhinoceros, or an elk
after this manner: the elephants, going always to water in troops in a line,
make a path from their haunts to the water side. In this path (...) Hottentots,
without spade or pick-axe, (...) ^hey have no such tools, make a hole (...) six
to eight feet deep, in the middle of which they fix a strong stake tapering up
to a point almost to the top of the hole. When this is done they cover the hole
with small boughs, leaves, mould, and grass, so that no man living would
suspect the trap. The elephants keeping pretty close to the track, one or other
of them is sure to fall in with his fore feet, when his neck or breast being
pierced by the stake on which his whole body rests, the more he struggles, the
farther it penetrates. The rest of the elephants immediately make off as fast
as possible. Mean while the Hottentots seeing the elephant thus caught, issue
out of their covert, get upon the neck of the beast, and either break his skull
with heavy stones, or cut his large veins with their knives. The carcass is
then cut in pieces and carried to the kraal, where all the inhabitants feast
upon it very jovially. The rhinoceros and the elk are also frequently taken in
the same manner.

The Hottentots are likewise very dextrous swimmers: this they perform in a
different manner from other nations; they beat the water with their feet, and,
raising themselves erect, paddle along with their necks and arms above the
surface. Thus they cross deep rivers, and proceed with great swiftness in the
sea, dancing forward without the least apprehension of danger, in the manner
which the European swimmers call treading the water, rising and falling with
the waves like so many corks. They are also extremely expert at fishing.

I have already observed, that the wealth of the Hottentots co^sts in their
cattle, and it is never to be seen in any other kind, unless it be in elephants
teeth, of which they get a great number, though they bring but few to the Cape.
Generally speaking, however, they part with their cattle, both to the Europeans
and to one another, at so cheap a rate as is almost incredible. I never offered
a pound of tobacco to a Hottentot for an ox, half a pound for a large sheep,
and a quarter of a pound for a fat lamb, but the offer was accepted; though I had
the bargain the sooner, if I offered to crown it with the present of a dram.

The wild beasts of the country are extremely fierce and savage. The lions
here, are remarkable for their strength. When they come upon their prey, they
knock it down, and never bite it till they have given it the mortal blow, which
is generally accompanied with a dreadful roar. When the lion is pinched with
hunger, he shakes his mane, and lashes his side with his tail. When he is thus
agitated, it is almost certain death to come in his way; and as he generally
lurks for his prey behind the bushes, travelers sometimes do not discover the
motion of his tail till it is too late; but if the lion shakes not his mane,
nor lashes himself with his tail, a traveller may pass safely by him. The flesh
of a lion eats something like venison.

The leopard and tiger, which nearly resemble each other, are next in
fierceness to the lion. The tiger is much larger than the leopard, and is
distinguished by rings of black hair enclosing spots of yellow: but the black
streaks of the leopard are not round, but formed with an opening in the manner
of a horse shoe. They will neither of them eat the flesh of any beast they have
not killed themselves.

The Cape elephants are much larger than those of any other country, and their
teeth are from 60 to 120 pounds weight. The female is much less than the male,
and her dug^ fall from her breast between her forelegs. I am certain those
authors are mistaken who say that they sleep standing; for I have many a time
seen very perfect impressions of their bodies on the ground where they have
slept. Their ordinary food is grass, heath, roots, and the tender branches of
shrubs. They have no hair, and their skins have a multitude of scars and
scratches, which they receive by pressing through thorns and bushes.

The Cape rhinoceros is of a dark ash color approaching to a black. His skin
is also without hair, and so hard that it is difficult to pierce it with a
sharp knife. He is represented as armed all over with scales: but at the Cape
he has really none, though the numberless scars and scratches on his hide, make
him look at a distance as if fenced with scales. His mouth resembles that of a
hog, and upon his snout grows a solid dark gray horn near two feet long,
somewhat bent, with which, when he is angry, he will tear up the ground, and
throw stones a great way over his head; and on his forehead is another horn,
about six inches in length, hollow and in the form of a half ^owl inverted. His
ears are small, and his legs shorter than those of the elephant. With that
animal he is at perpetual enmity, and whenever he surprises him, he rips open
his belly with the horn on his snout. He catches the scent of any creature that
is to the windward of him, and marches toward it on a right line, grunting and
tearing his way through all opposition of trees and bushes. He never attacks a
man unprovoked, unless he wears a red coat, in which case he rends and destroys
every thing that stands between him and the object of his rage; if he seizes
him, he throws him over his head with great violence, and then feeds upon him
by licking the flesh off the bones with his rough and prickly tongue. His eyes
are very small, and he only sees strait forward: though he is pretty swift of
foot, he is very slow and awkward in turning. The way therefore to avoid him is
to suffer him to come within eight or ten paces of you, and then to slip a few
paces aside, by which means he loses sight of you, and it costs him a great
deal of awkward trouble to get you again in view. He feeds chiefly on shrubs,
brooms, and thistles.

The buffaloes of the Cape are larger than those of Europe, and of a brown red.
Their ^horns are short, and their skin so hard and tough, that it is difficult
to kill them without very good firearms. They are also enraged at the sight of
any thing red, and at the discharge of a gun near them: on these occasions they
roar, stamp, tear up the ground, and run with fury at the offending party.

The earth hogs in the Hottentot countries are not unlike the hogs in Europe,
only they are somewhat red; their heads are longer, their snouts more pointed,
and they are quite toothless. The tongue of this animal is very long and sharp.
When he is hungry he looks out for an ant-hill, and placing himself near it, he
stretches out his tongue to a great length, when the ants mount upon it in vast
numbers, where they are held by a glutinous matter; and when it is well
covered, he draws it in, swallows them, and then ^ays out his tongue for more.
His legs are long and strong. He scratches holes in the ground, in which he
hides himself, and is very expeditious at his work. If he gets but his head and
forelegs into the earth, he holds so fast, that the strongest man cannot pull
him out. His flesh tastes much like that of a wild hog.

The porcupines of the Cape are about two feet high, and three long. The body
of this animal is armed with a sort of black and white quills very sharp at the
out-points, and not unlike goose quills stripped of the feathers. Those on his
back are about six inches long; but the longest are on his hind part: and these
he darts at his pursuer, whether man or beast; but never does till they are
pretty near him, and sometimes does it so effectually that they stick in the
flesh, and cause a violent pain and inflammation. His head and feet are like
those of a hare, and his ears resemble those of a man. His flesh is wholesome
and well tasted. This animal does great mischief in the gardens; and therefore,
when the breach is discovered by which he enters them, a musket is planted
against it charged and cocked: to the trigger is tied a string, which runs
close along by the barrel to the muzzle, where a carrot or turnip is fastened.
The porcupine on seizing this bait, pulls the trigger, and is shot.

The baboons at the Cape are very numerous, and frequently enter the gardens
and orchards, they being great lovers of fruit. On their entering them, they
set a party to watch upon the fences, and a number of them begin to strip the
trees, while the rest stand at a distance from each other, in a line from the
orchard or garden, to the place of rendezvous on the mountains. The fruit, as
it is gathered, is tossed to the baboon at the head of the line, and it
immediately passes from paw to paw up to the mountains; they being so very
nimble and quick sighted ^s hardly ever to fail catching in their paws the
fruit that is thrown to them. All this is done with great silence and dispatch.
When the baboons upon the watch discover any body approaching, they give a loud
cry, and the whole troop scowers away, as if destruction was at their heels,
the young ones jumping up on the backs of their mothers. It is supposed they
punish neglect in the sentinels with death; for when any are taken or shot
before the alarm is given, a quarrelling noise is heard among them on their
getting back to the mountains, and it is not uncommon to find the bodies of
some of them torn to pieces on the way.

One of the most extraordinary animals at the Cape is called by the Dutch
stinkbingsem, or stinkbox; stinking being the grand defense nature has given
this creature against all its enemies. It is shaped like a ferret, and is of
the size of a middling dog. When its pursuer, whether man or beast, is come
pretty near, it pours from its tail so horrid a stench, that it is impossible
to endure it. A man is almost knocked down by it before he can get away; and a
dog, or other animal, is so strangely confounded by it, that he is obliged
every minute to stop, to rub his nose in the gra^s, or against a tree. The
stinkbingsem having thus stopped his pursuer, gets a great way ahead of him
before the chase can be renewed; and if he comes up with him a second time, he
gives him another dose, and by that means escapes again. Thus he proceeds till
his pursuer is stunk out of the field. This animal is sometimes shot by the
Europeans, but they are obliged to suffer it to lie till it rots; for it is no
sooner dead, than its body contracts all over so nauseous a smell, that if you
do but touch it with your fingers, they retain ^ stench, that you can neither
endure nor easily get off by any kind of washing.

Ostriches are so numerous, that a man can hardly walk a quarter of an hour in
the country without seeing one or more of them. The feathers of some are black,
and of others white. The head is very small in proportion to the body, which is
the largest in the feathered world. The neck is long, the legs thick and of
great strength; and the feet, which are cloven, resemble those of a goat. The
weight of the ostrich's body prevents her being able to fly; but when she sees
herself ^n danger, she runs, and promotes her speed by ^lapping her wings,
proceeding with such ^wiftness, that a man must be well mounted ^o overtake
her. If she finds she cannot es^ape her pursuer, she hides her head, and ^tands
stock still, till she is shot or seized. Ostrich^s will swallow pebbles, or
pieces of ^ron, but void them whole, without any remarkable change. They are
easily tamed, and their eggs are so large, that one of them will give a pretty
good meal to three or four ^ersons. The ostriches at the Cape do not ^eave
their eggs to be hatched in the sun; or the male and female sit upon them by
^urns. They lay them in the sand; but if my one touches them, even without
doing them the least hurt, the ostrich will forsake them. The young ones are
not able to walk ^ll some time after they are out of the shell, and are
therefore attended by the old one till ^hey are in a condition to take care of
themselves.

Among the reptiles at the Cape, there are ^everal sorts of serpents, of which
the tree-^erpent seems one of the most singular. It is about two yards long,
and three quarters of ^n inch thick. This serpent winds itself about ^he
branches of trees in such a manner, as to ^e hardly distinguished from them.
All the ^ifference in point of color is its being a ^^ttle speckled. While
persons are gazing at the tree, it darts its head in their face^* and sometimes
wounds them. It immediately draws its head in again, and always end^avours to
abandon the tree; but it descends so slowly, that it is easily killed before it
comes to the ground.

The dipsas, or thirst-serpent, is so called from its bite causing a burning
thirst. It ^ frequently to be met with in the Cap^ countries, and is about
three quarters of a yard long.

The Cape hair serpent is about a yard long* and three quarters of an inch
thick. (...) more dangerous than any of the other serpents* its bite causing
immediate death, unless ther^ be a remedy at hand.

Scorpions are very numerous at the Cape and harbor mostly among the stones;
on which account the Europeans are very cautious of removing the stones with
their hands, for fear of being stung. Their sting causes intolerable pain, and
frequently endangers life. A Cape scorpion is from two and a half to three
inches long, of a dark green, speckled with black. It resembles a cray-fish,
only its tail is longer and narrower.

There are several sorts of sea snail^, among which the nautilus, or pearl
snail, is mo^^ worthy of notice. It is no small pleasure to observe them on the
surface of the wa^^^ in calm weather, when their shells serve th^^ as ^oats.
They erect their heads considerably ^bove these natural vessels, and, spreading
out (...) kind of sail with which nature has furnished them, move along in a
manner very diverting (...) the spectator. If when they sail they find ^hey are
in danger, they draw themselves close ^^to their shells, and sink out of sight.
Ma^y of these shells will hold near a quart, and ^e used at the Cape as
drinking cups. The ^ape Europeans put to them a foot of silver, ^ory, or wood,
and some are curiously em^ellished with ornaments engraved on the out^^de.

I have now given an account of the most ^aterial circumstances relating to the
nations ^ the Hottentots, and shall therefore only ^d, that on the 9th of
April, 1730, I em^rkedon board the company's ship the Stadt^use for Holland,
and after an agreeable ^^yage, in which nothing remarkable hap^^ned, arrived on
the 22d of May at Am^^erdam.

A voyage to, and description of CHINA, by Lewis Le Compte, with an Account of
the Manners and Customs of its Inhabitants.
THE French king having resolved to send six Jesuits to China, under the
character his majesty's mathematicians, I was appoin^ one of them. In the
beginning of the year 1685, we all set sail in a ship which carried an
ambassador to Siam, and had a very agreeable voyage.

At this time a rebellion broke out at Siam, from which we set sail in a small
Chinese vessel. And after a navigation of six and thirty days, which the
continual dangers and hardships to which we were exposed, had rendered very
tedious, we came within sight of the city of Nimpo where we landed. It is
situated in the most eastern part of China, and has a very difficult entrance;
but from thence a very considerable trade is carried on to Japan. Thi^ city is
one of the first class; it is walled round, and very populous.

From Nimpo we traveled to Pekin, which signifies the north court, and is the
chief city of China, and the usual seat of the emperors* it being thus named to
distinguish it from Nankin, or the south court, where the emperor formerly
resided, it being in the finest and most commodious situation of any city in
the empire; but the continual incursions of the Tartars obliged the emperor to
settle in one o^ the northern provinces, where he might b^ always ready to
oppose them. Pekin was the place fixed upon for this purpose, it being situated
in the 40th degree of north latitude at a small distance from the famous
Chines^ wall. Its neighborhood to the sea on the east, and the great canal on
the south, affo^ it a communication with several fine provinces, from which it
draws part of its subsistence.

The city of Pekin, which is exactly square, was formerly four leagues round:
but the Tartars settling there, forced the Chiness to live without the walls,
where they soon built a new town, which, with the old one, composes an
irregular figure. Thus Pekin consists of two cities, one called the Tartar's,
because they permit none else to inhabit it; and the other the Chinese, which
is as large, and more populous than the first; both together being six leagues
in circumference. So that the city of Paris, which is 10,000 paces round, is
but half as big as the Tartar's town, and but a quarter as large as all Pekin.
Indeed their houses are generally no more than one story high, and those of
Paris are, one with another, five. The streets of the former city are wider;
the emperor's palace, which is of a vast extent, is not half inhabited;
besides, there are in that city magazines of ^ice for the support of 200,000
men, and large courts filled with houses, in which those who are candidates for
their doctors degree are examined; which alone would form a very considerable
city. But on the other hand the C^se live so close together, that twenty or
more of them dwell in as little room as ten persons at Paris. The multitude of
people in the streets is quite ^^^zing; even those that are widest are not free
from confusion; and at the sight of such numbers of camels, horses, mul^^*
wagons, chairs, passengers, and rings of one or two hundred persons gathered
here and there round the fortune tellers, one would imagine, that some unusual
show had drawn-all China to Pekin. The most populous cities in Europe appear a
wilderness to this. Hence some have imagined, that as only the men are here to
be seen, the number of the inhabitants of both sexes must amount to six or
seven millions of souls.

This is, however, a very erroneous computation; and I think I shall not be
very wide of the truth, if I allow the inhabitants to amount to two millions.

Almost all the streets are built in a direct line, the largest being about 120
feet broad, and a league in length, and the ^^ops, where they sell silks and
China ware, which generally take up the whole ^^reet, form a very agreeable
vista.

However, the ho^^e^ are neither well built, nor of a sufficient height; and
besides, are always incommoded with mud or dust. There i^ so much of the
latter, tha^ the city is generally ^ed with a cloud o^, which makes its way
into the closest closets, and notwithstanding their striving to allay it, by
continually sp^ling the streets, it is not only offensive, b^ p^^judicial to
the health.

(...) surprising to see the perfect tranquillity ^ained among such infinite
numbers of Ch^e and Tartars; for it seldom happens i^ ma^y years that a house
is broke open by thieves, or any murder committed. Indeed such strict order is
observed, that it is impossible such crimes should be committed with impu^ity.
All the great streets, which are drawn by a line from one gate to another, have
several corpse de guard. Day and night, soldiers with their swords by their
sides and whips in their hands, are ready to chastise those who make the least
disturbance, and have power to take into custody whoever raises any qu^^rel.
The little streets that come into the greater, have gates made in the form of a
lattice, which afford a view of all who pass along: they are guarded by the
corpse de guard placed-over against them in the great street. The latti^^ gates
are sh^^ at night by the corpse de guard, and are seldom opened but to persons
known, who carry a lantern in their hand, an^ give a good reason for their
going out. As ^oon as the first stroke is given by the watch on a great bell, a
soldier or two must go from one corpse de guard to another; and as they walk
along, they pl^ continually on a sort of rattle. Whoever (...) walking in the
streets in the night, is (...), and if his business is (...) of a (...)
^ordinary nature, he is taken into custody. To this it must be added, that the
governor is obliged to take his rounds when ^^st expected; and that the
officers who keep guard on the walls, and on the pavilions of the gates, where
the watches are, beat on great drums of brass, send subalterns to examine the
quarters belonging to their respective gates; and that the least neglect is
punished the next day, and the officers broke. By this beautiful order, peace,
silence, and safety reign throughout the city.

The emperor's house is the only one at Pekin that deserves the name of a
palace; the other are extremely mean, and those of the grandees, like all the
rest, but one story high; however, the great number of rooms for themselves and
their servants, make some amends for their want of beauty and magnificence. The
nobility of China are, indeed, like those of other nations, fond of making a
great appearance; but they are curbed by the customs of the country, and the
danger of being taken notice of. While I was at Pekin, one of the chief
Mandarines built himself a house somewhat more lofty and magnificent than the
rest. For this crime he was accused before t^^ emperor, when, being afraid of
the consequence, he pulled it down while the affair was under examination.

The halls in which they plead, have little advantages above the other houses.
Indeed they have spacious courts and lofty gates, sometimes embellished with
tolerable ornaments; but the inward halls and offices ^^e neither magnificent
nor even cleanly.

In treating of Pekin, it would be doing that city great injustice to passover
in silence its noble gates, and stately walls. The former are not like the
other public buildings in China, embellished with statues or other carrying, all
their beauty consisting in their prodigious height, which at a distance has a
fine appearance. They consist of two large edifices, built separately, but
bound together by two thick and lofty walls forming a square sufficient to
contain above 500 men in battle. The first building which resembles a fortress,
faces the road. There is no way through it; but you enter in at the side wall,
where there is a gate proportionable to the rest; you then ^urn to the right,
and meet with the second ^ower which commands the city, and has a gate like the
former; but the gateway is so ^ong that it grows dark in the middle. There ^hey
constantly keep a guard, and a small magazine of stores. Though these gates are
^estitute of the embellishments of architecture, ^et on approaching Pekin,
these immense ^uildings have an air of magnificence preferable (...) our
ornaments. The arches are built with (...), and the rest with very large
bricks, (...) with excellent mortar.

The walls are answerable to the gates, so lofty that they hide the whole city,
and so thick that sentinels are placed upon them on horseback. Square towers
are raised at the distance of a bow-shot from each other. The ditch is dry, but
very broad and deep, and the city is as regularly defended by a strong
garrison, as if the people were under the continual apprehension of a siege.

Among the most sumptuous buildings of China, we ought not to omit their
temples or pagods, erected to fabulous deities by the superstition of the
princes as well as of the people. Of these there are a prodigious number, the
most celebrated of which are built in barren mountains, to which, however, the
industry of the people has given the beauties and advantages denied them by
nature: the canals cut at a great expense to conduct the water from the heights
into reservoirs made for that purpose, with gardens, groves and grottos made in
the rocks, for shelter against the excessive heat of the climate, render their
solitudes delightful.

These temples consist partly of porticos, paved with large square polished
stones, and partly of halls or pavilions that stand in the corners of courts,
and communicate by long galleries adorned with statues of stone, and sometimes
of brass. The roofs of these buildings shine with beautiful tiles japanned with
green and yellow, and at the corners are adorned with dragons of the same
color, projecting forward. Most of these pagods have a great tower standing by
itself, and terminating in a dome, to which they ascend by a handsome
staircase that winds around it. A square temple commonly occupies the middle
of the dome, which is often adorned with Mosaic work, and the walls covered
with stone figures of animals and monsters in relievo. This is the form of most
of the pagods, and these are the habitations of the bonzes, or the priests of
the idol.

The frontier towns, especially those near Tartary, are fortified with good
bulwarks, towers, brick walls, and large and deep ditches filled with running
water: in these all the skill of the Chinese engineers consists, which is no
wonder, since none else were known in Europe before cannon were in use. Their
most singular fortification is the great wall, which extends from the eastern
ocean, to the province of Chansi, and, if all its windings be reckoned, is no
less than 500 leagues long. It is fortified with towers, much like those of the
cities; and where the passes might be more easily forced, they have raised two
or three bulwarks one behind another, of an enormous thickness; these with the
forts that command all the avenues, (...) guarded by a great number of forces,
protect the Chinese from all attempts on that side. As China is divided from
Tartary by a chain of mountains, this wall has been carried not only through
the valleys, but over the highest hills: it is every where of a great height,
but rather lower than the walls of their cities, and only four or five feet in
thickness: it is mostly built with brick, and bound with such strong mortar,
that though it is 1800 years since it was built, it is scarce the worse. This
work was at once one of the greatest and the most ridiculous ever made by man:
for notwithstanding its being extremely prudent thus to guard all the passes
and the easiest avenues, how absurd was it to carry this wall to the top of
some precipices which the birds can scarcely reach with their flight* and to
which it is impossible that the Tartarian horse should ever ascend? besides, if
they could fancy it possible for any army to clamber up thither, how could they
imagine that so thin and low a wall could be any defense. Yet it is amazing how
the materials were conveyed thither, which was not done without a vast expense,
and the loss of more men than would have perished by the greatest fury of their
enemies, It Is said, that during the reigns of the Chinese emperors, this wall
was guarded by a million of soldiers; but as that part of Tartary now belongs
to China, they are contented with manning well the worst situated, but best
fortified parts.

There are in China above a thousand fortresses of the first rate; but though
the rest scarcely deserve the name, they are all well garrisoned, whence some
judgment may be formed of the vast armies constantly kept on foot.

But what is far more astonishing is the number, the largeness, and the
government of their trading towns. These are generally di^ided into three
classes, the first consisting of above an hundred and sixty, the second of two
hundred and seventy, and the third of near twelve hundred. Besides, there are
near three hundred walled cities, which they consider as not worth notice,
though most of them are populous, and places of trade. The largeness of these
cities is not less amazing than their number. Pekin is not to be compared to
Nankin, or, as it is now called, Kiam-nin, which was formerly enclosed within
three walls, the outermost of which was sixteen leagues round; and though this
city has lost much of its former splendour, yet including those who live in its
suburbs, and on the canals, it is still more populous than Pekin. The streets
are of a moderate breadth, and very well paved; the houses are low, but
cleanly, and the shops richly furnished with silks, and other costly goods.
Thither all the curiosities of the empire are brought. There the most famous
doctors, and the mandarins out of employment, usually settle, on account of the
convenience of several libraries filled with choice of good books. Their
printing is fairer, their artificers more skilful, the language more polite,
and the accent smoother than elsewhere. Besides the river Kiam on which it is
situated, is the largest, deepest, and most navigable in the whole empire.

Nankin is famous for what is called the China tower. Of which it may be proper
to observe, that there is without the city a house named by the Chinese, the
temple of Gratitude, built 300 years ago by the emperor Yonlo. It is erected on
a massive basis built with brick, and surrounded with a rail of unpolished
marble. Around it are ten or twelve steps, by which you ascend to the lowermost
hall, the floor of which stands one foot higher than the basis, leaving a walk
two feet wide all round it. The front is adorned with a gallery and some
pillars. The roofs, which in China are generally two, one next the top of the
wall, and a narrower over that, are covered with green shining tiles; and on
the inside the cieling is painted, and formed of little pieces differently
wrought one within the other, and this the Chinese esteem very ornamental.
Indeed such a medley of beams, joists, rafters, and pinions, appear
surprisingly singular from our judging that such a work must be very expensive:
but it only proceeds from the ignorance of the workmen, who are unacquainted
with that noble simplicity, which renders our buildings at once solid and
beautiful.

The hall has no other light besides that admitted at the doors, of which there
are three very large ones, that open into the China Tower. This last structure
joins to the temple, and is of an octogonal figure, each side fifteen feet
wide. A wall in the same form is built round it, at the distance of two ^athoms
and a half, and being of a moderate height, supports one side of a penthouse
which ^^ues from the tower, forming a pretty kin^ of gallery. The tower is nine
stories high, each story being adorned with a cornice three feet wide at the
bottom of the windows, and distinguished by little penthouses like the former,
but narrower, and, like the tower, decreasing in breadth as they increase in
height. The wall, which, at the bottom is at least twelve feet thick, and above
eight feet and a half at the top, is all over incrusted with coarse China ware,
which has in a great measure retained its beauty, though the tower ^as been
erected 300 years. The staircase ^ithin is narrow, and the steps high. Each
^tory has a room with a painted cieling, and in the walls of the upper rooms
are several small niches, in which are carved idols gilt. The first floor is
the most lofty, and all the rest of an equal height. This tower, from the
bottom of the base to the top of the cupola, rises at least 200 feet from the
ground. Towers of the same kind are erected in almost every city, and are some
of their greatest ornaments.

Nankin was once famous for the largeness of its bells; but their weight
brought the whole steeple to the ground. One of these which is still entire, is
eleven feet in height, and that of its ear is two feet, and its outward
circumference is twenty two feet. But this is nothing, when compared with seven
bells at Pekin, cast 300 years ago, each of them weighing 120,000 pounds; these
are eleven feet wide, forty round, and twelve high, besides the ear, which is
at least three feet: but as much as their bells exceed ours in size, ours
exceed theirs in sound; perhaps chiefly owing to their clappers being o^ wood.
These bells are used to distinguish the watches of the night, of which they
usually reckon five. They begin the first with striking one, which they repeat
a few moments after, and thus continue till the second watch; when they strike
two strokes; at the third watch they strike three, and so on; so that these
bells serve as so many repeating clocks, which every minute inform you of the
time of night. For the same purpose they in the same manner beat very large
drums.

Of all the public works in China, none do the people such honor as their
canals and bridges; nor is any thing more worthy of the attention of the
curious. By means of these canals the whole trade of the empire is carried on,
with the advantage of water carriage, and in this manner one may travel from
Canton, the most southern city, to Pekin the most northern, without traveling
above one day by land. This, which is called the great canal, is 160 leagues in
length. The number of these canals is very surprising; they are often lined on
each side to the height of ten or twelve feet with fine square stone, and in
some places with a kind of marble of the color of slate. The banks of some of
them are 20 or 25 feet high on each side, and some extend above ten leagues
together in a straight line. But what most charms the eye is the great number
of beautiful ^mperial barks, loaded with the best productions of different
provinces; many of them 80 tons burden.

As in an extent of 400 leagues in length, the earth cannot be every where,
level, there are several cataracts, where the water is precipitated with
greater or less violence, according to the difference of the level; but the
industry of the Chinese has found out a means of remedying the inconveniences
that might arise from them with respect to navigation. At each of these
waterfalls live a number of men who are employed in raising the barks. These
having drawn cables to the right and left, to lay hold of the vessel, in such a
manner that it cannot escape from them; they have several capsterns, by the
help of which they raise it by little and little, till it be in the upper
canal, and in a condition to continue its voyage.

In some places where the waters of two canals have no communication, they have
a method of making the boats pass from one to the other, though the level may
be above 15 feet different. At the end of the canal they have built a double
sloping bank of freestone, which uniting at the top extends on both sides to
the water of each canal. The bark is hoisted up the slope by means of several
capsterns, till being raised to the top, it slides down the other bank, like an
arrow shot from a bow, and entering the other canal skuds away with prodigious
swiftness. There are no such obstructions in the grand canal, and, indeed, the
emperor's barks, which are as large as our frigates, could not be thus raised.

These canals are at proper distances covered with bridges of three, five, or
seven arches; that in the middle is sometimes 36, and even 40 feet wide, and so
high that barks may pass through without taking down their masts; those on each
side are seldom less than 30, and diminish in proportion to the slopings of the
bridge. Some of these bridges have but one arch, which is sometimes
semi-circular, and built of arched stones five or six feet long, and only five
or six inches thick. These arches not being thick at the top, cannot be strong;
but then carts never pass over them; for the Chinese make use of porters to
carry their bales. Several bridges have three or four great stones from 12 to
18 feet long placed on piers, like planks. There are a considerable number of
this sort neatly built over the great canal, whose piers are so narrow, that
these bridges seem to hang in the air.

Many of these bridges are very handsome: one two leagues and a half from
Pekin, was one of the finest that ever was seen, before part of it was b^oken
down by a land flood. The whole was of white marble. On each side were seventy
pillars, separated by cartridges of fine marble, curiously carved in flowers,
foliages, birds, and several sorts of animals. On each side of the entrance at
the (...) and were two lions of an extraordinary size* on marble pedestals,
with several lions of stone, some climbing on the backs of the great ones, some
getting off them, and others creeping between their legs. At the westend stood
on marble pedestals, the figures of two children, carved with the same skill.

One of the most extraordinary bridges is built over the point of an arm of the
sea. It is 2500 Chinese feet in length, and 20 in breadth. It is supported by
252 strong piers, 126 on each side. All the stones are of the same bigness, as
well those laid from pier to pier, as those that are laid crosswise. It is
difficult to conceive how stones of such an enormous size should be placed with
such regularity, or even raised to the top of such high piers.

In the way leading from Han-tchong-fou to the capital, the Chinese have
levelled mountains, and made bridges from one mountain to another, and when the
valleys were too wide, they erected pillars to support them; these bridges
which form part of the road, are so high, that one cannot look down without
horror: four horsemen can ride abreast upon them, and for the greater security,
they have rails on each side.

Kircher observes, that in the same province is a bridge of one arch, extending
from mountain to mountain, whose length is 400 cubits, and its perpendicular
height 500 above the Saffron river, which runs under it.

To these extraordinary instances of industry, it will be proper to add, that
the road from Signanfu to Hamtchoum, is said to be one of the strangest pieces
of work in the world. I have been told, that upon the side of some mountains
that are perpendicular, and have no shelving, the inhabitants have fixed large
beams into them, upon which they have formed a kind of balcony without rails,
extending along the sides of several mountains. Those unused to these kind of
galleries, cannot travel over them without great apprehension; but the people
of the place who have mules used to these roads, travel with as little fear and
concern over these steep and hideous precipices, as they could do in the
plainest heath.

One cannot imagine the care that is taken of the common roads: these are as
fine as possible, and are generally near 80 feet broad. At about a mile and a
half distance from each other, are erected wooden structures about 30 feet
high, resembling triumphal arches, with three gates, over which is wrote upon a
large ^neze, in characters of an extraordinary size, the distance from the
place you left, and how far it is to the town to which you are going.

The origin of the empire of China is as obscure as the source of those rivers
that can scarce be discovered. The vulgar history of its monarchy is indeed
manifestly false, since forty thousand years are supposed to have passed since
its foundation: but according to their regular history, which none of their
learned men ever questioned, China has had its kings for above four thousand
years. It seems probable that the children or grandchildren of Noah dispersed
themselves into Asia, and at length penetrated into the most westerly part of
China, where they lived at the beginning in families, and the kings were
fathers, to whom a long succession of years, abundance of flocks, and other
pastoral riches, added authority. The foundation of the monarchy was laid by
Fohi, whose wisdom, power, reputation and virtue, together with his great age,
made the people listen to him as to an oracle. He regulated all private, as
well as political, and religious affairs: thus the state soon became in a
flourishing condition. His subjects at first possessed the province of Homan,
and some years after all the lands and territories that extend as far to the
south as the sea.

The people now principally applied themselves to the education of their
children, and to agriculture, for which they had the highest esteem; they were
laborious to excess. The judges and governors of provinces were grave and
sober, and by the equity of their decisions gained the love and respect of all
the people; while the emperor placed his highest felicity in rendering his
subjects happy, and did not so much consider himself the sovereign of a grand
empire, as the father of a numerous family. By this means the Chinese acquired
such reputation, that they were considered by all the neighboring nations as
the oracles of wisdom; and it is probable that from their first origin they
considered themselves as superior to all other men; an opinion which they still
entertained after they had suffered as great revolutions in morals as in
politics; and became so vain, that they fancied heaven had placed them in the
center of the universe to give laws to mankind, the wretched outcasts who had
been placed on the extremities of the creation, and who had scarcely the human
form. But perceiving the Europeans instructed in all sciences, they were struck
with astonishment. How can it be possible, said they, that a people so far
remote from us, should have any wit or capacity? they have never perused our
books; they were never instructed by us, and yet like us, they speak and reason
right. On seeing our stuffs, clocks, watches, and mathematical instruments,
their surprise increased; for they had imagined that expert artificers were no
where to be found but in China. They saw that we were not so barbarous as they
had imagined, and in a joking way, cried, We supposed all other people to be
blind, and that nature had bestowed eyes upon none but the Chinese; that is not
universally true; for though the Europeans do not see so clearly as we, they
have at least each of them one eye.

The countenance, air, language, disposition and manners of the Chinese, differ
not only from ours, but also from those of all other nations. Of the persons of
the Chinese in general we may form a pretty distinct idea, by considering that
they entertain of beauty. They would have a man tall and fat, with a broad
forehead, small eyes, a short nose, great ears, a mouth of middling size, a
long beard, and black hair. They are naturally as fair as we, especially
toward the north; but their faces being continually exposed to the sun,
commonly renders them tawny as the Portuguese in the Indies. Those in the
southern provinces are of an olive complexion. The learned, especially if of
base extraction, never pare the nails of their little fingers, letting them
grow an inch long or more, to show that they are not driven by necessity to
work for their living.

The men shave their heads all over, except the crown, where they suffer a long
lock to grow; but they continually wear a bonnet or cap, which civility forbids
their pulling off. That worn in summer is the form of a cone, round below, and
terminating in a point. It is lined with satin, and the top covered with a
fine mat, much worn in the country: to which they add a piece of red silk, that
falls round about it and reaches to the edges; but when they walk, this silk
slows irregularly on all sides, and the continual motion of the head gives it a
particular pleasing grace. Sometimes instead of silk they wear long hair of a
vivid shining red, and this is more especially used when they ride. This hair
grows upon the legs of certain cows, and is naturally white: but they give it a
tincture that makes it dearer than the finest silk. In winter they wear a plush
cap, bordered with sable or fox-skins; the rest is of fine black or purple
satin, covered with a flake of red silk ^ike satin. Nothing can be handsomer
than their caps; but they are so shallow, that they always discover the ears.
When the Manda^ins are dressed in their formalities, the upper part of the
bonnet has a diamond, or some other precious stone ill cut, but inchased in a
gold button very curiously wrought.

Their habit consists of a vest that reaches to the ground, the skirts or sides
of which are folded before, in such a manner that the ^ppermost is extended to
the left side, where it ^ fastened by four or five gold or silver but^ons.
Their sleeves are wide toward the ^houlder, but grow narrow to the wrist. They
in a manner cover the whole hand, leaving nothing to be seen but the fingers
ends. They keep the vest close about the body with a broad silk sash, the two
ends of which hang down to their knees. The Tartars stick a handkerchief to it
on each side, with a sheath for a knife and fork; a purse, a toothpick, and
other things. In summer they have the neck quite bare; but in winter they cover
it with a satin collar fastened to the vest, or with a tippet of sable or
fox-skins, about three or four fingers broad, fastened before with a button.

Over this they wear an upper garment with short wide sleeves like those of the
barrister^ gowns; the students wear them very long but the gentlemen, and
especially the Tartars, have them short. As for their undergarment, they use in
summer, only a single pair of drawers of white taffety, under a very broad
short shirt of the same stuff; but in winter they have a linen shirt, and under
i^ breeches of coarse satin, quilted with cotton or raw silk. But what appears
more extraordinary, the Chinese are mostly booted, and when any one pays them a
visit, they mak^ them wait till they have drawn them on. The form of these
boots is somewhat different from ours: those made for riding long journeys are
of leather, or thick, black, pinked cotton but in the city they usually wear
them of satin, with a coarse border of plush or velvet upon the knee; besides
they have no heels. These boots are so extremely hot and cumbersome in summer,
that no people besides the Chinese would be able to endure them, and indeed the
working people scarce ever wear them. These people in public, and persons of
quality within doors, instead of shoes, wear ^ kind of slippers of black linen,
or some ^retty silk, made to fit close to the foot by a ^order that covers the
heel. Besides their ^sual garments, they sometimes travel in an upper coat of a
kind of green oil-cloth made of ^oarse taffety. The mourning habit is somewhat
singular, the bonnet, vest, surtout, ^tockings and boots being made of white
^en, and from the prince to the handicrafts^an, none dare wear any other color.

Ridiculous as this dress may appear to us, ^urs appears much more extravagant
to them; ^ particular the large curling peruke is a con^^ant subject of
ridicule; on this account they ^ook upon us as no wiser than a foolish set of
people, who for want of beard, should get an artificial one clapped to their
chin, that should ^ach down to their knees. This fantastical ^ead-dress, say
they, with that prodigious ^eap of curled hair, may be proper upon the ^ge, for
a man that would represent the de^: but no person can have the form of a ^an
who is thus disguised. On the other hand, nothing can persuade them that the
discovery of long shanks, with a stocking draw^ strait, and close breeches, can
look either grave or handsome,

As to the women, they all have little eyes short noses, and pretty fair
complexions which they take great care to preserve. A little collar of white
satin fastened to a vest, cover the neck all over. Their hands are alway^ hid
in long sleeves. Their head-dress usually consists of several locks buckled up,
and interlaced with flowers of gold and silver. They as well as the men, wear a
long vest of red blue or green satin or cloth of gold; but the elderly ladies
dress in purple or black. Ove^ this they have an upper garment, the sleeve of
which are extremely wide, and trail upon the ground, when they have no occasion
to hold them up. But what distinguishes them from all the women in the world,
is the smallness of their feet, in which lies the most essential part of their
beauty.

The girls are no sooner born, than the nurses take care to tie their feet
extremely hard, for fear of their growing; but wha^ appears most surprising is,
that this violenc^ offered to nature, does not seem to impa^^ their health.
Their shoes of satin, embro^dered with gold, silver, and silk, are extremely
neat; and though they are exceedingly small yet they study to show them as they
walk for walk they do, though one would scarce believe it possible, and indeed
would willingly walk all day long, had they the liberty to go abroad.

When persons of quality pay visits, when they are upon journeys, or when they
wait upon the emperor, they always appear with a grandeur that fills a stranger
with astonishment. The mandarins richly dressed, are carried in an open gilt
sedan, upon the shoulders of eight or sixteen persons, accompanied by all the
officers of the tribunal, who surround them with umbrellas, and other marks of
their dignity. Some walk two and two before them, bearing chains, rods, and
escutcheons of varnished wood, upon which are in large gold characters all the
titles of honor annexed to their places of trust, with a basin on which they
beat a certain number of strokes, according to the rank they bear in the
province. Other officers follow in the same order, and sometimes four or five
gentlemen on horseback bring up the rear.

Those that belong to the army commonly go on horseback, and if they are of
considerable rank, appear at the head of 25 or 30 men well mounted. The princes
of the blood ^t Pekin, are preceded by four of their officers, and followed by
a squadron of troops that march without order. The domestics ^ear no liveries,
but according to the quality of their master are dressed in black satin or
painted linen. Though their horses are neither fine nor well managed, their
trappings and harnesses are very magnificent; the bit, bridle, and stirrup are
gilt, or else of silver. Instead of leather they make bridles of two or three
twists of coarse pinked satin two fingers broad. Under the horse's neck hang
two great tassels of that curious red hair they wear on their bonnets, which
are fastened to two very large brass buttons, gilt or washed with silver, hung
at rings of the same metal.

The mandarins appear with the greatest magnificence when they travel by water:
their barges are of a prodigious size, adorned with carving, painting, gilding,
and decorated with their arms, flags, and streamers.

The emperors of China never appear in public without that splendour that may be
necessary to attract the respect and veneration of the people. They formerly
seldom showed themselves; but the Tartars, who at present possess the throne,
take more popular measures. The present emperor never marches, but at the head,
or in the midst of an army, accompanied by all the lords of the court. Nothing
is to be seen but silks, gildings, and precious stones: the arms, the harness
of the horses, the umbrellas, the streamers, and a thousand other badges of the
royal dignity, or of the particular quality of the princes, sparkle every
where. Every one, on these occasions, knows his respective rank, and that man
would lose his head, or at least his fortune, who should presume to discompose
the order of the march.

When he takes a progress through the provinces of the empire, he commonly
rides post, attended by some officers who are his confidents and a few guards;
but in all the cities, and at all the difficult passages, so many troops are
drawn up in order of battle, that he seems to ride post haste through an army.

^e sometimes goes into Tartary to take the diversion of hunting, when he is
attended by an army of 40,000 men, who endure great hardships, and in one of
these toilsome huntings there sometimes die more horses than he would lose in a
pitched battle; but he esteems the loss of 10,000 horses as nothing. He is
sometimes attended by thirty or forty petty Tartarian princes who come to pay
him tribute, and on these occasions the train, habits, and tents of the
Mandarins are surprisingly magnificent.

In nothing does the emperor display ^ter splendour than in the pomp with (...)
goes to the temple, to offer sacrifices (...) ^ven. The particulars of the
procession are the more worthy to be repeated here, as the ord^^ observed in
all public ceremonies in China, is so regular, that the very emperor dares not
add or diminish the least article. It begins with 24 trumpets, adorned with
gold coronets, and 24 drums, each ranked in two files; 24 men with staves six
or eight feet long, varnished and gilt, follow in the same order. Then come 100
soldiers bearing halberts, on each of which is a semicircle of iron, in the
form of a crescent, followed by 100 sergeants at mace, and two officers bearing
pikes painted with red varnish, with flowers, and figures in gold. Then appear
400 lanterns curiously wrought, 400 flambeaux of a gilt wood that flames like
our torches, 200 lances charged with huge tufts of silk, 24 banners, on which
are painted the signs of the Zodiac, and 56 others that represent the celestial
constellations: there are also to be seen 200 large fans, with the figures of
dragons and other animals; 24 umbrellas still more magnificent, and a kind of
beaufet filled with utensils of gold, and borne by the officers of his palace.
The emperor then appears on horseback, richly dressed, surrounded by the white
horses, whose harness is covered with gold and precious stones, and by 100 of
his life-guards and pa^^ ^o bear an umbrella that shades him and to (...) and
dazzles the sight with all the orna^^^ts that man could possibly invent. The
emperor is followed by all the princes of the blood, by the mandarins of the
first order, by the viceroys and principal lords of the court, all in their
formalities. After them appear 500 young gentlemen of quality, attended by 1000
footmen, dressed in carnation silk bordered with flowers, and spotted with
stars of gold and silver. Immediately after appear 36 bearing an open triumphal
chariot, and 120 bearers support another close one, so large, that it might be
taken for an entire apartment. Then come four chariots, the two first drawn by
elephants, and the other two by horses: each of these carriages is guarded by a
company of fifty men: the charioteers of the four last are richly dressed: and
the elephants as well as the horses are covered with embroidered housings. At
length this pompous calvacade is closed by 2000 Mandarin officers, and 2000
officers of the army, all in rich habits, and marching with a solemn gravity.
It is not necessary for the court to be at great expense for this pomp; for
whenever the emperor is pleased to make known his attention to offer sacrifice,
they are always ready to attend him.

But notwithstanding this parade, the houses of the great have neither
looking-glasses, tapestry hangings, nor wrought chairs: and even gildings are
only used in the apartments of the emperor and the princes of the blood: all
their magnificence consists in their cabinets, tables, and varnished skreens,
in their pictures, which are not very extraordinary, and in having several
pieces of white satin inscribed with a moral sentence on each in large
characters, hung here and there in the chamber. Besides these, porcelain or
China ware is the ornament of every house; it is found on the tables,
side-boards and even in the kitchen; for these are the ordinary vessels, out of
which they eat and drink. There are likewise many huge flower-pots of it. The
very architects cover roofs with it, and sometimes make use of it to incrust
buildings.

The Chinese painters are very deficient in the art of drawing, particularly of
human figures, and they have a very imperfect knowledge of perspective. Though
strangers are not admitted into the bed-chambers, yet their beds are very fine;
in summer they have taffety curtains powdered with flowers, trees, and birds,
in gold, silk, and embroidery. Others have curtains of the finest gauze. In
winter they make use of coarse satin worked with dragons, and other figures;
and their counterpanes are in the same taste. They sleep on thick cotton quilts
instead of feather beds; and their bed-steads are of joiner's work, sometimes
finely wrought in figures.

The emperor's authority is unbounded: he is almost adored by his people, who
style him the son of heaven, and the only master of the world. His words are
considered as oracles; he is seldom seen, and never spoken to but on the knee.
In which posture the grandees of the court, the princes of the blood, nay, his
own brothers, bow to the ground, not only when he is present, but even before
his throne. All places in the empire are at his disposal: he confers them on
whom he thinks fit, and none of them are ever sold; honesty, learning, long
experience, and a grave and sober behavior are the only qualifications in the
candidates; but if he dislikes their management, he dismisses them without
ceremony. He has even the liberty of choosing his successor, whom he may
nominate not only from the royal family, but from amongst the poorest of his
subjects. The old lawgivers have from the first foun^^^ion of the government,
made it a (...) maxim, that a king is the father of his people, and not the
master of slaves. This title they therefore esteem the greatest honor.

Yet every mandarin may tell the emperor of his faults, provided it be in a
submissive manner: and if he has any regard for his reputation, the manner in
which their histories are written, is alone sufficient to keep him in due
bounds. A certain number of men, who from their learning and impartiality are
chosen to this office, observe all his words and ^ctious: having separately
wrote their remarks without consulting each other, on a loose slip ^f paper,
each puts it through a chink into an office appointed for that purpose. Such a
day, say they, his behavior was unseasonable and intemperate; he spoke after a
manner that did not become his dignity. The punishment he inflicted on such an
offender, was rather the result of passion, than of justice. Or else, He gave
such and such marks of his love to his people. Notwithstanding the
commendations of his flatterers, he was not puffed up, but behaved with his
usual modesty; his words were tempered with sweetness.

That these men may be neither biassed by fear nor hope, this office is never
opened during the prince's life, nor while any of his family sit on the throne:
but when the crown goes to another line, which often happens, these loose
memoirs are gathered together, and by comparing them, they compose the history
of that emperor, to propose him as an example to posterity, if he has acted
wisely, or to expose him to the public censure, if he has been negligent of his
own duty, or the good of his people.

The emperor has two sovereign councils; one composed of the princes of the
blood alone, and the other into which the ministers of state are also admitted.
Besides these, there are at Pekin six sovereign courts, whose authority extends
over all the provinces of China, and who have different departments assigned
them. One presides over all the mandarins; another has the management of the
treasury, and the care of raising the taxes; another has the care of religion,
arts, sciences and foreign affairs; another presides over the army; another
over the public buildings and palaces, and another takes cognizance of all
criminals. In each of these courts is a censor, who, though he is not of the
council, is present at all assemblies, and accuses the mandarins for the faults
they commit both in their private capacities and in the execution of their
office. It Is said, that he who undertakes this office can never accept of
another, that the hope of preferment may never tempt him to be partial to any
one, nor the fear of losing his place deter him from accusing the guilty. Of
these officers even the princes of the blood stand in awe.

The province^ are under the immediate inspection of two sorts of viceroys; one
sort has the government of only one province; and the other have under their
jurisdiction, two or three, and sometimes four provinces, all of whom have
courts of the same nature as those of Pekin, but are subordinate to them. The
viceroy, in whom resides the imperial authority, convenes the principal
mandarins of his province to take cognizance of the good or bad qualities of
the governors, lieutenants, and inferior officers, and privately informs the
emperor of those who misbehave themselves, who are either deprived of their
offices, or cited to appear and justify their conduct. On the other hand the
power of the viceroy is counterpoised by that of the great mandarins, who may
accuse him when he acts inconsistently with the good of the public, and even
the people when oppressed by him, may petition the emperor for his removal. The
least insurrection is laid at his door, which, if it continues three days, he
must answer for at his peril. It is his fault, say the laws, if disturbances
spring up in his family, that is, in the province over which he has the charge.

Causes are generally decided and sentence given by a single mandarin, who,
after a short process, and the examination of both parties, orders the loser to
be bastinadoed, either for carrying on an unjust prosecution, or maintaining a
cause contrary to equity. This is the common punishment for the meaner sort;
but cannot be inflicted on a mandarin, till he is deprived of his office.

The next punishment is a collar, made of two pieces of wood hollowed in the
middle, and smaller or greater, according to the nature of the crime; this is
put on the delinquent's neck, and sealed with the seal of the tribunal, with a
piece of paper denoting the nature of the crime, and the duration of the
punishment.

These, except imprisonment, are all the punishments, which the Chinese laws
permit the mandarins to inflict on criminals: they may indeed condemn to exile;
but their sentence must be examined by the supreme courts. The capital
punishment is strangling. Mean and ignoble persons are beheaded; for in China
the separation of the head from the body is disgraceful. On the contrary,
persons of quality are strangled, which is a more honorable death: but if
their crimes are great, they are punished like mean persons, and sometimes
their heads are cut off, and hung on a tree in the highway. Rebels, traitors,
the children who murder a parent, and the servants who murder their master, are
cut in pieces. After the executioner has tied them to a post, he cuts the skin
of their foreheads, and tears it by force till it hangs over their eyes, that
they may not see the torments they are to endure. Afterward he cuts off the
flesh from their bodies wherever he think fit, and when tired of this barbarous
employment, he leaves them to the tyranny of their enemies, and the insults of
the mob.

As the emperor is considered as the father of his people, the greatest respect
is paid to the parental authority, and one cannot imagine how far this first
principle of nature is carried. There is no submission, no point of obedience
which a father cannot command: he is an absolute sovereign in his own family
while he lives, and at his death, is honored as a God. He is not only absolute
master of his estate, which he may distribute to whom he pleases; but also of
his concubines and children, whom he may even sell to strangers, if their
behavior displeases him; and if a father accuses his son of any crime before a
mandarin, there needs no proof of it; for if a father complains, they make no
doubt but that the son is in the fault. If a son is so wicked as to mock his
parents* or if he arrives at such a height of madness as to lay violent hands
on them, the province where it is done, is alarmed; the emperor himself judges
the criminal; all the mandarins near the place are turned out, especially those
of that town, who have been so negligent in their instructions. The neighbors
are all reprimanded for neglecting, by former punishments, to stop the iniquity
of the criminal before it arose to such a height; for they suppose that such a
diabolical disposition must have shown itsel^ on other occasions, and that it
is impossible to arrive at such a pitch of wickedness at once. As to the
criminal, they cause him to be cut in a thousand pieces; they burn his mangled
corpse, destroy his house to the ground, and even those that stand near it, and
set up monuments and memorials of so horrid an action.

TO preserve peace and order, the utmost modesty and civility are inculcated;
they have prescribed forms of salutation and address, and in paying visits a
great number of troublesome ceremonies, kneeling, and cringing gestures are to
be observed. Their feasts are ceremonious even to the most extravagant and
ridiculous excess.

Every guest has a separate table without table-cloth, napkin, knife or spoon;
for every thing is ready cut to their hands; and they never touch any thing but
with two little instruments tipped with silver, which the Chinese handle very
dexterously. They begin their feasts with drinking wine, which is given to
every guest at one and the same time, in a small silver or china cup, which all
the guests lift with both hands as high as their heads, thus presenting their
service to each other without speaking, and inviting each other to drink first.
After the first cup, a large vessel of hashed meat is set on the table. Then
every one observes the motions of the master of the feast: according as he
gives the sign, they take their two little instruments, brandish them in the
air, and after twenty different motions, strike them into the dish, from which
they bring up a piece of meat, which must neither be eaten too hastily nor too
slowly: in all this you must observe time, that all may begin and eat at once.
Soon wine is again brought, which is drank with the same ceremonies as before.
Then comes a second mess, which they dip into as in the first, and thus the
feast is continued, drinking between every mouthful, till there have been
twenty-four different dishes at table, and they have drank as many cups of
wine; but they drink as little as they will at a time, and their wine is small.
When all the dishes are served, no more wine is brought, and the guests may
take out of any one of the dishes before them; but it must be done when the
rest of the guests take out of some of the dishes; for order and uniformity are
held sacred. At this time they bring in rice and bread; for as yet nothing but
meat has been brought; they also bring fine broths made of flesh or fish, in
which the guests may mingle their rice. They sit at table grave and silent,
till the master seeing they have all done, gives the sign to rise, on which
they retire into the hall or garden; but in about a quarter of an hour return,
when they find the tables covered with sweetmeats and dried fruit, which they
keep to eat with their tea. This entertainment is followed by the entrance of a
company of strollers, who act a long tedious play.

Notwithstanding the excellent constitution of the Chinese government, which
teaches all the rules of civility, the people are far from being remarkable for
humanity and integrity. Though gaming be forbidden to persons in all ranks, it
does not hinder the Chinese from ^laying so long till they have lost all their
estates, their houses, their children, and their ^ives, which they sometimes
hazard on a ^^rd; for there is no degree of extravagance ^o which avarice will
not carry them: but ^hey take great care to conceal their gaming.

The men do not follow their own taste in ^he ^^oice of a wife; for they never
see her ^efore-hand, but take her parents word, or that of some old women, who
are a kind of ^^spectors, and are employed for the purpose; ^ut are in general
in fee with the girl's parents, ^ho reap an advantage from their daughter's
^eing thought beautiful, witty, or genteel: ^r as the Chinese buy their wives,
they give ^ore or less, according to their supposed ^ood qualities. The parties
having agreed (...) the price, the contract being made, and ^e money paid down,
both sides prepare for ^e marriage. When the day arrives, the ^ide is carried
in a sumptuous chair, prece^d by hautboys, drums and fifes, and follow^ by her
parents, relations and friends. All ^e portion given by her father is her
clothes, ^d some household goods. The bridegroom ^ands at his door richly
dressed to receive ^er: he opens the sedan, and having conduc^d her into a
chamber, delivers her to several women invited thither for that purpose, who
spend the day together in feasting and sports, while the husband entertains his
friends in another room. This being the first time in which the bride and
bridegroom fee each other, both, or one of them frequently disliking the
bargain, it is a day of rejoicing to their guests, but of sorrow to themselves.
The woman must submit, though she don't like the man; but the husband is not
always so complaisant; for some on opening the chair to receive the bride,
repulsed by her shape and aspect, have shut it again, and sent her back to her
friends, choosing rather to lose their money than take possession of so bad a
purchase.

A husband cannot divorce his wife, except for adultery, and in a few other
cases that seldom happen; the husband may then sell his wife; but if he
disposes of her without just reason, both the buyer and seller are severely
punished; yet the husband is not obliged to take her again. The Chinese are
generally so extremely jealous, that they will not suffer their wives to be a
moment in private even with their own brothers. The men may have as many
concubines as they please, and their children have an equal claim to the
estate; they are indeed esteemed the children of the wife, and they accordingly
call he^ mother. She indeed is the sole mistress of the house; and the
concubines serve and honor her.

Yet the people who are distressed by want, are permitted to expose their
children. Thus when the family feels the distress of penury, when the mother
falls sick, or when she has ^o milk, it is common to condemn the poor helpless
innocent to perish in the streets: and frequently they are so void of humanity
as to engage their midwives to stifle the females in ^ basin of water, as soon
as they are born. In all this the Chinese, notwithstanding their boasted
politeness, are as savage as the untutored Hottentots.

As the whole frame of the Chinese government is founded on filial piety, they
pay the greatest honor to their deceased parents. The usual time of mourning
is three years; but it is commonly reduced to 27 months, during which they
cannot exercise any public office; so that a mandarin is obliged to quit his
government; to live retired, and give himself up to grief. The mourning color
is white. The funeral is pompous and expensive, and a son will sometimes sell
himself to buy a magnificent coffin for his father. They ^re prohibited from
burying their dead within ^he walls of a city, but are permitted to keep them
in their houses, which they often do for several months, and even years,
enclosed in their rich coffins daubed on the inside with pitch, and without
japanned: however, if a son does not, at last, cause the corpse of his father to
be laid in the tomb of his ancestors, however distant it may be, he will lose
his reputation.

The Chinese are pagans of several sects: one of the principal of which is
composed of the worshippers of Foe or Fo; a religion brought from India. These
believe transmigration, and their bonzes, or priests, who are frequently great
hypocrites, grossly impose on the credulity of the people. Two of these bonzes
one day seeing two large ducks in a rich farmer's yard, fell on their faces
before the door, and bursting into bitter lamentations, the good woman, who saw
them from the chamber window, came down to ask the cause of their affliction.
They informed her, that the souls of their fathers inhabited the bodies of
those creatures; and that the dread of her killing them, was what they could
not support. The woman answered that she intended to sell them; but as they
were their fathers, she would keep them safe. But, perhaps, said the bonzes,
your husband will no^ be so charitable, and then if any acciden^ should happen
to them, it would kill us. A^ last, after a long discourse, the good woman was
so far moved by their tears and importunity, that to comfort them, she
committed the two ducks to their care, and allowed them to keep them for some
time. They took them with the appearance of the greatest respect; and
prostrated themselves before the unconscious ducks; but that very evening made
an entertainment for some others of their order, and the ducks were eaten for
supper.

They likewise get money from the people by public acts of penance, which are
sure to procure them the esteem and compassion of the ignorant multitude. I
have seen them dragging a long iron chain, as thick as one's arm, and about 30
feet long, fastened to their neck or legs. Thus it is, say they, at every door
as they pass, that we expiate your faults; and sure this deserves some alms.
Others in public places strike their heads with large bricks, till they are
almost covered with blood. One day I met in the middle of a town, a young
bonze, of a good mein, and with such an ingenuous and modest look as might
easily move compassion. He stood upright in a sort of sed^n, the inside of
which was like a barrow, full of nails with the points sticking inward, so that
he could bend no way without being wounded. Two fellows were hired to carry him
from house to house, while he endeavored to excite compassion, by telling the
people that he was shut up in that chair for the good of their souls, and was
resolved never to leave it till they had bought all the nails, of which there
were above 2000, at the value of sixpence each; the smallest of which, he
said, would derive incomparable blessings on themselves and families; since
their charity would be bestowed o^ the God Fo, to whose honor they were going
to build a temple. The bonze directing his discourse to me, I advised him to
leave his prison, and go to the temple of the true God, to be instructed in
heavenly truths, where he might submit to penances less severe, but more
wholesome. He calmly replied, that he was obliged to me for my advice; but
would be much more so, if I would buy a dozen of his nails, which would
certainly procure me a good journey. Here, hold your hand, said he, take these,
on the faith of a bonze, they are the best in all my sedan, for they prick me
the most, yet you shall have them at the same rate, at which I sell the others.
The tone in which he uttered these words would, on another occasion, have made
me laugh: but I left him with a mixture of pity and contempt.

The Chinese are, however, sometimes weary of paying useless addresses to their
idols, which are very numerous: for it often happens, that if after worshipping
them a great while, the people do not obtain the blessing they desire, they use
them in the most reproachful manner; some load them with hard names, and others
with hard blows: we lodge you, say they, in a magnificent temple, we cover you
with gold, and offer to you food and incense, and after all you are so
ungrateful as to refuse our requests. They then tie the idol with cords, pluck
it down, drag it along the streets, through all the mud and dunghills. Yet if
they soon after obtain their desire, they then take the idol, and with great
ceremony carry it back, and place it again on its niche, after they have washed
it clean, fallen down before it, and made excuses for what they have done;
promising that if it will forget what is past, they will gild it again.

These sects are, however, only tolerated; the religion of the court, and that
of the mandarins, consists in following the precepts and doctrines of
Confucius, an excellent moral philosopher, and those of the other sages of
antiquity; which they have intermixed with many idolatrous and superstitious
customs. They are far from abstaining from flesh: and almost all the people not
only feed on the animals that are usually eaten in other countries; but on
cats, dogs and horses, and even on such creatures as die of themselves; though
their principal food is hogs.

The Chinese in writing do not use pens made of quills, like the Europeans, nor
canes or reeds like the Arabians, nor crayons like the Siamese; but only hair
pencils. When they sit down to write, they have upon the table a piece of
polished marble, with a hollow at one end, that contains a little water, into
which dipping a stick of Indian ink, they rub it upon the smooth part of the
marble, and into the liquid ink thus made, dip their pencil. Every word has a
different character; for they have no idea of expressing sounds on paper, by
the letters of an alphabet. They write from the right to the left, and end
their books where we begin ours; so that our last page stands in the place of
their first.

The Chinese paper is made of the inner bark of the bamboo, which is soft and
white: this they beat in clear water; after which it is formed into sheets by
being taken up in long and broad frames. Some of these sheets are ten or twelve
feet long; they are exceeding white and smooth, and each sheet is dipped in
alum water, instead of size. They have also paper made of cotton, which is,
indeed, the whitest, finest and most used.

Printing, which is in a manner in its infancy in Europe, has been used from
all antiquity in China: but their manner of printing is very different from
ours. As they have no letters, they are obliged to cut the marks which stand
for words on even blocks of wood. He who intends to print a book, has it fairly
wrote, and then the wood cutter glews each leaf upon an even smooth pear tree
board, and cuts out whatever is not to appear when printed, leaving the
characters as perfect as those of the original. Having thus prepared the block,
they rub it over with a brush dipped in ink, and placing the paper upon it,
they rub a dry brush gently over the back of the paper, pressing it down a
little, that it may imbibe the ink* and take the impression. All this is done
with great expedition. They print only on one side of the leaf, and finish a
whole book in the manner here described; after which it is bound, and covered
either with a neat sort of gray pasteboard, or with fine satin or flowered
silk, which costs little, and some are covered by the binders with red brocade,
interspersed with gold and silver flowers.

The Chinese have a variety of books on morality, medicine, on agriculture, on
plants, on the military arts, on history, astronomy, philosophy, and the
mechanic art, romances, comedies, tragedies, and abundance of treaties composed
by the bonzes, on the worship of the deities of the country: so that some of
their public libraries are said to contain 40,000 volumes.

The Chinese are well skilled in the management of the silkworm, and in
raising and manufacturing the richest silks; in making cabinets resembling
those of Japan; and are particularly famous for their porcelain, so well known
in Europe by the name of China.

Among various instances of their ingenuity, that practiced in fishing appears
not the least extraordinary. Besides the line, nets, and the ordinary
instruments used in Europe, which they employ as well as we, they have two
methods that appear extremely odd. The one is practiced in the night by
moonshine they take two long strait boats, and nail on the sides from one end
to the other, a board about two feet broad, painted white, and finely
varnished. This plank slopes outward and almost touches the surface of the
water in order to answer their purpose, they turn i^ toward the moon, that the
reflection of that luminary may increase its brightness: when the fish playing
and mistaking its color, for that of the water, spring up toward it, and
either fall upon it, or into the boat. So that the fishermen with very little
trouble soon fill their boat.

The second manner of fishing seems at fir^^ equally surprising: as the
Europeans and others breed up hawks to fly at the game, and catch birds, the
Chinese train cormorants t^ catch fish: one fisherman can easily look after a
hundred of them: he keeps them perche^ on the sides of his boat, waiting
patiently for their orders, till they are come to the plac^ designed for
fishing in, and then at the fir^^ signal, each takes its flight, and flies the
wa^ assigned it. It Is pleasant to see them divi^^ amongst themselves the whole
breadth of the river, or of the lake: they seek up and down, they dive, come up
again, and hover over the water till they perceive their prey; when they
instantly dart upon it, seize it with their beak, and bring it to their master.
When the fish is too big, they help one another interchangeably, one taking it
by the tail, and another by the head, in which manner they carry it to the
boat, where the men hold out long oars or strong canes for them, on which they
perch with their fish, which they do not part with till they go in search of
others. When they are weary, they let them rest a while; but give them nothing
to eat till the fishing is over; during which time the throat of each ^ormorant
is tied with a small cord, for fear they should swallow the small fish, which
might prevent their having any inclination to return.

As the land of China is incapable of maintaining its inhabitants, the dread of
want puts every body in motion, and they have a thousand methods of getting
money, which other nations would never think of. If, indeed, they would
accompany labor and natural industry with a little more honesty, especially
with respect to strangers, they would make complete merchants; but they seldom
fail to ^heat whenever it is in their power. They ^alsify almost every thing
they sell; and in particular they are said to counterfeit gammons of bacon so
very artfully, that people are often mistaken in them, and when they have
boiled them a long time, they find nothing, when they sit down to eat them, but
a piece of wood under a hog's skin. It Is certain that a stranger will be always
cheated if he buy alone, let him take what care he will: he should employ a
trusty Chinese, who knows all the tricks of his countrymen; and indeed even
then you will be very happy if he that buys for you, and he that sells, do not
colleague together to your cost, and go shares in the profits. They have the
art to open the breast of a capon, and, taking out all the flesh, to fill up
the hole, and close it so nicely, that the cheat is not perceived till the fowl
comes to be eaten. These tricks, however, are seldom practiced on any but
strangers; and at a distance from the coast, the Chinese themselves will scarce
believe them.

The following instance will perhaps give a more perfect idea of their
character. An^ English captain having bought some bales o^ silk of a merchant
of Can^on, on opening them he found that they were almost all filled with
r^tten silk; upon which he reproached the Chinese in the severest terms, for
his dising^nuity and ^^^very; while the other heard him very a concernedly, and
only mad^ this reply: blame, sir, your rogue of an interpreter; for he
protested to me, that you would not examine the bales.

Their subtlety in deceiving is still more ex^raordinary in their thieves and
robbers, who break through the thickest walls, burn gates, and ma^e great holes
in them, by the help of a certain engi^e that fires the wood without any flame.
Thus they penetrate into the most private recesses, and having, it is said, a
certain drug, the fume of which stupi^ies the senses, and casts persons into a
deep sleep, they enter into the very bed-chambers without being perceived; and
when the people awake in the morning, they are amazed to find their bed without
curtains; their chamber unfurnished; and the tables, cabinets, ^offers, and
every thing removed without any ^race being seen of the thieves but the hole in
the wall, at which they went out with all the noveables of the house.

There are, howe^er, some few exceptions ^o this general character of the
Chinese: honesty and disinterestedness are sometimes to be found among them;
but the examples are ^ery rare.

China being of great extent, the nature ^f the soil is different, according to
its si^uation. The land, like all others, is divided into ^ills and plains; but
the latter are so even, that ^^e would imagine that the Chinese have ever ^^nce
the foundation of their monarchy, been employed in nothing but levelling them;
and their manner of meliorating their ground being to let water through it,
they could not think of a better way of rendering the whole country fertile,
than that they have taken; for was it not for their numerous canals, those
parts that lie highest would have been subject to continual drought, and the
rest have lain always under water. Their mountains are cut out like a pair of
stairs, from the top to the bottom, that the rainwater may spread equally, and
not wash down the ground with its seeds. A long series of such hills,
surrounded with such terrasses, losing in breadth as they gain in height,
afford a very entertaining landscape.

Their mountains are, for the most part, less stony than ours, and covered with
a mould that is light, porous, and easily cut; and what is most surprising, so
deep, that in most provinces you may dig three or four hundred feet in depth
before you come to the hard rock. Nature, however, has not every where equally
distributed her favors; for some places are naturally so fertile, as to yield
two crops a year; while others owe their fruitfulness to the indefatigable
labor of the husbandmen. They have mountains, that produce gold and silver,
iron, tin, and mercury. Their silver mines are not now worked; but as for their
gold, the torrents wash great quantities of it into the plains, and a number of
people are solely employed in looking for it among the sand and mud, where it
is found so pure as to need no refining.

The mines of common copper supply the empire with small money. But the most
extraordinary sort of this metal is white copper, which is of that color when
dug out of the mine, and more so on the inside than without. It appears by many
experiments made at Pekin, that its color is owing to no mixture: on the
contrary, all mixtures diminish its beauty; for when it is rightly managed, it
looks exactly like silver; but there is a necessity of mixing a small quantity
of some other metal with it, to soften it and prevent its brittleness; and
therefore those who would have it keep its fine color, mix it with a fifth
part of silver.

There are in China also many mines of pit-coal, of which there is a very great
consumption. In the mountains are found lapis armenus, cinnabar, vitriol,
alum, jasper, rubies, rock crystal, load-stones, porphyry, and quarries of
different kinds of marble.

The canals of China have been mentioned among the works which show the art and
industry of the inhabitants; and the rivers from whence they derive their
sources are very considerable. The river Kiam rises in the province of Yunnan,
and after having watered three other provinces, and run a course of 400
leagues, discharges itself into the eastern sea. The Chinese have a proverb,
that "The sea has no bounds, and the Kiam no bottom:" and indeed in some places
they have found none; but as their pilots never carry a cord of above fifty or
sixty fathoms in length, the impossibility of finding a bottom with their
ordinary plummet, probably gave rise to this hyperbole. This river is in many
places extremely rapid, and the passage along it is very dangerous.

China abounds with lakes, one of which named the Jau, is thirty leagues in
circumference, and is like the sea, subject to storms: indeed almost every
province, has lakes of a prodigious extent; these have a communication with the
rivers and canals, and are well stocked with fish.

The plains are extremely beautiful, they are all cultivated, and so afraid are
the inhabitants of losing an inch of ground, that they have neither hedge nor
ditch. All the northern and western provinces bear wheat, barley, several kinds
of millet and tobacco, with black and yellow pease, with which they feed their
horses, as we do with oats: the plains to the south, being a watery country,
produce rice. The husbandmen first sow it like other corn, and when it is grown
about two feet from the ground, pull it up by the roots, and set it in strait
lines, checquerwise, in small parcels like sheaves, that the stalks may support
each other, and the easier resist the wind.

The soil is proper for all manner of fruits; it produces apricots, peaches,
pears, apples, sigs, grapes of all kinds, and especially excellent muscadines.
There are also pomegranates, walnuts, chestnuts; and in general all that we have
in Europe; but as the Chinese are strangers to the art of grafting, they are
for the most part inferior in goodness to ours, and there is no great variety
among each distinct sort.

In the southern provinces grow other fruits that are in greater esteem among
the natives; for besides oranges of several kinds, lemons and citrons, which
were many years ago brought into Europe, there are other fruits that have a
fine taste and flavor, that seem peculiarly natives of the country;
particularly what they call the linchi, which is of the size of a date, and has
a soft pulp of a very agreeable taste, which it partly loses on its becoming
dry and wrinkled like a prune. Ananas, gauvas, bananas and cocoas have been
transplanted from the neighboring islands. Besides these there is a tree which
bears a small fruit that in shape, color, shell, and taste, is extremely like
a pea. This tree is common in several provinces, and in respect to its height,
its spreading branches, and the thickness of its trunk, is excelled by few.

Among their trees are the four following. The first is the varnish tree, which
is of a small size, and has a leaf resembling the wild cherry: a gum distills
from it drop by drop like the tears of the turpentine-tree; and if an incision
be made in it, it yields a greater quantity of liquor; but then it soon
destroys the tree. The varnish is much used, and is greatly esteemed by the
artificers: it takes all colors alike, and if it be well managed, neither
loses its luster by the change of the air, nor the age of the wood to which it
is applied.

There is also another tree from which a liquor is obtained that differs but
little from varnish.

Another is termed the tallow-tree. This is as large as a high cherry-tree: the
leaves are of a lively red, and the shape of a heart; the fruit is contained in
a rind, which, when ripe, opens in the middle like a chestnut: it consists of
white kernels of the size of a hazel-nut, whose pulp has the properties of
tallow, and of which candles are accordingly made.

The white wax-tree is no less extraordinary. It is not so tall as the
tallow-tree; and has longer leaves and a whiter bark. A small kind of worm
fixes itself to the leaves, and forms a sort of comb, much smaller than an
honeycomb, the wax of which is very hard and shining, and of far greater value
than the common beeswax.

They have most kind of woods that are to be found in Europe, and several
others, among which is the tse-tam, or rose-wood, which is of a reddish black,
and full of fine veins that s^ems painted. This wood is fit for the finest sort
of joiner's work.

Among the shrubs, the most extraordinary is that of tea, which is
distinguished into several different sorts. One of the principal of them is the
song-lo, which we call green tea. It is planted in the manner of vines, and if
not cut, will grow seven or eight feet high. The flower is white, and in the
shape of a rose, in the autumn; when it drops off, there appears a berry in
shape of a nut, a little moist, and of no bad taste.

There is another sort of the tea shrub which grows in the province of Fo-kien,
and is called vui, or bohea. The only difference between this tea and the
former, is, that the leaves of that are longer and sharper pointed, and those
of the latter of a darker color. This last being esteemed more salutary is
most generally used throughout the empire

From this shrub are prepared three sorts of tea; the first, of the tender leaf
when newly planted, which is seldom exposed to sale; but serves to make
presents of, and to send to the emperor: this is called man-cha, or imperial
tea. The second consists of leaves of a sensible growth, and is esteemed a very
good sort. The remaining leaves are suffered to arrive at their full growth,
and this makes a third sort; and a fourth is made of the flower itself.

There are also several other kinds of teas: but they are very little different
from the two principal sorts, except in what is owing to the nature of the soil
in which they are planted.

The flowering trees and shrubs are very numerous throughout the empire. In
th^se the Chinese have the advantage of the Europeans, as the Europeans have of
them with regard to the flowers that spring from seeds, and small roots. Large
trees are to be seen there that perfectly resemble tulips; the flowers of
others are like roses, which intermixed with the green leaves, make a very
beautiful appearance.

Among the animals is an odoriferous deer, which is without horns; the hair is
of a blackish color; and its musk-bag is composed of a very thin skin, covered
with exceeding fine hair; the flesh is good to eat, and served up at the best
tables.

Among the other animals horses, which are very indifferent, small asses and
mules, some cows and buffaloes, white goats and black hogs, which last are
excellent food, greatly superior to the pork of Europe. There are also a
prodigious number of bucks, does, wild boars, elks, hares, rabbits, and
squirrels.

In the southern provinces are parrots of all sorts, exactly resembling those
brought from America. They have the same plumage, and the same aptness for
talking: but they are not comparable to the bird called the golden hen. There
is no bird in Europe any thing like it. The liveliness of the red and yellow,
the plume on the head, the delicate shadowing of the tail, the variety of
colors in the wings, together with a well shaped body, render it the most
beautiful of the feathered kind; besides, the flesh is more delicate than that
of the pheasant.

I cannot conclude this account of China without mentioning a singular method
by which all kinds of fish are dispersed into different provinces even before
they have life. About the month of may the Chinese draw mats across the great
river Yang-tse-Kyange in order to stop the spawn, which they know how to
distinguish at first sight, though the water is scarce altered by it, with this
water mixed with spawn, they fill many vessels, which they sell to the
merchants, who go thither at that season in great numbers to buy it, and
transport it into different provinces. This they sell by measure to those who
have fish ponds belonging to their houses. In a few days the young fry begin to
appear in little shoals; but the different kinds of fish cannot be soon
distinguished.

ANECDOTES of the ELEPHANT. Extracted from the Adventures of Wolf.
THE elephant, of which I have seen several six else high. That they are not
all of this size, it is needless to inform the reader. -- A young cub does not
measure more than one ^ll in height, but goes on thus increasing
pro^ortionably, till it arrives at its full growth. This animal is not only the
largest, but likewise ^he most acute of any. Had it the gift of speech, ^t
would be found equal to many of our dull race ^f blockheads in point of
understanding. At ^east, such is the opinion and open declaration of ^ll those
who are thoroughly acquainted with the nature and properties of the elephant,
and have ^ad to do with him for a number of years. Even (...) the business of
generation he imitates man; and, indeed, considering the particular frame of
^he females, it could not be otherwise. For ^his purpose, the male makes a pit,
or hollow (...) the ground, and assists his consort to lay her^elf on her back;
and, in case he finds her per^ctly compliant and agreeable, very complai^ntly
helps her up again after the business (...) finished (for she cannot possibly
rise of herself) (...) throwing his trunk round her neck. But if^ at first
stood shilly shally, and gave herself prudish airs, he then even lets her lie,
and goe^ away about his business.

How long the female goes with young, is no^ as yet ascertained. I have been at
some pains to come at the truth on this point, but without success. That this
animal is capable of arriving a^ a great age, I am very well assured, from wha^
I have myself observed in the case of a tame one which was caught on the
island, in the yea^ 1717, and was still living in 1768, and was even then used
with advantage for the breaking in o^ the wild elephants that were just caught.
They keep together in great droves, and every mal^ has his peculiar female
belonging to him, which none of the others dare approach. On the other hand,
the males always quarrel and fight together, till each has his appropriate
female. If i^ so happens that one of these is beat out of the field, and is
obliged to go without a consort he instantly becomes furious and mad, killing
ever^ living creature that comes in his way, be it man or beast. One in this
state is called ronked^ and is a greater object of terror to a travell^ than a
hundred wild ones. It is generally a^firmed, that the Elephants of Ceylon, are
the best and the first in point of rank, as they hol^ their heads as well as
necks, higher than the^ that come from other parts; and it is reporte^ that
when they chance to meet together, the^ latter give them the pass, and show
evident t^ ^s of submission and respect. But of this la^ report I can say
nothing from my own experience. These animals are distributed into three
classes, males, majanis, and females. The two former are of the masculine
gender, and differ only in this circumstance, that the first have these two
large and long tusks, while those of the majanis are but small. The females
have none at all: on the other hand, they have two breasts between their
fore-feet; by means of which they suckle their young. They do not walk or run
in a diagonal manner like other quadrupedes, but rather sideling, lifting up
the two feet, which are on the same side, from the ground at once; in
consequence of which, they do not run very fast. It is almost superfluous to
mention here, that the elephant's skin is of an ash gray color, smooth* and
without scales; and that there is only one part of him in which he is
vulnerable by a musket shot, and that is, between the eye and the ear. But the
m^nner in which he is caught and ^amed is, I believe, not so well known; for
which reason I shall give a description of the different methods in this place.

I. A certain korahl has been used for these many years past, in which most of
the elephants in Ceylon are caught. In order to have some idea of this korahl,
you must imagine to yourself a large fishing net, with two flaps standing ^ut
wide from each other, and terminating in a bag Now this snare consists of a
collection of stout and vigorous trees, partly growing wild on the spot, and
partly planted there for the purpose. These trees stand very close and near to
each other; and where there is any gap, very strong palisades are brought to
fill it up, so that the elephants cannot by any means get out. As soon as the
hunters have given information that they have discovered a tolerable numerous
troop of elephants, the principal people of Ceylon are obliged to bring
together several thousand men. By means of these the whole drove, thus enclosed
is driven slowly toward the first opening of the korahl, that takes up an
enormous space. When they have got them thus far, the game is, as it were in
their hands. The whole train of huntsmen and country people now unite, and draw
up close into this opening, and making a great noise and uproar, as well by
their cries as instruments, which they carry with them for the purpose, they
contrive to get the elephants, who keep together in one drove, like a happy and
peaceful family, into the smaller space, which is called the sporting korahl.
Here there is likewise formed a palisadoe (as it were) of six or seven thousand
men, who make a large fire, and at the same time an intolerable din with
shouting, drumming and playing on the hautboy of that country, so that the
elephants are frightened; and instead of going backwards, move forwards toward
the smallest space, called the f^rl^rn hope. This ^^rait is closed likewise
with a large ^i^e, and a great clamor is made as before; by which means the
elephant being seemingly stu^ (...) as it were, looks round about him, on all
si^ either see if he can obtain his freedom, which h^ a great to arrive at by
means of his great bodily st^h side. He tries each side of the korahl's fence,
bu^h his that with his strong trunk, he is not able to ^ell the stout trees
that are planted there; in consequence of which, he begins to be in a passion,
inflating his proboscis with all his force. He now observes, that the fire
comes nearer and nearer to him; accordingly he ventures into the small outlet
of the korahl: and seeing the tame elephants stand at the end of it, imagines
that he has at length obtained his freedom. This narrow passage, through which
one of these animals only can pass at a time, is covered at top: on this top
are placed some expert huntsmen, who drive the elephant to the end of the
passage with a stick, to the top of which is fastened a sharp-pointed hook. As
soon as they have got him here, they take away the beams which close the end of
the passage, and leave the opening free. Now the elephant rejoices like a
prisoner just broke out of his confinement. Accordingly he takes a pretty large
^eap; but just at that moment he finds, standing by his side the two tame
elephants (called hunters, and more commonly cri^ps) who oblige him to stand
still, and keep him fast between them. If he refuses to stand and be obedi^nt,
they begin to discipline him with their tr^nks; and by their master's orders,
thresh him (...) these slagellatory instruments in such a man^ (...) that from
the mere pain he is forced to eva^ (...) ^he contents of his body. Now, when at
(...) ^e finds that he cannot escape from the (...) of these unre^enting
beadles, he gives the (...) up, and with a good grace allows himself to be led
to a tree at a small distance, to which he is bound by the hind-leg with a
stout thong of untanned elk, or buckskin, and where they leave him, and take
the tame animals back again. When one of these beasts has thus been led out of
the korahl, the others follow more willingly, being all in hopes of obtaining
their liberty, as they have seen nothing to make them suspect the fate of the
first that went out. When the hunt is quite finished, and all the elephants are
seen fast bound to trees. In that manner they are to stand several days, being
all the while kept low in point of food, in order that they may know that they
are not now their own masters, but subject to the will of others. Attendants
are placed by the side of each animal, who give him his food by little and
little, to the end that he may learn to distinguish, and grow acquainted with
mankind. At first he looks very sour on an attendant of this kind; in the
course of a few days, however, he becomes more resigned to his fate, and allows
the former to come near him and handle him. He likewise soon comes to
understand what his governor says to him; and even suffers a strong rope to be
thrown round his neck, with which rope he is coupled to a tame elephant, and so
led into the stable. This is performed in the following manner. A tame elephant
has, on either side of him a wild one; and, if he is of a great size, he has
even two smaller ones on each side. The kornack sits on the tame animal with
his sharp-pointed hook, with which he turns the creature by the head the way he
would have him go, and thus leads his captured elephants to their stables, in
which are driven down stout poles, or trunks of trees. To these they are
fastened by the hind leg, at some distance from each other, so that they cannot
come together; and thus they are suffered to stand, being fed daily with
cocoa-nut leaves, and once a day led to water by the tame ones, till the proper
time arrives for taking them to market and selling them. It is easy to imagine,
that this kind of hunting is attended with more trouble, noise and tumult, than
those which are set on foot by our princes and great people in Germany, as
neither dogs nor firearms can be used here. But what is most to be admired in
all this affair is, the great boldness of the huntsmen, who know how to manage
this animal, in itself so terrible, as readily as a skilful huntsman in our
country manages his hounds. These kornacks or huntsmen, have a trifling
pension; but the country fellows that help to drive the elephants together,
have only that one day taken off from the number of days on which they are
obliged to labor, as vassals, on ordinary services.

II. Another method of taking these animals, is that which is practiced (in the
countries respectively subject to them) by the orders of the seven tributary
princes, whom I mentioned in a cursory manner, when I was treating of the
extensive power of the governor. They have pits, some fathoms deep, in those
places whither the elephant is wont to go in search of food. Across these pits
are laid poles, covered with leaves, and in the middle baited with the food of
which the elephant is fondest. As soon as he sets eyes on this, he makes
directly toward it, and on a sudden finds himself taken unawares. His new
situation at first sets him almost mad; at length however he becomes cooler,
and bethinks himself what he shall do in these disagreeable circumstances.
Accordingly, having first thrown from him the materials of his snare, which had
fallen in with him, he makes some endeavors at getting out; but finding
himself too heavy to accomplish this, he cries out for some of his own species,
to come to his assistance. At length he sees some of them coming toward him,
and flatters himself that they are come to help him out. This, in fact, they
do; but being of the tame, domesticated kind, as soon as they have pulled him
out by means of ropes, they make him prisoner, and deliver him up into the
hands of their leader. If he appears discontented at this treatment, and
endeavors to regain his liberty, he gets well thrashed; and is disciplined in
this manner, till he submits with a good grace to be fettered and led any
where, just as his driver pleases. That he may be got out the easier, the pit
is made rather shallow, and shelving on one side, so that he can in some
measure help himself out; otherwise it would not be possible to draw out such a
large and heavy animal, without doing him some damage.

III. The third and last species of capture, is that practiced by the Moors (as
they are called in those parts, from their following the doctrines of the
Koran) who by these means are enabled to pay their rents to the lords of the
manor, the Dutch East India Company. It consists of the following maneuvers:
in times of drought, when the elephants, being in want of water, are used to
haunt certain particular spots, where they know they shall find water to quench
their thirst; these people (a strong and hardy race of men) go a hunting in
parties, consisting of four men each, accompanied by some stout young lads,
their children, whom they have brought up to this business; and in this manner
search the wood through, till they have found a herd of elephants. Having
attained this point, they pitch on the largest of these animals, and keeping
continually hovering about him, endeavor to get him away from the rest. The
elephant, on his part, wishes for nothing so much as to get rid of these
troublesome visitors, and accordin^ly strives to drive them out of the wood. O^
the other hand, the boldest and most expert (...) these fellows, with an ebony
stick, which (...) carries with him, about two feet long, begins (...) sham
fight with the elephant, who bangs t^ stick heartily with his proboscis. But
the Mo^ parrying the strokes, and taking care to av^^^ coming to close
quarters, by leaping nimbly fr^ one side to the other, the elephant grows
e^tremely angry, and does every thing in his po^^er to disarm this strange
fencing-master, a^^ take his life. But besides this more adventure enemy, he
finds he has two more to cope wi^ one on each side of him; and while he is
^^gaged with these, comes a fourth behind hi^ and watching his opportunity,
throws a ro^ made into a noose, round one of his hind le^ At this instant, the
lads, knowing that the a^^mal has work enough cut out for him bef^^^ him, and
that his whole attention is taken by the stick, approach him with the great
boldness, and fastening the noose as quick possible round his leg, drag him on
till they (...) a tree fit for their purpose, to which they fa^ him, and let
him stand. In the mean time (...) of the men run home, and bring a tame
elepha^^ to which having coupled the wild one, they (...) them together to the
stable.


