A Surprising Account, OF THE Captivity and Escape OF Philip M'Donald, AND
Alexander M'Leod, OF VIRGINIA. FROM THE Chickkemogga Indians, AND OF THEIR
Great Discoveries IN THE Western World.

From June 1779, to January 1786, when they returned in health to their
Friends, After an Absence of six Years and a Half.

WRITTEN by THEMSELVES.

THE SECOND EDITION.

Printed in BENNINGTON: in the Year MDCC,LXXXVI.

BY HASWELL and RUSSELL.

A Surprising Account etc. OF DISCOVERIES IN THE Western World.
IT has been a matter of observation, that whatever is out of the common line
of human occurrences, though credibly attested to, is generally passed over
very slightly, and treated as empty chim^ras by a respectable part of mankind.

The accounts received from the Ohio, of the discovery of ancient
fortifications, and the jaw-teeth, thigh bones, etc. of certain animals, though
recorded by a Parsons, a Sullivan, and other esteemed personages, and some of
these ^uriosities deposited in the custody of Dr. Styles of New Haven college,
yet the truth of the matter is doubted by many, and the veracity of the wr^ters
called in question. Probably the truth of this little narrative may be doubted,
but as the narrators are well known by many, and the reality of their
sufferings evident from the marks on their mutilated bodies, they doubt not
that the account of the^r extraordinary discoveries will be highly pleasing to
the public in general, and pay the expense of printing, etc.

It was early in the month of May in the ^ear 1779. that the narrators* Philip
M'Don^ald of Edinburgh, lately resident in Virgin^a, and Alexander M'Leod, of
Scotch descent* born in Williamsburgh, Virgin^a, and educated as well as that
part of the continent could afford; left the place of their residence to join
the American army, as volunteers, against the ind^ans. Our offer was graciously
accepted, and we soon had an opportunity, not only to show our courage in
combating those brutal enemies, the indians, but, almost fatally, to be made
acquainted with their most horrid cruelty. We were detached with a small party,
to make discoveries, and re^connoitre the situation of a number of indians
supposed to be in the vicinity; after a tedious scout of three or four days, we
were almost worn out with fatigue, and being destitute of necessaries, we
determined to return to the main body, but were soon convinced of the
impracticability of our scheme. It was just about eight o'clock in the evening
of the 17th of June, when, not being apprehensive of danger, we were set down
to supper on a quarter of a buck, which one of our company had killed about two
hours before; our arms and ammunition were about thirty rods distant; our
little company as happy in their repast as good food and keen appetites could
make them; and the fear of an enemy entirely ban^shed from our minds, when we
were fired on by a party of about twenty indians of the Chickkemogga nation,
and four out of ten, of which number our company con^i^ted were killed
instantly, and two others so badly wounded as to be unable to move. It may
easily be conceived how astonished we were at this salute, but no time for
consideration was given, for the savages, rising from their ambush, had nearly
surrounded us, at the distance of about thirty rods. An opening toward the
place where our arms were deposited, was left which we eagerly took the
advantage of, and got safe to the spot: By this time we were totally
surrounded, but determining to sell our lives as dear as we could, we
discharged all our pieces at the enemy. The surviving indians, now rushed on
and disarmed us in a moment, and from their behavior we had every reason to
expect a horrid and immed^ate death, but Providence had otherwise decreed.

The dead indians, nearly double our number, were no sooner bur^ed, than the
state of the surviving part of our little company was examined, and from the
looks and gestures of the indians, we could easily perceive a massacre was
intended, and one of their party, who c^uld speak English, ins^ltingly asked us
if we would not have a little more roast meat, and which of us would choo^e to
be roasted. As we well k^ew that no humil^ation would move them to pity, we
offered t^em every insult in our power, to induce them to dispa^ch us
instantly, b^t all (...) horrid thirst f^r cruelty and for (...) not to (...)
so easily d^sappo^^^ed.

A great fire was now ma^e, and the two unfortunate creatures, who, as before
related, were badly wounded, named Thomas Hudslip, and William Gradnow, of
Pennsylvania, were stripped naked, and bound fast to the tops of two saplings,
previously cleared of limbs and bark for the horrid business. These saplings
were just strong enough to keep the en^ seebled bodies of the unfortunate
sufferers in an erect position. Another sapling, rather larger was now pruned
of the limbs and bent down so as to reach the heads of the victims, by the
weight of two indians, who, having with their knives cut round the skin of each
of the victim's heads, from the forehead to the back of the neck, and sk^nned
it a little way, fastened their hair to the tree, and jumping from the tree it
tore the whole scalp off in an instant. They then threw hot coals and embers on
their heads, after this they pierced their bodies all over, and stuck them full
of pitch pine splinters, dipped in turpentine; even in their very eyes some of
these instruments of torture were placed, and set on fire. The poor unfortunate
creatures, under these dreadful tortures, were suffered to remain about half an
hour, when the split pieces of pitch pine before mentioned being wholly
consumed, or extingu^shed by their blood, the infernal savages br^^ght fire and
placed under their feet, burning them by degrees till their entra^ls dropped
into the fire, the fire was then renewed, about them and the whole carcases
consumed to ashes,

After this most horrid and unnatural tragedy, we were carried on for six days
through the woods into the Ohio country, without making any stop, here our
other two companions, were unable to proceed any farther, by reason of their
wounds, they were therefore massacred in a manner equally cruel as the others,
being roasted to death by such slow degrees, as to be nearly twenty four hours
in the extremity of torture.

After six days further very severe travel, we arrived at a large indian town.
Here we were met by a great number of indians, men, women and children, who
were no sooner acquainted with the loss they had sustained by our means, than
they determined on putting us to the torture for revenge: We were both
accordingly str^pped, and whipped by every indian present, till at length we
fainted with anguish and loss of blood. After remaining some time in this
distressed situation, we were removed into a wigwam, under a strong guard of
indians, to be kept a few days till the arrival of another party expected from
the westward, who were going to war against the Americans, when we were to be
sacrificed. But this horrid scene we providentially escaped in the following
remarkable manner.

The sixth night after our dreadful punishment, we awoke, and perceiving that
four out of six of our guard were asleep, and the other^ in a defenseless
posture, as our soreness made them think we could do them no harm: being both
unbound, and two or three tomahawks lying within our reach, we determined to
make an attempt to escape; we communicated our intention by signs to each
other, and seizing the tomahawks sunk them in an instant in the heads of the
waking indians. We killed the others likewise without any noise, and snatching
up our own knapsacks and clothes that lay in one corner of the wigwam, and
taking each of us a knife, tomahawk and musket, we issued forth and traveling
all night, reached the top of a high mountain* here we tarried near a week,
feeding on roots, etc. till our wounds began to heal, and then pursued our rout
along the mountain, fearing to descend into the valleys, least we should fall
into the hands of the inhuman savages, which we dreaded worse than death
itself. It was now, according to our calculation, about the middle of August,
and we had traveled near twelve days, improving every hour we could, in a due
west direction We were arrived at a part of the country beautiful to view, the
a^r was serene, the trees at so great a d^stance as almost to bear the
appearance of a cleared up country, for a considerable distance round, and a
variety of animals passed us, seemingly inoffensive, within a few rods of us
and would st^p and graise near us. Our surprise at these matters was very
great: It was sometime since we had tasted flesh, and appetite prompted us to
desire it; we had gathered a variety of fruits that answered very well for
bread, but we felt a reluctance at the thoughts of destroying creatures feeding
pea^eably around (...) We had ranged about for some time in search of a spring,
when we at last came to one, on the side of a hill, that laid open to the sun.
We d^pped up a cupfull and tasted it, when we were surpr^sed to find it salter
than brine, and observing the channel in which it flowed, we perceived the
margin was covered with a thin crust of pure white salt, of which we scraped up
a considerable quantity, returning grateful thanks to providence for so great a
^avour.

We now determined to make use of our newly acquired treasure, to prepare a
little food for prosecuting our journey westward, as we were not yet freed from
our fear of the indians. With this v^ew we shot one of the peaceful tenants of
the wood, who^e b^dy was about the size of a sheep, and most delicious food. We
corned our meat, and should have stayed in this beautiful place a long time,
but our fear of the Indians prevented. We found in the pleasant retreat trees
that bore a sort of fruit that tasted sweet and much like a good pear, when
first gathered but after being dried a few days, tasted like ^ew bread

We began to gather and prepare our bread, and in about four days set forward
again with all the expedition we could, being still ^a^nted with the dread of
the savages. We traveled on at a great rate, for a long time finding such a
plenty of delic^ous wi^d fru^ts, that we scarce^y ever eat more than one meal a
day of our preserved food.

We reckoned now that it must be about the latter part of September, and as we
had traveled at a great rate, we thought ourselves out of the reach of the
hostile indians, and thinking so beautiful a country must be designed for the
sustenance of some favored beings, we determined to descend into the valleys,
and make what discoveries we could.

We had passed several small rivers on legs, and trunks of trees, etc. which we
found blown down and lying near their banks, but after traveling in the low
lands about three weeks longer, in our old due west course, we arrived at the
bank of a large river or sea. We thought now that all our journeying westward,
was at an end, however after traveling along the bank of the river a few days
we discovered a large canoe with paddles in it; this circumstance made us fear
we were rear some nation of indians, and as we were afraid of falling into the
hands of savages, we determined, to embark, although the wind blow high from
the east, and accordingly jumping into the canoe, we soon rigged up a sort of a
mast, and committed ourselves to the mercy of the winds and waves.

We had when we went on board, about ten days provision, which we determined to
husband to the best advantage as we were uncertain what provision we should
find on the western shore.

It was about the middle of the afternoon when we embarked, and as we sailed at
a great rate we were soon out of sight of land, however as the wind seemed
rather to fall than ri^e, and the weather was clear, we apprehended no danger,
but put on before the wind cheerful expectation of reaching the western shore
next morning. But alas! how uncertain are all human prospects; about midnight,
we were ^urried away by a swift south-west current, at an inconceivable swift
rate, without any pr^spect of release from it, and without any appearance of a
western shore.

After being carried at a surprising rate for fifteen days, toward evening we
perceived the current gradually changed its course, and set toward the shore,
and that its force abated cosiderably. Our provisions were now exhausted to the
last morsel, but we had some hopes of relief, as we had worked our boat into
the ends, were got into a creek, with a pleasant sh^re on each side, on which
to our inex^^essi^l^ (...) we soon effected a landing, and feasted on the
spontaneous luxuries of nature, with which the shore abounded.

Here we must mention with admiration, the surprising benificence of Deity, in
replenishing the earth with every necessary and even luxurious growth of
nature, for the sustenance of his dependent creatures. Here we found a fine
well watered country, beautiful to behold, the trees were exceeding high and
large, at a great distance from each other, and so little underbrush that a man
may easily have cleared an acre in two days. The wild fruits were excellent,
and the spontaneous growths of the earth were beyond all descr^ption luxuriant.
We had not traveled far in the level country, before we reached a large plain
kind of track, free from every sort of vegetation, and resembling a road in
America: on seeing this, we concluded we must be near some sort of inhabitants,
but as we were uncertain of what sort they may be it made us tremble with
apprehension. We l^f^ed up our hearts a d^vo^ees to heaven for protect^on, and
relying on the mercyful care of providence determined to prosecute our journey
along the beaten path until we arrived at some place of dwelling for human
beings; we had not been long traveling, in the r^ad before mentioned, when we
distinctly heard a human voice at a small distance from us, and by the sound,
we were led to conclude, the speaker was not of the indian tribes with (...) we
had been acquainted. We st^pped for some time, irresolute and undeter^^^ed
whether to proceed or to retire; when a (...) voice assailed our ears, and
suddenly a monstrous creature in human shape, but; nearly twelve feet in
height, jumped from a rock into the road, and taking us both up, almost dead
with fear, it to his hand, exclaimed, in the Hebrew language, what creatures
can these be!

We were now partly recovered from our frig^t, and seeing no apperance of
malignity in the aspect of our possess^r, we carefully turned ourselves round
and took h^ld of the long shaggy hair of his outside parment to keep us from
talking, and then ventured to address him ^n the language of his ^xc^a^at^on,
and beg him not to kill us. He was pleased beyond measure to hear us speak, and
told us to apprehend no danger from him, for he belonged to a race of beings
that never intentionally did harm to any creature.

We were greatly relieved from our fears by this declaration, and after about
an hour's travel, upon rising a high hill we discovered a large regular built
city before us, in appearance, but when we came to it our astonishment was
greatly increased. The houses were exceedingly beautiful and lofty though
consisting of but two stories, and the people appeared exceedingly loving and
tractable.

It was only a little village as they informed us, about ten English miles in
length, and the same in breadth, and contained about five hundred families.

Mr. M'Donald having been educated at the University of Edinburgh, could
understand their language perfectly well, and communicated to them the history
of Europe, at which they were much surprised. In return they informed us, that
they had ancient records which we might see, if we pleased.

In examining the records, we discovered that they were originally from Asia,
and most probably separated from that continent soon after the fl^od. They have
a tradition among them that a long time ago, then progen^tors were miraculously
planted by the being they adore, on the happy spot they at present possess,
(which is (...) a^cording to our computation, two thou^and miles in
circum^erence. That they were prohibited by their religion from war, and that
murder and infidelity were equally unknown among them.

They address their praises to the sun, as the representative of the being they
adore; for which purpose the whole village were summoned together at the rising
and setting of that planet. When with united voices, and a solemn attention
beyond what we had ever seen before, they performed their ceremonies.

These people are strangers to the use of flesh, and all kinds of spirituous
liquors; they live to a great age, and though vastly numerous, they populate to
slow that it is very ra^e three children belong to one family. We saw some
people among them above an hundred years old, according to their reckoning, and
their days are nearly twice the length of ours.

We were sent soon after we were found, to the high priest or king of their
nation, who attended with great pleasure the recital of our principles of
religion, and the divine precepts of the scripture, but when we informed him of
the quarrels among christians, and their shedding so much blood to support
their different sectaries, his astonishment was greater than can be conceived,
and in his public declamations he often took occasion to return thanks that the
vices of christians were unknown to them as to practice.

We could have spent our lives among this people contentedly, and never should
have thought of seeking for another home, but Providence had ordered otherwise,
and (...) return to our native home after a long absence was effected by
accident as follows.

On a little uninhabited island, about three leagues from the main, grows a
sort of fruit of which the inhabitants of the main are exceeding fond, and
which, when dried, in taste, nearly resembles rich cake: the produce of this
island is collected annually by the king's orders, and distributed throughout
his dominions. The water craft made use of in this business, is very large and
strong built boats, conveniently fixed for the purpose, and covered with a deck
to prevent the fruit from getting wet. The annual produce of this island is
comput^ to be equal to one half the bread consumed by the inhabitants in a
year. And as the inhabitants are exceeding fond of milk with their cake, (of
which they have great plenty) it forms a very considerable part of their living.

We had been among these hosp^table people so long that all their cares became
ours, and we partook of all their amusements. We were with the party employed
on the ^sla^d business, and had nearly complea^ed our lading, when a violent
storm arose, which occasioned some of the boats to break their landfasts, and
as none of the natives were in the boat with us, we were driven at the mercy of
the winds and waves, and were soon out of sight of land. The storm beginning to
encrea^e, we^ (...) our helm down, and went (...) and now T^ raged with great
v^olence, (...) from the c^^^^s in (...) us to (...) ourselves up close, the
storm continuing with unremitted fury for several days, during which we lost
ou^ rudder and mast.

We were driven in this situation twenty eight days without any prospect of
relief. We put up our earnest supplications to heaven for assistance, and
returned unfeigned thanks for the signal interposi^^ons of providence in our
behalf. It was early in the morning of the twenty ninth day, while we were at
our devotions, that we discovered a sh^p to the south of us, and steering
toward us. Tho, we had never hoped to see Europeans again our joy at th^s
discovery cannot be easily conceived or described. The sh^p proved to be a
Russian frigate, just returning from a voyage of discoveries in the South S^a^,
w^o took us on board and tre^ed us (...) great humanity Our fruit was of a kind
they ^^d not seen in their voyage, and on our arrival at St. Petersburgh, we
received a hands^me price for our cargo, and a strong inv^tation to sail in ^er
I^per a Majesty's serv^^e (...) of the ^sland we described, but our imma^ to
see our friends prompted us to equ^p (...); for our voyage to America. We
accord^ (...) o^t Petersburg on board an English vessel (...) to L^^don, from
whence we set (...) a few days after, and (...) Heave arrived safe in Virginia
(...) of January 1786, after an absence of (...) six years and a half.

FINIS.

