Mr. Lathrop's Thanksgiving Sermon.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN THE FIRST PARISH in WEST-SPRINGFIELD, DECEMBER 14,
MDCCLXXXVI, Being the DAY appointed by AUTHORITY for a PUBLIC THANKSGIVING.

By JOSEPH LATHROP, A. M.

Published at the general desire of the hearers.

PRINTED by JOHN RUSSELL, AT HIS OFFICE, IN SPRINGFIELD. MDCCLXXXVII.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
ISAIAH 1.19, 20. IF YE BE WILLING AND OBEDIENT, YE SHALL EAT THE GOOD OF THE
LAND: BUT IF YE REFUSE AND REBEL, YE SHALL BE DEVOURED WITH THE SWORD; FOR THE
MOUTH OF THE LORD HAS SPOKEN IT.


WHAT was spoken by the prophets to the ancient people of God, is written for
our use, that we, through the warnings of scripture, might be moved with fear;
and, through the comforts of scripture, might have hope.

OUR relation to God, as a people redeemed by his hand and preserved by his
care, as a people enjoying his oracles and professing obedience to his laws, is
so similar to theirs, that we may justly apply to ourselves what was here
spoken to them. I shall therefore consider my text in accommodation to our own
case: and shall observe,

I. That the land, in which we are placed, is a good land: and,

II. That our enjoyment of the good of the land depends on our obedience to God.

I. It may as truly be said of us, as of ancient Israel, that God has given us
a good land.

WE lately thought it worth defending by our arms: it is still worth securing
by our virtue.

IT is an extensive land. Few empires on the globe are so large, as the
territory claimed by these states. It will admit a vast increase of numbers;
and probably distant generations will not find themselves straitened for room.

IT is a pleasant and fruitful land. As it lies in the midst of the temperate
regions, no part of it is afflicted with intolerable heat, or rendered
uninhabitable by eternal frosts and snows. With proper culture it yields us,
not only the necessaries, but the delicacies of life, in such plenty and
variety, that we need to be but little indebted to foreign trade.

GREATER industry may be necessary here, than in some other climes: but this is
no unfavourable circumstance; for industry contributes to health, virtue,
freedom and security.

WITH regard to commerce, nature has given us every advantage that can be
wished. We have an extensive coast, convenient harbors, navigable bays and
rivers, materials of all kinds for shipping, a rich and inexhaustible fishery,
and a variety of exportable produce, which may be exchanged for the riches of
other climes. Late experience shows, that, we are in greater danger from the
excess, than from the want of commerce. Moderate trade contributes to polish
and enrich a people; but when it is carried beyond its proper limits, it
produces contrary effects, dissipation, poverty and vice.

THIS is a healthful land. Those direful pestilences, which have ravaged other
countries, are unknown here. A considerable proportion of the people live to
old age; fewer die in infancy than in most European nations: Our natural
increase is supposed to double our numbers as often as once in twenty five
years.

IT is a land of liberty, and has been so, with little interruption, from the
days of our fathers.

THE royal charters first granted to the American colonies, particularly to
those of New England, were of the most liberal kind, and fully agreeable to
their views and wishes. No attempts hitherto made, to subvert our liberties,
has been successful. They will probably be preserved, until the people
themselves, sunk in vice and corruption, destroy them with their own hands. How
near we are to this fatal period, Heaven knows!

THE freedom of these colonies was first invaded by James II, who, with a
design to establish an absolute monarchy, seized their charters, together with
those of the corporations in England. But by the revolution which took place on
the accession of the prince of Orange to the throne, the freedom both of
Britain and America was restored and established.

THE late encroachments of the British court on our charter-rights awakened a
just and general concern. Though we were but an infant people, and our enemies
were an ancient, rich and powerful nation, we ventured to resist their claims;
and, by a series of wonderful interpositions, our resistance defeated their
designs and terminated in the establishment of our independence.

WE are now under a government of our own framing and choosing. There is perhaps
scarcely another instance of the kind on earth. It is a privilege, which few
nations ever enjoy, and which the same nation probably can never enjoy more
than once.

MANY of the governments, now subsisting in the world, were established by the
conquering arms of a powerful invader; some were introduced by the usurpation
of princes; others have been fixed in consequence of a civil war, in which one
party prevailing has by arms given law to the rest. Governments, which owe
their existence to such a birth, must, you know, in their very nature, be
tyrannies. The British constitution was settled in a more liberal manner, by an
explicit compact between the king, the hereditary nobles and the
representatives of the people; and it is undoubtedly more favorable to
liberty, than most other forms of government in Europe. But the constitution of
these states, and particularly of this, was framed and ratified in a manner
still more liberal. It is not, in any sense whatever, a compact between the
rulers and the people; but it is a solemn, explicit agreement of the people
among themselves. It was constructed by a convention of wise men, whom the
people deputed solely for that purpose, and who, at that time, could have no
share, and no appearance of a future share in the government they were framing.
It was then remitted to the people at large, and competent time allowed for
their deliberate examination and discussion; and it was finally adopted and
confirmed in consequence of their general approbation. So happily was it
adjusted to the views of the people, at a time when the spirit of liberty was
at the height, that not a single article was found in the whole, but what met
the approbation of more than two thirds of the inhabitants assembled in the
several towns to give their voices upon it. It is therefore, in the most
absolute sense, THE CONSTISTUTION OF THE PEOPLE; and, in this view, it is more
sacred than any form of government in Europe. Being framed by the people, it
never ought to be changed, or altered without their general consent fairly
asked, and freely given. There may undoubtedly be defects in it: nothing human
is perfect: but still it is our own; not imposed, but chosen. And whatever
imperfections attend it, yet it is acknowledged, by all, to be formed on the
highest principles, of liberty. The administration of it is committed to men
appointed by, and from among ourselves; to men who are frequently to return to
private life; to men who are subject to the same laws and burdens, which they
impose on their fellow citizens. The people have it in their power always to
influence the measures of government by petition and instructions, and often to
change their rulers by new elections. Nations, whose government is absolute,
may be under the sad necessity of submitting to oppression, or of repelling it
by force. This is a dreadful alternative, and usually terminates in the
increase of the evil. We are und^^ (...) such necessity. Our government is so
constituted, that public oppressions may be soon removed without force, either
by remonstrances against the measures of rulers, or by a change of the rulers
themselves.

YOU will ask, 'What if our new-chosen rulers pursue the measures of the
former?' In this case candor will lead us to suspect, that possibly they may
judge better than we. If their measures meet with general approbation, the few
who are dissatisfied must submit, until, by speaking and publishing their
sentiments, they can give general conviction. If we should ever be so unhappy
as to fall under succession of wicked rulers, we must censure our ill choice.
We have still wise and good men among us If the time should come, when there is
not a man to be found, who will execute judgment, and seek the truth, how will
God pardon us for this! Nothing, but immediate reformation, can prevent the
fatal consequences of such woeful depravity. These follow by a divine
establishment, and it is not in the power of human government to guard against
them.

PERHAPS it will be asked, 'Is there no case in which a people may resist
government?' Yes, there is one such case; and that is, when rulers usurp a
power oppressive to the people, and continue to support it by military force in
contempt of every respectful remonstrance. In this case the body of the people
have a natural right to unite their strength for the restoration of their own
constitutional government. And, for the same reason, if a part of the people
attempt by arms to control or subvert the government, the rulers, who are the
guardians of the constitution, have a right to call in the aid of the people to
protect it. If the people may use force to suppress an armed usurpation of
unconstitutional authority, rulers may, on the same principle, use force to
suppress an armed insurrection against constitutional authority.

CIVIL liberty is a very valuable blessing. It was the professed object of the
late dangerous war. It is secured to us, as far as success in the prosecution
of the war, wisdom in the settlement of the peace, and deliberation in framing
our government, could secure it. Our own virtue and prudence, under providence,
must do the rest.

THIS is a land; not only of civil, but religious liberty. The enjoyment of
gospel-privileges was a grand motive with our ancestors to enterprise on
emigration to this distant world. They brought with them the sacred scriptures,
early formed churches for divine worship, diligently instructed their children
in the knowledge of religion, erected private schools for their education, and,
as soon as the abilities of the country would permit, they established larger
seminaries, in which youth might be trained up for public employments,
especially for the ministry, that this important office might not become
useless and contemptible by falling into the hands of illiterate men. Care was
taken to secure to the churches the privilege of choosing their own teachers,
and of worshipping God according to the dictates of their own consciences; a
privilege which these churches now possess in the amplest manner, and which is
happily confirmed by the civil government under which we are placed. In
consequence of the pious zeal of our fathers, we still, through the divine
goodness, enjoy the gospel of the Redeemer, and the offers and means of eternal
salvation. The word of God is dispensed, his ordinances administered, his
sabbaths continued, churches are maintained and religious worship preserved in
them, and, we have reason to hope, that the gracious influences of the divine
spirit, are not wholly withdrawn, but are still vouchsafed to render the gospel
successful.

IS any thing now wanting to make this a good land? -- Nothing but our own
virtue and wisdom in the improvement of these advantages.

THIS thought naturally introduces our other observation,

II. That our enjoyment of the good of this land depends on our obedience to
God.

External advantages, without wisdom and virtue to apply them, will make
neither a people, nor a person happy. A man, surrounded with all the means of
wealth, will be indigent, if he knows not how to use them. One possessed of the
amplest fortune, without a capacity to enjoy it, will suffer all the miseries
of real poverty. The best natural constitution of body will soon be ruined by
excessive indulgence. So a people, blessed with all imaginable circumstances of
national felicity, may be enslaved, and even destroyed by their own vices and
follies.

There is a connection between virtue and happiness; between vice and
wretchedness, in social as well as private life. From the justice and goodness
of the supreme Governor, we may naturally conclude, that he will protect and
prosper a virtuous people, while he leaves corrupt and irreclaimable nations to
suffer the fatal effects of their own perverseness. This natural conclusion
from the divine character is confirmed by the declarations of scripture, and
the usual course of providence. The threatening and the promise in our text are
most explicit and peremptory; and to give them the greater solemnity, it is
added, The mouth of the Lord has spoken them.

IT will be proper for us particularly to consider, what those virtues are, on
which our national happiness principally depends.

1. The first thing that here meets our thoughts is internal peace and union.

CAN a man be happy, whose breast is the seat of contending passions? Can a
family prosper, who a members continually oppose and counteract each other? Can
the harvests of your fields stand secure amidst a war of conflicting elements?
-- No more can a nation flourish, while it is distracted with intestine broils.
'Every kingdom divided against itself is bro't to desolation.' A small people
united will be strong and respectable: the largest community broken and
disjointed becomes impotent and contemptible. It was our union in the late war,
that gave us strength to bear up against the power of a superior enemy. Had we
been divided, we must have fallen. The union, which was necessary to an
effectual defense, is still necessary to our enjoying the good of the land.

IT is not uncommon, that when the burdens arising from a long war press hard
on a people, and the terror of the invading enemy, which for a while animated
and united them, is entirely removed, they lose their patriotick zeal, and fall
into dangerous contentions. This is an event which our enemies predicted for
us; which our friends forewarned us of, and which, to our disgrace, we now
begin to realize.

WHATEVER oppressions we suffer, or seem to suffer, our measures of redress
must be only such, as may consist with our internal peace; for being divided
against ourselves, we shall become an easy prey to foreign invaders; or rather,
shall fall a contemptible prey to one another. Contentions, once begun, may
proceed to, we know not what, dreadful lengths; and may terminate in, we know
not what, direful events. While, with a watchful eye we guard against every
real invasion of our rights, we must place a reasonable confidence in our
rulers, and study and pursue the things which contribute to peace, both in our
smaller societies, and in the community at large.

A general distrust is inconsistent with government and subversive of all
security. Confidence joined with circumspection tends both to peace and
liberty. Let not Ephraim envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim, and their common
adversaries will be removed.

2. In order to our enjoying the good of the land, there must be mutual justice
and benevolence.

These are necessary to internal peace, and branches of the obedience
recommended in the text. Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, plead for the
widow.

OUR first obligation to mankind is justice. This is rendering to all their
dues, in opposition to every kind of fraud, oppression and violence. The great
law, which ought to govern our social conduct, is to do to others, as we would,
that they should do to us; to owe no man any thing, but to love one another.
This law, written in the heart, will prompt us to the voluntary exercise of
equity, integrity and righteousness. It is the want of this, that makes the
coercion of human government so absolutely necessary to the subsistence of
society. 'The law is made for the lawless.' Every man can easily judge of
himself what is right, by asking his own heart, what, in a similar case, he
would expect from another.

OUR next obligation is goodness. The poor we have always with us: and there
are times when their number is increased. The late war, as might naturally be
expected, has made a considerable change of property. It has reduced many to
absolute poverty, and others to an incapacity of sustaining any great share of
the common burden without leaving their families to want. Government, at such
a time, ought to adjust their demands to the common ability; and this, we hope,
is their aim, for they bear a part of the burden with others. But it should be
considered, that the general rules, by which the measures of government must be
directed, will often operate with some inequality. This is an unavoidable
imperfection of human society. In such cases, instead of charging government
with cruelty, it would be proper for the more strong to assist the weak. Bear
ye one another's burdens, says the law of Christ. The law of reason says the
same.

NO community ought to leave her prudent and industrious members to struggle in
vain under an insupportable load. By mutual succor in times of distress we
increase the common strength. Reciprocal support and protection is one end of
society. 'Two are better than one, for if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow; but woe to him that is alone when he falls, for he has not another to
help him up. And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him, and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.'

A community, in which an opposite spirit prevails, cannot be happy. Mutual
fraud, injustice and oppression cause perpetual animosities, and frequent
litigations, discourage industry and enterprise, destroy all confidence, and
obstruct every measure proposed for the common good.

3. The happiness of a people farther depends on industry and frugality.

THIS, though a good laud, will not support us in idleness and profuseness. If
it would, it must soon cease to be a good land. In a country, where every man
could grow rich with little labor, almost every man would in fact be poor; for
there being no spur to industry and few examples of it, the body of the people
would sink into idleness, luxury and wretchedness. All the wealth, and all the
power would be engrossed by the provident and enterprizing few. The rest would
be slaves, or little superior.

AT a time like this, when the expenses, incurred by the late contest for
independence, are lying as a burden on the country, diligence in our callings,
and prudence in our manner of living, are of peculiar importance. While the
object of the war appeared precarious, we thought no sacrifice too great to
obtain it. Since we have obtained it, let us submit to some self-denial, that
we may secure it. Though our burdens are heavy, yet we may hope, that by those
smiles of heaven, which will always attend a virtuous people, we shall soon, in
a way of prudence and industry, find relief: without these, miracles could not
make us happy. Idleness and luxury brings on poverty; this multiplies the
temptations to injustice; injustice breeds contention, and this makes confusion
and every evil work.

4. Our enjoyment of the good of the land will depend on the regular
administration of, and a peaceable submission to civil government.

MANKIND cannot subsist without society, nor society without government. If
there was no way to control the selfishness, check the passions and restrain
the vices of men, they would soon become intolerable to each other. Government
is the combination of the whole community against the vices of each member. The
design of it is not merely to provide for general defense against foreign
power, but to exercise a control over every individual, to restrain him from
wrong, and compel him to right, so far as the common safety requires. The best
form of government will not make a people happy, without a just administration
of it, and cheerful obedience to it; and both these very much depend on the
virtue of the people. We must commit the administration of our government to
our wisest and best men: not to those, whom we would not dare to trust in our
private affairs; but to those, whose known ability and integrity entitle them
to our confidence; for 'he that is faithful in the least, is faithful also in
much; and he that is unjust in the least, in unjust also in much.'

WILL you think a man capable of being a patriot whom you see to be dishonest,
unfaithful, dissolute, and profane? You may as well judge him a saint. As well
may your charity send him to heaven, as your prudence prefer him to be a leader
in the affairs of state. We must also contribute our aid to carry into effect
the good laws of the state, especially those which relate to virtue and morals.
If we discover errors, we must endeavor to rectify them; but let us not,
under pretense of redressing wrongs, destroy what is right; nor in our zeal to
amend the state, forget to amend ourselves. The more virtue there is among the
people, the more there will be among rulers, because better men will be elected
to power; and they, who are elected, will be more strongly influenced to a
right use of their power. If we indulge in ourselves the faults that we condemn
in rulers; if, while we complain of public oppression or profuseness, we are
prodigal in our expenses, or unjust to our neighbors, we are grossly
inconsistent. We show, how government would be administered, if it was committed
to our hands.

ZEALOUS for a good government, let us be zealous of good works, maintain them
ourselves, encourage them among others, and, as far as our influence extends,
give efficacy to wholesome laws, that they may be a terror to evil doers and a
protection to them who do well.

5. Another thing necessary to our national happiness is a diligent attendance
on the instituted means of religion.

THE gospel inculcates those virtues, which immediately conduce to public
felicity, such as peace, justice, charity, industry and temperance; and
therefore our attendance on its institutions, which are designed for the
promotion of these virtues, is a principal mean of national prosperity. The
observance of sabbaths and of social worship is, in this view, of vast
importance to society, and of still higher importance to each individual in
regard to his future salvation. It much concerns us therefore as members of
civil society, and more as christians, to maintain the public dispensation of
God's word and ordinances, to attend on it ourselves and encourage the
attendance of others, and to be likeminded one toward another, that we may with
one mind and one mouth glorify God.

6. As we wish to transmit to our children the goodness of our land, we must
train them up in such a manner, that they may be capable of enjoying it.

WE have generally professed, that the happiness of posterity, rather than our
own, was our object in the late war. This was our language, 'The present
generation will suffer much in the conflict; but we cannot be reconciled to the
prospect of leaving our children slaves. We suffer to purchase freedom for
them? The war has ended as successfully as we wished, and we have suffered no
more than we professed to exert. If the good of posterity was our aim, let us
not lose sight of it now. Let us educate them in knowledge and virtue, and
teach them to be willing and obedient, that they may eat the good of the land.
What benefit will all our labors and sufferings in the cause of liberty
transmit to them, if we leave them to grow up slaves to their own lusts and to
the evil manners of the world, and thus to bring down on themselves the fatal
judgments of an angry Deity?

POLITICAL liberty depends on national virtue. Prevailing vice sooner or later
introduces national slavery. Under almost any form of government a virtuous
people will be free and happy. But a people sunk in corruption must be
wretched. Their government, however liberal in its principles, will be fevere
in its administration, because they can subsist under no other. If we would
convey to our children the greatest possible freedom, we must train them up in
virtuous sentiments and manners.

HAVING illustrated the observations contained in the text, let us now
seriously apply them.

WE see what obligations we are under to God for his goodness to our nation;
and how we may enjoy the continuance of his goodness.

HE has placed us in a land of health, plenty, freedom and gospel light;
defended us in the enjoyment of our privileges; prospered us in a dangerous
war; granted the sweet return of peace; allowed us the independence which we
sought; settled us under a government of our own choosing; given us abundance of
health; made the seasons peculiarly favorable for several years, and
especially in the year past, and smiled on all the labors of our hands.

IT becomes us, under a thoughtful sense of his great goodness, to praise and
exalt his name, and to resolve that our future conduct shall be correspondent
with our present professions of gratitude. 'They who offer praise glorify God,
and to them who order their conversation aright, 'he will show his salvation.'

LET us, as becomes a people professing their dependence on God, deeply humble
ourselves for our sins. One principal design of his goodness is, to lead us to
repentance.

LET the restoration of peace, after a bloody and distressing war, influence us
to peace and union among ourselves. How provoking, in the sight of the God of
peace, would be intestine divisions and animosities, after such recent
experience of the calamities of war, and of the divine goodness in our
deliverance! Would he not be angry with us, till he had consumed us?

LET the bounty of our divine Benefactor, in supplying our various wants,
excite us to do good to the needy. The best expression of gratitude to God, is
an imitation of his beneficence. We are to offer the sacrifice of praise
continually, and especially to do good and communicate, for with such
sacrifices he is best pleased.

LET us use the bounties of his providence with temperance and moderation. This
is a moral duty at all times; it is a political duty at such a time as this. As
christians we are required to be temperate in all things, and with quietness to
work the thing that is good, that we may eat our own bread, and have to give to
those who need. As members of society we are now under additional obligations
to industry and sobriety, that we may relieve ourselves and our country from
the peculiar burdens of the day, and may enjoy the good of the land.

LET us remember our obligations to God for continuing to us his glorious
gospel, and pray for its general success, and for a divine power to accompany
it in our own souls.

LET us attend on the instituted worship of God, cultivate peace in the
religious societies of which we are members, and avoid all such divisions as
tend to obstruct the influence of the gospel and to defeat the end for which
churches are formed.

LET us bring up our children in the knowledge, and inculcate on them the
duties of religion, teaching them to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously and piously in the world, and thus to look for the
blessed hope which the gospel sets before them.

WORLDLY prosperity, however desirable, is not an object of the first
importance. We are soon to quit this mortal state; let us be chiefly solicitous
to secure a title to a better country.

WE have here no continuing city. In a few days we shall make our final remove,
and another set of mortals will succeed in our places. Every year makes
considerable changes; a few years produce vast alterations in the inhabitants
of this dying world. Though the past year has been generally healthful, yet the
number of deaths in this society has been greater than usual.

GOD's providence utters a warning voice to people of every age.

CHILDREN and youths are solemnly warned of their mortality, and urged to give
an immediate attention to their everlasting concerns. Let this day, be with
you, my children, not a day of thoughtless levity, wanton mirth and wild
dissipation; but a day of serious recollection, fervent prayer, and humble
dedication of yourselves to God. While you praise him for his goodness in
preserving you another year, repent of the sins and follies of the year past,
consecrate your spared lives to his service and enter on a speedy preparation
for the changes, that may await you in the year to come.

HEADS of families, and persons in the midst of life, are taught the
uncertainty of their continuance here. While the death of a neighbor and
friend awakens in our minds a grateful remembrance of God's sparing mercy to us
and our families, let it also impress us with a sense of the changes to which
we are exposed, and excite a serious concern to maintain religion in our
hearts, and promote it in our houses.

THE aged have been repeatedly warned. My fathers, a greater number of your
cotemporaries have been removed in the year past, than has been common in
preceding years. God's voice to you is, Be ye also ready. You stand on the
borders of the eternal world. Soon you must go the way, whence you will not
return. Within the ensuing year, it is probable, some of your small number will
make their last remove. You ought to examine your state, to be instant in
prayer, to live in the daily exercise of faith and piety, and by a holy and
blameless example recommend religion to those who are coming after you. May
you, and may we all, when the time of our departure is come, be able to rejoice
in the reflection, that we have finished our course well, and in the hope that
there is laid up for us a crown of righteousness.

THIS, though on many accounts a day of rejoiceing, is, in other respects, a
day of danger and darkness.

THE general indifference to the instituted ordinances of the gospel, threatens
the discontinuance of them; the prevalence of wickedness forbodes divine
judgments; and our civil commotions and disturbances give cause to apprehend a
troublous scene approaching. Should they spread and prevail so far as to
involve the state in a civil war, what have we to expect as the consequences,
but general poverty, bondage and wretchedness?

THAT the people are under great burdens, all are agreed. Whether there are
grievances, I leave with others to determine. Admitting there are, undoubtedly
there may be methods of redress more safe, and more effectual than arms. If any
of you have thought this a necessary measure, I only ask, that you would calmly
review what I have said on the nature of our government, and seriously consider
what may be the consequences of drawing the sword; and possibly you will see
reason to alter your sentiments.

I have spoken with freedom, because I am anxious for my country; and without
fear of offending, because I know the candor of my audience.

LET us all be solicitous to prove what is acceptable with God. Let us study
the wisdom which is pure and peaceable, full of mercy and good fruits. Let us
humbly implore the interposition of that being, who has all events, and all
hearts in his hand, to avert the evils that threaten us, to awaken our drowsy
hearts to a sense of the importance of religion, to lead us to repentance and
amendment of life, to prepare us for his mercies and make us a happy people.


