COLLECTION OF MEMORIALS CONCERNING Diverse deceased Ministers and others of the
People called QUAKERS, IN Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Parts adjacent, from
nearly the first Settlement thereof to the Year 1787.

With some of the last Expressions and Exhortations of many of them.

Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy,
he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Titus iii -- 5. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET,
BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXVII.

PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH they who are departed hence in the Lord, can receive no addition to
their happiness by any testimonial of their surviving friends, however just;
yet to the wise in heart, precious is the memory of the truly pious and
upright, whose humble walking in the fear of God has livingly witnessed against
the appearance of evil in its various transformations; their conformity in
spirit and practice to the holy law of the Lord, evincing the delight and
benefit to be found therein; for Verily there is a reward for the righteous,
verily he is a God that judges in the earth. Psalm lviii, verse 11.

What scene in this life more dignifies humanity? what school is more
profitably instructive than the deathbed of the righteous, impressing the
understanding with a convincing evidence, that they have not followed cunningly
devised fables, but solid substantial truth; that there is a measure of divine
light and grace in man, which if duly minded and obeyed, is sufficient to
preserve through all the vicissitudes in life, to give him the victory over his
spiritual enemies, and in the end over death, hell, and the grave? Life of
James Gough, page 53.


It is right therefore, that the remembrance of those should be preserved,
whose lights have so shone before men as to excite the beholders of their good
works to glorify God, the original, and source from whom all good is derived,
that though being dead, the luster of their pious example through life, and on
the approach of death, may continue to speak the inviting language, Follow us
as we have followed Christ.

With this view, our yearly meeting considering that many memorials of our
departed friends lay dormant on the records, directed a Collection to be made
of such of them as were most likely to be of general benefit by publication,
which the committee appointed for the service having performed to the best of
their judgment, it is now presented to the readers, some of whom will be
reminded of the sincere piety and virtue of their ancestors, who through the
dangers and difficulties to which they were subjected, in their removal from
their native land, and forming a new settlement in a wilderness, were happily
preserved in a steady attention to their religious duty, and many of them
faithfully engaged in promoting the cause of truth and righteousness among
mankind, to whom others succeeded, who through obedience to the powerful
influence of Divine grace, became alike eminent in their day, and serviceable
in the church.

The following Collection is affectionately recommended to the descendants of
those worthies, to the readers in general, and particularly to the youth, who
may derive profitable instruction by a serious observation of the happy effects
of an early devotion of heart, and the inexpressible advantages of embracing
the merciful visitation of the Most-High, to secure their true comfort in this
life, and enduring felicity in that which is to come.

Though the language and style of these memorials may not be calculated to
please such curious readers who in their estimate of the value of a Book, are
too much amused by the display of wit and literary accomplishments in the
composition, to give due attention to the instructive import of an artless
account of the christian experiences of those, who have not been so solicitous
for the approbation of men, as to be found humble followers of Christ, their
meek and lowly pattern and redeemer; but it is hoped, that there are many to
whom the contents of this Collection will afford information, edification, and
encouragement in the pursuit of their most substantial interest, a life of true
wisdom, piety, and virtue; and that the number of such may increase is the
design of the following publication.

Philadelphia, 12th Month, 1787.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX.
A
THomas Atkinson Page 10 Peter Andrews Page 168
B
John Bevan Page 75 Joseph Booth Page 94 Thomas Brown Page 179 Obadiah Borton
Page 209 Rachel Brown Page ^96 Anthony Benezet Page 411
C
Vincent Caldwell Page 58 Aaron Coppock Page 64 Hannah Carpenter Page 84 Thomas
Chalkley Page 103 Esther Clare Page 109 John Cadwalader Page 118 Hannah Cooper
Page 158 Joseph Cooper Page 159 Betty Caldwell Page 184 Hannah Carleton Page
194 Isaac Child Page 268 Grace Croasdale Page 278 John Churchman Page 323
D
John Delaval Page 17 James Daniel, senior Page 65 Lydia Dean Page 153 Nicholas
Davis Page 165 Elizabeth Daniel Page 205 James Daniel (2 d) Page 353
E
John Eckley Page 12 Rowland Ellis Page 91 Joseph Elgar Page 98 John Estaugh
Page 119 Cadwallader Evans Page 130 Evan Evans Page 137 John Evans Page 175
Elizabeth Estaugh Page 210 Ellen Evans Page 234 Margaret Ellis Page 243 Mary
Evans Page 276 Mary Emlen Page 370 Thomas Evans Page 409
F
Abraham Farrington Page 186 Peter Fearon Page 217 Josiah Foster Page 280
William Foulke Page 332 Hannah Foster Page 356 Rachel Farquhar Page 368 William
Farquhar Page 384 David Ferris Page 390
G
Joseph Glaister Page 56 Alice Griffith Page 141 Thomas Goodwin Page 321 Joseph
Gibson Page 367
H
Cuthbert Hayhurst Page 1 James Harrison Page 8 William Haig Page 52 Mary Haig
Page 54 Hannah Hill Page 70 Jacob Holcombe Page 140 William Hammans Page 162
Isaac Hollingsworth Page 202 Isaac Hornor Page 208 Elizabeth Haydock Page 222
Ellis Hugh Page 223 William Hunt Page 296 William Horn Page 317 Zebulon Heston
Page 349 Mary Hornor Page 351 John Hallowell Page 380 Joseph Husband Page 431
I
Thomas Janney Page 27 Benjamin Jordan Page 44 Robert Jordan Page 89 Joseph
Jordan Page 99 Robert Jordan (2 d) Page 109 Jane Jones Page 196 Cadwallader
Jones Page 199 Dinah James Page 246 Samuel John Page 251 Joseph Jones Page 376
Griffith John Page 379 William and Katharine Jackson Page 426
K
Edmund Kinsey Page 204 Mary Knight Page 264
L
Roger Longworth Page 4 Thomas Langhorne Page 6 Thomas Lloyd Page 21 Thomas
Lightfoot Page 63 John Lee Page 68 James Lord Page 74 William Levis Page 133
Thomas Lancaster Page 154 William Ladd Page 155 Michael Lightfoot Page 160
Joshua Lord Page 207 Samuel Large Page 238 Mary Lippincott Page 295 Rachel
Lippincott Page 389 Susanna Lightfoot Page 400
M
Anthony Morris Page 60 Moses Mendenhall Page 93 Susanna Morris Page 163 Sarah
Murfin Page 215 William Mott Page 240 Mary Moore Page 248 Abraham Marshall Page
257 Sarah Milhouse Page 331 Sarah Morris Page 334
O
Robert Owen Page 30 Robert and Jane Owen Page 32
P
Ellis Pugh Page 48 Caleb Pusey Page 68 Ann Parson Page 95 Samuel Preston Page
126 Margaret Preston Page 127 Thomas Pleasants Page 128 Sarah Pleasants Page
144 Israel Pemberton Page 156 Agnes Penquite Page 198 Mary Pennel Page 229
Rachel Pemberton Page 231 Mary Pemberton Page 386
R
James Radcliff Page 13 Hugh Roberts Page 34 Ann Roberts Page 149 Thomas Redman
Page 250 Edward Roberts Page 263 John Ridgway Page 318 John Reynell Page 423
S
John Simcock Page 36 Eleanor Smith Page 39 John Smith Page 42 Elizabeth Small
Page 46 Sarah Shotwell Page 200 Eleanor Shotwell Page 216 John Smith (2 d) Page
253 John Scarborough Page 274 Daniel Stanton Page 282 Elizabeth Shipley Page
371 Edith Sharples Page 434
T
Christopher Tailor Page 3 Richard Townsend Page 102 William Trotter Page 146
Evan Thomas Page 161 Joseph Tomlinson Page 197 Thomas Tilton Page 221 Benjamin
Trotter Page 259 John Thomas Page 292 Ephraim Tomlinson Page 398 Phebe Trimble
Page 420
U
Alexander Underwood Page 256
V
John Vail Page 319
W
William Walker Page 20 Henry White Page 41 Christopher Wilson Page 102
Elizabeth Wyatt Page 148 Anna Webster Page 212 Thomas Wood Page 266 John
Woolman Page 301 Joseph White Page 359 Esther White Page 374
Y
William Yardley Page 14 Nathan Yarnall Page 393
A COLLECTION OF MEMORIALS or TESTIMONIES CONCERNING Diverse MINISTERS and
ELDERS deceased.
An abstract of Nicholas Waln's Testimony, concerning that faithful servant of
the Lord, CUTHBERT HAYHURST, who departed this life, at his own house in the
county of Bucks, in Pennsylvania, about the 5th of the first month, 1682-3,
near the fiftieth year of his age.
HE was born at Easington, in Bolland in the county of York, in Old England,
and was one of the worthies in Israel. My spirit is comforted in a sense of
that power, which did attend him in our meetings, for many years in the land of
our nativity, and also after he came into these parts; having been a valiant
soldier for the truth, and bore a faithful testimony to the same, in word, life
and conversation. He went through many great exercises and imprisonments, and
was a comfort unto the faithful and true believers, who follow the Lamb through
many tribulations. He was a worthy instrument in the Lord's hand, against the
false teachers and hirelings, going several times to their steeple houses, and
testifying against their deceiving the people. He also went to several market
towns, and at their crosses, declared and published the truth as it is in
Jesus: I accompanied him and his dear wife at one of them, where he faithfully
warned the people and exhorted them to repentance; the divine power and
presence eminently attending him, which my soul was made sensible of to my
comfort and satisfaction. I can say he was of great service to me and many
others, being instrumental in bringing us near unto the Lord, whose name over
all we have cause to bless on his behalf; and although his body is gone to the
earth, his memorial lives among the righteous, and I am persuaded his soul is
in the enjoyment of peace with the Lord. I was often with him in the time of
his sickness, and beheld his meek, innocent and lamb-like deportment; being
also by his bedside when he departed, which was in a quiet and truly resigned
frame, like one falling into a sweet sleep; so that I have great cause to
believe he is one of those that died in the Lord, and is at rest with him
forever.

NICHOLAS WALN.

William Yardley's Testimony concerning CHRISTOPHER TAILOR, who died about the
year 1686.
HE was one of the Lord's worthies, strong and steadfast in the faith, very
zealous for the truth and careful for the church; his life being hid with God
in Christ. His ministry stood not in the wisdom of the flesh, but in the power
of God. It was the birth born from above, that could receive him and was
refreshed by him. In a word, he was a Jew inward whose praise is not of men but
of God. And forasmuch as he was a man thus qualified, I could not well be
satisfied that so worthy a man as dear Christopher Tailor, should be buried in
oblivion. His chiefest joy was to feel friends in the invisible life; and
although many exercises did attend him for the truth's sake, he was faithful
unto the death, and so has received a crown of life; and though his departure
from us is our loss, yet it is his gain; for blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord, they rest from their labors and their works do follow them.

WILLIAM YARDLEY.



It appears our said friend came from Old England, his native country, on a
religious visit to New England, in the year 1675; afterward into Pennsylvania,
among the first English, and settled at Philadelphia. He was of considerable
service in public affairs, and very active in settling meetings for discipline
in those early times; the first of that sort for the women, being held at his
house in 1683.

William Yardley and Phineas Pemberton's Testimony concerning ROGER LONGWORTH.
HE was born at Longworth, near Bolton in Lancashire. We were well acquainted
with him almost from the time of his convincement, being a man of a peaceable
disposition, gentle and mild, ready and willing to serve his friend to the
utmost of his ability, and a very diligent labourer in the work of the Lord,
willing to spend and be spent, not counting any thing in this world too dear to
part with, for the same. The Lord ^id eminently bless his ministry, whereunto
he was called about the year 1672, and traveled sometimes in that work, in his
own country until 1675; after which time he was wholly given up and devoted to
the service of the Lord, traveling much in England, where he suffered
imprisonment in several places; six times he passed through Holland, and some
others of those provinces; also part of Germany and thereabout, several times
as far as Dantzick, where he labored much for the release of friends, who then
were prisoners there, writing to the king, magistrates and officers on their
behalf. At Embden, where friends were sufferers, he labored for their freedom,
and it being a time of hot persecution, went through the streets, warning the
people to repent of their wickedness, where they kept him two nights a
prisoner: At another time in the said place, he delivered a paper to the
council, relating to the liberty of friends; after the reading whereof, he was
called in to the council room and received in a friendly manner, with promises
of freedom to the people called Quakers, in matters of faith and worship; he
also had good service with magistrates, lawyers, priests and collegians, and
was several times a prisoner in those parts. Five times he passed through
Ireland, visiting friends, where he had good service, sometimes among the Irish
when at mass. Once he passed through part of Scotland, twice at Barbados, once
through New England and Virginia, twice in Maryland and the Jerseys, and twice
at Pennsylvania; having traveled by land above 20,000 miles, his travels by
water, not being much less: And though he was often in storms and tempests at
sea, perils by land, and met with bad spirits and exercises of diverse kinds,
yet the Lord stood by him and made him a successful instrument in his hand:
Cheerfully passing through them all, by the power of him that called him
thereto, not being slack to labor in word and doctrine, wherever he came, to
the edifying of the brethren, and reconciling things where he found them amiss:
Settling and establishing meetings in many parts where he came, to the great
comfort and refreshment of the upright in heart, by which he got a name amongst
the ancients, and is recorded among the worthies of the Lord. Not long after
his arrival in Pennsylvania, he was taken ill with a fever; his distemper was
violent upon him, yet he bore it patiently and passed away like a lamb, leaving
a good savor. And though the name of the wicked shall rot, yet the righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

WILLIAM YARDLEY. PHINEAS PEMBERTON.




He died the 7 th of the sixth month 1687, about the fifty-seventh year of his
age.

John Hayton's Testimony concerning THOMAS LANGHORNE, who died at his own
habitation in Bucks county, Pennsylvania, the 6th of the eighth month 1687.
I KNEW him 14 years, he having been made instrumental in the hand of the Lord,
to turn me from the evil of my ways, and from darkness to his mavelous light;
and I am a witness that he held his integrity until the finishing of his
course, according to the saying of David, "Mark the perfect man and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace", And therein he laid down his head.
Having experienced the work of regeneration in himself, he became qualified to
strengthen the brethren, and went forth in the ministry and word of life,
preaching the everlasting gospel of Christ Jesus; having freely received he
freely gave, not fearing man but obeying God, who had committed a large
measure, and clear manifestation of his spirit unto him, not only for his own
profit and benefit, but many others received comfort thereby; for his doctrine
dropped as the rain, and his speech distilled as the dew, to the renewing and
refreshing the seed and plant of God.

Thus he went forth in the name of the Lord, and was valiant for truth upon
earth; and though many weapons were formed, and many tongues rose up against
him, yet the divine power which stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the
violence of fire, girded him with strength and valor, whereby he was enabled
to encounter all his enemies, and such as endeavored to stop the work which
God has begun in the earth. After some time, he with his wife and two children
came into this country, and whilst here, he bore a living, sound and faithful
testimony for the Lord God, to the great satisfaction and comfort of the
faithful in this wilderness, where his lot did fall. For having had the
opportunity of being with him here in this solitary country, as well as in our
native land, both in private and public places; I am a witness according to my
measure, that the power and presence of the Lord did greatly attend him in
preaching the everlasting truth. After he was taken sick, he grew weaker until
his departure, saying "The will of the Lord be done." His short continuance
here caused many to mourn when he was taken from them, yet not as those that
mourn without hope, for though he be dead, yet he lives, and though his removal is
our loss, it is his gain.

JOHN HAYTON.

William Yardley and Phineas Pemberton's Testimony concerning JAMES HARRISON.
THAT the righteous may not be buried in oblivion, we give forth this short
testimony concerning our well beloved friend James Harrison, who was born near
Kendal, in Westmoreland, and in the breaking forth of the truth in those parts
he was early convinced thereof, and in a short time after, came forth in a
public testimony for the same. His ministry was not " In the wisdom of this
world, but in the demonstration of the spirit and power of God", By which many
were convinced, the serpent's head was broken, the wisdom of the flesh
confounded, and several came forth in a living testimony for God, who were
begotten to the Lord by by him, and still remain seals of his ministry. As he
was instrumental in turninging many to God, so he was helpful in the
establishing of such as were converted, being a good pattern, as well in
conversation as doctrine, walking uprightly as in the daytime, being bold and
valiant for the truth, in opposing its enemies, whether professors or profane,
though they often raged sore against him, so that his sufferings were very great,
both by imprisonment and spoil of goods; yet he always with great courage
steadily kept his ground against all those that rose up against him for the
truth's sake, which was of more worth to him than all outward enjoyments. In
the year 1682, he removed with his family into Pennsylvania, and as his
testimony was in the power of God, when in the land of his nativity, so it was
when here; he being likewise serviceable many ways. And though he had great
concerns in this world, yet he earnestly labored to keep a conscience void of
offense, being a man of a peaceable spirit, and the Lord's power kept him a
sweet savor to the end. He bore his sickness with much patience, though often
greatly bowed down therewith to the time of his departure, laying down his head
in peace, and passing away in much stillness, the sixth of the eighth month,
1687, in the fifty-ninth year of his age: His removal being our loss but his
gain, for, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their
labors and their works do follow them.

WILLIAM YARDLEY. PHINEAS PEMBERTON.


Jane Atkinson's Testimony concerning her late husband THOMAS ATKINSON.
HE was born at Newby in the County of York, being the son of John Atkinson, of
Thrush-Cross, was convinced of the truth and had received a gift of the
ministry before I knew him. We were joined in marriage in the year 1678, and
lived together in love and unity. He was a zealous man for the truth, and
according to the gift which he had received, bore a faithful testimony unto it,
of which many were witnesses in that country from whence we came. In 1682 we
came into this country, with one consent, and in the unity of our dear friends
and brethren, who gave a good testimony for us, by a certificate from their
monthly meeting; and my soul has good cause to bless the Lord, and to prize
his mercies, whose presence was with us by sea and land. Since we came into
this part of the world, he retained his love and zeal for God and his truth,
his treasure not being in this world, and as it often opened in his heart, did
exhort others to stand loose from things which are here below, and diligently
seek after those things that are above. He was a tender husband, ready to
encourage and strengthen me in that which is good. About the latter end of the
fifth month 1687, he was taken with the ague and fever, which much weakened his
body, in which he continued a considerable time; being well content with the
dealings of the Lord: His heart was often opened in prayer and supplication
unto his God, to preserve him in patience unto the end of his days, and that
none of us might think hard of any of those exercises that he is pleased to try
us withal. At times he would look upon me and say, my dear wife, the Lord
preserve thee and take care of thee, for I must leave thee and go to my rest;
with many more sweet and heavenly expressions and exhortations, in the time of
his great weakness, which continued until the 31 st of the eighth month, when
he once more exhorted me to be content, and that I would desire his brother
(who was then absent) to be content also: After which he passed away as one
falling into a quiet sleep. And as the Lord has hitherto been my strength and
my stay in the time of my great distress, so the desire of my heart is, that I,
with my brethren and sisters, who yet remain behind, may also finish our course
in faithfulness, that in the end we may receive the same reward with the
righteous that are gone before

JANE ATKINSON.

Samuel Jennings's Testimony concerning JOHN ECKLEY, of Philadelphia in
Pennsylvania, who died about the year 1690.
I AM persuaded it is a justice due to the righteous, and a duty upon us, to
contribute something to perpetuate the names of such who have left a fragrancy
behind them, and through faith have obtained a good report. Though their bodies
sleep in the grave, and by divine appointment, they die like other men, yet
this signal difference has the Lord declared, the memory of the just is
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot, Pro. 10, 7. And to give
testimony to those that die in the Lord, is not only just to them, but is very
useful to the living; as many under great conflicts of spirit have experienced,
that it has been to their comfort and strength, to hear or read of the
faithfulness and constancy of God to his own in all ages, and how he has in
due time, made them more than conquerors, and crowned their end with peace and
dominion. These considerations, together with the sincere affection I had for
this our dear friend, has prevailed with me, in truth and soberness, to give
the following testimony concerning him. As a man he was pleasant, courteous,
discreet and grave, and in public services accompanied the foremost. The word
of wisdom was in his mouth, and he had received the tongue of the learned, to
speak in due season. I might truly say much of his innocence, love and zeal for
truth, which has left a lively impression upon the hearts of many. His last
sickness was the small pox, a distemper often known to be very afflicting;
notwithstanding which, he cheerfully and contentedly submitted to the
providence of God in it, upon all occasions expressing a free and hearty
resignation to his will; and was frequently filled with praises to God, and
instructions to his people.

SAMUEL JENNINGS.

Mary Radcliff's Testimony concerning her late husband JAMES RADCLIFF, who died
in or about the year 1690.
HE was an innocent man, and one that did truly fear the Lord, and wished the
welfare of all. It was his chiefest care, faithfully to serve the Lord, and
obey him in whatsoever he required; and it was often in his heart to exhort
others to faithfulness, and to improve the gift which the Lord had committed to
them. I knew him when he was young, we both belonging to the same meeting. He
was a prisoner upon truth's account, when about fifteen years of age; after
which his mouth was opened to bear a public testimony for the Lord and his
blessed truth, traveling many miles, and undergoing many hardships,
imprisonments and other exercises: And after we were married, he also passed
through many deep sufferings and imprisonments, but the Lord preserved him
through them all: And as he was of a mild lamb-like disposition, and lived an
innocent harmless life, so he ended his days in innocence, and being redeemed
from the earth, laid down his head in peace. And though his body be gone to the
dust, from whence it came yet his spirit is ascended to God who gave it, and
his living testimony and good savor that he has left, are comfortable
memorials upon my mind, desiring I may so live and so finish my course as he
has done.

MARY RADCLIFF.

Thomas Janney's Testimony concerning WILLIAM YARDLEY.
HE was born near Leek, in the north part of Staffordshire, of honest parents,
who brought him up in the employment of a farmer. In his youth he sought more
after the knowledge of God and the things of his kingdom, than the fading
vanities or momentary pleasures of this world, and therefore joined himself in
society with a people that were then the highest in profession in those parts,
who called themselves, the family of love, among whom he walked for some time;
but when it pleased the Lord to send two of his faithful messengers, called in
scorn Quakers, out of the north of England into the parts where William lived,
he received their testimony, as did also several others of the aforesaid
society. But this my friend received the truth with a ready mind and gladness
of heart, and thought nothing too dear to part with for it, yea it was precious
to him as the pearl of great price, and it wrought effectually in him, not only
in opening his understanding, but also in its various operations, both to wound
and to heal, to purge out the old leaven and to leaven anew into its holy
nature and quality: And as the Lord had made him a living witness of the power
and life of truth in himself, he called him to bear a testimony to the truth as
he had received it, and also against the false ways and worships that were then
extant in the world; for which he suffered several imprisonments, bearing the
burden and heat of the day, being one of the first that received and bore
witness to the truth in those parts. He was very serviceable in his public
testimony, not only in convincing but also to the edification of many; yea he
was a great stay and support to friends in the parts near where he lived: For
he was an instrument of great service in the Lord's hand, being much esteemed
for his works sake, not only at home but in other places where he traveled in
truth's service.

In the year 1682, being in the fiftieth year of his age, he removed himself
and family into America, and settled according to his intention in
Pennsylvania, where he continued very serviceable amongst us, in his ministry,
and sometimes visited places adjacent: He was also useful in some other
services in our first settlement here. In short, as he was a sensible, so he
was a serviceable member of the body, having a sense of and share in whatever
tended to the strength and benefit thereof; as on the other hand, if any thing
happened that caused grief or trouble, he bore his part of it.

He was a man of sound judgment and good understanding, not being drawn aside
by any false spirit that has risen in our day, nor joined with any that broke
forth into separation, or sought to divide or make schisms in the body, either
in England or America. He dearly loved the society of his brethren, and much
prized unity, as one who knew the comfort and benefit thereof He had a high
esteem for all who were of a right spirit and of service in the church,
alt^ough his younger brethren. His ministry was with a good understanding, not
only of what he spoke from, but also what he spoke unto; and the things which
he testified were what he had learned of the Lord, and had himself seen, heard
and tasted of in the good word of life, not boasting in other men's lines. In
the latter part of his days he grew weak in body by some infirmities which
increased upon him, nevertheless, he was often raised in meetings by the power
of the Lord, and thereby carried on in his testimony, to our refreshment and
comfort.

What I have here written concerning this my dear friend and brother, is from
my own certain knowledge, we having been intimate friends, from our youth up,
and since we came into America, we have had the advantage of frequent
opportunities together, it being our lot to live near to each other, which now
makes my loss in the want of him to be the greater, although I am satisfied his
removal is his gain.

From my house in Makefield, in the county of Bucks, 26 th of the sixth month
1693.

THOMAS JANNEY.

James Dickinson's Testimony concerning JOHN DELAVAL, who died in Philadelphia,
about the year 1693, supposed to have been written when on one of his visits to
America.
MY heart is opened by the power of truth, to give forth a testimony to the
Lord's power, that has wrought effectually in this latter age of the world,
for the bringing many sons unto glory; of the number of whom I do believe was
this my dear friend John Delaval, whose memory lives among the faithful that
knew him, and needs not these characters, to set forth that comeliness which
the Lord put upon him, but his name is recorded in Heaven, and shall never be
obliterated. Although he was one called in at the eleventh hour, yet he was
faithful and zealous for the truth, a man of a tender broken spirit, and loved
the power of truth and the operation of it, which helped him through and over
what was contrary to it. My soul loved him and was drawn near him the first day
I saw him, because of the sincerity that I beheld in him; and as our
familiarity increased, so I found the bent of his mind was to serve the Lord in
uprightness of heart. The Lord gave him a gift in the ministry, and blessed him
in it, and enabled him to get his days work done in his day, whose example I
pray God, we that remain may follow; who was valiant for the truth upon earth,
and turned not his back to the opposers of it, nor would spare the backsliders
from it, but stood faithful to the end. His bow abode in strength, and though
many archers shot at him, yet he kept the shield of faith, by which the fiery
darts of the wicked one were quenched, and his soul preserved in communion with
the Lord, and in the faith of Christ he finished his testimony, with a heart
full of love to God and his people: The Lord took him away from evil to come.
And my desire is that we who remain, may keep to the same power by which he was
visited; and love the operation of it, that thereby all may be prepared for
their latter end, which hastens upon us; so obtain the crown that is laid up in
store, for all them that fight the good fight and keep the faith, and keep
their eyes single to Christ Jesus the author of it, and keep the word of
patience; these will be kept in the hour of temptation, and know an overcoming:
And unto him that overcomes, says Christ, will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame, and am sat down with my father in his throne.
These shall not be hurt of the second death, but know a part in Christ, the
first resurrection, and know that they are the sons of God, as was anciently
said, "Now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be." But "When Christ, who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear
with him in glory." Let all keep to Christ and know him to be their life, so
shall they be made partakers of the better resurrection, even that unto life;
when the sentence will be passed upon all, either come ye blessed, or go ye
cursed, by the just Judge of the whole earth, who will do rightly to every man,
and give to every one according as their works shall be: To whom all must give
an account, and happy will they be who keep to God's power, they will be kept
by it to his glory, and their eternal salvation*

JAMES DICKINSON.

Elizabeth Walker's Testimony concerning her husband WILLIAM WALKER.
THE love of God to him was great, in calling him out of the broad way to
labor in his vineyard; and though it was late in the day, I believe he received
his penny. Great was the care and awe that was on his mind, lest he should do
any thing to hinder his religious growth and service; for having no trade, and
we possessing little but what my dear husband earned by hard labor, he was
advised to learn a trade, to which he answered, "I dare not let out my mind to
learn one, but can freely follow my present calling, if the Lord will enable
me; because it is no encumbrance to my mind, and through God's goodness we do not
want." However, in an unexpected time, way was made for our getting into a
small business, which suited our capacities, and the Lord gave a blessing unto
our endeavors. He often visited the sick, and his soul sympathized with the
afflicted, being also willing to administer to the necessities of the poor as
objects of charity presented. He was a tender husband unto me, and one whom my
soul had true unity with in the life of Jesus; his delight and meditations
being in the law of the Lord. Many were the seasons of divine love we enjoyed
the little time we were together, which often tendered our hearts before the
Lord, in our private retirements, so that praises have been returned to his
pure name, in a sense of the aboundings of his love and life. And although his
body is removed from me, I am well satisfied he has obtained the recompense of
reward with the redeemed of the Lord.

ELIZABETH WALKER.



The aforesaid William Walker, was born in Yorkshire, but removed to
Pennsyl^ania, where he was convinced. In the latter end of the year 1693, he
went to England on a religious visit, and died at London the 12 th of the
fourth month 1694. A further account of him and some of his last expressions,
are inserted in the 2 d part of the book, called piety promoted.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Haverford in Pennsylvania, concerning
THOMAS LLOYD.
THE love of God and the regard we have to the blessed truth, constrains us to
give forth this testimony, concerning our dear friend Thomas Lloyd, many of us
having had long acquaintance with him, both in Wales, where he formerly lived,
and also in Pennsylvania, where he finished his course, and laid down his head
in peace with the Lord, and is at rest and joy with him forevermore.

He was by birth of them who are called the gentry, his father being a man of a
considerable estate and of great esteem in his time, of an ancient house and
estate called Dolobran, in Montgomeryshire in Wales. He was brought up at the
most noted schools, and from thence went to one of the universities; and
because of his superior, natural and acquired parts, many of account in the
world had an eye of regard toward him: Being offered degrees and places of
preferments, he refused them all: The Lord beginning his work in him, and
causing a measure of his light to shine out of darkness, in his heart, which
gave him a sight of the vain forms, customs and traditions of the schools and
colleges: And hearing of a poor despised people called Quakers, he went to hear
them, and the Lord's power reached unto him and came over him, to the humbling
and bowing his heart and spirit; so that he was convinced of God's everlasting
truth, and received it in the love of it, and was made willing, like meek
Moses, to choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of the Lord, than
the honors, preferments and riches of this world. The earthly wisdom came to
be of no reputation with him, but he became a fool, both to it and his former
associates, and through self denial, and taking up the daily cross of Christ
Jesus, which crucified his natural will, affections and pleasures, he came to
be a scholar in Christ's school, and to learn the true wisdom which is from
above. Thus by departing from the vanities and iniquities of the world, and
following the leadings, guidance and instructions of the divine light, grace
and spirit of Christ, he came more and more to have an understanding in the
mysteries of God's kingdom, and was made an able minister of the everlasting
gospel of peace and salvation; his acquired parts being sanctified to the
service of truth.

His sound and effectual ministry, his godly conversation, meek and lamb-like
spirit, great patience, temperance, humility, and slowness to wrath; his love
to the brethren, his godly care in the church of Christ, that all things might
be kept sweet, savoury and in good order; his helping hand to the weak, and
gentle admonitions, we are fully satisfied have a seal and witness in the
hearts of all faithful friends who knew him, both in the land of his nativity
and in these American parts. We may in truth say, he sought not himself, nor
the riches of this world, but his eye was to that which is everlasting, being
given up to spend and be spent for the truth and the sake of friends.

He never turned his back on the truth, nor was weary in his travels
Sion-wards, but remained a sound pillar in the spiritual building. He had many
disputes with the clergy and some called peers in England, and also suffered
imprisonments and much loss of outward substance, to the honor of truth, and
stopping in measure, the mouths of gainsayers and persecutors. Yet these
exercises and trials in the land of his nativity, which he sustained through
the ability God gave him, were small and not to be compared to the many and
great exercises, griefs and sorrows he met withal and went through in
Pennsylvania, from that miserable apostate George Keith and his deluded
company. Oh the revilings, the great provocations, the bitter and wicked
language, and rude behavior which the Lord gave him patience to bear and
overcome. He reviled not again, nor took any advantage, but loved his enemies,
and prayed for them that despitefully abused him. His love to the Lord, his
truth and people was sincere to the last. He was taken with a malignant fever,
the 5 th of the seventh month 1694, and though his bodily pain was great, he bore
it with much patience. Not long before his departure, some friends being with
him, he said, Friends, I love you all, I am going from you, and I die in unity
and love with all faithful friends: I have fought a good fight and kept the
faith, which stands not in the wisdom of words, but in the power of God: I have
fought, not for strife and contention, but for the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the simplicity of the gospel. I lay down my head in peace and
desire you may all do so; friends, farewell all. He further said to Griffith
Owen, a friend then intending for England, I desire thee to mind my love to
friends in England, if thou lives to go over to see them; I have lived in unity
with them, and do end my days in unity with them; and desire the Lord to keep
them all faithful to the end, in the simplicity of the gospel. On the 10 th day
of the seventh month aforesaid, being the 6 th day of his sickness, it pleased
the Lord to remove him from the many trials, temptations, sorrows and troubles
of this world, to the kingdom of everlasting joy and peace; but the remembrance
of his innocent life and meek spirit lives with us, and his memorial is, and
will remain to be sweet and comfortable to the faithful.

He was buried in friends burial-ground in Philadelphia, aged about forty-five
years, having been several years president and deputy governor of Pennsylvania.

The followng epistle, which appears to have been written soon after his
arrival in Pennsylvania, is thought not improper to be here subjoined.

Philadelphia, 2d of sixth Month 1684. My dear and well beloved friends, of and
belonging to Dolobran Quarterly Meeting.
THE warm and tender salutation of my love is unfeigned to you, with whom I
have conversed and walked some years, in unity, zeal, concord, and endeavored
serviceableness: You are, because of our nearness, familiar, yet honorable in
my thoughts and esteem. The truth as it is in Jesus, prosper and increase daily
in your minds, and rest bountifully on your habitations. My heart is affected
with the remembrance of you, and especially of the virtue and operation of that
living principle which traverseth the deeps, and though it bounds the seas, yet
cannot be bound thereby, but continues its being and intireness through and
over all distances, and makes us of many, one people to himself. The God of
Israel and the excellency of Jacob is with us, and the present days are as the
former, days of glad tidings, days of humility, days of holy fear, obedience
and refreshment, increase and growth to the faithful. We and you are under
respective exercises, the way of your trial may be in a more severe manner at
present. The Lord in his wonted tenderness bear you up, and grant you a
rejoicing in simplicity and godly sincerity before him. That is no new thing to
you, to suffer joyfully in your persons and goods; the Lord gave us strength,
courage, satisfaction and honors thereby. Whilst he is in our eyes, and his
holy fear in our hearts, whether in bonds or free, in that or this part of the
world, our preservation we shall witness. -- Our meetings are very full: I
guess we had no less number than eight hundred last first day; we are glad to
see the faces of serviceable friends here, who come in God's freedom, who are
persons of a good understanding and conversation, and will discharge their
stations religiously; such will be a blessing to the province. The favorable
revolution of Providence has founded the government so here, that a man is at
liberty to serve his Maker without contempt, discouragement, or restraint.
Truth indeed makes men honorable, not only here, but in most places at last;
but here truth receives a good entertainment at first. Our governor is
embarking for England; our w^^l wishes go with and attend him. He hopes to have
an opportunity by testimony or writing, to express his love and remembrance to
the several churches of Britain. Our friends from the neighborhood are
generally well, and tolerably settled. In love I lived with you, in love I took
my leave of you, and in love I bid you a christain and brotherly farewell.

Your friend and brother THOMAS LLOYD.


A Testimony from the Falls Monthly Meeting in Bucks county, Pennsylvania,
concerning THOMAS JANNEY.
HE settled with us at his first coming into these parts, laboring amongst us
in word and doctrine ^ivers years. We loved and highly esteemed him for his
works sake, being an able minister of the gospel, sound in doctrine, endowed
with wisdom and a ready utterance; and favored with openings into the
mysteries of the things of God's kingdom. He was not forward to offer his gift,
having a true regard to the giver, who said formerly, "Cast the net on the
right side of the ship:" Therefore his "Bow abode in strength." And though the
Lord had furnished him with such excellent qualifications, he had so learned
self-denial as not to glory therein; but was ready to prefer his friends before
himself, and give them the right hand of fellowship; being careful to keep the
testimony of truth clear on all accounts, saying, "Those that appear in public,
are doubly bound so to do." He was of a cheerful and peaceable temper, and
innocent and blameless in life. As the Lord had bestowed on him a gift of the
ministry, beyond many of his fellows, so he was careful to improve it to his
honor and the comfort of his people, laboring therein, not only here in
Pennsylvania and New Jersey, but he also several times visited the churches in
New England, Rhode Island, Long Island and Maryland, and lastly he went on that
service to Old-England, where he finished his course. And though our loss of him
is great, we are satisfied he has his portion, among those that turn many to
righteousness, and shine as the stars forever and ever.

There are other accounts concerning Thomas Janney, from which it appears, that
he was born in Cheshire, and received the truth about the year 1654, and the
twenty-first year of his age. In 1683 he came with his family into
Pennsylvania: And in 1695 he went in company with Griffith Owen, to visit his
brethren in England; where, in the course of his travels, he was taken ill at
Hitchin; and two of his relations from Cheshire, going thither to visit him, he
said to one of them, It is some exercise to think of being taken away so far
from my home and family, and also from my friends and relations in Cheshire. My
care has been for my sons, that they may be kept in the fear of God: I have
been a good example to them. I have a care upon me, that they may be kept
humble while they are young, that they may bend their necks under the yoke of
Christ. If I am taken away, I am very clear in my spirit, I have answered the
requirings of God. I have been faithful in my day, and I have nothing that
troubles my spirit; my spirit is very clear. He also expressed his concern for
his brethren of the ministry, especially the young, that they might observe the
leadings of God's spirit in their ministry, and not lean upon their own natural
parts. After this, he recovered so as to be able to get down into Cheshire; but
after some time his disorder returning, he said to his sister, If it be the
will of God, that I be taken away now, I am well content. He departed in much
quietness of mind, the 12 th of the twelfth month 1696, and was buried the 15
th of the same month, in friends burying place in Cheshire. Aged sixty-three
years. A public minister 41 years.

Hugh Roberts's Testimony concerning his brother ROBERT OWEN.
HE was one that feared the Lord from his youth, being convinced of the truth,
when about seventeen years of age; he loved the company of such of his
acquaintance as were most substantial in religion, and was also beloved by them
and all sort of people that knew him, being greatly helpful to his brethren,
and made a cause of gladness to those that were his fathers in the truth. The
Lord not only opened his heart like Lydia's formerly, but he likewise opened
his mouth to publish his name and truth amongst many, traveling several times
through his native country Wales, where he was of good service. In 1690, he
came into Pennsylvania, where he lived about seven years, visiting this and the
adjacent provinces, and was also very useful in the meeting where he resided,
both in doctrine and discipline; he was indeed a strong pillar in the church: I
never saw him take part with a wrong thing: Oh the want of him which I feel!
his place is yet empty, I pray God, if it be his will, to fill it up. Oh my
brother, my dear companion! how can they that knew thy faithfulness to truth,
do less than leave a memorial to succeeding generations? for thy name is worthy
to be recorded in Israel. He was a man of peace and hated all appearance of
contention, and indeed he was a skilful peacemaker, being endued with wisdom
and authority, yet full of mercy and compassion unto every appearance of good.
His removal is a great loss unto us who are left. Well my dear brother, in the
remembrance of thee, and the many good and precious opportunities we have had
together, my soul is bowed and ready to say, I shall never have the like
companion, so fitted and knit together in every respect; the more I consider my
loss of thee, the greater it appears; therefore conclude this my testimony, and
return to my own work and service, that I may be prepared to follow after thee.

HUGH ROBERTS.



He died the 8 th of the fifth month, 1^97, and was interred the 10 th of the
^a^e, in friends burying ground at Merion in Pennsylvania.

Rowland Ellis's Testimony concerning ROBERT OWEN before mentioned, and JANE
his wife.
WHEN I think of former times and days that are over and gone, wherein the Lord
visited a remnant by the gathering hand of his power, in the land of our
nativity, to wait for the renewing of his love from one meeting to another, to
our great refreshment and daily encouragement, to run our race through many
trials within and without: The Lord whom we waited for, has been the strength
of his people in this our age and generation, as in all by past ages. So the
remembrance of those days and times, and that near fellowship which was between
the little remnant in that part of the country, is at present brought to my
view; though most of the ancients that bore the heat of the day are now removed,
yet methinks their names and worthy acts should be had in remembrance, that
generations to come might see and understand, by what instruments the Lord was
^^eased to carry on his work, by making ^ cl^ar discovery of the good way on^^
^ost ^n the night of apostasy; amongst whom were my dear friends Robert Owen
(...) his wife. And although we are not to set (...) or praise tha^ in man or
woman which perishes, o^t because they made ch^^ce of the better and most
durable substance, therefore their ^ames shall be had in remembrance.

He was descended of a very ancient and (according to the worlds account) one
of the greatest families in those parts, having by his father a competent
inheritance, and in all his time had the right hand among his equals; brought
up a scholar, quick in apprehension, and whatever he took in hand he did it
with all his might. He was zealously devoted to religion, and a great searcher
for the pearl of great price; being one of the first in our parts who sought
after it; and having found it, he sold all to purchase the same.

After King Charles II came to the crown, he suffered five years close
imprisonment, for not taking the oath of allegiance and supremacy, being
confined at the town of Dolgelly, in Merionethshire, North Wales, within about
a mile from his dwelling house, to which he was not permitted to go during the
said time: And it was observed, that the person who had the greatest hand in
prosecuting him, was visited with sickness, when remorse of conscience seized
so hard upon him, that he could find neither rest nor ease, until he sent a
special messenger to release him.

And concerning his wife Jane Owen. She was daughter of a justice of peace, a
man o^ great integrity and exceeding most of his ran^ a^ that time. She was a
woman rarely endowed with many natural gifts, being a^ help-meet to her husband
in his exercises, s^l^d in her deportment, and not given to many words. In all
their exercises together for the truth's sake, they did not shrink nor give way
for fear or flattery; not only their hearts, but their house was open to all
upon truth's account; meetings being held therein for many years. They were
serviceable in their places and much beloved in their native land, where having
borne their share of the heat of the day, they embarked therefrom in the fifth
month 1690, and came into Pennsylvania, where they finished their course, and
were buried within a few days of each other.

John Bevan's Testimony concerning HUGH ROBERTS.
TRUTH in the inward parts God loves, and those that love it and give way to
the operation thereof, are made precious and lovely in the sight of God, and he
makes them instrumental in his hand for the good of others; among whom was my
dear friend and brother Hugh Roberts deceased, who was qualified by God's
power, to be a serviceable instrument to the churches of Christ in our parts of
America. He came to this country about 18 years since; we were near neighbors
and entirely loved each other, not having had a cross word, nor I believe an
hard thought one of another, at any time since our first acquaintance. Having
passed through many trials and exercises, he could by experience speak a word
in season for the encouragement of weary travelers; his doctrine often
"dropping as the dew, and distilling as the small rain upon the tender plants,"
for in the openings of life, "things new and old" came forth of the treasury of
wisdom, which gladned our hearts and comforted our spirits in a sense of God's
love, who is the author of all good to his people. He was zealous for good
order in the church, serviceable in the discipline, and skilful in
accommodating differences. And it is my desire, that we, especially of that
meeting he belonged to, and the adjacent meetings, which mostly received the
benefit and advantage of his labor of love, may lay to heart and consider our
loss of him, and in the sense thereof, may breathe and cry unto the Lord, who
is the repairer of breaches, to raise up instruments in his room, for carrying
on of his great work that he has begun in the earth, to his own praise, who is
alone worthy of the same forever. -- I was twice with him over sea, and in many
places in our native land, also in Maryland, and in his last journey to visit
friends on Long Island, Rhode Island and New England, where he had good
service. And though he was often very weakly, yet his heart was bent to
accomplish the work the Lord laid upon him, which he was enabled to perform to
his great comfort and satisfaction.

On our return homeward, being sick and in much pain, at the house of our
friend John Rodman, on Long Island, he said nothing lies in my way as an
obstruction to hinder my peace and well being with God. He afterward came
home, and a few days before his departure, a dear friend taking leave of him
said, "I believe thy deep trials and exercises are near at an end, and that
peace and joy everlasting will be thy portion from the Lord." In much
brokenness of heart and sense of the sweet presence of God upon his spirit, he
answered, I am satisfied thereof, and can bless my God for it.

He died the 18 th of the sixth month 1702, and on the 20 th was interred at
Merion, after which a large meeting was held, wherein the Lord's presence was
sweetly enjoyed, and several living testimonies borne concerning his
faithfulness to God and friends satisfaction of his eternal well-being.

JOHN BEVAN.

Margaret Minshell's Testimony concerning JOHN SIMCOCK.
HE was a nursing father in Israel, tender over the seed of God, and wherever
he saw it in the least appearance he was a cherisher of it without respect of
persons; but he abhorred deceit and hypocrisy. I have known him near forty
years, and may say that his ministry was sound, edifying and helpful to myself
and many others, he being endued with a spirit of discerning, and wisdom beyond
many in spiritual things. He was a great sufferer in Old England, for truth's
sake, both by imprisonments and loss of goods. He traveled pretty much in
truth's service, and notwithstanding all his sufferings, he was no ways
chargeable to any, but rather helpful to those that stood in need.

MARGARET MINSHELL.



In Joseph Besse's history of friends sufferings, are some accounts of those
sustained by the aforesaid John Simcock, and of his pious, meek disposition
toward his oppressors. Once he was imprisoned a year and three months, for
accompanying his wife to a steeple house, for a sign and testimony against
their false ways and worships. His persecutors at different times, distrained
from him to the amount of several hundred pounds sterling, for preaching;
taking nineteen cattle at one time, and twelve at another, besides corn,
cheese, and other goods; all which he bore patiently. Once when they were
driving away his cows, his servant maid, who did not profess amongst friends,
said to him, "Master, how can you stand by and see them drive away so many
cattle?" He replied, it did not trouble him any more than if they had drove
away so many geese.

He removed to Pennsylvania in early times, and settled in Chester county; and
when the spirit of division began to appear in George Keith, he was active in
visiting him, to endeavor to recover him; and when the labor of friends in
that respect proved ineffectual, he joined steadily with faithful friends in
testifying against the said George Keith and his party.

In the time of his last sickness, he appeared to be in a heavenly frame of
mind, and uttered many lively expressions: At one time he said, I have had many
hard besetments with the enemy of my soul since I knew the truth, and have been
in many straits, and great combats and buffetings for the trial of my faith;
but the keeper of Israel is near to all them that wait upon him, and truly put
their trust in him, and their faith is made strong in him, whereby they are
enabled to make war against the adversary of souls, and to fight the good fight
of faith, for whom is laid up a crown of eternal and endless joy, peace and
heavenly comfort and glory. And now I may say in truth, that I have kept this
living faith, in which my soul has renewed cause to magnify the name of my
holy Redeemer, and powerful Savior Christ Jesus, in whom my faith has been
made strong at this time. The day before his departure, his wife and son, with
some other friends being present, he bore a living testimony to the necessity
of dwelling in love, even that holy love which labors for the peace, welfare
and everlasting good of all; concluding in these words, And now I desire my
love may be remembered to friends in general, and it is the desire and earnest
prayer of my soul, that the heavenly spring of true love and stream of divine
life, may ever be known to spring and run amongst those who would be accounted
children of God, and followers of Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and eternal
Savior, who laid down his life to be a ransom for fallen man, and to be an
atonement for all them that would come to God by him, who is the living word
and promised seed of the covenant.

He died the 27 th of the first month, 1703.

A Testimony from Derby Monthly Meeting, in Pennsylvania, concerning ELEANOR
SMITH, wife of John Smith.
SHE was born at Harborough, in Leicestershire, Old England, her maiden name
was Eleanor Dolby. She received the truth about the age of thirteen years, and
lived and died therein, being a religious exemplary woman, and some years
before her death was concerned in a public testimony. A little before her
departure, desiring that her husband and children should come and sit down by
her, she spoke as follows, I entreat you my children to walk soberly, plainly
and keep to the truth, and the Lord will provide for you every way beyond your
expectation. I am clear of you, having done the part of a tender mother to you:
I leave and commit you to the Lord, who is able to keep you to the end of your
days. -- She desired them not to mourn if it should please God to remove her
from amongst them, saying, It will be my great gain. Often repeating her full
assurance of future happiness, adding, I can praise thy name O Lord in the
midst of affliction, for surely thou art worthy of all praise, honor and
glory, and that forever more; for thou neither leavest nor forsakest those that
put their trust in thee. Then said, Dear children be content, for I shall die
in favor with God, and true love and unity with his people. She desired to be
dissolved, saying, I can freely give up husband and children and all this
world, to be with the Lord, whose presence I feel flowing as a river into my
soul.

She died the 10 th day of the seventh month 1708, aged fifty-five years.

In the time of her last illness, she wrote the following epistle to the
monthly meeting of women friends at Derby, viz. Dear Sisters,
Herewith I send you the last salutation of my love, with whom I have been many
times refreshed and truly comforted. I say I have traveled with you through
various exercises and difficulties, when the Lord has been sometimes pleased to
give us (as it were) the bread of adversity to eat, and the water of affliction
to drink; yet blessed be his name, he has sweetened our cups many times as with
honey, and sustained us as with the oil of the cruse; and by his sweet presence
caused our cups to overflow, to the praise of his great name. Wherefore, dear
sisters, I entreat you to dwell in the love of God, which love is the bond of
peace. Let charity be found to dwell amongst you, and then I do believe, you
will be neither barren nor unfruitful, but your branches laden with good and
weighty fruit, which will find acceptance with God. So no more, but my tender
love to you in the blessed truth. I take my leave and bid you farewell in the
Lord. The last from your loving sister,

ELEANOR SMITH.




The following Testimony concerning HENRY WHITE, is from the committee of the
Yearly Meeting in North Carolina.
HE was a minister of the gospel and a faithful friend, who^ christian conduct
and loving behavior ^^wards the Indians, who were numerous in these parts at
that time, was such, as we have been credibly informed, not only procured him
great esteem and respect from them, but for his sake they showed great love and
tenderness toward others in the infant settlement of these parts.

He dwelt in Pasquotank county, and died the 3 d of the eighth month 1712, aged
about seventy-seven years.

A Testimony from Derby Monthly Meeting, in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN SMITH.
HE was born in Licestershire, in Old England in 1645, and was convinced of the
truth at the age of fourteen years, and being faithful thereto, after some time
he came forth in the ministry. He was an early settler in Pennsylvania, where
he was well beloved. Being taking sick, he was visited by many friends; and
about two d^ys before his departure, being asked how he did, he answered, I am
very poorly and weak indeed, but much easier than I have been, for I was
extreme ill, so sick and full of pain, such as I never had undergone before; so
tha^ I could not retire in my mind to God, my extremity was so great; but now
the Lord has been pleased to give me ease, so that I can stay my mind on him,
for which I am truly thankful: And now I feel the fresh remembrance or
renewings of the love of God, flowing into my heart, which is of much more
comfort to my soul than all transitory things that are here below. Now I feel
his living divine presence is with me, which bears up my spirit over that which
flesh and blood would or could not be able to bear. Shortly after, a friend
taking leave of him, asked him if he thought he should recover, That (said he)
I am not worthy to know, however I am content; and this I know, that if we
abide faithful to God to the end, we shall receive a godly portion, so
farewell, and the Lord go along with thee. At another time he said, He was full
of pain, yet he could sing of the mercy and goodness of God to his soul in the
midst of affliction. Afterward adding, Do not mourn for me, but be still and
quiet, and let me pass away quietly, that so my soul may enter into God's
everlasting rest; for my conscience is clear from guilt in the face of all men.
Saying, Come Lord Jesus, receive my soul, thy servant is ready, come quickly.
This he spoke in great freshness and cheerfulness of spirit, saying, "Now I
think I am near my end;" but reviving again, he sat up, and his children being
present, he said to them," I was never covetous to get a great deal of this
world's riches, but I have endeavored to bring you up in the fear of the Lord,
and educate you in the way of his truth to the best of my understanding; and if
you do but wait upon the Lord in the sincerity of your hearts, for the dropping
down of the love of God upon your souls in the meetings and gatherings of the
Lord's people, he will shed his blessings amongst you; for he has been and is
a father to the fatherless, and as a husband to the widow. This he spoke just
before his departure, being fresh in spirit, and perfect in sense and memory to
the last hour.

He died the 11 th day of the twelfth month 1714, aged sixty-nine years and
four months.

A Testimony from the Yearly Meeting of friends in Virginia, concerning
BENJAMIN JORDAN.
HE was born the 18 th of the seventh month 1674, in Nancemond county in
Virginia, of believing parents, who were careful to educate their children in
the blessed truth for which they suffered, whose examples, together with the
influence of grace, were sanctified unto this our friend as well as several
others of their numerous offspring. He was a man who gave up much of his time
in waiting upon God and services for the church, being clerk both to the
monthly and yearly meeting; was a good example of piety and charity, and kept
his integrity to the last.

The day before he died, several neighbors coming to see him, one of them
being in a flourishing state as to the world, to whom the way of truth seemed
too low and despicable, he said, Rejoice O young man, in thy youth, and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart,
and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment. He looked upon another who seemed to be under
some convincement of truth, but did not live in obedience, and said, Blessed
are they that hear the word of God and do it. And to another that appeared to
have sought after the honor of this world more than the Lord's honor, he
said, He looked too big to enter in at the strait gate. He gave particular
directions concerning the place and manner of his burial, desiring that no more
provision might be made than was sufficient, having, whilst in health, borne a
testimony against making such a time, a time of feasting instead of mourning.
One of his brothers asking him how it was with him, he replied, As to my
eternal state, nothing but well. Soon after, holding up his hands and looking
upwards, he said, Lord Jesus, into thy hands I commit my spirit, Lord help me
at this time, And so departed in quietness, the 12 th of the twelfth month
1716, aged about forty-two years.

A Testimony from friends in Virginia, concerning ELIZABETH SMALL wife of
Benjamin Small, of Nancemond county.
SHE was born the 31 st of the sixth month 1666. Her parents Edmund and
Elizabeth Betson, were pious friends and zealous for the truth, whose care in
the education of their children, had the desired effect on this our much
esteemed friend; for being obedient to the manifestation of divine light, it so
improved a tender, affectionate and affable disposition, that she became
qualified for and endowed with an excellent and acceptable gift in the
ministry, so as suitably to dispense doctrine, edification and consolation to
the churches. She was very diligent in attending meetings of friends in this
colony, even beyond what could be reasonably expected from so weakly a
constitution, and was earnest in and much devoted to the cause of truth,
greatly desiring the growth and prosperity thereof, saying, She could lay down
her natural life for it, if required. She was a woman of a generous and kind
disposition, as well in helping the poor as entertaining of friends, saying (to
such as were ready to think she would do more than her circumstances would
admit of) that she hoped the Lord would so provide for her, that she should
never want what was convenient, having never desired long life or riches for
herself or children, but that they might live in his fear.

She was taken ill the 21 st of the seventh month 1717, being the first day of
the yearly meeting at Chuckatuk, which gave opportunity to diverse friends from
different parts of the country to visit her, to whom she signified her peace of
mind and submission to the divine will, saying among other things, If the Lord
has any more work for me to do, he can raise me up again; otherwise I am easy
and freely resigned to his will. To a beloved relation she said, Dear cousin,
thou art bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh; live in the fear of the Lord,
that every high thought may be brought down. To two friends belonging to a
distant meeting which she had often visited, she said, I have not ceased to
admonish you heretofore, and now again desire you would be valiant for the
truth and walk steadily therein, and remember my dear love to friends of the
meeting to which you belong. She often spoke to friends, To be steadfast in the
truth; And once to a public friend belonging to the same meeting, earnestly
desiring him To be valiant for the good cause. She told her son William, She
hoped that that day would be a good one to her, And said She had prayed for an
easy passage; And accordingly she quietly departed the 25 th of the seventh
month aforesaid, aged fifty-two, a minister about 11 years.

An account of ELLIS PUGH, extracted from a testimony from Gwynedd
Monthly Meeting concerning him, and also from a short summary of his life, both
of which are prefixed to a book he wrote, called A salutation to the Britons,
etc.
ELLIS PUGH was born in the parish of Dolgelly, in the county of Merioneth, and
dominion of Wales, in the sixth month 1656. His parents were religious people;
but his father died before he was born, and his mother a few days after. In the
days of his youth, when going with the multitude into folly, it pleased God by
his judgment, to stand in his way, and caused him to consider the things that
belonged to his soul's everlasting peace. And in the eighteenth year of his
age, the Lord visited him more eminently, kindling a zeal in him to serve his
Creator more diligently; having been also reached by the testimony of
John-ap-John, one of the people called Quakers.

God who promised to be a father to the fatherless, took care of him; and about
the year 1680, gave him a part in the ministry of the gospel of Christ,
(notwithstanding he was not one of the wise of this world, nor had human
learning) yet he was made a profitable instrument to turn diverse from vanity,
and to exhort and strengthen many in their spiritual journey, in his native
land, and also in this country where he finished his course.

In the year 1686, he and his family, with diverse of his acquaintance prepared
to come over to Pennsylvania, and whilst they waited for the ship to be ready,
there came great trouble and exercise upon him, so that he was sick for some
days; in which strait the Lord showed him, that they should meet with troubles
and exercises in their way, and that he had a work for him in that country, and
must return again to his native land. After they sailed, they met with storms,
straits and troubles; and having been upon the tempestuous sea all winter, they
arrived at Barbados, where they were joyfully and lovingly received by their
friends, and the summer following, in the year 1687, they arrived in
Pennsylvania; where this our friend was a serviceable instrument in the Lord's
hand, to cherish and instruct us, in meekness and tendern^ss, to obey that
which God made known unto us of his will, and to follow and understand the
operation of his spirit, discovering to us the snares of the enemy of our
souls. His pious labors (among others that were fitted for the same service)
have been profitable in directing and edifying us in the way of truth; for by
the tenderness and influence which came as dew upon our souls while we sat
under his ministry, we believed his doctrine was of God.

In the year 1706 he was engaged to visit the inhabitants of his native
country, according to what the Lord revealed unto him before he came from
thence; which service he performed to the benefit and acceptance of many, and
returned to his family in 1708. After he came home, three of his children, in
the flower of their age, who from their youth walked orderly and were hopeful,
died within one month; in the time of which trial the Lord was near unto him;
he mourned not as one without hope. Strength was given him to bear his
affliction. He said in a public meeting "If he could bear his affliction
acceptably in the sight of God, it would be as marrow to his bones:" Which
testimony, amongst several other things, was to the edification and comfort of
the hearers. His residence was then nearer to us than before, which rendered
his life and conversation more conspicuous, and his fellowship more known unto
us. His ministry was living, profitable and to edification. He was of a meek
and quiet spirit, considerate and solid in his judgment, of few words, honest
and careful in his calling; and several were induced to speak of the benefit
they received by his chaste conversation, and his loving and comfortable
expressions while he was amongst them in their families. He was honorable
among his friends and of good report among all people generally, therefore his
memory will not soon wear out.

He was in a declining state of bodily health about a year and three months
before his decease, so that he was not well able to follow his calling; but his
candle shined brighter, as may be seen by perusing his treatise, called A
salutation to the Britains; which he wrote in his own language, in the time of
his long sickness, when his view was toward that which pertains to eternity,
more especially to those, or for the sake of those to whom the salutation of
his life reached over sea and land, for the encouragement and instruction of
them that were seeking the way to Sion, the New Jerusalem, the city of the
Great King, whose walls and bulwarks are salvation.

The last meeting he was at among us, he was weak in body, but fervent in
spirit, as one taking his last leave in a great deal of love and tenderness,
saying, that the Lord granted him his desire to come and visit us once more;
putting us in mind to live in love and unity, and to keep out from amongst us
as much as we could, all strife and discord; and when any thing appeared which
had a tendency thereunto, that hands should be laid without delay to end it,
and that none should depend upon his own hand, eye, or balance in judgment. --
He was fitted to counsel others, because his life and conversation was
answerable to his testimony; amongst his family tender and careful to counsel
them (...) in the fear of God.

We looked upon him as one who had finished his work, that the time of his
dissolution drew nigh: And that he might say in the words of Paul, according to
his measure, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing.

Being patient in his tedious indisposition, and contented to wait the Lord's
time; he slept with his fathers on the 3 d day of the tenth month 1718, in
favor with God.

The following Testimony concerning WILLIAM HAIG, was furnished by a committee
of the Yearly Meeting of North Carolina.
WILLIAM HAIG senior of Pasquotank county, who removed from Antigua with his
family and settled in this province, was of a loving and sweet spirit. In his
last sickness, as some friends were sitting by him, he was filled with heavenly
joy, and said, Friends I am glad of your company, I feel so much of the blessed
truth, as I hope will carry me into that joy where I shall praise the Lord
amongst the redeemed. I hear that truth prospers mightily in England, blessed
be the Lord for it. He exhorted all his children with many heavenly
expressions, took his solemn leave of them, and in a living sense of truth,
prayed to God for his blessing upon them; charging them to love and obey their
mother, learn their books and keep to the truth. He said to his wife, My dear,
thou have been a true wife unto me; when my mind was drawn to love thee, I did
not inquire what thou had, nor thou what I had, but we came together in love
and we have lived in love. And when his speech was very low, he spoke to hi^
wife thus, The Lord bless thee and my children, God Almighty protect you. To a
young woman who came to visit him he said, Fear God, keep to the truth, never
turn thy back upon it, lest the days come in which thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them: As for me, I am going to my place, and I hope it will be in
everlasting rest. To another who had been visited with great sickness, he said,
It had been better for thee to have died in thy sickness, than to live to
forget God. He prayed that God would remember all his people, and that their
dwelling might be with the Lord, adding, But what shall I say, there are too
many that tread the testimony of truth under foot; O! gather them into thy fold
of rest, I pray thee O Lord! To a friend of the ministry he said, Thou art of
the ministry and have been a great while, and I am but young, but. I would
advise thee to be careful in thy testimony, not to enlarge beyond thy gift or
concern; and have a care, thou do not stand in the way of others, or speak any
thing to hurt others that may be but small or tender; but wait until thou art
filled and then be humble, and not puffed up with pride, for pride goes before
a fall. After praying unto the Lord to settle him upon the sure foundation and
rock that can never be removed, he quietly departed this life, at his own
house, on the 6 th of the eleventh month 1718, and now rests in joy.

A Testimony from the same committee concerning MARY HAIG, wife of the
aforesaid William Haig.
SHE was a woman of an exemplary life and conversation, of a sweet and loving
behavior, and was favored with a gift in the ministry. In her last sickness,
after imparting her mind to a friend about her outward concerns, she spoke as
follows, According to my small gift, I have discharged myself, so that nothing
lies at my door. O! that the people would remember the words that I have
spoken among them, and that this young generation would come up in truth. As
for me, I had never left the island of Antigua, if it were not that I might
have my poor children amongst faithful friends: I have seen the wonders of the
Lord in the deep ocean, and witnessed his delivering arm in many exercises, and
he has kept me sweet and clean all along since I knew the truth. Oh! that my
children may remember the advice they have received of their father and me; I
am clear, having done my duty. And praised God; also uttered many sweet and
comfortable expressions. At another time, she said to some friends, When I was
but nine years old, the Lord made himself known unto me, but I then lived where
there were no friends; and after some time, I went to Pennsylvania, and there
met with friends, but some were loose and light, others were solid and weighty,
and with these I joined, and received much benefit from the family of the
Lloyd's. After I was married, we went to Antigua, and there in the first
meeting, the power of the Lord was greatly with me, insomuch that the peoples
expectations were upon me for words; but soon after it pleased the Lord to send
two of his servants, Josiah Langdale and Thomas Thomson, to visit the island,
when the power of the Lord did break in upon me like thunder: And signified she
had been faithful ever since in her measure, in giving up to the work of the
Lord. On the day of her decease, she said to some present, Friends, be loving
one to another, that the Lord may bless you. The love that I feel in my heart
is inexpressible. After a while she desired a friend to remember her love to
Lydia Lancaster, Elizabeth Rawlinson and friends generally, adding, Tell them,
I die in unity with all faithful friends. Afterward she said, My husband is
gone, but I shall not be long a sorrowful widow; yet not my will but thine be
done; my speech fails apace, sweet Lord Jesus, thou have loved me from a child,
and I have loved thee ever since I knew thee, and my case is no doubtful case,
I come, I come, hasten thou my journey.

She died the 13 th of the eleventh month 1718, aged about thirty-nine years.

A Testimony from the aforesaid committee, concerning JOSEPH GLAISTER.
JOSEPH GLAISTER of Pasquotank county, formerly of Cumberland in Great Britain,
who removed with his family and settled in North Carolina, was a valuable
minister, and very serviceable in discipline, being well qualified therefore; a
constant attender of meetings with his family, and one who traveled much for
the spreading of truth. In his last sickness, he said to some friends that
visited him, I am very ill, but am out of all doubt of my salvation, being well
assured of it. Two other friends coming in, he added, Now I think I have most
of the chief friends about me that I desired; dear friends, give me up freely,
that I may not be kept longer in misery, for I can say with one of old, Lord I
have long waited for thy salvation, and now have an assurance of it, and although
the pains are great, yet the comfort and pleasure I see before me do outbalance
them all. -- Again he said, He hoped that friends might keep their places in
being faithful, and not to shrink one from another when troubles or differences
may arise in the church, or amongst neighbors, by any evil spirit that may get
into any unfaithful one, for want of a due, true and faithful watch; and then
if any such thing do happen, pray friends, I hope that such as now are, or may
then be, do stand firm together, and give judgment in or by a living, fresh and
divine spirit, and keep constant in mind, and thereby the transgressor or
transgressors may be judged down and not able to resist; but if you see in them
any thing tender, then dear friends, turn to them with bowels of love and
perhaps in so doing, you may gain such as in time past may have gone astray. He
went on speaking of the great love and unity, and the many good times he had
had with us; having his spirit borne up by the ancient arm that had been from
time to time his great support. Near his end, we were sensible of his being
engaged in prayer, but being almost spent we could not hear every word so as to
pen it down. Thus this good man ended his life, with a sense of the great love
of God to his soul, on the 31 st of the eleventh month 1718, aged about
forty-five years, and a minister about 24 years.

A Testimony from Kennet Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning VINCENT
CALDWELL.
HE was born in Derbyshire Great Britain, and was convinced about the 17 th or
18 th year of his age, by the ministry of John Gratton; having received the
truth in the love of it and continuing faithful, the Lord was pleased to commit
to him a dispensation of the gospel, so that he had to declare to others of the
goodness of God to his soul. He came over into Pennsylvania, and after his
marriage settled in East Marlborough in Chester county. His ministry was sound
and edifying, being attended with the power of truth and adorned with an
exemplary conversation; in the exercise whereof he twice visited the meetings
of friends in the southern provinces, and once in diverse of the West India
islands, where he was made instrumental to the convincing of many; for though he
had but little school-learning, yet being as a good Scribe, well instructed
unto the kingdom, did at times bring forth out of the treasury things new and
old.

His last sickness continued about six days, wherein he was preserved in a
sweet, sensible and tender frame of spirit, and at times spoke in substance as
follows, viz. The doctor coming to visit him, he said with cheerfulness, I
would have thee speak thy mind freely concerning me, for I am not afraid to
die. The doctor after some pause, signified the doubt he had of his recovery;
which bringing an awful silence over his mind, he broke forth in earnest
supplication to the Lord for the welfare of Sion, and exhorted friends present
to love and unity, and to beware of that spirit which would lead into a
separation. He spoke clearly to the states of some, warning them to fear the
Lord and walk humbly before him, and then they would be made partakers of his
divine and heavenly blessing. He prayed the Lord to prosper his work, and said,
"The Lord will cause his glorious truth to break forth in the north country,
and among the Ethiopians," In a sight and sense whereof he rejoiced. Another
time, his wife sitting by him, he looked earnestly at her and said, "My dear,
don't be surprised, for in time thou will come into that rest that I am going
into." She queried, "Do thou think so?" He said "I have no doubt of it." Then
taking leave of her, he said, "Thou have been a loving wife, a tender mother
and a good neighbor." Taking leave of his children one by one, he charged them
to be loving and obedient to their mother, and not to go out in their
marriages. He prayed the Lord to make his passage easy, and receive him
graciously into his arms of rest and peace forever; and desired his love to
friends in general at their monthly, quarterly and yearly meetings, and meeting
of ministers. After which, being sensible his end drew near, he said, Give me a
little water, and I think I shall not want any more, till I drink at that
fountain which springs up into eternal life. -- Thus in a resigned frame of
mind, he finished his course, the 10 th day of the first month 1719-20, in the
forty-sixth year of his age, and was interred in friends burying-ground at
Kennet. Concerning whom we believe, he is entered into the mansions of glory,
where "The wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest."

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia concerning ANTHONY MORRIS.
OUR ancient and well esteemed friend Anthony Morris, was a member of this
meeting at the early institution thereof, and in the year 1701 appeared in the
ministry, and being obedient and faithful, he soon became acceptable and
edifying, being sound in word and doctrine. He was advanced to his
forty-seventh year when he engaged in this service, and having a prospect of a
great work before him, requiring his close application, he drew his worldly
business into a narrow compass, and devoted his time principally to the service
of truth; not only visiting neighboring meetings, but also traveled through
New Jersey, Long Island, Rhode Island, New England and Maryland; and about the
year 1715 performed a visit to friends in South-Britain. He was early appointed
clerk of our monthly meeting which service he performed many years to
satisfaction; being zealous and serviceable in the discipline, a diligent
attender of all our religious meetings, careful in observing the time appointed
and often concerned to exhort such to amendment as were remiss herein.

In the eighth month 1721 his speech was much affected by frequent attacks of a
paralytick disorder, but his understanding remaining clear, and being favored
with the enjoyment of divine love, he was enabled to utter some sentences to
those that visited him, saying, That if consistent with the divine will the
time of his dissolution was at hand, it would be more joyous to depart now,
than continue longer in the body. Yet expressed his free resignation to the
will of God, and in an humble tender frame of spirit mentioned the testimony
Christ gave concerning the woman who poured on his head the precious ointment,
saying He was favored with the evidence in himself, that he had done what he
could, and felt peace, Expressing at the same time, That his hope for eternal
salvation was alone in the mercy of God through his son Christ Jesus, the only
savior and mediator. Some friends who were going to attend a neighboring
yearly meeting coming to visit him, he took an affectionate leave of them,
saying Remember my dear love to friends in general; tell them I am going and
all is well.

He departed this life the 23 d of the eighth month 1721, aged sixty-seven
years; and on the 25 th his corpse was borne to our meeting house in
High Street, accompanied by many friends and neighbors, as well as friends
from the adjacent country meetings, and thence to our burial ground in this
city where it was interred. Concerning whom we hope, he has obtained an
entrance into the mansions prepared by Christ Jesus our Lord, for those who
continue faithful to the end of their time here, as did this our friend.

Two Extracts from Thomas Chalkley's journal concerning THOMAS LIGHTFOOT.
IN the eighth month 1725, I went to Derby to visit our worthy aged friend
Thomas Lightfoot, who lay very weak in body, none expecting his recovery; I
called as I went from home, and then he was very ill, and told me, He thought
that illness would conclude his time in this world, but said that all was well
and likewise that he had a great concern upon his mind for the growth and
prosperity of truth in the earth, and desired with tenderness of spirit, that I
would give his dear love to all friends; And he now said, I never thought to
see thee more, but am glad to see thee. I stayed there all night and in the
morning we had a comfortable heart-melting time together, in which was revived
the remembrance of the many favorable seasons of God's love we had enjoyed in
our travels in the work of the ministry of the gospel of Christ, and we
tenderly prayed if we never met more in this world, we might meet in that which
is to come, where we might never part more, but might forever live to sing with
all the saints and holy angels, hallelujah to God and the Lamb.

In the 9 th month 1725, I was at the funeral of our worthy ancient friend
Thomas Lightfoot. He was buried at Derby; the meeting was the largest that I
have ever seen at that place. Our dear friend was greatly beloved for his piety
and virtue, his sweet disposition and lively ministry: The Lord was with him in
his life and death and with us at his burial.

This our friend removed from Ireland in an advanced age, and settled in
Chester county Pennsylvania. In 1724 being then near fourscore years of age, he
with Benjamin Kidd, a young minister from England, paid a general visit to
friends in New England.

A Testimony from Nottingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning AARON
COPPOCK.
IT appears he was born in Cheshire in Old England, the 25 th of the tenth
month 1662, was convinced of the truth when a young man, came to America soon
after and lived near Chester; about the year 1714 he, with his family, settled
at Nottingham in said county; being a man of an exemplary conduct and much
esteemed by friends, he was chosen an elder for the particular meeting of
East-Nottingham, until he appeared in a public testimony, and therein was often
concerned to exhort friends to a life of self denial, watchfulness and prayer,
the which he did in great sincerity, zeal and innocence. In the forepart of his
last illness he complained of much poverty, but before he died had a prospect
of happiness, and a sure hope of obtaining the same. He departed this life on
the 10 th day of the tenth month 1725, and was buried in friends burying ground
in East Nottingham the 12 th of the same month, aged sixty-three, and a
minister 7 years.

A Testimony from Salem Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JAMES DANIEL
senior.
THE memory of the righteous cannot soon be forgotten by those who follow their
footsteps, but are as memorials, deeply engraven on their minds, and are worthy
to be had in remembrance, of which number was that steady friend and exemplary
elder James Daniel, whose pious life and savoury conversation is fresh in some
of our memories.

He was born in Ireland about the year 1675; his father Neal Daniel brought him
over sea when about five years of age, and settled in Alloway's-Creek township
in the county of Salem West-Jersey; at which time the white people were but
few, and the natives a multitude. He learned their language perfectly, and has
frequently said, that at that time the natives were a sober, grave and
temperate people, and used no manner of oath in their speech. About the 15 th
year of his age his father died, leaving him in the care of friends to be
educated in the way of truth, which he embraced in the love of it; and as he
grew in age, he grew in experience and divine favor, and had a share of the
oversight of the flock and eldership conferred upon him, which he faithfully
performed in the spirit of love and meekness, thereby rendering his service
acceptable and obtaining a good report. He ruled his own house well, having his
children in subjection: Diligent in attending meetings for worship and
discipline, although for many years with difficulty, the country being new and
roads not made; but afterward he, with considerable cost and labor, got
bridges erected over some creeks and a public road made near his own house. His
house and heart were open to entertain friends according to his ability; was
zealously concerned for the honor of God and promotion of truth. He often
lamented that as the country grew older the people grew worse, and had
corrupted the natives in their morals, teaching them bad words and the
excessive use of strong drink, which he, during many years in the latter part
of his time, for example's sake took none of, and frequently admonished such as
were in the use thereof, to observe great temperance.

In the latter years of his life, he desired his eldest sons to take the care
of his temporal concerns upon them, for his mind seemed divested therefrom as
much as though he possessed nothing, (a good example for all elders; for
sorrowful experience shows us, that too many as they grow in years, grow more
closely attached to the earth; which is a sorrowful prospect and poor example
to the rising generation) but devoted his mind and time to truth's service,
often accompanying friends in their religious engagements, to his great
satisfaction.

Whilst in health, the Lord gave him a sense that his departure drew near; soon
afterward he was taken with the pleurisy and lay about eight days, during
which time he gave much good advice to his family, friends and neighbors that
came to see him, to whom he also gave evident proofs of a happy exit. The day
before his departure, many friends and neighbors came and had a religious
meeting, after which, several taking leave, he said, I am glad of this visit
and of the meeting, but I have a great concern on my mind for this generation,
mentioning many growing evils then prevalent, and said, Many of the elders are
called away and more must soon; but I hope the Lord will raise up some that
shall be faithful and zealous. The evening of his decease, he took his solemn
leave of all present, beginning with his wife, and afterward his children in
order, giving each something in charge; to one particularly he said, Thou do
not know what service the Lord has for thee to do in thy generation. So
remaining sensible until about the 10 th hour, he departed like one falling
into a sweet sleep, at his own house on the 26 th of the tenth month 1726, in
the fifty-second year of his age.

Extract from Thomas Chalkley's journal concerning JOHN LEE.
THE 27 th of the tenth month 1726, I heard the news of the death of my dear
friend John Lee: It affected me with sorrow, he being an old acquaintance and
inward friend of mine, with whom I had traveled many miles. He was a living
serviceable minister of the gospel of Christ, and instrumental to convince
diverse of that principle of divine light and truth which we profess: Our love
and friendship was constant and entire unto the end, having been acquainted
about thirty-five years as near as I can remember.

A Testimony from New-Garden Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning CALEB
PUSEY.
HE was born in Berkshire Old England, and educated in the Baptists profession,
but after he arrived to years of religious consideration, he was convinced of
the principles of truth as professed by the people called Quakers. In the year
1682, he removed to Pennsylvania and settled near Chester, where he resided a
considerable time, then removed to Marlborough in the same county, where he
dwelt the remainder of his days.

He was a worthy elder in the church, being endowed with a good natural
capacity, sound in judgment, and zealous in maintaining the cause of truth
against contrary and contending spirits. His constancy in attending meetings
for worship and discipline was remarkable and worthy of imitation. Much might
be said of his zeal and integrity for truth, which he retained to the last,
but, for brevity's sake, let it suffice, that he was a just man, therefore let
him be had in remembrance.

His last illness was heavy upon him for six days; during which he was
preserved sensible; signifying what a brave thing it was to be prepared for
death. The morning before he died, being asked by his son-in-law how he did,
answered, "The time was near come that he must leave the world;" to which his
son replied, "Father, I hope that is no surprise to thee;" he answered, "No,
No;" after which he spoke little that could be understood, only desired "That
friends might keep their meetings in uprightness."

He died the 25 th of the twelfth month 1726-7, in the seventy-sixth year of
his age, and was interred in friends burying ground at London Grove.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning HANNAH HILL.
OUR worthy and much esteemed friend Hannah Hill, wife of Richard Hill, and
daughter of Thomas Lloyd (formerly governor of this province) by Mary the
daughter of Gilbert Jones, of Welchpool, was born in Montgomeryshire North
Wales, at the seat of her ancestors called Dolobran, the 21 st of the seventh
month 1666. She was a woman highly favored of the Lord, possessed many
excellent christian virtues, as well as natural accomplishments: Coming over
into this country with her parents when young; soon after their arrival it
pleased the Lord to remove her pious mother by death, when the care of the
younger children devolved upon her: This close trial in the earlier part of her
time, was abundantly sanctified to her; for her mind being engaged to seek the
Lord for her portion, and her father's God for the lot of her inheritance, he
was graciously pleased, not only to favor her with the knowledge of himself
and the enjoyment of his living presence in the days of her youth, but also
made her a singular instrument of good, and a blessing to her father's family.
As she grew in years, her conspicuous virtues, joined with a courteous
deportment, justly gained the esteem and favor of most if not all with whom
she conversed. Being earnestly solicited in marriage by John Delaval, who (though
a worthy man) was not at that time of the same religious communion, she, by her
prudent conduct and pious resolution to maintain the principles she professed
without deviating therefrom in a matter of such importance, did not agree
thereto; until he after some time embraced the truth in sincerity of heart, and
bore his cross like an humble follower of Christ; he received a gift in the
ministry, and continued faithful therein to his death: Concerning whom she gave
this testimony, viz. "That he never used to her an expression of anger, or the
product of a disturbed mind." The decease of her said husband proved to her a
time of deep probation, having been heard to say, that in eight weeks time she
lost eight of her family by death, beginning with the decease of her beloved
husband, and ending with that of her only child: Under which afflicting
circumstances, as well as what attended her the remaining part of her life (of
which she had a large share) she approved herself a shining example of patience
in tribulation, and a meek, humble, self-denying follower of Christ.

In the affluent station wherein divine providence had placed her, her
benevolent disposition was conspicuous in administering to the necessities of
the indigent, her charity not being limited to those of her own profession. She
was a true servant of the church, and in the sense of the apostle's
expressions, "One that washed the saints feet," receiving with joy into her
house, the ministers and messengers of the gospel, for whom her love was great:
The low, the poor and the mean, were objects of her peculiar care.

In her younger years she received a gift in the ministry, which she retained
with faithfulness to the end; and though not large in her appearance, yet with
great modesty and soundness of expression, "Her doctrine dropped as the dew,
and distilled as the small rain," and was therefore truly acceptable. She
traveled in the service of the gospel, to New England and diverse other parts
of this continent, and was also concerned for the good order and discipline of
the church, having for a number of years, served in the station of clerk of the
women's monthly, quarterly and yearly meetings, wherein she gave satisfaction.

Although bodily weakness frequently attended her in the latter years of her
life, it did not abate her love and zeal for the everlasting truth, which she
experienced to be her support in every time of trial; and when her dissolution
drew near, she made diverse seasonable remarks and observations, also signified
her acquiescence with the divine will, in the dispensations of his providence
toward her; at one time particularly mentioning the expressions of the
apostle, That no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous,
nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby. This was her happy experience; and after a
well-spent life, interspersed with a variety of exercising vicisitudes, she
exchanged this state of existence (no doubt) for a blessed immortality in the
regions of unmixed felicity; after about three weeks illness, on the 25 th of
the twelfth month 1726-7, in the sixty-first year of her age. Her corpse was
respectfully attended by a large number of friends and others, to the
High Street meeting house in Philadelphia, where diverse living testimonies were
borne, after which it was interred in friends burial ground.

She was twenty-six years the wife of Richard Hill, who was a serviceable
member both in church and state, and died in good esteem, the 4 th of the
seventh month 1729.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JAMES
LORD.
HE received a lively gift of the gospel ministry whilst young in years, was
frequently exercised therein to the edification and encouragement of friends;
and was much concerned for the true Sioners, that they might hold on their way,
and that the outcasts of Israel might be gathered home into the true fold of
rest. An exemplary man, by which he greatly adorned the doctrine he preached;
was called from works to rewards in the flower of his age, being in his
thirty-fourth year and in the year 1727.

Extract from Thomas Chalkley's journal, concerning the aforesaid JAMES LORD.
ON second-day the 25 th of the seventh month 1727, I had the sorrowful tidings
of the death of my beloved friend James Lord; who, on his deathbed, desired
that I might be sent for to his burial. In the consideration of that christian
love which was between us, I think I may truly note, that we were always glad
to meet each other; therefore the thoughts of this so sudden change and final
parting, brought, for the present, a sadness and heaviness over my mind;
considering his station in that neighborhood, and service in that congregation
to which he did belong; for therein he was well-beloved and very serviceable.

And Oh! the loss that his dear wife and tender children will have of him,
really affects me with sorrow in penning these notes; but the sorrow, in these
things, is all on our side; for he, without doubt, is at rest with his great
master in Heaven. We had a larger meeting at his funeral than ever was known to
be there before (as an ancient friend told me) which was solemn and serviceable
to many.

Some account of JOHN BEVAN, copied from a manuscript, appearing to be a
testimony from a meeting in Wales concerning him, the conclusion of which is
wanting. And though he was born and died in that country, yet having lived many
years in Pennsylvania, the following memorial is thought not improper to be
inserted in this Collection.
OUR deceased friend John Bevan, the worthy subject of our testimony, having
deserved to have his name transmitted to posterity, for his pious life and
conversation, the following account of him, probably, will not only be
satisfactory to his relations, friends and acquaintance, but afford edification
and comfort to those who knew him not.

He was born about 1646, and well descended; his parents died when he was very
young, leaving five children, of whom he was the eldest. In 1665 he married a
religious woman. His father had left him a considerable estate, but the rest of
the children were unprovided for; he therefore, when he came of age, (his
sister being dead before) portioned all his brothers, and gave them a helpful
subsistence in the world. Some years after, he was convinced of the blessed
truth as it is in Jesus, the manner whereof, as he himself has left it in
writing, was thus,

My wife was religiously inclined in her young years, and zealously concerned
to observe the ceremonies of the church of England, and I believe (as she has
often told me) she aimed sincerely therein at God's glory and the salvation of
her immortal soul. After we were joined in marriage, she continued very zealous
in that way; but when a weighty concern came upon my mind for the well-being of
my immortal soul, I saw it very needful for me to make a narrow search after
the best way, and those people who performed that worship and service that was
acceptable before God; and being in a weighty frame of spirit, the people
called Quakers came before the view of my mind; and hearing of a book of George
Fox the younger's, to be at a relation's house, I was willing to go thither for
it, and in the reading thereof, I was so well satisfied, that I can truly say,
what I then read, answered the witness of God in my own bosom, as "Face
answers face in a glass:" But soon after I came home, my wife perceiving me
to be more serious and weighty in my spirit than formerly, was jealous I had an
inclination toward that way which the people called Quakers made profession
of; and finding I had the said book, came up to the chamber where I was, and
cautioned me not to be beguiled: I spoke to her in simplicity and much
brokenness of heart, of the sense and satisfaction I had, that those who were
faithful to that divine principle which the people called Quakers bore
testimony to, were the people God owned, or to that import; and it reached to
God's witness in her, that we parted in much tenderness at that time. However
she continued somewhat zealous in her way still, and would be often arguing
with me in vindication thereof, much about twelve months; but at one time, when
she was at their worship, the Priest denounced his excommunication against me,
and she being in a seat just under him, it came so near her that she was nigh
to faint away; when their worship was over, she went to the Priest and spoke
somewhat home to him, and that she thought she deserved more civility, at least
so much as to know aforehand of their excommunication, for he might know that
she sincerely loved her husband though he dissented from her in judgment. And
after that time, she became more willing to search closely into the weighty
work of the salvation of her immortal soul; and the Lord's love was manifested
to her, that in a little while after, her understanding came to be opened, and
she came to be convinced of God's everlasting truth, that was promised To lead
into all truth. And having tasted of that living bread that gives life to the
soul, she came withal to see there was no need of the outward bread, which
formerly she was zealous and conscientious in the observation of, to
commemorate the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ; the true
remembrancer being come and witnessed, even he Who stands at the door of men's
hearts for an entrance, that he may come to sup with them and they with him.

Soon after our convincement, the enemy of souls mustered his forces, and
endeavored to stifle our convictions, and we were hard put to it both within
and without, but as our eyes were to the Lord, and in poverty and humility of
spirit we leaned upon him, he made the hard things easy, and in the sense of
his divine love which was often shed abroad in our hearts, we were made willing
to deny ourselves, to take up the cross, and to despise the shame. And though we
were but a few, we thought it convenient to meet together to wait upon the
Lord, being fully satisfied it was a duty incumbent upon his people in all
ages; and in the performance of our duty herein in the year 1675, several
friends were taken from our house at two several times, and brought before two
justices of the peace, who tendered the oath of allegiance and supremacy to
them, and because, for conscience sake, they could not break the command of
Christ who said "Swear not at all," they were committed to prison, where they
remained about fourteen weeks, and then were set at liberty; ever since which,
the meeting has been kept either at our house or at the meeting house, quietly
without any more disturbance.

Sometime before the year 1683, we heard that our esteemed friend William Penn,
had a patent from king Charles the second, for that province in America called
Pennsylvania; and my wife had a great inclination to go thither, and thought it
might be a good place to train up children amongst sober people, and to prevent
the corruption of them here, by the loose behavior of the youth and the bad
example of too many of those of riper years; she acquainted me therewith, but I
then thought it not likely to take effect for several reasons; but as I was
sensible her aim was upright on account of our children, I was willing to weigh
the matter in a true balance; and I can truly say, my way was made easy and
clear to go thither, beyond my expectation; and it was the Lord's great mercy
to preserve us over the great deep to our desired port: And what hardships we
met at the beginning of our settlement, the Lord was our helper and support to
go through: And I can in a sweet remembrance say, many were the blessed seasons
we had with God's people in that remote country, and I believe and am well
satisfied that the Lord has a remnant there, that sincerely aim at his glory
and the prosperity of his truth, blessed and praised be his holy name forever.

We staid there many years, and had four of our children married with our
consent, and they had several children, and the aim intended by my wife, was in
a good measure answered. -- When a weighty concern came upon my mind to return
to my native country, and that chiefly on truth's account. I laid it before my
wife, and she could not be easy to stay behind me, and we came over in the year
1704; and through the Lord's great mercy we were preserved in that tedious
voyage, north about Scotland through many difficulties, and from the cruelties
also of the privateers, of which there were many then on that coast, as we were
afterward informed. -- This wonderful preservation deserves to be remembered
with thanksgiving; having lost the fleet, we were only four ships coming
together from Virginia, and one of them belonging to Bristol, we thought to
remove to that ship, because Bristol was nearer to our habitation in Wales than
London, whither our vessel was bound; we agreed with the master for our
passage, and next morning we were to go on board, but that night I was under a
weighty exercise about our removal, but in the morning it happened to be so
stormy that he could not take us in, so he parted from us, and bore his course
toward Bristol; then the weight I was under was removed, and I was very easy
in my spirit; and as I was afterward informed, that ship was taken near to
Lundy Island: This deliverance therefore and preservation of us, I ascribe to
the Lord's great favor and mercy toward us, thanks, honor and praises be
rendered and ascribed to him for the same and all other mercies forever.

In this voyage, our youngest daughter Barbara Bevan accompanied us, and she
was of good service on truth's account, the short time she remained in the
body; her innocence and sweet behavior preached truth wherever she came. It is
my comfort and great satisfaction, that she left a good savor, and has
finished her course in peace with her maker, and is gone to her eternal rest in
the mansions of bliss and joy, to laud and magnify him forever. A short
testimony concerning her, worthy of perusal, i^ printed in the 5th part of
Piety Promoted.


We landed at last at Shields in Northumberland, and staid over the meeting on
first day, where we were comforted with friends; next day we set forward toward
our habitation in Wales, having near three hundred miles to travel. We had
several good meetings in our way, and about the beginning of the eighth month
1704, we came to our home at Treveyricke; and from that time forward my dear
wife was given up as before, to be serviceable on truth's account, and so
continued during her pilgrimage here, being six years and upwards. Her house
and heart since her convincement, were open to receive the Lord's messengers,
both here and in America, and she was very careful and open hearted to help the
poor and weak, both amongst us and others. In her last sickness, she was
sensible she was not like to recover out of it, and she was satisfied and
contented therein to submit to the Lord's will; speaking to me, she said, I
take it as a great mercy that I am to go before thee, we are upwards of
forty-five years married, and our love is rather more now toward one another,
than at the beginning, yet I am willing to part with all, for the Lord is
better than all. She quietly departed this life the 26 th of the eleventh month
1710; aged seventy-three years and about four months; and though my loss thereby
is great, yet it is her eternal gain.

Our well esteemed friend having left us this just account of his convincement,
and of the reasons of his removal to, and return from Pennsylvania to his
native country again; it remains for us to add, that by their testimonials from
Pennsylvania, we find they were all three of good service there, the old
friends being examples of meekness, temperance and charity, and having lived in
love and fellowship with the brethren and sisters there, were in good esteem
amongst all. And the young friend being of an innocent and good life and
conversation, was well beloved amongst them; and further, that the father and
daughter had received a gift of the ministry, which had been to the comfort and
edification of the churches thereaway. -- We heard he visited New England in
particular with our friend Hugh Roberts, about the year 1701. -- Soon after he
returned from Pennsylvania, he and his daughter visited together several
meetings of friends in South and North Wales, and were eminently favored
therein with the divine presence. -- His sufferings, considering his
faithfulness and the time he lived in, were not very many; his relations at
times diverting the strokes from him; however after a long prosecution by the
Vicar of the parish for his pretended dues, he was at last confined to Cardiff
goal in 1721, upon an excommunicatio capiendo, but there being some error in
it, he was discharged the following sessions, and ever after left unmolested.

He was endued with a good understanding in things spiritual and temporal,
discreet and prudent in his ways, of an unspotted life and conversation, grave
and solid in his deportment, and careful to keep concord and unity among
friends, constant and unmovable against that which would divide and rend, yet
laboring to restore those that were beguiled thereby. In his last sickness, he
had no small conflict, but he was favored with much patience and possessed his
soul therein, and bore his indisposition to admiration. -- At one time he said,
Ever since I had the knowledge of the truth, I have endeavored to be innocent.
To a relation asking him how he did? he answered, Weakly, but I find some
strength to bear my weakness.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning HANNAH
CARPENTER.
SHE was born at Haverford West in South Wales, where having the opportunity of
seeing the patient, innocent and steady sufferings of friends who were
imprisoned for their religious testimony, together with their good conversation
in Christ, she was convinced of the blessed truth, and became very serviceable
to those who were in bonds there for Christ's sake. She came over here in the
early settling of this province, and after some time was married to our well
esteemed friend Samuel Carpenter, of this city. She received a share of the
gospel ministry, which was seasoned with a lively savor of divine sweetness;
and though not frequent in her appearances, was very acceptable. Her heart and
house stood open to receive and entertain the true gospel ministers, to whom
she was a tender nursing mother both in sickness and in health; being full of
warmth and love to faithful friends, a bright example of meekness in the church
as well as in her own family; and her life and conversation being adorned with
the christian virtues of benevolence and charity, rendered her beloved,
respected and useful in her station.

She died the 24 th of the fifth month 1728, in the eighty-third year of her
age.

The following Epistle to parents concerning the education of children,
manifesting her pious regard for the youth, and her anxiety for the increase
and prosperity of the church of Christ, is thought proper to be here annexed,
viz.
"UPON the 4 th day of the fourth month, I was drawn forth to wait on the Lord,
and as I was waiting, the consideration of my dear children whom the Lord had
taken to himself in their innocence came before me, and my soul blessed his
holy name for his great love toward them and me, in that they are gone to
their rest, and shall never partake of those exercises and sorrows these do
that remain in the world; and then my soul was poured forth before the Lord for
them that remain, that as they grow up in years, they may grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ; or else I would rather
follow them to their graves whilst they are young, than that they should live
to the dishonor of his worthy name: And then a more general and weighty
concern came upon me for friends children that are grown up and do not come
under the yoke nor bear the cross. Oh! the cry that ran through my soul, and in
the anguish and bitterness of my spirit, I said, Lord what will thou do with
friends children when we are gone off the stage of this world; will thou raise
up children, and not those of believing parents? And this was the word that
livingly sprung up in my soul. They reject my counsel and cast my law behind
their backs, and will have none of my reproofs, and though my hand be stretched
forth all the day long, yet they will not hear, but go after their own hearts
lust. Then I said in my heart, Lord are they all so? The answer was, there are
some that are innocent, whom I will bless with a blessing from me, and they
shall shine forth to my praise. And now, Oh friends! that you may dwell and
abide in the innocent life, that so the blessing of the Lord you may feel daily
to descend upon you. But as for you that "Reject the counsel of the Lord and
cast his law behind your backs, and will have none of his reproofs," which are
sorrowful sayings concerning you who are the children of believing parents, you
who are under the profession of the truth, which will do you no good, unless
you return unto the Lord; therefore I desire you may all return unto him,
whilst the day of a long-suffering merciful God lasts: But if you still
reject the counsel of the Lord, the many faithful warnings you have had, how
will you answer it in the day when he comes, "To render unto every one
according to their deeds?" And now, something further is with me to parents of
children. Dear friends, you that have been convinced of God's unchangeable
truth, and have known the work and operation of it, working out and bringing
down that which was of a contrary nature to it. And Oh! that we may all abide
faithful in his work, and retain our integrity to the Lord, then let our
breathing cries and prayers be offered up to the Lord for our children, that he
would be pleased to look down in mercy upon them, and visit them as he did our
souls. But as David said, "If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me;" so I desire we may all be clear in our offerings before the Lord,
that he may smell a sweet savor from them.

Dear friends, what is here written is with great caution, knowing that I have
children of my own, and that many honest parents have bad children, which is no
small exercise; but if we keep faithful to the Lord, and discharge our duty to
them by precept and example, we shall be clear of them in the sight of God: And
therefore friends, faithfulness is the word that runs through me, not only for
our own souls, but for our children's also; that a generation may grow up to
his praise in this part of the world, when our heads are laid in the dust.
Great and manifold has the love and mercy of God been toward us, the
consideration of it, man* times has deeply affected my mind; and ^t was he by
the same arm of power that reached unto us, and brought a concern upon us in
our own native land; and I do believe that many had as clear a call to leave
their native country, as some of old had, which caused many days and nights of
sore travel and exercise before the Lord, and no ease could we have, but in
giving up life and all unto him, saying, "Lord do what thou will with us, only
let thy presence preserve us." And to his praise we can say, he has been with
us since we came to this country, and has preserved us through many and
various exercises, both inwardly and outwardly. And now that which lies on our
parts I desire may be considered by us all, that so suitable returns may be
made unto the Lord, by walking in humility and godly fear before him; that so,
good patterns we may be, by keeping our places "To the praise of him who has
called us," for he is worthy forever more. And friends, something more is with
me which I thought to omit, but find I cannot well do it, that is, concerning
our children, that we be very careful while they are young, that we suffer them
not to wear such things that truth allows not; and though it may be said, they
are but little things and well enough for children, but we find, that when they
are grown up, it is hard for them to leave off, which may be, if they had not
been used when young, would not have been expected when grown up: So I desire
we may all be clear in ourselves, and keep our children out of the fashions and
customs of this world. And Oh! that we were all of one heart and mind in these
and other things, then would the work of the Lord go on easily, which is the
sincere desire of your friend,

HANNAH CARPENTER.

A Testimony from the Yearly Meeting in Virginia, concerning ROBERT JORDAN.
HE was son of Thomas and Margaret Jordan, of Nancemond county in Virginia,
born the 11 th of the seventh month 1668, and carefully educated in the way of
truth by his worthy parents, who lived to see the religion of his education
become that of his choice and practice in his mature years, in which he was
preserved to the last, without wavering, in great peace with the Lord and unity
of his brethren.

He was an hospitable man, very ready to entertain strangers, especially the
Lord's messengers, whom he treated with great respect and affection, honoring
them for their work's sake; being also charitable to the poor, and as a man of
trade and commerce, obtained a good reputation, having declared he had never
wronged any man knowingly in all his life.

In the time of his illness, which continued about two weeks, he seemed very
patient and resigned to the will of God, and much concerned for the everlasting
welfare of his children, which he expressed in a lively manner; and often in
fervent prayer, desired they might be preserved from the vanities and
corruptions of this world, and that they might love and fear the Lord in their
youth, saying at one time, "O Lord preserve my flock, let them never go astray,
nor forget thee nor one another: O my God! hold them in thy arms that none of
them be lost, let not the enemy prevail over them:" Being humbly thankful and
blessed God, that he had been pleased to support him through every dispensation
of his providence to that time. He died the 3 d of the eighth month 1728, and
on the 9 th of the same month, after a large meeting held on the occasion, was
interred in the family burying-ground.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ROWLAND
ELLIS.
OUR ancient and esteemed friend Rowland Ellis, was born in the year 1650, in
Merionethshire North Wales, convinced of the truth about the twenty-second year
of his age, suffered several years imprisonment with constancy on account of
his testimony, it being then a time of sore persecution; the two judges who
committed him with many others for refusing to take the oath of allegiance and
supremacy, declared openly at the assizes, "That in case they refused a second
time to take it, they should be proceeded against as traitors, the men hanged
and quartered, and the women burned." In 1686 he came over into Pennsylvania to
prepare for a settlement for his wife and family, with whom he returned in
1697. He was endued with a gift in the ministry, and though not very frequent in
appearance therein, his service was acceptable and to edification; being of
sound judgment, ready and willing to assist his neighbors and friends in all
cases civil or religious when desired. He was zealous for supporting our
christian discipline, and exemplary in conducting himself agreeable therewith,
sometimes saying "If the hedge of discipline was not kept up, the labor of the
husbandman would soon be laid waste." He was careful in educating his children
religiously, by timely endeavoring to inculcate in them the principles of
piety and virtue; a practice of his tending thereto, was, having meetings
frequently in his family, which he long continued. In the last monthly meeting
he attended he was taken unwell, but afterward said to diverse friends present,
"I am glad I was here to day, for I had a lively meeting, and though I now feel
much weakness and the infirmities attending my advanced age, yet I can say,
truth is as dear and as sweet as ever." He also said, Satan sometimes lies in
wait like a roaring lion to devour me, but I find he is chained by a secret
hand which limits his power, so that he cannot harm me. His indisposition
continued a few days, which he bore with christian patience, expressing "His
sense of his near arrival at the haven of rest and quiet, where none could make
him afraid." He expired at the house of his son-in-law John Evans, in the
eightieth year of his age, and was interred in friends burying-ground at
Plymouth, (to which particular meeting he belonged) in the seventh month 1729.
Concerning whom we trust it may be said, he rests, enjoying the reward of the
righteous, and his works do follow.

A Testimony from Newark Monthly Meeting in New Castle county on Delaware,
concerning MOSES MENDENHALL.
HE was born at Concord in Chester county Pennsylvania, about 1693, being the
son of Benjamin Mendenhall, an early settler in that place; in his youth he was
religiously inclined, loving the conversation of such* and choosing places of
retirement to wait upon God. He married about the year 1719, and soon after
settled at Kennet, where he contin^ed his habitation the remainder of his li^^
As he grew in years he grew in religious experience, and in 1724 appeared in
the ministry; first in a few words, but continuing faithful, he increased in
his gift, and in time had a seasonable refreshing testimony, which often
affected the minds of the hearers. He visited the meetings in Maryland,
New Jersey, and sometimes those near home; being also rightly gifted for the
discipline, and serviceable therein. He had a clear discerning of a spirit of
undue liberty that seemed (...) one time to prevail, which afterward
manifested itself to the exercise of the faithful.

Being sensible in his last sickness that his end was near, he signified "He
was thankful to the Lord, that he was like to be taken from the troubles of
this world;" exhorting friends to faithfulness; and died in a resigned frame,
in the ninth month 1731, aged about thirty-eight, and a minister about 7 years,
and was interred in Kennet burying-ground.

A Testimony from Duck-Creek Monthly Meeting in Kent county on Delaware,
concerning JOSEPH BOOTH.
HE was born at or near Situate in New England, and educated in the religion
of the independants; leaving his native country when a young man, he came and
settled early on Muspillion in Sussex county upon Delaware, where he filled the
station of a magistrate many years, and was also chosen a member of the house
of assembly, discharging the several trusts reposed in him, with reputation.

In the year 1699, he was convinced by the ministry of Thomas Story, who left
this testimony respecting him, "That he was the most sober and knowing person
in those parts." As he gave up faithfully to the manifestation of truth, it so
operated upon him, as to bring the creaturely part into subjection, though much
in the way of the cross, and the more so, by reason of the station and
character he supported in the world; but through continued obedience, he
witnessed love so to prevail in his heart, as to constrain him, livingly to
declare to others what the Lord had done for him. Being rightly called and
anointed for the work, his appearances were solemn and awful, ministering in the
power of truth. He was a nursing father in the church, constant in attending
religious meetings, and exemplary in humbly waiting therein; having likewise
been instrumental in settling the meeting at Murtherkiln where he belonged, as
also that at Cold-Spring; and before any meeting was held at the latter, he
frequently visited the few families of friends adjacent thereto, and was in
general good esteem amongst men. He died about the year 1732.

A Testimony from Wrights-Town Monthly Meeting in Bucks county Pennsylvania,
concerning ANN PARSON.
SHE appeared in the ministry in her youthful days, and continuing faithful,
she traveled on that account, several times through New England, the Jerseys,
Pennsylvania, Maryland and Virginia in America, and through England, Ireland,
Scotland and Wales in Europe; her ministry being savoury and to edification.
She was a good example, of an inoffensive life, patient in affliction, and died
in good unity with the church.

In her last illness, she said to her brother Abraham Chapman, I have traveled
a pretty deal in my time, and, according to my ability, have labored in the
love of God (in the service of truth, and goodwill to all men) which springs in
my bosom now as fresh as ever; blessed be his name. And I desire thee (if I go)
by a few lines, to remember my kind love to friends, desiring they may stand in
the counsel of God; for I have often rejoiced and been glad, to see friends
stand in his counsel and keep their places in the truth; and on the contrary,
it has often wounded my spirit, to see those that have made a profession of the
truth, (and some of them children of good parents) take undue liberty, taking
pleasure in vanity and folly, and neglecting that which would be to their
everlasting peace. It is my advice to friends, that they stand in the counsel
of God, which will be to them as a mighty rock in a weary land, and enable them
to wade through the various exercises and troubles which may fall to their
share to meet with in this troublesome world. I have found it by experience to
be a sure help in every needful and difficult time, when exercises seemed to
surround me on every hand like the billows of the main, then I found, to stand
in the counsel of God, was the only place of refuge that I could retire unto,
where I found safety, and was often refreshed, strengthened and comforted by
the influence of the love of God in me; and I would counsel and advise, that
all friends keep close to meetings, and patiently wait to feel their strength
renewed in God. And as it has been the desire and labor of my spirit, that
friends should keep up their meetings in good order, and in the wisdom of
truth; so I recommend it as my advice and counsel to friends, to be careful to
keep to meetings, and patiently wait to feel the overshadowing power of truth,
to strengthen and renew their hope in God, which brings down and abases every
thing that would exalt itself above the peaceable government of truth. After
having lain sometime in great stillness, she, in fervent prayer, besought the
Lord, To carry on the work he had begun, so that many might flock unto his
church, as doves unto the windows; and that sin and iniquity might cease, and
righteousness and truth cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea; fervently
beseeching the Lord, To bless his people and her near relations, and that her
companion might be favored with the visitation of divine love, and know his
last days to be his best days; and that he might find admittance into rest and
peace, when time to him in this life should be no more, with many more of the
like expressions, at sundry times during her illness.

She died the 9 th of the tenth month 1732, in the fifty-seventh year of her
age, having been a minister 33 years.

A Testimony from Nottingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOSEPH
ELGAR.
HE was born (as we are informed) at Folkstone in Kent, Old England, the 30 th
of the fourth month 1690, of believing parents; and came into America about the
year 1720, living some time near Philadelphia, and in 1728, removed within the
limits of East Nottingham particular meeting. After his coming to this country,
he was called to the work of the ministry, wherein he was not forward, yet his
appearances being lively and edifying, friends had near unity therewith. A good
example in attending meetings, a faithful labourer therein, and careful in
keeping to the hour appointed. He was industrious in outward affairs, though
cheerfully given up to answer the requirings of truth; visiting the meetings of
friends in Pennsylvania, as also in New Jersey and Maryland generally. He was
gifted in discipline, and likewise qualified for the service of visiting
families, wherein he was engaged the last time he was absent from home, within
the limits of Bush-River and Deer-Creek particular meetings; in his return from
whence, he told a friend, There was an unusual weight over his spirit, and a
cloud that he could not see beyond, which made him think his days work was
nearly over. The night he returned home, he was affected with sickness and much
pain, which continued several days, bearing the same with exemplary patience.
Afterward growing weaker but remaining sensible, he often expressed, He had
done with the world, and was willing to leave it, for he had been faithful to
what was made known to him, since he gave up to the requirings of truth.

Continuing in a sweet composure of mind, he departed on the 19 th of the
eleventh month 1733-4, in the forty-fourth year of his age, a minister about 12
years. His remains were interred in friends burying-ground at East-Nottingham;
on which solemn occasion, our friend Mungo Bewley of Ireland, who was then on a
religious visit in America, exercised his gift to the comfort of many friends.

A Testimony from the Yearly Meeting of friends in Virginia, concerning JOSEPH
JORDAN.
HE was born in Nancemond county in Virginia, in the year 1695, being the third
son of Robert Jordan, as well as one of the third generation who have walked in
the truth. He was of a sprightly genius, affable disposition, and even temper,
which, as he grew to manhood, gave him easy access to company, esteemed the
better sort. A visitation of divine love being extended to him about the
twenty-second year of his age, he like Zaccheus, made haste, and with joy
embraced, both the message and the messenger of salvation: And being endued
with a gift in the ministry, acquitted himself "As a workman that need not be
ashamed," and had great place in the minds of men. Although he had not much
school literature, yet he might be said to have had the tongue of the learned,
being both correct and concise in speaking the word in season, insomuch that
diverse have confessed to the truth and embraced the doctrine he preached. Being
patient in tribulation, he was favored with that hope which affords content
and solace of mind. After laboring in the gospel in his own country and the
adjacent provinces, he visited most parts of England, Ireland, and diverse parts
of Holland; being absent on this service above three years, he returned with
peace, and found his presence necessary at home; for his father being deceased,
and his brother Robert then absent, the care of the family devolved upon him,
which trust he discharged with judgment, being a good oeconomist, kind
neighbor and steady friend.

He often intimated that he should not continue long, and was therefore
concerned to use diligence. Not long before his decease, he visited friends in
Virginia and North Carolina, edifying them with his gift; and in the beginning
of the month in which he died, (though very weak in body) attended their
quarterly meeting, signifying at his return, his great satisfaction therein,
believing it would be the last meeting of the kind he should ever be at, and
accordingly he never afterward went from home, except to a weekday meeting in
the neighborhood.

On the morning of the day of his dissolution, he uttered many savoury
expressions, saying to some young ministers, Mind your gifts and the Lord will
bless you, and you will be a blessing to the church. Be humble and obedient;
obedience brings sweet peace. I have a great desire there might be a right
ministry continued in the church, for there are many not strictly of this fold,
who in due time the Lord will bring in: And as you come to have an experience
of the work of truth in your own hearts, you will be able to confute them who
persuade themselves there is no living without sin in this world. I am not in a
condition to speak much, neither is it, I hope, very needful; as you are thus
taught of the Lord, you will have cause to rejoice in him on whom you have
believed.

Thus having happily completed his day's work, he laid down his head in much
resignation and peace with the Lord, the 26 th of the ninth month 1735, aged
forty years, a minister about 17.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning RICHARD
TOWNSEND.
HE was a meek and humble man, sincerely concerned for the promotion of piety
and virtue; his ministry being sound, living, and tending to edification, was
well accepted. He visited friends in the service of truth in Great Britain,
continued faithful to the end of his days, and departed this life about the 30
th of the third month 1737.

A Testimony from Newark Monthly Meeting in New Castle county on Delaware,
concerning CHRISTOPHER WILSON.
HE was born in Yorkshire Old England, of parents who were members of the
church of England. In his youth he was inclined to vanity, but his mind being
reached through the visitation of divine grace. When he grew up, he joined in
fellowship with friends; and came to America in 1712, being well recommended by
certificate, though then a servant. About 1728 he appeared in the ministry, first
in a few words, but growing therein, his appearances were seasonable and
savoury, and attended with a degree of that life that "Makes glad the heritage
of God;" being likewise serviceable in the discipline of the church according
to ability.

He began the world with little, but being industrious in the creation, and
concerned for truth's prosperity, the Lord blessed his labors, so that he
lived comfortably and maintained his family reputably, supporting the character
of an honest peaceable man, and was often instrumental in restoring peace
amongst others. In his last sickness, being asked by a friend "How it was with
him?" He answered, "If the messenger of death comes, I see nothing in my way."
Keeping mostly still and quiet, he, in a resigned, composed frame of mind,
finished his course the 11 th of the seventh month 1740, in the fiftieth year
of his age, a minister about 12 years, and was interred in Center
burying-ground.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning THOMAS
CHALKLEY.
HE was a member of our monthly meeting above forty years, so that some of us
had opportunities of being intimately acquainted with him, and of knowing his
fidelity ^^d diligence in promoting the cause of truth, and the edification of
the church of Christ; this having been the principal engagement and concern of
his mind, and which he preferred to any other consideration; as will evidently
appear to those, who, with an ^^nest and unprejudiced intention, peruse his
journal of his life and travels.

By which it will appear, that he was, in the early part of his life, sensibly
affected with the visitation of divine life and grace, and, by adhering
thereunto, was preserved from the vanities and follies, which often divert and
alienate the minds of youth from the due remembrance and awful regard of their
creator; so that he was enabled to bear a testimony of christian patience and
self-denial in his youthful days, and, by keeping under that exercise, as he
advanced in years, attained to further knowledge and experience in the work of
religion, in which he had a sight of the necessity of keeping in a state of
humility, and of bearing the cross of Christ, which mortified him to the world;
so that the loss many sustain by the anxious pursuit of the lawful things
thereof appearing to him, he was concerned to avoid it, and in obedience to the
precept of Christ, to seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
having faith in his promise, that all these things (necessary for him) should
be added.

Thus the love of God influencing his mind, and opening his understanding, he
became concerned for the general good of mankind, and received a gift of the
ministry of the gospel of Christ, before he had attained the age of twenty-one
years; in the public exercise of which, he soon after traveled through many
parts of England, and into Scotland, and the next year, being 1697, he came to
visit friends in this and the adjacent provinces of America, where his ministry
and conversation were to the comfort and edification of the faithful, (as some
of us can with satisfaction declare, from our knowledge and remembrance of him
at that time) and the near fellowship and union he then had with friends here
(we believe) contributed to his more speedy determination of settling among us,
which he afterward thought it his duty to do, though the leaving his parents and
relations (as he afterward expressed) was no small cross to him, being of a
dutiful and affectionate disposition.

After fixing his residence among us, he persever'd in his concern and labor
for the edification of the churches, and gathering people to faith and
dependence on the inward teachings of Christ, and for that purpose only he
traveled many long journies and voyages through the several English colonies
on this continent, and most of the islands in the West Indies, and in Europe,
through England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Holland, Frizeland, and several
parts of Germany, and the adjacent northern kingdoms; and in many of these
places his ministry and religious labors were blessed with the desired
success, of which there are yet some witnesses living, and others, who were
convinced of the principles of truth by his means, became serviceable members
of the church, and continued therein to the end of their lives.

But as the wise king Solomon formerly observed, that one event comes to the
righteous, and to the wicked, so it happened to this good man, who met with
various losses and disappointments in his temporal estate; after which, the
circumstances of his affairs engaged him to undertake some business, in the
management of which he was obliged to cross the seas frequently: This, however,
did not abate his zeal and religious care to make use of all opportunities of
visiting the meetings of friends when among them, and of calling, at other
times, to such who might be accounted as the outcast of Israel, and the
dispersed of Judah, or as sheep not yet of the fold of Christ; and his services
of that kind are worthy to be commemorated, having been often productive of
good effects.

His patience was remarkable in disappointments and afflictions, of which he
had a large share; and his meekness, humility and circumspection, in the
general course of his life and conversation, were conspicuous and exemplary;
and as he frequently exhorted and admonished others to the observation and
practice of the many excellent precepts and rules of Christ, our Lord and
lawgiver, and more especially those expressed in his sermon on the mount (which
contains the sum of our moral and religious duties) so he manifested himself to
be one of that number, whom Christ compared to the wise builder, who laid a
sure foundation; so that his building stood unshaken by the various floods and
winds of tribulations and temptations he met with, both from within and without.

He was a lover of unity amongst brethren, and careful to promote and maintain
it, showing the example of a meek, courteous, and loving deportment, not only
to friends, but to all others, with whom he had conversation or dealings; so
that it may be truly said, that few have lived so universally beloved and
respected among us: And it was manifest this did not proceed from a desire of
being popular, or to be seen of man: For his love and regard to peace did not
divert him from the discharge of his duty in a faithful testimony to those that
professed the truth, that they ought to be careful to maintain good works; and
he was often concerned zealously to incite and press friends to the exercise of
the good order and discipline established in the wisdom of truth, by
admonishing, warning, and timely treating with such as fell short of their duty
therein, and by testifying against those who, after loving and brotherly care
and endeavors, could not be brought to the sense and practice of their duty;
and thereby he sometimes shared the ill will and resentment of such persons.

The several Essays he wrote on religious subjects at sea, are further proofs
that his mind was principally engaged in the great business and concern of
religion; and as he continued under the same engagement to the end, we are
fully persuaded the words with which he concluded his last public testimony on
the island of Tortola, may be truly and properly applied to him, that he had
fought a good fight, and had kept the faith, and we doubt not, he now enjoys a
crown of righteousness.

Much more might be truly said of his integrity, faithfulness and worth, but we
do not think it necessary; our chief intention being to express our respectful
remembrance of him, and our unity with his labors and services; and we are
sincerely desirous, that the glory of every good and perfect work may be
attributed to that divine power alone, which can qualify others to supply the
places of those faithful ministers and servants of Christ, who have been of
late years removed from among us, and are of that number, of whom it is
written, blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea,
says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them.

He departed this life on the island of Tortola (where he was engaged on a
religious visit) the 4 th day of the ninth month 1741, aged upwards of
sixty-six years.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning ESTHER CLARE.
SHE was a minister well qualified for the publication of the doctrine of the
gospel, and visited friends in Great Britain and Ireland in the service of
truth. In the latter part of her life, when not prevented by bodily
infirmities, we had the benefit of her labors much in this city; her testimony
being frequently attended with demonstration of divine help, was well accepted
and of good service. She departed this life the 3 d of the eighth month 1742,
in the sixty-eighth year of her age, in unity and good esteem among friends.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning ROBERT JORDAN.
IT appears, he was born in the county of Nancemond in Virginia, the 27 th of
the tenth month 1693, of parents in good esteem among friends, and that about
the year 1718 he received a gift in the ministry, as did his brother Joseph
about the same time; and to their first appearance in that weighty work the
labors of Lydia Lancaster and her companion then on a religious visit from
Great Britain, were, under divine help, made instrumental.

Of his first travels in the service of truth, the following is an abstract
from an account committed to writing by himself.

I early found a concern on my mind to visit friends in Maryland, which I did
on both sides of the bay (Cheasapeak) in fear and trembling, being young and
weak, and the work very exercising by reason of an obvious declension, which
occasioned me much exercise in speaking and writing against the spirit of
liberty, superfluity, and conformity to the world, for a testimony against
which, in many particulars, ancient friends suffered much; but now, with many
is the offense of that cross ceased, and friend's sufferings trampled upon, to
the great grief of my spirit, respecting tithes, apparel etc. And as the Lord
has been pleased to commit a part of the ministry to me, and of that part
which is more necessary than desirable, in this age of the church, he has been
graciously pleased hitherto to furnish with a suitable ability for his honor,
and my faithful discharge of duty; for, as before my appearance I was long
under the concern, being fully convinced it was required of me, but giving way
to reasonings, the suggestions and buffetings of Satan, I was likely to lose my
condition, had not the Lord been very gracious, who knew that I did not hold
back obstinately, but through human weakness, and contempt of myself for such a
weighty service; so in a deep travail of soul once in a meeting, breathing for
strength to bring forth, I desired, that the Lord would commit the hardest part
of the work to my charge, which I think was granted, and a hard travail I had
in my first appearance; but it fared otherwise with my brother, whom I prefer,
he was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, submitting speedily to the call,
and has been very prosperous hitherto; may the Lord preserve us steady and
faithful to the end.

After this, we traveled together in Maryland, visiting friends on each side
of the bay, and at the yearly meeting near Choptank, having meetings also in
the way on our return, and were frequently employed and zealously concerned in
the Lord's work; blessed be his name who has called us out of darkness, and
with the day spring from on high visited our souls, accounting us worthy of
this high vocation, even to hold forth the glory of this gospel day, giving
encouragement and enlargement of heart in the mysteries and doctrines of his
kingdom, so that in the ability of divine faith, we frequently traveled about,
both in Virginia and Carolina, while young; but as there is a diversity of
gifts, so there is of operation, according to the good pleasure of our great
benefactor, and the emergency of times and occasions; so let not us of the
ministry, imitate one another in this respect, but be careful, dear friends, to
keep to our true guide, the holy spirit, for youth is warm, zealous, and
without seasonable caution and watchfulness, apt to exceed ability and
experience, and so may be overstrained, and sustain loss and injury.

In the year 1722, he performed a religious visit as far as New England, which
employed him about ten months, and on his return home, he was sued in the
beginning of the following year for priests wages, and for his refusal to
comply with the demand, he offered to the magistrates in writing, sundry
considerations, which being taken amiss, he was, after some time, indicted by
the grand jury, and summoned before the governor and council; in this time of
trial (he says) Some forsook me as being ashamed of my testimony, and of my
sufferings for it; at my first appearance the fierceness of the dragon was
felt, his dark power seeming to be great and terrible, as though he would have
swallowed me up quick, and truth's adversaries seemed to rejoice, for I was
made to stand like a fool for them to glory over me; however my mind being
composed, and stayed in stillness on the Lord, with earnest breathings for
divine aid in this his cause, for which and myself, I found it safest to say
little at that time, being greatly desirous that I might not give way one jot
from my testimony, through fear even of death itself, for I thought I felt the
bitterness of it strike at my natural life.

On the day when final judgment on the case was to be given, I was brought
before them the third time, and they demanded what I had further to say before
sentence was passed; I then desired liberty to make my defense, and to give my
sense on the contents of my paper, the commissary or chief priest having
perverted my meaning, which request the governor seemed disposed to allow, but
it was afterward denied, as I apprehend, through the influence of the priest,
howbeit I told them I remembered to have read a proviso of an act of parliament,
that no man should be punished for any offense against the act, unless he was
prosecuted within three months after the fact, but this, said I, was about
seven months after; but some of the court resolving on severity to induce me to
submit, they proceeded to give sentence of a years imprisonment, or bonds with
security for good behavior etc. when with a composed mind and an audible
voice, I said, this is an hard sentence and I pray God to forgive mine
adversaries, which affected diverse of the bystanders with tears, and one in
particular, a judge, and man of note, was much affected, made himself
acquainted, and conversed with me more than once, appears to be a tender man,
and well convinced, having since gladly received meetings into his house, and
as he has told me, laid down his commission. --

Being committed to prison, I was first placed in the debtors apartment, but in
a few days was removed into the common side, where condemned persons are kept,
and for sometime had not the privilege of seeing any body, except a negro who
once a day brought water to the prisoners; this place was so dark, that I could
not see to read even at noon, without creeping to small holes in the door;
being also very noisome, the infectious air brought on me the flux, that, had
not the Lord been pleased to have sustained me by his invisible hand, I had
there lost my life; the governor was made acquainted with my condition, and I
believe used his endeavors for my liberty: The commissary visited me more than
once under a show of friendship, but with a view to ensnare me, and I was very
weary of him. I wrote again to the governor, to acquaint him of my situation;
so after a confinement of three weeks, I was discharged, without any
acknowledgment or compliance, and this brought me into an acquaintance, and
ready admittance to the governor, who said I was a meek man etc. -- Thus I
returned home with praise and thanksgiving in my heart to the Lord, who had
caused his truth to triumph over the strong efforts of man and the powers of
the earth.

In the year 1725, accompanied by Thomas Pleasants, he again visited friends in
Maryland, and the yearly meeting near Choptank. My concern here (he says) Was
principally to labor for the restoration of wholesome discipline, the neglect
whereof I conceive has been a great cause of the disorder and undue liberty
prevailing among the professors of truth there, and when the service of this
meeting was over, we visited the meetings on the western shore, and returned
home, having left an example of that useful and necessary practice of visiting
families, joining friends therein for sometime; we are, thanks be to God, come
and coming into the same in Virginia, which, with some assistance, I have
pretty generally performed through our monthly meeting, and never, I think, was
more sensible of the company and ability of truth in any service, according to
the dignity of it.

A malicious person getting into his possession, the judgment obtained against
him for the demand of tithes before mentioned, had seven of his cattle seized
and appraised, but deferred taking them away until about two years after, when
he procured a new action against him, alleging, but not proving, that Robert
had converted at least a part of them to his own use, and so managed the matter
in his absence, as to make the debt amount to twenty-pounds, though the demand
was but eight-pounds, and serving the execution on his body, he was again
committed to prison in the twelfth month 1727, where being confined fifteen
weeks, he was at length discharged, without any person paying any thing for
him, which he would not suffer.

Soon after he was brought under a trial, with others of his friends, by the
operatiin of a militia-law, whereupon they addressed governor Gooch on his
arrival, representing to him their sufferings by spoil of goods and
imprisonment, which, with the friends who attended on the occasion, he received
with kindness.

Having this year (he remarks) suffered persecution in body and estate, as a
preparative to a greater affliction, (all which does and will work for good) my
dear affectionate wife was called away.

The next year 1728, he embarked for Great Britain, with our friend Samuel
Bownas, who had accomplished his journeys on this continent in the service of
the gospel; and after performing a religious visit to the meetings of friends
in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, he proceeded to Barbados, and arrived
from thence in this city in 1730, then went to Virginia, and in the same year
performed a visit as far eastward as Rhode Island, accompanied by his intimate
friend Caleb ^^per of Burlington.

The following year intermarrying with Mary the widow of Richard Hill, he
became a member of our monthly meeting, and after a visit to the meetings of
friends in Maryland and Virginia, he embarked on a second visit to
Great Britain, from whence he returned in the summer of 1734, between which
time and the year 1738, he performed another visit eastward, and three to the
southern provinces, besides one to South Carolina and Georgia, and from thence
proceeded to Rhode Island, and to Boston, and in 1740 he went on a second visit
to Barbados, and in the succeeding year, accompanied by Caleb Raper, he
accomplished his last visit eastward as far as Boston.

Hereby we may observe his unwearied application and exercise, to fulfill the
ministry which he had received of the Lord. He was a member of this meeting
above ten years, and though his time was much employed in his religious duties
abroad, he did not omit the adjacent meetings, being industrious and laborious
for the general welfare and prosperity of the churches; for the promotion
whereof he was, through the divine anointing, eminently qualified.

His ministry being convincing and consolatory, his delivery graceful but
unaffected; in prayer he was solemn and reverent; he delighted in meditation,
recommending by example, religious retirement in his familiar visits among his
friends; in his sentiments he was generous and charitable, yet a firm opposer
of obstinate libertines in principles or practice, demonstrating his love to
the cause of Religion and righteousness above all other considerations, being
careful to adorn the doctrine of the gospel, by a life of piety and
benevolence, and we have ground to hope and believe he was, prepared for the
sudden summons from his pilgrimage here, which was on the fifth day of the
eighth month O. S. 1742, when being at the house of one of his most intimate
friends on the third day of the week in the morning, waiting for the hour of
meeting, he was seized with a fit of the apoplexy, which very soon deprived him
of speech, and he died about midnight following, in the forty-ninth year of his
age, being a minister about 24 years; his burial on the 7 th of the same month
was attended by a great number of his fellow-citizens, to our meeting house in
High Street, and thence to the grave-yard.

A Testimony from Abington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
CADWALADER.
HE was convinced of the principle of truth when young, and underwent many deep
baptizing seasons, by which, it is believed, he was in a good degree made an
overcomer. He traveled much in the exercise of his gift in the ministry,
having visited his brethren in truth's service, in most or all parts of this
continent where friends then resided; and crossed the seas twice to Europe on
the same account, and once to the island of Barbados. In which concern he was
always careful to have the concurrence of his brethren, and good accounts and
credentials of his acceptable service were upon all those occasions
communicated to this monthly meeting. He was also serviceable amongst us in
meetings of discipline. His last visit was to the island of Tortola, in company
with our worthy friend John Estaugh. He was taken unwell on his passage
thither, yet when he landed, proceeded in the service he went upon, to the
satisfaction of friends there, as appears from accounts sent hither by a friend
of that island. But his distemper increasing upon him, he departed this life in
peace on said island, the 26 th of the ninth month 1742, aged near sixty-six
years.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOHN
ESTAUGH.
THE remembrance of our dear deceased friend John Estaugh, remains as a good
savor on many of our minds. He was born in Keldevon in Essex in Great Britain,
on the 23 d of the second month 1676. In the year 1700, he came over to America
on a religious visit, which he performed to the great satisfaction of friends;
after which, he settled at Haddonfield, in the county of Gloucester, and
western division of New Jersey. He has been heard to say, that when he first
settled in our parts, he was nearly united to a solid remnant of friends that
then belonged to Newtown-meeting, and that he had been careful to feel the
drawings of the father's love in visiting neighboring meetings, in many of
which, he was favored to minister suitably to the states and conditions of
those that heard him; he being as a scribe well instructed, who brought forth
out of the heavenly treasury, things both new and old. -- Since his first
settlement among us, he visited friends in England, Ireland, New England and
some of the West-India-Islands, several times. He was an humble minded
exemplary friend, solid and grave in his deportment, well becoming a minister
of Christ, zealous for preserving good order in the church, and maintaining
love and unity, that badge of true discipleship, remarkably careful in his
conversation among men, his words being few and savoury. The last visit which
he made was to the island of Tortola, where after his service was over, he was
taken sick, and departed this life: And we doubt not but that he is in the
fruition of that glory and happiness which will never have an end.

An Abstract from Elizabeth Estaugh's Testimony, concerning her beloved husband
JOHN ESTAUGH deceased, prefixed to a treatise of his, entitled "A call to the
unfaithful professors of truth."
SINCE it pleased divine providence so highly to favor me, with being the near
companion of this dear worthy, I cannot be altogether silent, but must give
some small account of the early working of truth in him. He was born of
religious parents, but grew uneasy with the religious professions of both
father and mother who were of different persuasions, and being a seeker, fell
in with the baptists, and liked them so well he was near joining them. But a
neighbor who was a friend, being dead, he was invited to the burial, where
that worthy minister of the gospel, Francis Stamper of London, being led to
speak with life and power directly to his state, it made such deep impressions
on his tender mind, that put him upon search into the principles of friends,
and being fully satisfied, joined with them in the seventeenth year of his age.

About the eighteenth year of his age, he came forth in the ministry, and being
faithful he grew in his gift, so that in some time he traveled to visit
friends in the north of England, and Scotland, and in the year 1700 came over
on a visit to friends in America. We were married on the first day of the tenth
month 1702, and settled at Haddonfield in New Jersey. In the fore part of his
time he traveled pretty much; but in the latter part he was prevented
therefrom by an infirmity of body; and his good master, who requires no
impossibilities of his servants, favored him with being easy at home; where
through mercy, we lived very comfortably; few, if any, in a married state, ever
lived in sweeter harmony than we did. He was a pattern of moderation in all
things; not lifted up with any enjoyments, nor cast down at disappointments; a
man endowed with many good gifts, which rendered him very agreeable to his
friends, and much more to me, his wife.

After some years of indisposition, (as before is observed) it pleased the Lord
to restore him to a state of health; and soo^ after he had a concern to visit
friends at Tortola. This brought on him a deep exercise, but when he was
confirmed it was really required of him, he gave up to it; and was then weaned
from home, and the company there which used to be so pleasant to him. He first
wrote to friends on that island; but finding that would not excuse him, he
durst no longer delay; so, on the 13 th of the eighth month 1742, we parted in
the aboundings of love and affection. And now, the most acceptable account I
can give of his service in Tortola, is extracted from two letters which I
received from a friend of that place, directed to me, and to the following
effect, viz.

On the eighth of the ninth month 1742, he arrived at the house of John
Pickering with his companion John Cadwalader, where they were received with
much love and great joy, being made to rejoice together in the tender mercies
and love of God, which was greatly manifested that day, to the honor and
praise of his great name, and also to the comforting of his poor people. The
testimonies of these servants of the Lord were with life and power, and were as
clouds filled with rain upon a thirsty land. --

But to be more particular concerning thy dear husband, whose memory is dear
and precious to me, and many more whose hearts were open to receive the
glad-tidings which he brought. His godly life and conversation spoke him to be
a true follower of the the Lamb, and minister of Jesus Christ, whom he freely
preached, and by the effectual power of whose divine love, was he called forth
to our assistance, for which we bless, praise and magnify the God of all our
mercies: And as a faithful messenger, with much love, in a tender frame of
spirit, would he invite all to the fountain which had healed him. O! the deep
humility that appeared in him in the time of his public testimony; and when in
private conversation with his near and dear friends, as he often said we were
to him, how cheerful and pleasant would he be, in that blessed freedom wherein
Christ had made him free, Innocent, harmless, of a cheerful countenance, yet
not without a christian gravity well becoming the doctrine he preached. He was
valiant for the truth to the last, and though he is gone to his grave, his memory
is sweet and precious.

He had his health very well until the death of his dear companion; but going
to his burial, we were caught in a shower of rain, which we and he believed was
the occasion of his illness. However, he was mightily favored with the divine
presence, which enabled him to answer the service of that day; and the next,
being the first day of the week, we had a blessed meeting, the Lord's presence
accompanying us; and though thy dear husband was so near his end, his candle
shined as bright as ever, and many that beheld it were made to glorify God on
his behalf, This was the last opportunity on this island, save his farewell
upon his dying bed, where he both preached and prayed, a little before his
departure.

On the next day, being the second day of the week, he went to a little island
called Jos Vandicks, accompanied with several friends; but on the 3 d day in
the morning he complained very much, yet was enabled to go to meeting, where a
pretty many people were assembled, and a blessed opportunity we had together,
to the tendering and melting our hearts into a heavenly frame.

But he who never spared his labor whilst amongst us, extending his voice as a
trumpet of the Lord's own sounding, was so inwardly spent he was ready to
faint. However, he went on board the sloop that afternoon, and next morning
came ashore at our house; where he had not been long before a shivering fit
seized him, and a fever soon followed, which kept its constant course every
day. This being the 1 st day of the tenth month, he took great notice that it
ended forty years since his marriage with thee; that during that time you had
lived in much love, and parted in the same; and that thou wast his greatest
concern of all outward enjoyments. And though the last two days he was in much
pain, yet he was preserved under it in much patience and resignation, and had
his perfect senses to the last, exhorting friends to faithfulness, etc. And on,
the 6 th day of the tenth month, about six-o'clock at night, he went away like
a lamb, with praises and thanksgivings in his lips but about two minutes
before. Thus far from the said letters.

And thus finished this dear worthy in the sixty-seventh year of his age;
highly favored by his great and good master in the very extreme moments; the
consideration whereof, and the account given of his service, afford me, at
times, some relief. And I have a secret satisfaction in that I was enabled to
give him up (though so dear to me) unto the service into which he was called.
This is a hint for those who may be under the like exercise and trial, that
they may not hold back, but submit, and freely give up their all, leaving the
consequence to the wise disposing hand, who knows for what cause it is, he is
pleased so nearly to try his people.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning SAMUEL
PRESTON.
HE was born in Maryland, but removing to settle in and near this city, he
became and continued a member of this meeting; being an elder circumspect in
his conduct, and carefully concerned for the good of the church, active and
serviceable in the maintenance of our christian discipline; and by his
attention to the dictates of divine grace, he became well qualified for this
service. He filled some stations in the government, wherein he acquitted
himself with justice and uprightness; and being endued with a clear judgment
and good understanding, his integrity to what he believed to be his duty,
became conspicuous and instructive; being a lover of truth, and extensive in
his charity to mankind. In his last illness he discovered great resignation of
mind, and much love and fellowship with his brethren, with whom he lived and
died in good unity.

He departed this life on the 10 th of the seventh month 1743, in the
seventy-ninth year of his age.

His first wife Rachel, was one of the daughters of our worthy friend Thomas
Lloyd, and was said to have been a very serviceable, judicious, and valuable
woman.

His second wife, was Margaret the widow of Josiah Langdale (a worthy minister
who lived in Yorkshire in Great Britain, and had formerly visited friends in
America, but concluding afterward to remove with his family to Pennsylvania,
he died on his passage in the year 1723.) -- Concerning the said Margaret, the
aforesaid monthly meeting of Philadelphia thus testify.

"She was endued with an excellent gift in the ministry, and traveled much in
the service of truth through this and the neighboring provinces; her testimony
being lively, sound and edifying, was well received among friends; being
likewise well qualified for the maintenance of our discipline, she became an
useful instrument for the promotion and support of our christian testimony. She
died the 23 d of the sixth month 1742, in the fifty-eighth year of her age."

According to John Rutty's account, she went from Yorkshire on a religious
visit to Ireland in 1715.

A Testimony from friends in Virginia, concerning THOMAS PLEASANTS.
HE was the eldest son of John and Dorothy Pleasants, and born the 3 d of the
ninth month 1695; being a youth of good natural parts, and well instructed in
school-learning. His father dying whilst he was young, he was deprived of the
additional advantage, of the admonitions and restraints of a worthy parent, so
beneficial to the forming the minds of youth: Nevertheless he had an eye to the
recompense of reward, and about the twenty-ninth year of his age was called to
the work of the ministry, in which he labored both amongst friends and other
people much to satisfaction, having meetings where none had been held before.
Once, in company with his brother Robert Jordan, he visited friends on the
western shore of Maryland, and also attended the yearly meeting at Choptank, on
the eastern shore. His services seemed much confined to his own country, where,
though the number of friends was small, he was not discouraged thereat, but
endeavored to discharge his duty amongst them, not only at the adjacent
meetings but those more at a distance, and was made instrumental in convincing
several in the upper parts of the colony, as well as in settling two or three
meetings. A few years before his decease, he wrote an epistle, directed to
friends in every station, but more particularly to the ministers, thereby
further demonstrating that his diligence and labors proceeded from an earnest
concern for the promotion of truth and a right gospel ministry. He was indeed a
man much devoted to the service of truth, and a considerable sufferer for
bearing his testimony against priests-wages, having once been a prisoner on
that account. He married Mary the daughter of Robert Jordan of Nancemond
county, and left a numerous offspring, some of them young, for whose eternal
welfare he was particularly solicitous; being once on a visit to friends at
some distance from home, he was taken very ill, and seemed desirous that he
might finish his course among his dear children, in order that he might have an
opportunity at that awful period, of enforcing his experienced advices to them,
and promoting the cause of God to which he was much devoted to the last.
Accordingly he departed this life at his own house the 24 th of the eleventh
month 1744, and on the 28 th of the same month was interred in the family
burying-ground at Curles, attended by a numerous company of friends and
neighbors.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning
CADWALLADER EVANS.
HE was a native of the principality of Wales, and arrived in Pennsylvania in
the year School. And although he was not then in profession with friends, yet he
soon after entered into close fellowship with them, and continued steadfast to
his end. He was a diligent and seasonable attender of our religious meetings:
On first days particularly, he was ready an hour before the time appointed, and
then read several chapters in the bible or some religious book: As the time
approached, he would frequently observe the time of day, and by means of such
watchful care, he was seated in meetings one of the first, and scarcely ever
after the time appointed. The gravity and composure of his countenance as he
sat in silence, was no less remarkable than his punctual attendance, and
bespoke such inward recollection and divine engagement of mind, as often
attracted the eyes and affected the hearts of others.

He received a gift in the ministry, in the exercise whereof, he was generally
led to speak of his own experience in religion and the christian warfare; and
his testimony, though short, was instructive, lively, and manifestly attended
with divine sweetness: Notwithstanding it was always acceptable, he was very
cautious of appearing, lest any, as he often said, should be drawn from a right
concern of mind, to place their dependence on words.

He was zealously concerned for the honor and promotion of truth, and support
of our christian discipline; and being endued with discerning, and clear
judgment tempered with charity, he was very useful in many services of the
church, especially that weighty one of visiting friends in their families. And
although he was naturally of a warm disposition, yet a tender regard to the
service of truth, and a continual awe of the divine presence presided in his
heart, insomuch that meekness and condescension were conspicuous in his conduct.

There was a freedom and affability in his behavior and conversation, which
indicated a benevolence of heart, and endeared him, not only to the household of
faith, but also to the profligate and vain; rendering him serviceable in
composing differences, and in comforting the sick and afflicted; and
particularly in that skilful and tender office of healing discord in private
families, wherein his endeavors were remarkably successful. In such services,
he spent much of the latter part of his life, riding about from one house to
another; and where no cause of reprehension appeared, he interspersed his
discourse on common affairs, with useful hints, solid remarks, and lessons of
instruction. But where admonition or comfort were necessary, the propriety of
his advice and the uprightness of his life, added weight to his labors, and
seldom failed of good effects.

In private life, few had a better claim to the virtues of temperance, justice,
industry and frugality, and as he well knew how advantageous it was, "To train
up a child in the way he should walk," he took frequent opportunities to drop
his experienced advice among those under his care. It was his practice, in
winter evenings especially, to read the holy scriptures in his family, and was
particularly careful that neither child nor servant should be from home at
unseasonable hours* being highly sensible how slippery the paths of youth are,
and how numerous the snares which attend them.

He was greatly favored in the use of his natural abilities, and enjoyed an
uncommon share of health until his last illness, which was short; during that
time, very many came to see him, who showed great marks of esteem and
affection; and even libertines whom he had often rebuked and treated with, were
deeply affected with sorrow: Indeed it was rare to see so many tears shed at a
sick bed, more especially of one of his years, which gave a proof that he had
not outlived his services. His soul overflowed with love to God and man, and
being favored in his last moments, with a blessed hope and confidence, he was
going to that place which God had prepared for those that love him; he had a
happy exit from time to eternity, the 30 th of the third month 1745, aged
eighty-one.

A Testimony from Kennet Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning WILLIAM
LEVIS.
WILLIAM LEVIS, of Kennet in Chester county Pennsylvania, son of Samuel Levis
an early settler in Springfield in said county, was born in Springfield
aforesaid, about the year 1688, and removed to Kennet about 1718. By giving
heed to the measure of grace bestowed upon him, he became a serviceable friend
in the society in diverse respects; was a good neighbor, kind and open hearted
to his friends, and has left a good report.

His last sickness was the small pox, which was heavy upon him, but he bore it
with much patience and resignation of mind to the last; saying, that when the
distemper came into the house, it was no surprise to him, for he was freely
resigned, and thankful he was so, ^or he could not of himself. The same evening
he was taken sick, he signed his will, and remarked how good it ^a to be
contented to bear affliction. One night, as those that watched with him were
preparing something for him to take, he said, 'You shall see your endeavors
for me will avail nothing.' He continued in a state of resignation and appeared
cheerful in the time of his illness. When nearer his end, he was concerned that
others might do their duty faithfully according to the best of their
understanding, saying, I have often thought at other times as at this, of the
shortness of our lives and time here, and the uncertainty thereof, which ought
to engage us to circumspection and faithfulness to the Lord, and I charge you
here that are elders, to discharge your trust faithfully in the sight of the
Lord, having your eye single to him, and let nothing of self rule, and then his
work will be carried on in love and patience. I could be glad to have an
opportunity once more with my friends, but if I should not, I would have those
present, to acquaint them with what I have to say, and press it home to the
elders, that they may faithfully discharge their duty, and acquit themselves of
that charge wherewith they are entrusted; and also that parents of children and
heads of families, may faithfully discharge that great duty which is laid upon
them, not only in being good examples to their children and families, but also
to be concerned that they follow their footsteps, adding, it was a noble
testimony that God gave of Abraham, I know him, that he will command his
children and his household after him. And if parents were concerned to teach
their children and bring them up in the way of their duty to God, and less
concerned to deck and set them off, and provide things to make them look great
in the world, it would be of far more benefit to them. And my desire is, that
elders may walk faithfully as good stewards, not only in their own families,
but to the flock which they have the oversight of; that so they may leave a
good savor to the rising and succeeding generation. I am sensible that all
those who are rightly concerned for the discipline and promotion of truth, will
meet with trials from that libertine spirit which would lay all waste; these
will say, that religion consists not in such small things; but I have observed,
that one small thing makes way for another, and greater things will take place;
and if there is not a careful watching against these small things, the eye that
should be kept open to see the evil of them, will become darkened. But keep ye
your places, and labor in faithfulness with such, if possible to gain them;
but if after friends labor, they will not be gathered, friends will be clear
and have peace in themselves; but a blast will come on such troublesome
spirits. And as friends faithfully maintain this their discipline, the Lord
will preserve them, but if they neglect it they will surely suffer loss. To
some present who had been engaged in the service of visiting families, he said
It was a good work and desired it might not be forgotten. At another time,
being in a weighty frame of mind, he said, There is an enemy busy to accuse the
innocent, and prompts on the wicked in their wickedness. Seeing his
affectionate wife and sister with some neighbors weeping, he said, Don't weep
for me, but be you faithful, and we shall meet again, for it is the hardest of
all to see you weep.

The morning before he died, he desired to be helped to the chamber where his
eldest son lay ill of the same disorder, and sitting down by him, he charged
his children to be dutiful to their mother, and have a care of doing any thing
that would be a trouble to her, but mind to take her advice, and desired a
blessing might attend them; adding, My race is almost run, and I shall lay down
my head in peace with the Lord; and if you are faithful (meaning his wife and
children) and live in the fear of God, he will bless you. After some time of
silence, he said, Farewell my son, the Lord bless thee my child, and thine
after thee. Being then helped down stairs, he sat in his chair, and after a
time of silence, clasped his hands together, saying with a composed
countenance, 'I bless thee O Lord' Afterward laying still in a quiet composed
frame of mind, he grew weaker and weaker, and about the ninth hour in the
evening, departed without sigh or groan, like one going to sleep, and we
believe in peace with God and unity with faithful friends.

He died the 17 th of the second month 1747, in the fifty-ninth year of his
age, and was interred in Kennet burying-ground, the 19 th of the same month.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly-Meeing in Pennsylvania, concerning EVAN EVANS.
HE was born in Merionethshire, in the principality of Wales, in the year 1684,
and came to Pennsylvania with his parents in School; under whom he received a
sober religious education; but, being early in life convinced, that a form of
godliness, without the real enjoyment of the quickening principle of grace and
truth, would not afford solid and lasting peace to his soul, he therefore
sought earnestly after it, and resigned his heart to the baptizing power of
God, which fitted him for eminent services in the church.

In his constant attendance at our religious meetings, he was a remarkable
example of unaffected piety; for whilst he sat in silence, the earnestness
wherewith his soul "wrestled for a blessing," was obvious in the steady engaged
appearance of his countenance. He was favored with an excellent gift in the
ministry, which he exercised in solemn dread and reverence; and as he always
retained an awful sense of appearing in public testimony, he was particularly
cautious and watchful, not to presume to speak without assurance of a necessity
being laid upon him, and equally careful to attend to the continuance of it:
And therefore his "Preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but
in the demonstration of the spirit and of power." His service was rendered more
effectual, by the distinguishing marks which he bore, of "An Israelite indeed,
in whom was no guile," a plainness and simplicity of manner in word and deed,
with a zeal seasoned witb divine love; and as he had large experience in the
work of regeneration and the mysteries of the heavenly kingdom, as well as the
snares of the world, he was thereby well qualified to administer to the states
of the people.

He traveled through many of these colonies in the service of the ministry, in
company with his relation and dear friend John Evans. Their friendship was
pure, fervent, and lasting as their lives, and their separation a wound to the
latter, the remembrance of which he never wholly survived. He also frequently
visited the several counties in this province, and more particularly many of
the adjacent meetings in their infancy; wherein his unwearied labors of love,
tended much to their comfort, growth, and establishment in the truth.

He was religiously concerned for the support of our christian discipline; and
as he was always diffident of himself, he labored faithfully for the discovery
of truth and a disposition of mind to embrace it; whereby he was often enabled
to lay "Judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet," whether in
reproof to the obdurate, or instruction and comfort to the penitent. In
visiting friends families his service was great; for being endued with a spirit
of discerning and the authority of truth, his advice was adapted with great
propriety and advantage, to the particular states and conditions of persons and
families. His conduct and conversation in common life, adorned the doctrine he
preached, being a good example of plainness, moderation, and uprightness of
heart.

He was abroad in the service of truth when attacked with his last illness; and
as the disorder was slow and tedious, he attended several meetings in the
forepart thereof; in some of which, his lively powerful testimonies clearly
manifested, that the God of his youth who had raised him up an instrument in
his hand, and on whom he had relied all his life, continued to be his shield
and support in the evening of his days and period of life; which was on the 24
th of the fifth month 1747. He was buried at Gwynedd.

A Testimony from Buckingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JACOB
HOLCOMBE.
HE was born at or near Tiverton in Old England, being a descendant of friends:
His father died while he was young, and his mother brought him up to useful
learning, being naturally of a quick and cheerful disposition, and his capacity
large and extensive. The prime and strength of his days, was, much of it, spent
in folly and vanity, until it pleased the Lord effectually to touch his heart,
and favor him with a close visitation of his blessed truth, which wrought a
willingness in him to take up the cross, and submit to the Lord's righteous
judgments, whereby he came to witness a being redeemed from his former
conversation, and was often zealously concerned to tell others, what the Lord
had done for his soul. He was frequent and diligent in the exercise of his gift
in the ministry, which was acceptable; often signifying he was as one born out
of due time: He was zealous in maintaining the discipline of the church,
wherein he was clear and his labor very helpful and serviceable; very diligent
in attending meetings for worship and discipline, wherein he was exemplary by
his steady waiting and lively labor that life might be witnessed.

In his last illness, which was short, he appeared cheerful, patient and
resigned; saying, There was no cloud in his way, that he was thankful he had
known his redeemer to live, and redeem him from all iniquity, and that he was
well assured he should see a happy eternity.

He died the 30 th of the sixth month 1748, and was buried at Buckingham. A
minister upwards of 18 years.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ALICE
GRIFFITH.
ALICE GRIFFITH, late wife of Hugh Griffith, of North Wales in the county of
Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, was one that feared the Lord from her youth,
remarkable for her modesty and plainness. When she was married and settled, she
demonstrated a religious concern for the advancement of truth and welfare of
the professors thereof; and being a woman of great integrity and uprightness of
heart, became very serviceable in diverse respects; zealous for maintaining good
order and christian discipline in the church.

She was well qualified for that weigh service of visiting families, having, at
such opportunities, to communicate of her own experience, and tell what God had
done for her soul; and under a good degree of divine influence, would often be
drawn forth in opening divine mysteries, as if she had been in a large
assembly, as many witnesses can testify, that have been sensibly reached, yea
baptized by her religious visits; at which she was mostly full of good matter,
well adapted and suitable to the different circumstances of individuals and
families.

She was often concerned to stir up her friends, to a close attendance of
meetings, both on first and other days, as also to observe the hour appointed,
being herself a good example therein, until, by old age and infirmity of body
she was disabled, which was about three years before her removal. And
notwithstanding the circumspect life and watchful state she was observed to be
in, yet in the time of her weakness, she was visited with great discouragements
and dejections, as may appear by her following expressions.

At a certain time she was heard to say, Lord how long will thou withdraw
thyself from me, and not show for what cause I am thus afflicted; I have been
acquainted with thy righteous judgments, which were ever mixed with mercy; but
now, my trouble is more than I am well able to bear, being almost ready to
sink. Again was heard to say, Lord, wherein have I offended thee; what part of
my duty have I neglected, that thou should thus hide thy face from me? Time
was, when my hope in full assurance was to rest in thee, but now I fear I shall
become a castaway. At another time she said, What have I done that I should be
thus afflicted, Lord shall there be any end of my sorrow? Many sweet times and
opportunities I have had when alone, but now am left as in the dark, fearing to
make one step forward lest I stumble, he that once was my guide has now left
me. Again said, I still desire to be willing to suffer whilst in this body, any
thing thou may please to bring upon me, be the exercise of what kind soever,
if thou will favor me with thy living presence; then Lord, shall not any thing
be too near or dear to part with, or to suffer for thy namesake. Yea Lord, if
thou should see meet to deprive me of my sight or hearing, health or speech,
let me never murmur, but Oh! give patience to bear this inexpressible exercise
to the end. One morning, after calling her two daughters, she said, Pu^ by your
work my children, for I have to tell you of a glorious visitation the Lord was
pleased to favor me with. As I was making my supplication to him for
deliverance and redemption from my sore exercise, and to obtain some
refreshment to my poor distressed soul, the Lord was graciously pleased to
answer my request in a satisfactory manner: He opened the eye of my mind, to
see him coming in his glory to relieve me from my long distress. May my whole
trust and confidence ever abide in him, who has so filled my heart with joy,
that pain and grief vanished away. This glorious season surpassed! all that
ever I had known before: At which time, the Lord gave me a sure promise, that,
although my afflictions were many, and more I had yet to go through, yet I should
in the end, be rewarded with a crown of righteousness in the kingdom of rest
and peace; with more to the same effect.

It was observed, that a certain change appeared in her countenance from that
time forward; she being cheerful and pleasant and never sad as before.

Her decease was on the first day of the second month 1749, and was buried on
the 3 d of the same.

A Testimony from friends in Virginia, concerning SARAH PLEASANTS.
SARAH PLEASANTS, fourth daughter of Thomas and Mary Pleasants, was taken ill
the 26 th of the seventh month, and departed this life the 7 th of the eighth
month 1749, in the seventeenth year of her age. In the time of her illness, she
called to several persons then present, to view her blooming youth, how
changed, and likely in a short time to bid adieu to the world and all its
enjoyments; praying that the moment she was prepared she might go; but in a
particular manner, she desired the physician who attended her, to observe the
frailty of poor mortals, as well as the uncertainty of time in this life,
saying, Look on me doctor, I am like a bud cropped from the vine before it is
fully blown, yet young as I am, I have something to repent of, which in health
and strength we are apt to overlook, and flatter ourselves is no crime, which
is, I have been too much given to laughter and jesting with those of my
companions who fondly embraced and returned the same, naming one in particular,
whom she expressed a great desire to see before she died, that she might warn
her of the weight she now felt, not only in these two things, but in a third,
which was, taking too much delight in dress. Then directing her discourse to
the doctor, she said, Nothing, else have I to charge myself with, yet, dear
doctor, I find it enough, therefore let me prevail with thee to take warning by
me; I am sensible that some things thou art in the practice of, are full as
dangerous, if not more so, than those which now lay so heavy on me; that of
drinking to excess to oblige company, as thy excuse and many others is, yet
thou will find it of greater weight when thou comes to lay in the condition I
now am in, than now thou may think possible, thou will surely wish it had been
left undone, with all other unprofitable things. The doctor replied weeping, I
take it very kind and hope I shall observe it. Many more good expressions and
advice she dropped to him and others then about her. -- She one day called her
brother Thomas to her bedside, and said to him, Dear brother, I know thy
situation to be very lonesome, and destitute of suitable company,
notwithstanding, I pray thee, keep as much as possible out of low company, not
the poor do I mean, because they are poor, but the loose and vulgar, whether
poor or rich, which are of a corrupting spirit, and will tend to the hurt of
those who associate with them; but keep thy place and thou will be like a light
set on a hill, as a guide to others, who will praise God on thy behalf.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning WILLIAM
TROTTER.
OUR friend William Trotter, late of Plymouth in the county of Philadelphia,
son of William Trotter, was born in the fourth month 1695, of religious
parents, and was educated amongst friends; as he grew in years, he was blessed,
in that he grew in grace, and in the fear and knowledge of our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. About the twenty-first year of his age, he received a
gift in the ministry, in which he was frequently exercised during the course of
his life. His ministry was sound and savoury, attended with a good degree of
that life and power "By which the dead are raised, and without which all
preaching is vain." He was not tedious or burdensome, but often very reaching
and edifying to his hearers. In his life and conversation he was grave, yet
innocently cheerful, and strictly just in his dealings, also a lover and
promoter of peace, unity, and brotherly love amongst friends, of which himself
was a good pattern. He was generally beloved during his life, and at his death
left a good savor. His removal from time to a happy eternity, though certainly
his greatest gain, was a considerable loss to the meeting where he belonged. He
departed this life on the 19 th of the tenth month 1749, aged about fifty-three
years and six months, and was interred on the 21 st of the same month, in
friends burying-ground at Plymouth; and we believe is gone from his laborious
service here, to receive a heavenly reward of peace, "Where the wicked cease
from troubling, and the weary be at rest."

A Testimony from Salem Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ELIZABETH
WYATT.
ELIZABETH WYATT (wife of Bartholomew Wyatt) a minister, removed by marriage,
within the limits of our monthly meeting, in the year 1730, as appears by her
certificate from Haddonfield monthly meeting. Her testimony was large and
edifying, sound in word and doctrine, to the comfort of the humble minded
amongst us; yet she was a sharp threshing instrument in the hand of the Lord,
against the backsliders and unfaithful professors of truth.

Her labors were not confined to this meeting, but it pleased the great Lord
of the harvest, to send her forth in his service into other provinces on this
continent, as Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, New England,
Rhode Island, Long Island, etc. in all which she had good service for truth, as
appears by certificates produced to this meeting. She was exemplary in life and
conversation, adorning the doctrine she had to deliver; and was in good esteem
amongst her friends and neighbors. It pleased God to take her off the stage of
this world, on the 20 th of the eleventh month 1749-50, aged forty-three years.
It may be observed, that about three years of her time, her residence with her
husband and family was at Philadelphia, to the satisfaction of friends there,
as appears by certificate from thence.

Her name before marriage was Tomlinson, she first appeared in public testimony
at Evesham-meeting in New Jersey, while she lived at the house of our friends
William and Elizabeth Evans, which was about four years before her marriage.
Besides what is truly said of her above, it may be justly. added, that her
capacity, qualifications and improvements were superior to most, and that she
possessed a cheerfulness of temper, joined with great discretion, which
rendered her company very desirable and profitable.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ANN
ROBERTS.
SHE was convinced of the truth in her native country, Wales, when young, which
incurred her father's heavy displeasure, but in time he became reconciled to
her. Some years after her convincement, she came over into this country, where
she received a gift in the ministry, and by a diligent improvement thereof,
together with the influence of a pious life, she was made useful in her
generation and a blessing to many. Her love and companion for the widow, the
fatherless, and others in affliction, appeared by her often visiting them: She
was one of the wise in heart, who was favored to foresee the enemy in his
approaches, and would rouse and excite her fellow soldiers to use their utmost
endeavors to repel his attempts, which was often done with desirable. success.
She was also zealously concerned for maintaining christian discipline in the
church.

She was rightly qualified for the weighty service of visiting friends
families, and at those opportunities was frequently favored with something
suitable to every state and condition, which was attended with beneficial
effects, especially on the youth. But such indeed was the divine savor which
usually accompanied her discourse and conversation, one could rarely be an hour
with her without sensible edification.

Her first coming to reside among us was seasonable, for we having but few
ministers, the field before her was extensive, in which she labored fervently,
tenderly inviting those afar off to draw nigh, and querying with them, whether
they knew what the Lord had for them to do. By the visitations of heaven and a
blessing on her labors, many came to have their mouths opened to speak of
God's goodness to their souls; whereby was verified, what she had declared at
our meeting before she came to dwell among us, though it then seemed
improbable, and some doubted the accomplishment thereof. To these babes in the
ministry, she who had a large share of experience in the work, was not wanting
to administer suitable precaution and advice.

She went pretty much abroad, visiting friends in this and the adjacent
provinces, to wit, the Jerseys, Maryland, Virginia and Carolina, accompanied to
the remotest parts by her near and dear friend Susanna Morris. In her more
advanced years she visited Great Britain, accompanied by our esteemed friend
Mary Pennel, between whom a near and strict union was preserved throughout
their travels; and she brought home very clear and comfortable accounts of her
acceptable service in the gospel ministry, and her godly conversation in Christ.

After her return from Great Britain, she met with great difficulties in
respect to her outward circumstances, which she sustained with christian
fortitude. A near friend of hers asking her how she felt under it, she replied,
While I keep my eye steadily directed to the object worthy of our chief regard,
it seems as if a wall was on each side; all is calm, and nothing hurts or
annoys: But if I suffer my eye to wander to the right hand or the left, the
enemy breaks in upon me like a torrent, which hurries me away, and it is with
great difficulty I recover myself. After this, she met with a very heavy
affliction in the loss of her husband, which she likewise bore with becoming
resignation and composure of mind. In a few months afterward, she fell into a
lingering disorder; (the dropsy) and as in time of health she preferred the
prosperity of truth to her chief joy, so in her illness she rejoiced much to
hear of any young people appearing hopeful in the ministry. On the other hand,
she would, even in time of great weakness, lament with anxiety of mind the low
situation of the seed, and say Oh! what will become of us? Will this dark cloud
which hangs over our assemblies, terminate in a boisterous storm to try the
foundations of the children of men?

By the long continuance of her disorder, she was reduced to great weakness
sometime before her end; yet it was evident, that charity, (to wit) Love to God
and his people, continued with her to the last.

She died on the 9 th day of the fourth month 1750, in the seventy-third year
of her age, having been a minister 50 years, and was buried at Gwynedd
aforesaid; on which solemn occasion we had a good meeting, the extendings of
divine love being witnessed.

A Testimony from Wilmington Monthly Meeting in the county of New Castle on
Delaware, concerning LYDIA DEAN.
SHE was the daughter of Joseph Gilpin, of Birmingham in Chester county
Pennsylvania; was born the 11 th of the eleventh month School, and married to
William Dean of the aforesaid place in 1722. In the year 1728 she appeared in
the ministry, much in the cross, which was manifest by her brokenness of heart
and contrition of spirit under the weight thereof. And as she became willing to
give up all for the cause of truth, the Lord in his own time made her a living
minister of the everlasting gospel; in the exercise whereof, she was drawn to
visit friends in New England, Jersey and Maryland. Her ministry was plain and
powerful, often speaking particularly to the states of meetings where her lot
was cast; her conversation solid, weighty and grave, becoming the gospel of
Christ; and very helpful to those who stood in need. Her place of abode was at
Birmingham aforesaid, until about a year before her decease, when the family
removed to Wilmington; where she had the exercise of parting with several of
her children, who were taken away by death; which she bore with patience and
great resignation to the will of divine providence, expressing a sense she had
of her own dissolution being nigh: And being engaged with friends who were
visiting families belonging to this monthly meeting, she was taken sick, and
her illness increasing, she said, the day before she died, It was the
joyfullest day she ever had.

Thus having passed the time of her sojourning here, in a good degree of godly
fear, she finished her course, and is gone (we doubt not) into the mansions of
undisturbed rest.

She departed this life the 2 d of the tenth month 1750, and was interred in
friends burying-ground at Wilmington, aged fifty-two, a minister 22 years.

A Testimony from Richland Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning THOMAS
LANCASTER.
ABOUT ten years of the latter part of his time, he was a member of this
meeting, he was sound in the ministry, and exercised his gift therein with
great fervency and zeal, his life and conversation corresponding therewith. In
the second month 1750, he laid before our meeting his concern to visit friends
on the islands of Barbados and Tortola, which the meeting approved of, and gave
him a certificate in order thereto: Toward the latter end of the same year he
performed said visit, and had good service there, as appeared by certificates
from friends on each of the said islands; on his return homewards, it pleased
divine providence to visit him with sickness, of which he died at sea; his
removal being deeply felt and lamented by his family and friends at home.

A Testimony from friends in Virginia, concerning WILLIAM LADD.
WILLIAM LADD, son of John and Mary Ladd, both from Old-England, was born near
Curles in Virginia, in the sixth month 1679, and about the time of his marriage
he removed to Wainoak, became a member of that meeting, and resided there the
remainder of his days. He had an acceptable gift in the ministry, and was a
great sufferer for bearing a testimony against the hireling ministers. In one
instance, a very exorbitant seizure was made upon his effects, yet he lived to
see the officer who made it reduced to such low circumstances, that he
charitably contributed to supply his necessities. -- He continued a faithful
sufferer to the end of his days, encouraging his children to faithfulness,
saying, The truth is more to me, than my all in this world. -- The night of his
decease, one of the family saying, This was to be a night of great sorrow to
them, he replied, 'It was a night of great joy to him,' which was one of the
last of his expressions. -- He died the 27 th of the ninth month 1751, and was
buried in the family burying-ground near his own house, aged seventy-two, and a
minister about 25 years.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning ISRAEL
PEMBERTON.
HE was born in the county of Bucks in Pennsylvania, in the year 1684, being
descended of pious parents, well esteemed among friends in the first settlement
of this province. He served his apprenticeship and settled in this city. Having
chosen the fear of the Lord in his youth, and being preserved therein, he
established and supported an unblemished character, by his justice, integrity,
and uprightness in his, dealings amongst men, and his mild, steady and prudent
conduct through life. He was a member of this meeting near fifty years, and
being well grounded in the principles of truth, of sound judgment and
understanding, he approved himself a faithful elder; adorning our holy
profession by a life of meekness, humility, circumspection, and a disinterested
regard to the honor of truth; of great use in the exercise of our discipline,
being a lover of peace and unity in the church, careful to promote and maintain
it; constant in the attendance of meetings, and his deportment therein, grave,
solid and reverent, and a true sympathizer with those who were honestly
concerned in the ministry; a conspicuous example of moderation and plainness;
extensive in his charity and of great benevolence. In conversation cheerful,
attended with a peculiar sweetness of disposition, which rendered his company
both agreeable and instructive.

A few days before his decease, being in a free converse with two of his
friends whom he much loved and respected, he took occasion to recount many
occurrences of his life, and with a great sense of gratitude, to express the
lively remembrance he retained of the merciful extendings of divine love
toward him in his youth, by the continuance whereof he had been enabled to
persevere in a conscientious discharge of his religious duties to the best of
his knowledge; and that being still favored with a degree of the same love, it
was his greatest comfort in his declining years.

His death was sudden, though not altogether unexpected, having been at
intervals, frequently affected with a dizziness in his head; and several times
so as to deprive him of his speech.

He was very lively and pleasant the morning before his departure, and in the
afternoon went to the burial of an acquaintance, and accompanied the corpse to
the graveyard, where he was seized with a fit, supposed to be of the
apoplectick kind, and expired in about an hour; being the 19 th of the first
month 1754, and was buried on the 22 d of the same month, in the sixty-ninth
year of his age.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning HANNAH
COOPER.
OUR well esteemed friend Hannah Cooper, was born in Wensleydale in Yorkshire
Great Britain, and arrived at Philadelphia in the year 1732, on a religious
visit to friends in America, and performing that service, was afterward
married to our friend Joseph Cooper, a member of this monthly meeting, where
she resided the most of the remaining part of her life, except when she was
called abroad in truth's service, in which she traveled much in the fore part
of her time; but as she grew in years, she was under great indisposition of
body, and so continued the most of her time, which unfitted her for traveling.

She was indeed a living minister, an humble tender hearted friend, a true
sympathizer with those in affliction, and as a nursing mother to those that
were young in the ministry, her service was truly very acceptable, and her
memory still remains as a sweet savor.

Near the conclusion of her time, she desired those then present, Not to mourn
for her, for that she had nothing to do but to die. She departed this life, the
11 th of the second month 1754, and we hope enjoys that unmixed felicity which
will never have an end.

Her name before marriage was Dent. She received a gift in the ministry when
young, and traveled in that service in several parts of England before she
came to America. In 1739, having our friend Mary Foulke for a companion, she
took shipping for Barbados, and after visiting friends and others on that
island, went from thence to Rhode Island, from whence she returned home. -- The
following testimony concerning her husband, whom she survived several years, is
from the same monthly meeting, of which he was diverse years an elder, viz.

Our well esteemed friend Joseph Cooper deceased, was born in Newtown in the
coun-of Gloucester New Jersey. He was an exemplary friend, and serviceable
amongst us in many respects; was generally well respected, careful to rule well
his own house. He departed this life, about the 1 st of the eighth month 1749,
having expressed a little before, That he had done justly, loved mercy, and
hoped he had been careful to walk humbly.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning MICHAEL
LIGHTFOOT.
HE came over from Ireland with his family and settled in this province, in the
beginning of the year 1712, and was called to the ministry about the year 1725,
and the forty-second year of his age. Being faithful in the exercise of his
gift, he became zealously concerned for the honor of truth and promotion
thereof; and in this service performed a religious visit to friends in
Great Britain and Ireland; from whence we received very satisfactory and
comfortable accounts of his labors. He likewise visited friends in
New England; and in the year 1753, he traveled on the same account in the
southern provinces.

He was a member of this meeting the last eleven years of his life; being of a
grave and solid deportment, and an example of plainness and temperance, was
much esteemed amongst us. His ministry was deep and penetrating, attended with
the demonstration of the spirit and power; under the influence whereof he was
frequently led to unfold the mysteries of the kingdom, and eminently qualified
to set forth the excellencies of the gospel dispensation, with the benefit and
advantage of inward and spiritual worship; recommending diligent attendance on
the spirit of truth, for instruction and assistance therein. His delivery was
clear, distinct and intelligible, and in supplication humble and reverent. He
was likewise well gifted in discipline, and often concerned to speak in those
meetings to our edification and comfort.

He departed this life, on the 3 d day of the twelfth month 1754, after a short
sickness, in the seventy-first year of his age, and 29 th of his ministry.

A Testimony from Hopewell Monthly Meeting in Virginia, concerning EVAN THOMAS.
HE was born in Wales, and educated in profession with the church of England;
but in his tender years, joined in society with friends; and proving faithful
to the gift and measure of grace bestowed upon him, by the great giver of every
good and perfect gift, he came to be early engaged in the work of the ministry,
and was a serviceable instrument; being also a preacher in life and
conversation, remarkably meek, humble and grave in his deportment. He was
zealous for the honor of God and promotion of his blessed truth, and
serviceable among friends, being one of the first settlers in these parts, and
a constant attender of our meetings whilst in health. He died in a very serene
frame of spirit, on the 4 th day of the second month 1755, aged about seventy
years.

A Testimony from Duck-Creek Monthly Meeting in Kent county on Delaware,
concerning WILLIAM HAMMANS.
HE was born in Old-England, in the year 1683, and educated in the profession
of the church of England; but as he grew up, he became uneasy with the ways and
ceremonies thereof; and being a diligent seeker after the true way of worship,
in a short time joined with friends; soon after which, he left his native
country, being but a young man although married, and coming over to Pennsylvania,
settled in Chester county, and after some time, received a gift in the
ministry; by keeping low and humble, and attending thereto, he became an able
minister, having a particular gift in quoting the scriptures and explaining
them clearly to the understandings of the people. About the year 1738, he
removed within the limits of our monthly meeting, where his service was very
considerable, being well qualified for the discipline of the church, and very
exemplary in attending meetings both for worship and discipline, and an humble
waiter therein. Diverse within the bounds of our monthly meeting, were convinced
by his ministry, and others who had been convinced before, were thereby further
confirmed in the truth of the gospel.

Living in a public place, he had much of friends company, whom he was very
hearty in entertaining, and so continued to the end of his time; and departed
this life, the 8 th day of the fourth month 1755, in the seventy-second year of
his age. On the 11 th of the said month, was interred in friends burying-ground
at Duck-Creek.

A Testimony from Richland Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning SUSANNA
MORRIS.
AS the reviving and transmitting to posterity, the memory of the righteous and
faithful fervants of God, especially those worthy elders who are to be highly
esteemed and loved for their work's sake, may be conducive to the promotion of
truth, the comfort and edification of the living, and to encourage the
imitation of their pious examples.

We are concerned to give forth this testimony concerning our ancient and
worthy deceased friend Susanna Morris, late wife of Morris Morris, who was a
member of our monthly meeting near fifteen years of the latter part of her
time: Her memory still lives, and yields a precious savor to those who are
measurably sharers of that divine love and life with which she in an eminent
degree was endowed, and was frequently made an instrument to communicate it to
others, by a living and powerful ministry, in which she faithfully labored
with unwearied diligence both at home and abroad, for the space of forty years
and upwards, having traveled much in the service of the gospel both in America
and Europe, made three voyages over the seas to visit the meetings of friends
in Great Britain, and twice through Ireland and Holland; in which voyages and
travels, the gracious arm of divine providence was evidently manifested, in
preserving and supporting her through diverse remarkable perils and dangers,
which she ever reverently remembered and gratefully acknowledged.

Her life and conversation was innocent and agreeable, seasoned with christian
gravity; was a bright example of plainness, temperance, and self-denial;
devoted to the service of truth and the propagating of religion and piety
amongst mankind: In which ardent love and zeal she continued, until it pleased
her great Lord and master in his wisdom to put a period to all her pious
labors and travels, and to take her to himself, as a shock of corn gathered in
due season, after a short illness of nine days continuance, within which time,
on a first day of the week, friends at her request, held an evening meeting in
her room, wherein she was wonderfully strengthened to bear a lively testimony
to the everlasting truth, setting forth, the ground work of true religion and
divine worship, concluding with a fervent prayer to the father of all our
mercies, for the continuance of his love and favors to his children and
people. After which, her weakness increasing, she lay in a calm and quiet
frame, without much appearance of pain, until she died, which was on the 28 th
day of the fourth month 1755, in the seventy-third year of her age.

The Testimony of the Quarterly Meeting of Sandwich in New England, concerning
NICHOLAS DAVIS.
HE was born at Sandwich, the 28 th of the eighth month 1690, but lived the
greatest part of his days in Dartmouth and Rochester. He came forth with a
living testimony in the ministry, before he was twenty years old, in which he
grew very fast, and soon became an able skilful minister of the gospel,
dividing the word of truth aright; zealous against obstinate offenders, but to
those under affliction, his words were as healing balsam, and his speech as dew
on the tender grass. He strove to live in peace with all men, and was generally
well beloved by his acquaintance and neighbors, more especially his brethren
of the same religious denomination. He traveled much in visiting friends in
New England, was very serviceable in strengthening them, and also made
instrumental in convincing some of the blessed truth. A diligent and seasonable
attender of meetings, and a lover of the honest hearted, but always hated
hypocrisy in any. He twice visited friends in the western parts of America,
going once as far as North Carolina. -- Before he proceeded on his last journey
into those parts, he appeared resigned to the will of God, and much weaned from
the things of this world; his kinsman Adam Mott accompanied him, and by
testimonials received from several meetings, their service was well accepted.
On his way homeward, he was taken sick at Oblong in New York government,
bearing his pain with great patience to the last; and whilst his understanding
was clear, often mentioned his concern for the prosperity of truth. In the time
of his sickness he wrote a letter to his wife, wherein he expressed his
submission to the will of God whether in life or death, desiring she might
experience the same; and in an especial manner requested her care in the
education of their children, to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord; keep them from hurtful and unprofitable company, and endeavor to
instill into their minds the christian principles of patience, temperance,
meekness and sobriety, that so they might be made fit vessels for the holiest
to dwell in. In another letter wrote to his children, in the time of his
sickness, we find these words, I hereby let you know, that as I am doubtful
whether I shall ever see you more, there rests something on my mind to write to
you by way of advice, which I greatly desire may not be forgotten, and that is,
as you have a tender affectionate mother, who is desirous you may do well,
therefore dear children, be obedient to her in all things in the Lord, and
submit to her counsel and advice at all times in love to her, and also
endeavor to live in love and peace one with another at all times, and let not
any contentions or hard thoughts arise one against another by any means, but be
helpful one to another, and be exceeding careful to attend weekday meetings,
and encourage others also, and endeavor to let all things be in good order in
the church. He would sometimes desire those about him to be still and quiet,
that they might have a time to wait on the Lord in silence, and several times
opened his mouth in prayer and supplication in a living and powerful manner;
also exhorted the bystanders in the same life and power. Thus he finished his
course at Oblong aforesaid, on the 7 th of the tenth month 1755, in the
sixty-fifth year of his age; and we believe he is admitted Where the weary are
at rest. He bore a public testimony above forty-six years, and has left an
unblemished character.

A Testimony from Burlington Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning PETER
ANDREWS.
IT having pleased the Lord to bestow on him a gift in the ministry, he was
faithful thereto, and made helpful to many; being so devoted to the service of
God, that when any religious duty was required of him, he was fervently engaged
to perform it, as strength was afforded.

He was careful to attend meetings for worship and discipline, and when there,
manifested a real concern to wait upon God for strength and wisdom, that so our
meetings might be truly profitable. Amongst his neighbors he was serviceable,
his example having a tendency to strengthen the good in them and others, and to
discourage that which was wrong.

His engagements in the exercise of the ministry, occasioned him to be much
from home, yet his regard to his family was becoming his station both as a
husband and a father; it was his frequent practice to fit down with them to
wait upon the Lord, and we believe his faithfulness therein, was of
considerable service.

In the year 1755, he, in a weighty manner laid before us, a concern that had
sometime rested on him to visit friends in England. And having obtained the
concurrence of friends here, and settled his temporal affairs, he embarked
about the 29 th of the fourth month the same year.

For an account of his services in that nation, we refer to the following
testimony of the monthly meeting of friends in Norwich, at which place he
departed this life, aged about forty-nine, and a minister about 14 years.

A Testimony from Norwich Monthly Meeting concerning PETER ANDREWS.
OUR dear friend Peter Andrews, from West-Jersey in North America, being on a
religious visit to friends in this nation, deceased in this city; and the
lively sense of his services, and the regard we bear to his memory, engages us
to transmit the following testimony concerning him.

His first visit to us was in the eleventh month 1755, and his service and
exemplary deportment will remain as a lasting testimony for him, and to the
truth he preached, in the minds of many; and we have good reason to believe he
was made instrumental, in a very particular manner, to the help and furtherance
of some amongst us, whom it had pleased the Lord to visit with a fresh
visitation of his love. And by the information of other friends, who well knew
him, and particularly our friend Edmund Peckover, who frequently accompanied
him, as well as from our own knowledge, we are enabled to give the following
brief account of his labors and travels, from the time of his arrival to his
death.

He landed in the south part of England, in or about the sixth month 1755, and
came directly up to London, where he was kindly received by friends, and had
very good service during a short stay there; but being desirous of being at the
quarterly meeting to be held at York, in company with several friends of
London, he went as directly to the said city as he could well do, being near
two hundred miles, and reached there by the 24 th of the sixth month, at which
time began the quarterly meeting; and this our dear friend had a very memorable
and weighty opportunity in ministry, in the meeting of ministers and elders at
the opening thereof; but, in the succeeding meetings for worship, was mostly
silent; yet in those for discipline, was divinely led to set forth the nature,
good end and tendency of the same, and very zealously pressed to the keeping
them up, in the same wisdom and power in which they were first established;
evidently setting forth, that they proceeded from that which gathered our
forefathers to be as a peculiar people unto God; to the no small edification
and comfort of many sincere hearts, who rejoiced greatly in having his company,
which remains fresh in their remembrance; his services being as bread cast upon
the waters, which, according to the wise man's observation, shall be found
after many days.

After the quarterly meeting was ended he went to Pickering, where a very large
meeting is kept annually for worship, and had seasonable and profitable
service. He traveled to many other places in that county, and friends were
greatly refreshed and edified by his christian visit, though not always
attended by public declarations in their religious meetings appointed on his
account, which were mostly very large, and expectations high, yet his eye was
to his great master's putting forth. He often was led to famish that too eager
desire after words; and in several public meetings he had nothing to say
amongst them; which though a great disappointment to many for the present, yet
there afterward appeared a signal service in it.

He was at Yarm, Stockton, Bainbrig, and several other meetings in and about
the Dales; then came to Leeds, Bradford, Wakefield, Doncaster, and so into
Lincolnshire; which county he visited pretty generally, also the isle of Ely,
and came into Norfolk, and to this place in the eleventh month 1755, as
aforementioned; was at most, if not all, of friends meetings in our county;
then went into Suffolk and Essex, and returned to London the latter end of the
first month 1756, where he remained a few weeks, being exceeding ill; yet was
at most of the meetings in that city, and was very serviceable, with many other
friends, in affairs particularly relating to the society in Pennsylvania at
that time.

He went back again into Essex, and so for Hertfordshire, some parts of
Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, and to the yearly meeting at
Bristol in the fifth month 1756; and had good service both in meetings for
worship and discipline, which was well received, and, it is hoped, made lasting
impressions on the minds of many who had the opportunity of being present.

His indisposition still continued, but did not hinder him from traveling:
From Bristol he passed through some part of Gloucestershire, Wiltshire, and
Oxfordshire, and got to the yearly meeting at London in the sixth month, and
although his illness continued upon him, was enabled to bear several living
testimonies, in the demonstration of the spirit and of power.

After the said yearly meeting was ended, he came down to the yearly-meetings
at Colchester and Woodbridge, where he was eminently supported to be
serviceable in the churches. At Woodbridge he was strengthened to bear a large,
powerful and affecting testimony in the last meeting of worship, to the
tendering of many hearts, whose states were so effectually spoken to, as that
it may be fitly compared to the excellency, and glorious situation which the
Psalmist described, when he says, How good, and how pleasant a thing it is, for
brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the precious ointment upon the
head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments: As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended
upon the mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even
life for evermore, Psalm cxxxiii. 1, 2, 3. It was indeed a most heavenly,
precious, baptizing season, (this being the last public opportunity our dear
friend had) in which he was wonderfully led to set forth the progressive steps
the Almighty was pleased to make use of, in appearing to Gideon, confirming him
in the certainty of his requirings, condescending to grant his requests in a
very peculiar manner, and sealing them with his presence, and giving him
victory over his enemies, as he was faithful to follow the blessed author that
pointed forth the beginning as well as finishing that great work, to which that
extraordinary servant of God, Gideon, in his day was called; which memorable
service of our dear friend, there is great reason to believe the great Lord,
who prepared him for the same, was graciously pleased to fix as a nail in a
sure place; and may it so continue in the remembrance of those then present,
who are left for a small space yet in mutability.

He continued very weak in body all his stay in Woodbridge, being above five
days, and no persuasions could prevail with him to hinder his setting forward
for his journey, having strong desires in his mind to see friends in this place
again; and to a particular friend he expressed his love so great to us, That he
thought he could willingly die with us. He was favored to accomplish it in two
days after he left Woodbridge, though with great difficulty, and lodged at the
house of our friend John Oxley, as he had done before, but took to his bed soon
after he got in, to which, the remaining part of his time, he was mostly
confined.

It being the time of our yearly meeting, many friends went often to visit him,
and he expressed to some, That he was satisfied he was in his place, in giving
up to follow the requiring of the Lord, in leaving his outward habitation, and
those near blessings of a most tender affectionate wife and dutiful children.

The severity of his illness kept him mostly delirious, yet he was favored
with some clear intervals; in one of which, being in a sweet heavenly frame of
mind, he broke forth in the following fervent supplication, viz. Oh! this poor
soul has been for many days on the brink of the pit of distress; but thou,
dear father, do not afflict thy children willingly, but for some great and
good cause known only to thyself: Dear father! suffer not thy children ever to
despair of thy mercies, but that we may be helpful, as much as may be in our
power, to one another in all such times of trouble. Dearest father! thou have
been pleased to open, and to favor with thy goodness; my soul is thankful, and
can say, thou art worthy of glory and praise for evermore.

He continued to the 13 th of the seventh month 1756, and then departed this
life, and was interred in friends burying-ground the 18 th of the same, after
an awful meeting, (his corpse being attended by a very large number of friends
and others) and no doubt he rests, with the spirits of the just made perfect,
in those glorious mansions prepared for all those that hold out in faithfuness
to the end. His memory is very precious and dear to many who are yet surviving,
and we believe it may truly be said, that few friends who have traveled in
this nation, have been more approved, or had more general service in so short a
space of time.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
EVANS.
HE was born in Denbighshire, in the principality of Wales, in the year 1689,
and arrived in Pennsylvania with his parents in School, under whom he received a
pious education. -- He was a man of good natural understanding and favored
early in life to see the necessity of a diligent attention to the voice of
divine wisdom, to establish and preserve him in peace with God; and by a steady
adherence to it, he became honorable in society and eminently serviceable in
the church of Christ. -- In the twenty-third year of his age he appeared in the
ministry of the gospel, his deportment therein was reverent as became a mind
sensible of the awful importance of the service. He had a clear engaging manner
of delivery, was deep in heavenly mysteries, and plain in declaring them; being
well acquainted with the holy scriptures, he was made skilful in opening the
doctrines therein contained, and was often led to draw lively and instructive
similitudes from the visible creation. He traveled through most of the
northern colonies in the service of truth, and several times through this
province. -- He was often drawn to attend general meetings, funerals and other
public occasions, particularly the adjacent meetings after their first
establishment, over which he had a tender fatherly care, as a good shepherd
taking heed to the flock; -- and the great shepherd of Israel blessed his
labors, and afforded him at times great satisfaction and comfort. -- The
latter part of his time, the visible declension of many from the life and power
of truth, frequently made sorrow and deep lamentation his portion. -- His
labors were fervent with the youth, in much love and zeal, that they might
come to know God for themselves, bow their necks to the yoke, and lay their
shoulders to the work, saying, That their remembering their creator in the days
of their youth, would be as marrow to his bones. It was indeed his great joy to
behold the peaceable fruits of righteousness, and his labors for the promotion
thereof made him honorable amongst men of various ranks and professions, and
his testimony generally acceptable to them.

In the support of our christian discipline, he was zealous, active and
unwearied, and favored with qualification to advise in difficult cases, which
seldom failed of succeeding. His testimony was close against hypocrisy and an
outside show of religion only, but full of parternal tenderness to the
afflicted, weak, or diffident in spirit; of sound judgment, and deep in divine
experience, yet modest and condescending, and being favored with the
descendings of the father's love, that at times appeared to clothe him as with
a mantle; he had an open-door in the hearts of his friends, and an ascendency
over the spirits of gainsayers. -- He was a zealous promoter of visiting
friends in their families, was many times engaged therein, and his labors were
awakening and useful; often employed in visiting the sick, the widow, and the
fatherless and others in affliction; on these occasions he was seldom large in
expression, but his silent sympathy and secret breathing for their relief, were
more consolatory than many words; a considerable part of his time was spent in
assisting widows, and the guardianship of orphans, which, though laborious to
him, was of much advantage to them.

The importance of love and peace to civil and religious society he was deeply
sensible of, diligent in promoting them both by precept and example, and
successful in restoring harmony where any violation of it appeared. -- His
conduct and conversation in private life was exemplary, and such as implied an
inward close inspection into the secret operations of his own heart.

He was apprehensive of his approaching end for sometime before his last
illness, and told a friend, He should not survive one year, who admired he was
so positive; but he made no further reply than, See what will follow. In his
public testimony also, he frequently said, He had but an inch of time to treat
with us. In the first part of his illness, he went to some meetings, one
whereof was large, and he was favored with strength to speak in a powerful and
instructive manner to the youth, for whose welfare his desires were ardent. --
His disorder was slow and lingering, wherein he was favored with his
understanding almost to the last; and although, at some seasons, he was much
concerned on account of the gloominess of the times in religious and civil
respects, yet in general he possessed a very great degree of calmness and
serenity of mind, with a perfect resignation to the will of God, whether life
or death should be his portion. On the day of his departure, observing his wife
troubled, he said with a cheerful countenance, I am easy, I am easy, and
desired her to be easy also; indeed it appeared that the Lord had strengthened
him on the bed of languishing, and made all his bed in his sickness. And thus
having served God in his generation, he departed the 23 d day of the ninth
month 1756, aged sixty-seven years; having, we hope, shaken himself from the
dust, put on his beautiful garments, and entered the wedding chamber of the
bridegroom of his soul, and enjoys the reward of his faithful labors; was
buried on the 25 th day of the same month, in friends burying-ground at Gwynedd.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning THOMAS BROWN.
HE was born in Barking, in the county of Essex, Great Britain, on the 1 st of
the ninth month 1696, came whilst young with his parents into this province,
and lived some time in this city, from whence he removed with them to Plumstead
in Bucks county, where he first appeared in the ministry; some years after
which, he settled in this city. His gift in the ministry was living, deep, and
very edifying; and in the exercise thereof, he was remarkable for an awful
care, not to appear without clear and renewed evidence of the motion of life
for that service: And though not a man of literature, was often led into
sublime matter, which was convincing and persuasive, in setting forth the
dignity and excellence of the christian religion, yet was very attentive that
those heighths should not detain him beyond his proper gift, but to close in
and with the life, which made his ministry always acceptable to the living and
judicious. Although he was not led to visit the churches in distant parts, yet
was sometimes concerned to attend some of the neighboring meetings, of two of
which he has preserved some minutes, which being a lively description of his
concern of mind for the promotion of the cause of truth, it is thought well to
subjoin them here in his own words.

1756, eighth month 9 th, I went to Concord quarterly meeting, but found no
cause to espouse the cause of God in a public manner that day. The next day
went to the youth's meeting at Kennet, which was to great satisfaction; my soul
was so bended toward the people, that I could scarcely leave them, being
engaged in a stream of the ministry, to extol the divinity of that religion
that is breathed from heaven, and which arrays the soul of its possessor with
degrees of the divinity of Christ, and entitles them to an eternal inheritance;
also introduces a language, intelligible only to the converted souls which have
access to a celestial fountain, which is no less than a foretaste of eternal
joy, to support them in their journey toward the regions above, where religion
has room to breathe in its divine excellencies in the soul; here it is
instructed in the melody of that harmonious song of the redeemed, where the
morning stars sing together, and the sons of God shout for joy. --

1756, the 29 th of the eighth month, I visited Gwynedd-meeting, where in
waiting in nothingness before God, without seeking or striving to awake my
beloved before the time, by degrees my soul became invested with that concern
that the gospel introduces, with an opening in these words; I think it may
conduce to my peace, to stand up, and engage in a cause dignified with
immortality and crowned with eternal life. The subject raised higher and
brighter until my soul was transported on the mount of God in degree, and
beheld his glory; where I was favored to treat on the exalted station of the
redeemed church, which stands in the election of grace, where my soul rejoiced
with transcendent joy and adored God. Returned home in peace.

His conduct and conversation was innocent and edifying, being much weaned from
the world and the spirit of it. He was careful not to engage in worldly
concerns so as to encumber his mind, and draw it off from that religious
contemplation, in which was his chief delight; which happy state of mind he
maintained to the last, as evidently appeared to those friends who were with
him toward his conclusion; to some of whom he expressed himself in the
following manner, viz.

I am fine and easy, and don't know but what I may recover; but if I should, I
expect to see many a gloomy day, but nevertheless I am willing to live longer,
if I might be a means of exalting religion, that the gift bestowed on me, might
shine brighter than it has ever yet done, or else I had abundance better go
now; for I think I have shone but glimmeringly to what I might have done, had I
been still more faithful; though I cannot charge myself with a presumptuous
temper, nor wilful disobedience; but I can say, it has often happened with me,
as with the poor man at the pool of Bethesda, whilst I was making ready another
has stepped in. I am sensible that my gift has been different from some of my
brethren, I have not been led so much into little things, but I am far from
judging them.

I have often to pass through the valley of the shadow of death, and have
experienced the possibility of a soul's subsisting the full space of forty days
without receiving any thing, only living by faith and not by sight, provided
they keep upon the foundation of convincement and conviction, and not turn
aside to take a prospect of the world, and desire to draw their comfort from
visibles; they will be supported by an invisible yet invincible power; for he
will be sure to appear, and when he does appear at times, does rend the vail
from the top to the bottom, with an invitation, as Samuel used to say (meaning
Samuel Fothergill) Come up hither, and behold the bride the lamb's wife; then
the soul will have to enjoy, and see things beyond expressing; my tongue can do
little or nothing at setting it forth. The soul will be filled with holy
admiration, and say, Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the
moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners.

Although the soul has at times to behold the glory, splendour and magnitude of
the true church or spouse of Christ, yet those extraordinary sights are but
seldom, not often: Though I have had at times, cause to espouse the cause of
God, yet there are times that the soul is so veiled, and surrounded with
temptations and fiery trials, and all out of sight, that I have wondered that I
was made choice of; but I have experienced, that they that would reign with
Christ must suffer with him; I never expect to get beyond it, while I
am;clothed with this clog of mortality.

People may have a regular outside, and be diligent in attending meetings, and
yet know little or nothing of it; for formality and externals are nothing;
religion is an internal subject, subsisting between Christ and the soul: I
don't confine it to our name, but amongst the different names there are, that
my soul is nearly united to, who are in a good degree, I do believe, in
possession of that religion which is revealed from heaven: And I am in the
faith, that there will be them raised up, that will shine as bright stars, and
religion will grow and prosper, and the holy flame rise to a greater height
than it has ever yet done. I can say with the holy apostle, I have nothing to
boast of, save my infirmities, yet thus much I venture to say, that if I die
now, I die a lover of God and religion. And after expressing a compassionate
sympathy with the poor afflicted churches up and down, concluded with this
saying, Be of good cheer little flock, for greater is he that is in you, than
he that is in the world.

In the sixty-first year of his age, he was seized with an apoplectick
disorder, which gradually increasing, deprived him of life, on the 21 st of the
sixth month 1757, and was interred in this city the next day.

A Testimony from Newark Monthly Meeting in New Castle county on Delaware,
concerning BETTY CALDWELL.
SHE was the daughter of George Pierce, of Thornbury in Chester county, was
born in Gloucestershire in Old-England, and came into Pennsylvania with her
parents, about the year 1683, who settled in Thornbury aforesaid. She was
married to Vincent Caldwell in 1703, and soon after they settled in
Marlborough, Chester county, where she continued, and belonged to Kennet
meeting, till a few years before her death, when she removed to Wilmington. She
was from her youth, remarkably exemplary for plainness and sobriety, much
concerned for peace in the church and amongst neighbors, laboring to restore
it according to ability as occasions required, often with the desired success.
She was very serviceable in that weighty work of visiting friends families, in
which she had at times to impart to others, of her own experience in the work
of religion, and to exhort to faithfulness and obedience to what the Lord
requires; was a constant attender of meetings, and exemplary for solid and
humble waiting therein, and much concerned that her children might walk in the
truth. After the death of her husband in 1720, she had the care of the family
upon herself, remaining in a state of widowhood upwards of 37 years, in which
station she behaved with such prudence and circumspection, that her conduct, in
bringing up her children without much correction, is worthy of imitation; which
together with her pious concern for the welfare of the church, entitled her to
be accounted of the number of the "Widows indeed." She had many years been in
the station of an elder for Kennet meeting, and several years before her death,
had a few words in testimony in meetings, which was generally well received,
being seasonable and weighty.

Her last sickness was a fever, which brought her very low, often Praying the
Lord to be near her, and by his supporting hand to bear up her spirits now in
this pinching time; and finished her course here, we believe in peace with, the
Lord and in unity with friends, the 27 th of the tenth month 1757, and was
interred in Kennet burying-ground the 29th of the same month, in the
seventy-seventh year of her age.

A Testimony from Burlington Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ABRAHAM
FARRINGTON.
HE was born in Bucks county, Pennsylvania, of parents professing the truth as
held by us the people called Quakers. About nine months after his birth his
father dying, and his mother sometime after marrying from among friends,
exposed him to a loose irregular education; about ten years of age being put
apprentice, where through eleven years servitude, he suffered great bodily
hardship, and much greater danger as to the better part; yet (says he in a
manuscript lest for the use of his children) I took delight in my bible, and
believe the good hand was with me, that inclined my mind thereto. -- Though I
followed lying vanities, and so forsook my own mercies, yet I could say my
prayers every night, till I grew afraid to say them any more, and seemed like
one abandoned from good for several years. Having served his time out, he
providentially became a resident in Benjamin Clark's family at Stony-brook, who
were exemplary and kind to him; I thought (says he) they were the best people
in the world, careful in their words, yet cheerful and pleasant, so that I
thought I must be a Quaker. And Edward Andrews, from Eggharbour, being at a
quarterly meeting at Crosswicks, He came (adds he) with power to give me my
awakening call; I was much reached, but after the manner of the world, looking
at the man, gave him the praise, viz. he is a brave man, he preaches well, I
wish I lived near him, I would go to hear him every first day; at same time not
minding what he directed to, Christ in ourselves, the true teacher, that will
not be removed till we remove from him; in us is the place he has ordained to
reveal himself. -- I afterward went more to friends meetings than I had done
before, and read much in friends books, but was yet in the dark, the time of my
deliverance was not come, the sins of the Amorites were not full; I was under
Moses in the wilderness, come out of Egypt, but Joshua's time was not come, the
Savior, the warrior that brings through judgment, and makes war with the old
inhabitants; yet I sometimes longed for something which I could not find, a lot
in the good land. I think this year Thomas Willson and James Dickenson, came
into the country, and sometime afterward to visit the meeting of friends at
Crosswicks, I happened to be at the meeting before they came in; the sight of
them struck me, the heavenly frame of mind which their countenances manifested,
and the awe they seemed to sit under, brought a stillness over my mind, and I
was as ground prepared to receive the seed: James stood up in the authority of
the gospel, and in it he was led to unravel me and all my works from top to
bottom, so that I looked on myself like a man dissected or pulled to pieces,
all my religion as well as all my sins were set forth in such a light that I
thought myself undone: After he sat down, Thomas stood up and brought me
together again, I mean what was to be raised, bone to his bone, with, the
sinews and strength that would constitute a christian; I almost thought myself
new born, the old man destroyed and the new man made up, concluding I should
never be bad again, that my sins were forgiven, and I should have nothing to do
but to do good; I thought I had gotten my lot in the good land, and might sit
now under my own vine and fig tree, and nothing more should make me afraid.
Poor creature! I had only a sight, I did not yet think what powerful
adversaries I had to war with; this has been the miserable case of many, they
have sat down under a convincement, and in a form of religion, some depending
on former experience or former openings, some on their education, some a bare
belief, and knowledge historical of the scriptures and principle of truth. --
Thus though I received the truth, yet I was like the stony ground; I received it
with joy, but had not root in myself, my heart grew hard again, for when
tribulations, persecutions, temptations and trials came upon me, I fell. Oh!
how I moped at times and wandered about as a prisoner at large, I would have
run, but I could not, my offended judge, my accuser was in me, I could not fly
from him; yet, great goodness was near, and his power kept me from gross evils
in a great degree. -- I kept pretty much to meetings, but there was such a
mixture of undigested matter in me, it was not to be soon separated. Oh! the
necessity there was, and still is of a continual watch against our soul's
enemies both within and without.

Having passed through various probations, he had considerable openings of the
divine sense of the scriptures, and also saw that the Lord had a work for him
to do, to which he at length gave up, and being faithful therein, was made
helpful to many, being enlarged and sound in testimony, and at times very
particularly led to explain passages in the scriptures, to the comfort and
information of hearers.

He was an affectionate husband and parent, diligent in attending meetings for
worship and discipline, and manifested therein a zealous concern for the
promotion and honor of truth, waiting for wisdom to see his duty, and strength
to perform it. -- He diverse times traveled abroad on this continent in the
service of truth, and frequently to the neighboring meetings to satisfaction;
his outward circumstances being at times difficult, gave him an opportunity to
show an example of christian resignation, and to see its effects in diverse
providential assistances.

In 1756 he laid before this meeting a religious concern to visit friends in
Great Britain, which had been on his mind upwards of ten years, wherewith the
meeting concurring, he had our certificate, and embarking, landed in Ireland;
and after visiting the meetings in that country, arrived in England and
performed his religious visit in several counties, but was taken ill, and died
in London the 26 th of the first month 1758; finishing his days work with a
firm assurance that the gates of Heaven were opened to him; very acceptable
accounts of his services both in England and Ireland have been received, as are
more fully set forth in the annexed testimony of Devonshire house
monthly meeting concerning him.

He died aged about sixty-seven, was in the profession of the truth near 44,
and an acceptable minister upwards of 30 years.

A Testimony from Devonshire-house Monthly Meeting in London, concerning
ABRAHAM FARRINGTON.
THIS worthy minister and elder, having had drawings in spirit for several
years, as we are informed, to visit the churches of Christ in this nation and
Ireland, in the service of the gospel; when he apprehended the time approached
wherein he was to enter upon this weighty engagement, he settled his outward
affairs: and having the concurrence and unity of the brethren, embarked in a
vessel bound from Philadelphia to Dublin, in company with three friends from
Europe, who had performed a religious visit to the churches in America. --
After a favored voyage of about four weeks, landing at Dublin, he visited the
meetings, of friends in Ireland, and by the accounts from thence, had very
weighty and acceptable service there: Having labored faithfully in that nation
to strengthen the brethren and assist in building up the waste places in Zion,
he embarked for England, visited the churches in some of the northern counties,
attended the yearly meeting at Penrith, and afterward that in this city, his
labor of love in the work of the ministry, being to edification and comfort,
was truly acceptable. -- After attending the yearly-meetings of Colchester,
Woodbridge, Norwich and the quarterly meeting of York, he visited many meetings
in the northern and midland counties, from whence good accounts have been
received of his weighty and affecting labors. He returned to London the
lattter end of the twelfth month 1757. Having traveled with great diligence
and labored fervently, his health was impaired; nevertheless he attended
meetings till his disorder increased so as to render him incapable of further
service.

As this our dear friend spent but little time in this city, we cannot from
knowledge and experience give such a testimony concerning him as might be
thought requisite; yet, as some of us partook of the benefit of his religious
labors, we find ourselves engaged to give forth this testimony concerning him.

His conversation was innocently cheerful, yet grave and instructive; he was a
man of a weighty (...) it, a valiant in Israel; a sharp reprover o^ ^ertine and
loose professors; but tender to the contrite and humble; and a lover of good
order in the church.

He was strong in judgment, found in doctrine, deep in divine things; often
explaining, in a clear and lively manner, the hidden mysteries wrapped up in the
sayings of Christ, the prophets and apostles; and it may truly be said, he was
well instructed in the kingdom, bringing forth, out of his treasure, things new
and old.

His ministry was in plainness of speech, and attended with divine authority,
reaching the witness of God in man, and to the habitation of the mourners in
Zion; frequently pointing out, in a lively manner, the paths of the exercised
travelers, and the steps of heavenly pilgrims; by which he was made helpful to
such as are seeking the true rest, which the Lord has prepared for his people.
It may truly be said, he was eminently gifted for the work of the present day,
remarkably qualified to expose the mystery of iniquity, and to point out
wherein true godliness consisted.

His distemper increasing, he was confined to his bed, at the house of our
friend Thomas Jackson, in Devonshire-square, where all necessary care was taken
of him. During his illness, he was very sweet and tender in his spirit, and
remarkably patient. He uttered many comfortable and heavenly expressions, and
several times said, He apprehended his time in this world would be but short;
and seemed fully resigned to quit mortality, having an evidence, That he should
be clothed upon with immortality, and be united to the heavenly host.

He had frequently been heard to say, in time of health, That he thought he
should lay down his body in this nation, and not see his friends in America
more; to which he appeared freely given up. He often expressed his desire, That
he might be favored with an easy passage, which was graciously granted.

He departed this life, the 26 th of the first month 1758, like a lamb, without
either sigh or groan, as one falling into a sweet sleep, aged about sixty-six
years; and on the 30 th of the same, his body was carried to Devonshire-house,
where a large and solemn meeting was held, which was owned by him whose
presence is the life of our meetings; and from thence his body was carried, by
friends, to their burying-ground in Bunhillfields, a large concourse
accompanying it, and was there decently interred among the remains of many of
our primitive worthies, and valiant soldiers in the lamb's war, who loved not
their lives unto death, for the word of God and testimony of Jesus.

A Testimony from Kennet Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning HANNAH
CARLETON.
HANNAH CARLETON, late wife of Thomas Carleton, of Kennet, in Chester county
Pennsylvania, was born at Haverford in the said county, about the 5 th month
1689; she was sensible of the Lord's visitation of love to her in her young
years, and as she gave heed thereto, was preserved in a good degree from the
(...) and evil conversation of the world; as she grew in years she grew in the
truth, was a serviceable friend in the society and her neighborhood in diverse
respects; and of latter years was helpful in that weighty work of visiting
friends families, having at times to impart (not only in such opportunities,
but in our more public meetings) of her experience of the work of truth in her
young years, and urging to others the necessity of the same work in them; which
was well received by friends. Being taken with an excess of bleeding at the
nose, she was thereby so weakened that for some months before her decease, she
did not go from home nor much out of doors; she apprehended her end was near,
and when it was proposed to send to a doctor for help, she said, 'It seemed
needless, for I am in the hands of the great physician who knows what is best
for me.' A neighbor signifying she hoped to see her better, she answered,
Better I shall be in a little time. The friend replied, In a better state of
health I mean; she answered, 'I neither expect nor desire it,' admiring the
kindness of the almighty in favoring her so, that she felt neither sickness
nor pain. Another time she said, As I have labored for peace and love, so now
I see nothing but peace before me, with several other sentences which
manifested, that the peace and quietness she was favored with, came from the
father of mercies to her in her last moments.

She departed this life, the 6 th of the fifth month 1758, about the 3 d hour
in the afternoon, and was buried in friends burying-ground in Kennet, the 8 th
of the same month, in the sixty-ninth year of her age.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JANE
JONES.
JANE JONES, wife of John Jones of Montgomery township, was educated amongst
friends, and as she grew in years, she increased in divine knowledge, and
became a serviceable member of the church. The affability and sweetness of her
disposition, and her love to all, rendered her very near, not only to the
faithful, but many others also. As a parent, she was much more concerned for
her children's eternal welfare, than for their acquiring of wealth or
preferments in this world. And as she possessed affluence and plenty herself,
the sensibility of her heart toward the needy, would not permit her to eat her
morsel alone. She sought for the poor, and distributed bountifully to their
wants. As she advanced to old age, she became frail, and subject to pain and
disorders, which disabled her from attending meetings as duly as she desired;
nevertheless her love to truth and the prosperity of Zion brightened and
increased, and she bore her weakness with patience, as a dispensation permitted
for her probation.

She departed this life, the 11 th of the fifth month 1758, and was interred
the 14 th of the same month in friends burying-ground at Gwynedd, in the
seventieth year of her age.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOSEPH
TOMLINSON.
OUR well esteemed friend Joseph Tomlinson deceased, was convinced of the truth
in the early part of his life. His zeal for attending religious meetings when
but young, was such, that he frequently traveled many miles on foot to them,
and continued remarkably diligent in attending all our religious meetings. As
he grew in years, he became more and more serviceable amongst friends, being
several years an overseer of Haddonfield meeting, and likewise an elder;
careful to maintain the discipline. His life seemed to be unblameable. He was
nearly united unto his friends, and their love to him was very great.

He died the 3 d of the ninth month 1758, and we believe he was prepared to
receive the answer of "Well done, etc."

A Testimony from Wrights Town Monthly Meeting in Bucks county Pennsylvania,
concerning our ancient friend and sister AGNES PENQUITE, who departed this
life, the 20th day of the eleventh month 1758, being upwards of one hundred
years old.
SHE brought a certificate with her from Europe, dated the 6 th day of the
second month 1686. She was of an innocent pious life and conversation, a good
example in attending meetings both on first and weekdays, until a few years
before her death. She was a minister above seventy years; her testimony, though
generally short, was mostly to satisfaction and edification; and in her
declining age, when nature seemed almost spent, she appeared more divinely
favored than common, to the admiration of some. When she could no longer
attend meetings, she would often, at meal times, appear in prayer, with praises
to the Lord, to the comfort and satisfaction of those present; and frequently
signified, She had the evidence of divine peace. Not long before her departure
she said, That her sweet Lord had not forsaken her, but was still with her to
comfort and refresh her in her old age. Thus she was removed from time to
eternity, like a shock of corn fully ripe.

A Testimony from Goshen Monthly Meeting in Chester county, Pennsylvania,
concerning CADWALLADER JONES.
HE was born the 27 th of the first month 1687, near Bala, in Merionethshire,
in the principality of Wales, and removed with his parents into Pennsylvania
about the year 1697; soon after their arrival, he was placed with a friend
until he came of age, in this time of his youth, he was naturally very wild and
airy, and delighted much in vain company, until by convictions he broke off
from his companions. In the year 1710 he married, and soon after settled at
Uwchlan in Chester county, where he remained until his decease. A meeting being
established at that place shortly after his removal thither, he duly attended
the same both on the first and other days of the week; sometimes remarking,
That he knew the benefit of leaving the hurry of the world to attend meeting,
where he was a good example, both in keeping to the time appointed, and his
solid sitting in silence. He was zealous for the support of our christian
discipline and active therein, as well as in overseeing the flock and other
services in the church.

He served in the station of an elder about 28 years, diligently attending
those meetings even until old age and under bodily weaknesses. In his sickness,
he often expressed much concern and sorrow for some of the professors of truth,
saying, They are on the decline, what will become of them? And further said,
This thing had often been a burden to him, and he thought he had discharged his
part, and it would now soon become the burden of others; expressing a concern
for the right management of the discipline, and remarking the remissness of
some herein. He frequently expressed his resignation to the will of God; and on
the 21 st of the eleventh month 1758, quietly departed this life, and was
buried the 23 d in friends burying-ground at Uwchlan aforesaid.

A Testimony from Woodbridge Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning SARAH
SHOTWELL.
SARAH SHOTWELL departed this life, in the eighth month 1759, in the
forty-fourth year of her age. She was educated amongst friends on Long Island,
and was early engaged in a public testimony. In the twenty-seventh year of her
age, she was married to Joseph Shotwell of Rahway; was a woman much beloved, of
a sweet, free and hospitable spirit, guarded in her expressions, careful to
give no just occasion of offense, a prudent loving wife, a tender exemplary
parent, an affectionate and kind neighbor; often sympathizing with those in
affliction, especially such as were religious and virtuous; the rich and poor
of those were equally near to her, and nearer than natural kindred where truth
had not united in spirit: She gladly received strangers; and her carriage and
behavior to young ministers and burden-bearers, manifested her concern for and
sympathy with them, often dropping seasonable hints for their encouragement.
Although she did not travel much abroad, yet she was diligent in attending
meetings at and about home, being endued with a sound and living ministry,
clear and distinct in her testimony, whereby many were alarmed, some convinced,
strengthened and confirmed in the faith through a blessing on her labors. She
was much engaged in silent humble waiting on the Lord, who was pleased to own
her, and often raise in her memorials and songs of thanksgiving to the God of
all mercies, who never forsook his people in the deep, nor left them to perish
in the wilderness, but was faithful and true, and failed not to bring to the
promised land. The gospel truths she was enabled to open, were so affecting to
many, that some who were prejudiced against women's preaching, have been heard
to say, If such a thing could be, she was a true gospel minister.

She was a pattern of humility, not seeking applause, nor forward in her public
appearances, and though sometimes large, was generally careful not to stand long;
fervent and living in prayer, wherein, we believe, she had access to the
father. She frequently exhorted all to come up in faithfulness, signifying,
That God would have a people that would serve him in uprightness and integrity
of heart.

Having had a sight sometime before her last sickness, that her time here was
nearly accomplished, she departed this life, after about four days illness, in
a resigned frame of mind.

A Testimony from Hopewell Monthly Meeting i^ Virginia, concerning ISAAC
HOLLINGSWORTH.
IN his youthful days he was deeply affected with the visitation of the love of
God, and by adhering and carefully waiting in his counsel, he was preserved
from the deluding vanities of the world, which are too apt to draw and divert
the minds of young people, from an awful regard to him who created them. He
received a gift in the ministry when about twenty-one years of age, and was, we
believe, a faithful labourer in his master's work, being much concerned for the
promotion of truth and the eternal well-being of mankind: Of a sober and grave
deportment, diligent in attending religious meeting^, and exemplary in humble
waiting therein. He visited the churches in diverse parts of the neighboring
colonies; and we find by accounts from thence, that his services and labors of
love were well accepted among them. In the year 1757 he removed with his family
within the limits of Fairfax monthly meeting, so that we cannot give a very
particular account of him, toward the latter part of his time, which we refer
to that meeting.

A Supplement to the foregoing Testimony, from Fairfax Monthly Meeting in
Virginia.
THE foregoing testimony concerning our worthy friend Isaac Hollingsworth, was
read in this meeting, to which we are free to add, that the few years he
resided among us, he was a diligent attender of our religious meetings, and
also a promoter of opportunities for retirement in families. He greatly
desired, That truth might prosper in the hearts of the youth, being frequently
concerned in meetings, to speak to and encourage them, To come up in their
duty, and also to warn the disobedient, 'To forsake the evil of their ways;' A
degree of the holy anointing accompanying his ministry, it tended to the
encouragement and edification of the sincere in heart.

His last illness was a nervous disorder, which continued on him nineteen days;
within which time he attended our meeting on a first day, and bore a living
testimony much to the satisfaction of friends, whereby he seemed much spent;
and on going home he immediately took his bed, uttering but few words, and
departed this life, easy and quiet, on the 10 th of the ninth month 1759, and
on the 12 th of the same month, was interred in friends burying-ground at
Fairfax, aged about thirty-seven years; and we doubt not he is a partaker of
that joy which crowns the labors of the faithful.

A Testimony from Buckingham Monthly Meeting in Bucks county Pennsylvania,
concerning EDMUND KINSEY.
HE was born in Philadelphia, in the year 1683, and it pleased the Lord to make
him acquainted with truth, which he embraced in a good degree, and became
sober, grave and steady in his deportment. In his early days he received a gift
in the ministry, wherewith friends had unity; being also serviceable and
exemplary to the particular meeting of Buckingham when it was small, by his
diligence in attending it, his humble waiting therein, and lively ministry to
the refreshing and encouraging of the little stock. Though his understanding as
a man was not very extensive, yet that was abundantly supplied by his meek,
innocent, loving and inoffensive deportment to all people. He was very diligent
and industrious in his outward affairs, a good example in his family, and
affectionate to friends. His latter days were attended with great affliction of
body, which he bore with patience and resignation, frequently signifying his
Dependence on the Lord, the great physician of value; saying, He was traveling
toward the city of rest, whose builder and maker God is. Having attained to
the age of seventy-six years, he departed this life, the 24 th of the twelfth
month 1759, in great peace and good will to all men. A minister upwards of 40
years.

A Testimony from Salem Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ELIZABETH
DANIEL, wife of James Daniel.
SHE was born in the year 1709, was a woman endowed with a lively gift in the
ministry, and by yielding in obedience to the heavenly call and following the
paths of true wisdom, it became as a crown and royal diadem on her head; for
the truth was her chief adorning, and by it she was advanced from a poor, low,
despised girl, to be as a mother in our Israel; and by wisdom was enabled to
stand in the midst of the congregation, with reputation and honor for the
cause of our God, and to plead with gainsayers and the lukewarm, to join in
With the glorious truth that had made her free, in the demonstration of the
power of pure love; and in the stream thereof she was often led forth, to
comfort the mournful travelers in Zion, and in the line of experience could
tell what great things the Lord had done for her soul, through her obedience and
trust in him, to whom she freely attributed all she received as from his
bountiful hand, and thereby gave the glory to God, and administered comfort to
weary traveling souls. But being of a backward spirit, from a sense of her own
weakness, was loath to give up to travel in truth's service, which often
brought her very low under such exercises. She sometimes traveled in
Pennsylvania and Maryland, of which service we had comfortable accounts, and
was also useful in building up the church within the limits of our
monthly meeting.

She was very lively to the last, and her testimonies were accompanied with
power that made them truly seasonable to the auditory, the divine presence
being sensibly with her, under a sense whereof she was very much resigned, and
rather desirous to depart and be at rest with the Lord. On being asked how she
was, she answered with much calmness, I am in great pain of body, but quite
easy in mind, free to depart and be released from my various exercises; and
feel as if my day's work was done, and that I might lay down this tabernacle in
peace. But Oh! the pain at times is so great, nature is ready to shrink, and am
afraid I shall not be able to bear it with that patience I ought, though I strive
for it, for my mind is quite easy and resigned.

Her pain was great under the extremity of a sharp pleurisy, and after seven
days, this servant of the Lord quietly departed in peace, on the 30 th of the
tenth month 1760, in the fifty-first year of her age, and the 26 th of her
public ministry.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOSHUA
LORD.
HE was born the first day of the eleventh month School, near Woodberry, in the
county of Gloucester West-New-Jersey, of parents professing with friends, and
appeared in the ministry about the year 1727, being early favored to
experience a growth therein, becoming a useful member in society. The forepart
of his time he traveled pretty much, having twice visited friends in
New England and Long Island, as also Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina; of
which services we had satisfactory accounts by certificates; he also frequently
visited the neighboring meetings in Pennsylvania and the Jerseys; the latter
part of his time he spent mostly at home.

His last illness was of short continuance, in which he was favored with a
quiet and resigned mind; expressing, That he had gone through a series of
trouble, but had been supported by the best of support; and we believe he is
gone to enjoy that unmixed felicity that will never have an end.

He departed this life, the 19 th of the eleventh month 1760, aged about
sixty-two years, and on the 22 d of the same month was interred in friends
burying-ground at Woodberry Creek.

A Testimony from Chesterfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ISAAC
HORNOR.
HE was son of John and Mary Hornor, born the 17 th of the second month 1678,
in the town of Tadcaster, in Yorkshire Old-England. In 1683, he came with his
parents to America, and settled within the limits of this meeting. After his
father's decease, it pleased the Lord to visit him with his blessed truth in
his young years, which he received in the love of it, and being obedient
thereto, as he grew in years he grew in grace, and in the saving knowledge
thereof, whereby he became a serviceable member amongst friends, both as an
overseer and elder. Although he did not appear in public testimony, he had a
sense of the true ministry, and was particularly qualified to administer
counsel and admonition; often advising to a steady course of life, and setting
forth the way and leadings of truth in a very informing and encouraging manner,
to the edification and comfort of many, which rendered his conversation
agreeable, not only amongst those of our society, but others also; being
likewise useful in settling differences. His sitting and waiting in meetings
was grave and solid becoming a true worshipper; was a nursing father and a
faithful elder, serving in that station diverse years. He departed this life,
after a short illness, on the 24 th of the eleventh month 1760, and was
interred in a burying-ground on his own plantation, aged eighty-two years and
six months.

A Testimony from Evesham Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning OBADIAH
BORTON.
HE was born in the township of Evesham, in New Jersey, in the year 1708, and
the influence of divine grace made early impressions on his mind whilst young
in years, which led him to love solitude and sobriety, and to shun those vices
incident to youth. About the twenty-second year of his age, a dispensation of
gospel ministry was committed to him. He was very awful at times in his public
approach before the divine majesty in prayer, and often engaged to exhort
friends to humility, and to shun arrogance and pride, being a good example
herein himself; so that his upright innocent deportment, gained him the good
esteem of his friends and others. He departed this life, the 7 th of the
seventh month 1761, aged fifty-three, a minister 31 years, and was buried at
Evesham.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning
ELIZABETH ESTAUGH.
SHE was daughter of John and Elizabeth Haddon, friends of London; born in the
year 1682, her parents gave her a liberal education; who having an estate in
lands in this province, proposed coming over to settle; and in order thereto,
sent persons over to make suitable preparation for their reception; but they
being prevented from coming, this our friend with her father's consent, came
over, and fixed her habitation where he proposed if he had come; she being then
about twenty years of age, in a single state of life, and exemplary therein.

In the year 17^2, she was married to our worthy friend John Estaugh, who
settled with her where she then dwelt, the place being called Haddonfield, in
allusion to her maiden name; there they lived together, near forty years
(except in that space, her several times crossing the sea to Europe, to visit
her aged parents, and when he was called abroad on truth's service, to which
she freely gave him up.) She was endowed with great natural abilities, which
being sanctified by the spirit of Christ were much improved, whereby she became
qualified to act in the affairs of the church, and was a serviceable member,
having been clerk to the women's meeting near 50 years, greatly to
satisfaction. She was a sincere sympathizer with the afflicted, of a benevolent
disposition, and in distributing to the poor, was desirous to do it in a way
most profitable and durable to them, and if possible, not to let the Right hand
know what the left did; and though in a state of affluence as to this world's
wealth, was an example of plainness and moderation; zealously concerned for
maintaining good order in the church, diligent in attending meetings at home,
where her service seemed principally to be, and from her awful sitting, we have
good cause to believe she was an humble waiter therein, which administered
edification to the solid beholder. Her heart and house was open to her friends,
whom to entertain, seemed one of her greatest pleasures; was prudently
cheerful, and well knowing the value of friendship, was careful not to wound it
herself, nor encourage others in whispering and publishing their failings or
supposed weaknesses.

Her last illness confined her about three months, being often in great bodily
pain, but favored with much calmness of mind and sweetness of spirit, which
rendered her confinement more easy to herself and those with her, which affords
matter of encouragement to survivors, to press after the mark of the high
calling in Christ Jesus. She departed this life, the 30 th of the third month
1762, as one fulling asleep, full of days, like unto a shock of corn fully
ripe. Her body was interred on the 1 st of the fourth month following, in
friends burying-ground at Haddonfield, being accompanied by many friends and
others, where a solid meeting was held; aged about eighty-two years.

A Testimony from Woodbridge Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ANNA
WEBSTER.
ANNA WEBSTER, an elder, wife of John Webster of Plainfield, departed this
life, the 20 th day of the fifth month 1762, in the thirty-sixth year of her
age. She was favored when young, to have her mind turned to him who is able to
preserve all that put their trust in him* and by her obedience to the
manifestations of divine light, she was enabled to conduct herself in a steady
and upright manner; and in the time of her last sickness, gave much useful and
instructive advice, to he^ ^usband, children and friends. She diverse times
entreated her husband, To give up to the Lord's disposings, and not to be over
troubled about her, expressing, Her d^^^^dance on the Lord and resignation to
his will, with desires, That the Lord would be with and comfort him, and that
he might seek for heavenly wisdom, and thereby be directed how to walk before
the Lord, and bring up their children in his fear, that they may have a portion
in heaven; charging her children, To consider the poor and administer to their
necessities.

At a time, speaking to her eldest son, she said, My dear child, let it never
be said of thee, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but
the son of man has not whereon to lay his head. She earnestly importuned
friends, To keep, not only themselves, but their offspring, to weekday
meetings, and teach them to wait on the Lord, that he might mercifully bless
them. Also recommended, 'Unity amongst friends,' expressing, Her sorrow in the
b^each thereof, and urged closely, 'The necessity of living in love;'
entreating friends, To notice her husband and children in their distress, and
watch over and advise her children, not sparing to tell them their faults.

She advised her children, In all their undertakings to seek the Lord for co^*
especially in that of choosing compani^^^* and expressed her experience of
favors received thereby, saying, She had often magnified that gracious hand
which was with her when a poor orphan child; and pressed them to serve the Lord
in their youth, which would draw divine blessings on them; adding, There are
excellent accounts of God's love to such as give up all in their youth; and
charged them, To avoid bad company, and keep to plainness; strongly advising,
Against disobedience to parents.

At a time when several young people were present, one of whom was light and
airy, she testified against her vain practices in very moving expressions, and
informed her, That the enemy would incline the mind in meetings, to such
vanities as were practiced out of meetings.

She was diverse times concerned in fervent prayer and supplication to the
almighty, That she might have sure hope before her change, and bear patiently
her distress; and for the poor afflicted seed, that the Lord's work might be
carried on in the earth, and that he would destroy all the inventions of the
enemy, which lead people to sin against him. Many more deep and weighty
expressions she uttered, which for brevity sake are omitted.

May the dying penetrating language o^ one whose general conduct was virtuous,
have a proper impression on our minds, and stir us up to prepare for our great
and final change, is our sincere desire.

A Testimony from Chesterfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning SARAH
MURFIN.
THIS worthy woman was one whom it pleased the Lord, to call out of the broad
way and vanities of the world, and make acquainted with his blessed truth; and
as she abode under the cross, it pleased the almighty to manifest unto her,
that she was a chosen vessel or instrument for his service, to preach the
gospel. She was fervent in prayer, serviceable in visiting families, and her
godly example in life and conversation, great humility and self-denial, much
adorned her ministry; careful to bring up her family in the fear of the Lord,
and in plainness of speech and apparel; being indeed a mother in Israel.

We fervently desire that the great Lord of the harvest, may be pleased to
continue to his church and people, a living ministry; and that many may be made
willing to run his errands and be serviceable in his hand, as was this our
worthy friend, who departed this life, the 26 th of the seventh month 1762,
aged about seventy-six years.

A Testimony from Rahway Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ELEANOR
SHOTWELL.
ELEANOR SHOTWELL, late wife of Jacob Shotwell of Rahway, was a tender hearted
friend, and encouraged such as sought the Lord. She was an elder of sound
judgment, concerned for the church's welfare, and that Zion might be restored
to her primitive beauty, and was a pattern of plainness and self-denial. In the
ninth month 1762, being on her journey to attend the yearly meeting at
Philadelphia, a friend mentioned the danger of going to said city, on account
of an infectious distemper then prevalent there; to which she replied, She had
no fear on that account, and that it was no matter where we departed the world,
so that we were in our duty. She accordingly went to the meeting and attended
the sittings of it, until she was suddenly seized with a violent disorder,
attended with extreme pain near three days, which she bore with a calm and even
mind. To a friend who visited her, she said, She was almost gone, and in great
pain of body, but exceeding peace of mind. At another time said, It was
satisfactory that her peace was made with the Lord, and that it would be
terrible to have a wounded conscience at such a time to struggle with.
Concerning her husband and children whom she dearly loved, she said, Though she
was not like to see them more, she was glad in the Lord, that she had given up
to attend the yearly meeting; expressing her desire, That her offspring should
be brought up in plainness, and that friends watchful care might be over them;
and that her husband might be preserved in self-denial, and humble resignation
to the Lord's will in all his trials.

She departed this life, on the 2 d day of the tenth month 1762, in the
forty-sixth year of her age, and was interred in friends burying-ground at
Philadelphia.

A Testimony from Burlington Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning PETER
FEARON.
HE was the son of John and Elizabeth Fearon, of Great-Broughton, in
Cumberland, and born in or about the year 1683. He came amongst friends on a
principle of convincement, during his apprenticeship with his uncle Peter
Fearon, and appeared in a few words in meetings before he was twenty years of
age. In the latter end of 1703, with the concurrence of friends, he left
England, and landed in Virginia, where he staid about three months, then came
to Burlington in the second month 1704, and from that time until his decease,
he was a useful member of this meeting.

Between the years 1704 and 1730, he traveled in the service of the gospel,
through most parts of this continent where meetings were then settled, and to
some provinces several times; and employed above two years in visiting friends
in England, Scotland and Ireland; returning with satisfactory certificates of
the approbation and unity of friends with his religions labors.

After those travels, his worldly circumstances being attended with
difficulties, and his desires earnest that he might get through them with
credit, he went many voyages to sea as a factor, chiefly to Boston and the
island of Barbados; and through many difficulties, he was enabled to pay his
debts, and to save sufficient, with industry and care, to yield a comfortable
subsistence in old age, and to be helpful to some others. In those undertakings
he took certificates, and returned such as were very satisfactory, both of his
diligence in his outward business, and of his care to edify the churches with
the gift of ministry which had been committed to him. Whilst in Barbados in the
beginning of 1746, a concern came upon him to visit friends on Tortola, which
by their large and full certificate, appears to have been very seasonable; and
was the first after our worthy friends Thomas Chalkley, John Cadwallader and
John Estaugh, had laid down their heads in peace among them. They say, He came
in a needful time, as a cloud full of rain upon a thirsty land, greatly to our
mutual comfort and joy in the Lord, and in one another.

One of his last voyages by sea, was in 1750, and on purpose to perform a
religious visit to friends in Barbados and Tortola, having our friend Thomas
Lancaster for his companion; and when they had performed their service, the
said friend was, after a sharp sickness, removed by death at sea. Besides this,
he met with other sore trials in his pilgrimage through life, particularly in
the long confinement of his wife, who was seized with the palsy five years
before her death, and lay most of that time entirely helpless. His behavior
toward her, was as an affectionate husband, with much tenderness and care; and
indeed his frequent practice of visiting the sick and afflicted, evidenced a
sympathizing heart, and was very becoming his station.

He was preserved in the exercise of his ministry, in much love and gospel
simplicity. And his sense of the nature and spirit in which the discipline
should be managed, is thus expressed in an epistle which he wrote to friends on
Tortola, viz. That you may grow up together a spiritual house that holiness
becomes, and a care according to gospel order may be kept to amongst you, and
that no harshness be used one toward another, but tender and helpful, and not
apt to judge or censure one another, that you may be kept in that universal
spirit of love, that seeks the good of all and hurt of none, and yet gives all
their due, and what is right and just.

His diligence in attending religious meetings was remarkable, for though he
lived three miles from the particular meeting of Burlington to which he
belonged, it was very uncommon for bodily infirmities, or any extremities of
weather to keep him at home on meeting days; and the year before his decease,
he visited several general meetings both in this and the neighboring provinces.

A life so spent in fervent endeavors to promote truth and righteousness among
mankind, was, we have cause to hope, in a suitable preparation to be closed at
a short warning. He was seized with a fit by his own fire side, which quickly
deprived him of understanding, and about three days after he breathed his last,
on the 21 st of the twelfth month 1762, in the seventy-ninth year of his age,
having been a minister about 60 years. He was interred on the 23 d in friends
burying-ground at Burlington, after a solid meeting held on the occasion.

Having observed strict temperance and moderation, he finished his course in a
good old age; being an example of prudence and steadiness, which we desire may
be often remembered, and usefully improved to the advantage of such as are left
behind.

A Testimony from Shrewsbury Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning THOMAS
TILTON.
ON the 4 th day of the first month 1763, died our friend Thomas Tilton, in the
seventy-ninth year of his age. Some of whose last expressions were as follows,
viz.

That his passage was very long and hard, and many times prayed God to carry
him through, that his poor wife's trouble was greater for him than she could
well endure, and that he was not insensible, she labored for him both in body
and mind. Some time after he said, It was a comfort to him to see his children
concerned for themselves, and desired them, To keep to their duties, for there
was a falling away of some, but that they might not neglect theirs; that they
would live in love and in the fear of the Lord, which would be to their
advantage, but to live loose and wanton would make hard work on a dying bed;
observing, That people thought too little of their latter end, although they
think of it sometimes, it soon goes out of their minds. Then prayed, That the
Lord would carry him through, saying, His passage was very hard, and his pain
and affliction great; yet his peace was steady, for the Lord did not charge him
with any thing.

A Testimony from Rahway Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning ELIZABETH
HAYDOCK.
OUR friend Elizabeth Haydock, late wife of James Haydock, of Rahway, was
religiously inclined from her youths and an early pattern of self-denial and
plainness to those of her age and sex. Being called to the work of the
ministry, it became a trial to her, and such a cross to her own will to give up
to the Lord's work, that she was ready to give way to consultations, and on
account of her own incapacity and frailties, to question its being his call; so
that (as she expressed) could she have found peace, she would rather have
chosen death than obedience; but finding the love of God, as it is abode in, to
be stronger than the world, she yielded thereto; and confiding in the Lord
alone, came forth an instrument of his own preparing; and continuing to walk in
the way of self-denial, she grew in her gift, increasing both in understanding
and utterance to the close of her days.

In her last illness, she signified, She had near done with time, and was fully
resigned; and departed this life, in the seventh month 1763, in the
twenty-seventh year of her age, and the 4 th of her ministry.

A Testimony from Exeter Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ELLIS HUGH.
THOUGH few of us were personally acquainted with this our dear ancient friend
in the early part of his life, yet as we have information by good authorities,
of some things remarkable therein, we think it not amiss to transmit some hints
of them, with what has fallen out within the compass of our knowledge
concerning him.

He was born in Merionethshire, in the principality of Wales, and came over
with his parents into Pennsylvania, when about twelve years of age.

He was naturally of a very cheerful disposition, and for some time indulged
himself in keeping company with such, whose conversation and conduct were
unprofitable and vain, for which, though we do not understand he was guilty of
immoral practices, he was closely reproved by the witness of God in secret, and
his condition being thereby plainly manifested to him, as likewise the danger
of pursuing such courses, he did not dare to go any longer in vanity: but
submitting to the reproofs of instruction, was brought under great exercise and
godly sorrow; in which state, the conversation of his former companions, once
his delight, became a burden and increased his distress; but avoiding to feed
their light airy dispositions, keeping his mind retired, and reading the holy
scriptures, when they sought to entice him, had such an effect, that they
forsook him, which was a great ease to his mind, in that it afforded him
opportunity for a further search after the will of him, who in mercy had called
him to glory and virtue. As he was thus engaged, after many deep baptisms and
trials, it pleased the Lord, about the thirty-fourth year of his age, to call
him to the work of the ministry; which was an exceeding humbling exercise to
him, and many sore conflicts he had therein, through the buffetings of Satan;
but by endeavoring to follow the Lord in the way of his requirings, help was
administered, so that he at times, had to experience, that he gives The oil of
joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

His chief inducement to come and settle in these parts, was a strong draught
of love attending his mind, which however he did not hastily give way to,
having felt drawings hither near eight years before he came; of so great moment
did the removing himself and family appear to him.

He was a diligent attender of first and week day meetings for worship, as also
of our monthly, quarterly and yearly meetings, even when age and infirmity of
body rendered traveling very difficult to him. He likewise visited some of the
neighboring provinces on truth's service, with the unity of friends; and by
accounts which we have had from the places he visited, his labors of love were
well received and serviceable.

From the time of his coming amongst us, he was always one of the number, who
went on the visit to friends families; which weighty work he undertook in much
diffidence of himself, and fear of a forward spirit, often saying, That former
appointments and engagements thereto, were of no account for future services;
but that such as went, must wait for renewed qualifications to enter upon that
work, which he used to say, He thought must be a good one, since it occasioned
greater nearness, and was a renewal of love, both among visitors and visited:
And by accounts received, it was so in a good degree.

In meetings for worship he was a good example in silent patient waiting upon
the Lord, and when raised to bear a public testimony, it was with that power
and authority, which accompanies a true gospel minister, and has made lasting
impressions upon some minds. Though he was of an exceeding tender disposition,
yet being a lover of good order in the church, and well knowing the dangerous
tendency of undue liberty, he both by precept and example, endeavored to
promote the former and discourage the latter; in which he gave repeated proofs,
that the near connections of natural kindred did not bias his judgment.

His deportment being meek and loving, and his conversation familiar and
instructively cheerful, gained him the esteem of most who knew him, of
different ranks and religious persuasions. He was a nursing father in the
church, and particularly so to diverse whom the Lord had visited that were under
affliction, whether of body or mind; nor was his charity in this respect
confined to the members of our society.

He was an affectionate husband, a tender parent, a kind master; and having, by
the blessing of divine providence on his honest industry, obtained a competency
of the necessaries of life, was very hospitable, entertaining both friends and
others freely and kindly, not with ostentation or for applause, but for the
promotion of piety and virtue, and the good of mankind.

As his natural strength abated in the last years of his life, he appeared more
bright and lively in his public ministry, both at home and abroad; and the day
he was taken ill of his last sickness, at the funeral of one of his sons, which
was the last meeting he was at, he was remarkably favored in his public
testimony to a large gathering of people; and in supplication at the same
meeting, his great Lord and master was pleased to favor him with a
transcendent view into the beauty of holiness, crowning; a life, a great part
of which had been, according to the measure received, devoted to his honor,
with evident tokens of his being near to the kingdom of rest and peace
everlasting. And the same evening he was taken ill at his own house in Exeter
aforesaid, and continued for about eleven days, mostly in extreme pain, yet
bore it with patience and resignation to the divine will; and though he
inclined much to be still and quiet, uttered many comfortable expressions, some
of which were taken down in writing. At one time he said, It is a fine thing to
have a clear conscience. And one morning, Here is another day, Lord so preserve
me through it, that I may do nothing to offend thee. In the evening he said,
Lord bless this night to me. And taking something to give him ease, he said. He
that turned water into wine is able to give a blessing. After laying still some
time, said, Sorrow at night, but joy comes in the morning. And in the morning
he said, I remember a dream I had about fifty years ago, I thought I was in a
room alone, just going to die, and as I was much concerned and troubled because
there was no one present to see me die, I thought the great physician of value
stood by me and said, I will be with thee; and I have a little faith, that he
will be with me, and if I am favored with my senses, hope I shall not give
over wrestling for a blessing. A little before noon he said, Lord, this is the
way of mortal men, when they come to lie on a sick bed, they crave thy favor,
though at other times many are forgetful of thee. At another time he said,
Though affliction may not seem pleasant during its continuance, yet it works
an exceeding great joy to them that love and fear God. And in the evening,
being in great bodily pain, said, Lord give me ease if it be thy blessed will.
The next day being the first day of the week, several friends came to see him
before meeting, to whom he said, Fear God and serve him, and his regard will be
unto you, but if you neglect to worship him, he will cast you off forever, or
words nearly to that import. And being fearful they would over stay the time
for meeting, inquired what hour, saying to them, Don't neglect the business of
the Lord: And when they were going, desired, They would remember him when it
was well with them. In the evening inquiring what sort of a meeting they had
that day, and being answered, a good meeting; he said with seeming joy, The
Lord is not limited to persons, but all that worship him aright shall be
accepted of him, or words to that effect. A little after midnight, being in
great bodily pain, and from the symptoms, it was thought for about an hour he
was departing, during which he appeared to have his mind retired to the Lord,
and then reviving a little said, This has been a blessed meeting. The next
morning taking leave of a neighbor, he said, Farewell, and if we never meet
again in this world, I hope we shall meet in a more glorious place among the
righteous. The day before his departure his speech failed much, though he
remained very sensible; and the last words he was heard to say, were, 'Lord in
heaven receive my soul.' Then growing weaker until the third hour next morning,
being the 11 th of the first month 1764, he departed this life, in a quiet
frame of mind, aged seventy-six years and some months. His corpse was interred
in friends burying-ground at Exeter aforesaid, accompanied by a large number of
his friends and neighbors.

A Testimony from Bradford Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning MARY
PENNEL.
SHE was born in Radnorshire, in Wales, and educated by her parents in the
profession of the church of England. About the thirteenth year of her age,
going with her elder sister to a meeting of friends, who were sitting in awful
silence, with tears dropping down the cheeks of diverse, it made such religious
impression on her tender mind, that she thereby became in some degree,
convinced of the truth. About the sixteenth year of her age, she arrived in
Pennsylvania, where living in a friend's family, and experiencing the renewed
visits of truth, she became willing to come more closely under the discipline
of the cross, and joined with friends; was married to John Pennel, and resided
within the compass of Concord meeting many years. Being diverse years under a
weighty exercise to appear in public ministry, about the year 1722, she gave up
thereto, and increasing in her gift, had in time, a refreshing edifying
testimony; being well approved by her friends at home, and frequently led into
the states of meetings where her lot was cast; in the exercise of the ministry
she traveled into the eastern provinces, also into Great Britain and Ireland,
where in diverse places, she had acceptable service, to the strengthening some
tender minds in the way and work of truth. Afterward removing with her husband
to East Caln, they resided there the remainder of their time; and several years
before her decease, her understanding by reason of age, became weak, yet she
was preserved in much innocence, having a love and regard to friends, and was
always pleased with their visits.

She died the 10 th day of the fifth month 1764, and was interred in friends
burying-ground at East Caln aforesaid, aged eightysix years.

An additional Testimony concerning MARY PENNEL, by a friend from Great Britain.
HAVING read the preceding memorial, concerning our worthy deceased friend.
Mary Pennel, it is in my heart to make a small addition thereto. In the course
of her travels in England, she visited friends at Ipswich in Suffolk, and had
good and acceptable service there, among a number of young persons who were
newly convinced of the truth. Her conversation was solid and instructive,
accompanied with sweetness of spirit, and having obtained to a considerable
growth in experimental religion, she spoke in a feeling effectual manner to our
inward states. At a certain time giving some account of her own convincement,
she said, In her very young days, she was a watchful observer of the conduct of
friends at markets and public places, that she might see whether in their
dealings they kept to the principle of truth, of which she was convinced; and
seeing their words were few and savoury, their countenances and behavior
weighty, and that they were just and upright in their commerce amongst men, it
had a great tendency to confirm and establish her mind in the truth she had
embraced.

I. H.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning RACHEL
PEMBERTON.
SHE was born at Burlington, in West-New-Jersey, in the year 1691, being the
daughter of Charles Read, who was one of the early settlers of Pennsylvania
under the grant to William Penn. It pleased the Lord to extend his gracious
visitation to her in her tender age, which as she submitted to and abode under,
she happily experienced to lead her into a life of righteousness and great
circumspection. About the eighteenth year of her age, she was married to our
worthy friend Israel Pemberton, who united with her in a pious concern for the
prosperity and prevalence of the cause of truth, her sincere love to which and
the friends thereof, she uniformly manifested by her kind sympathetic care as a
"Mother in Israel." She usefully filled the station of an overseer and elder,
being carefully concerned to rule her own family well, and that her offspring
might have a portion in that treasure which fails not. She was a true
sympathizer with those under affliction of body or mind, demonstrating her
sensibility herein, by her frequent visits to such, which were weighty and
comforting, her conversation being solid and instructive.

In the first month 1754, it pleased divine providence to deprive her of her
beloved husband, in whom was removed, a father, a friend, and counselor to her
and the church; which close trial (after 40 years living together in much
harmony) she was enabled to bear with christian calmness and resignation;
having often to experience the reality of that truth left upon record, A father
to the fatherless, and a judge for the widow, is God in his holy habitation.

She continued her house open for the reception of friends near and from remote
parts, as it had been in her husband's time, particularly for the entertainment
of those who came from Europe on religious visits to America, with whom she was
often dipped into much feeling sympathy under their weighty travel and exercise.

Few have been more zealously concerned, and diligent in the attendance of
religious meetings, seldom allowing the inclemency of weather to prevent her;
and continued to manifest the like concern when very feeble; which diligence,
was, in the time of her confinement and languishing state, a satisfactory
reflection to her, as her attendance had been from a real sense and persuasion
of duty.

On the 22 d day of the tenth month 1764, she attended the second day's meeting
of ministers and elders, which was the last meeting she was at, her feeble
state requiring her confinement to her chamber the 25 th, and gradually
weakened; yet love to the cause of truth continued, and her concern was great,
that the professors thereof might live under its preserving influence.

She uttered many lively expressions at different times in the course of her
illness, in acknowledgement of the goodness and mercy of the Lord, In
preserving her in patience under great bodily pain, and with an evidence of her
future well-being.

She departed this life, on the 24 th day of the second month 1765, and was
interred in our burial ground in this city, on the 27 th of the same month.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ELLEN
EVANS, an elder of said meeting.
SHE was the daughter of Rowland and Margaret Ellis, born near Dollegelle, in
the principality of Wales, in the year 1685. She was favored with a good
understanding, which being improved by a religious education and strict
attention to the dictates of divine grace, soon distinguished her as one
seeking after heavenly treasure, which made her in riper years, an honorable
member of society.

She married our worthy and much esteemed friend John Evans, of this place, to
whom she was truly a help-meet, more especially in public religious services;
for whenever she discovered the least inclination in him, to visit the meetings
of friends whether far or near, she did all in her power to cherish and
encourage the motion; she was also a great support and comfort to him under his
spiritual conflicts about the time of his appearing first in a public testimony.

In her family, she was an example of piety and industry, rising early in the
morning, and encouraging others so to do, often observing that those who lay
late, lost the youthful beauty of the day, and wasted the most precious part of
their time; that the sun was the candle of the world, which called upon us to
arise and apply to our several duties. When the affairs of the morning were
transacted it was almost her invariable practice, except on meeting days, to
retire about noon, with the bible or some religious book; where a portion of
her time was spent alone; from which retirement she often returned with evident
tokens, that her eyes had been bathed in tears.

She was remarkably well acquainted with the holy scriptures, as also the
writings and characters of our ancient worthy friends, together with those of
her own time; frequently expressing, The many advantages she reaped from often
conversing with the dead and absent; endeavoring to cultivate the same
disposition in her family, by often calling them together in the winter
evenings, and requiring one of her children to read audibly in the bible or
some other religious book; repeatedly observing to them, The benefit which
attended preserving the characters of those faithful ministers and elders in
the church, whose pious lives and happy dissolution, if held up to the view of
posterity, might be a likely means of kindling the same holy zeal, and
resolution to tread in their footsteps. And as ministering friends (whom she
truly loved from her infancy as brethren and sisters in gospel fellowship) in
the course of their visits came this way, generally lodged at their house, at
which times she seldom missed to prepare her family, and inform the
neighborhood of an intention to sit a while together in the evening; which
select opportunities, many can yet remember, were often singularly blessed with
divine comfort and edification.

Her diligence in attending meetings for religious worship, was no less
manifest than her steady zeal for supporting our christian discipline, and that
we might adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things: Ye^ was her zeal
mixed with charity, for b^ing long experienced how few were qualified to lay
justice precisely to the line and righteousness to the plumbline, she thought
it safest rather to incline to the merciful side; firmly believing that the
grace of God which brings salvation, had appeared unto all men; delighting to
converse with our uninstructed Indians about their sentiments of the supreme
being; and often said, She discovered evident traces of divine goodness in
their uncultivated minds.

In her friendships she was warm and steady, and on her death bed earnestly
pressed her children, Not to forget the friends of their father and mother; and
the sensibility of her heart, made her very attentive to the wants of the poor
in her neighborhood.

Some years before her decease she lost in the husband of her youth, a bosom
friend, and the great support of her age, which proved so great a trial, she
said, That if God whom she loved all her life long, had not enabled her to
sustain it, she must have sunk under it. This dispensation of providence weaned
her from all temporal enjoyments. She continued attending meetings, and
frequently visiting the sick and afflicted while her strength permitted, and
when that failed, much of her time was spent in reading the holy scriptures and
in meditation.

The early state of religion in this province was a grateful subject of
conversation to her in the evening of her day, but upon turning her eye to the
present time, she would say with a deep sigh, Oh! what is become of the morning
dew and celestial rain, that used to fall and rest upon our assemblies. For
herself, she often prayed, That she might possess a lively relish of truth to
the last, and retain the greenness of youth in old age, which God was
graciously pleased to favor her with.

Her last illness began about a year before her decease, in the forepart
thereof she felt a lowness and depression of mind, that caused her to cry, Tell
me, Oh! thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy
flocks to rest at noon. But after some time, this cloud was removed, and she
was enabled to say, He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over
me was love.

And thus, by remembering her creator in the days of her youth, and a steady
perseverance therein, she was enabled to meet the king of terrors with a serene
countenance, and resigned her breath without a sigh or groan, the 29 th day of
the fourth month, and was buried at Gwynedd, the 2 d of the fifth month 1765;
being, we trust, admitted to the general assembly and church of the first born,
which are written in heaven.

A Testimony from Kingwood Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning SAMUEL
LARGE.
OUR ancient friend Samuel Large, departed this life, the 9 th of the sixth
month 1765, and was buried the 11 th of said month, in friends burying-ground
at Kingwood, aged about, seventy-seven years, having been a minister upwards of
40 years. He was religiously inclined when young, insomuch (as he related) that
at times he thought he could freely declare to others of the goodness and
merciful dealings of God to his soul; but for want of giving diligent heed to
the inshinings of that divine light which had measurably redeemed him, he
suffered a loss of that sweet and heavenly communion which he had been made a
sharer of, and began to join with folly and vanity, which youth are apt to do;
but in process of time, being revisited by an all-merciful God, he gave up to
bear the cross; and about the thirtieth year of his age, was made willing to
bear a public testimony, and declare to others what God had done for him; which
testimony was living and powerful, and tended to the refreshing and watering
the Lord's heritage and people; being often concerned where his lot was cast,
to invite and persuade people to seek the Lord for themselves, that they might
know the work of regeneration wrought and completed in and for themselves. He
freely gave up to spend both time and substance on truth's account when called
thereto, having visited several provinces on this continent, and some of them
diverse times. He was a generous kind friend, ready to do good to all,
especially the household of faith, very ready in assisting the servants and
messengers of Christ when traveling on that account; bringing up his children
in the principles of the christian religion, and in plainness of speech and
apparel, a great encourager of his family and others in attending meetings,
that they might discharge their duties which they owed to their maker. In the
latter part of his days, when old and infirm, he met with exercises and
difficulties, yet we have good reason to believe, he was carried through them
all, and died in peace with the Lord and goodwill to all mankind, and is
entered into rest, and reaps the reward of the faithful, where trouble and
exercise are at an end. He had a sight of his approaching exit, and gave orders
that his burial should be plain. Some of the last words he uttered, were to his
wife, a few hours before he expired, when he said, All is done that is needful,
now I must leave thee.

A Testimony from New-Garden Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning
WILLIAM MOTT.
OUR worthy friend William Mott, of Mamaroneck in New York government, being on
a religious visit to friends in this province; after attending our
yearly meeting at Philadelphia, intended proceeding to Nottingham, and on his
way thither, was at our mon^^ly-meeting in the tenth month 1765; where, after a
time of silence, he appeared in a short yet satisfactory testimony; but being
much indisposed, left the meeting in a few minutes afterward, and went to a
friend's house, where his disorder, which proved to be the small pox, increased
and lay heavy upon him. Two days afterward, some friends going to visit him,
he mentioned his desire of having a time of retirement together, in which
opportunity he expressed in a lively and sensible manner, his resignation to
the will of God respecting his indisposition, and spoke of the great advantage
it would be to the members of our society, if they were more drawn from the
spirit and friendship of the world, and the eager pursuit after the riches and
grandeur thereof; saying, that the professors of truth suffered great loss in a
spiritual sense, for want of being often deeply inward, when about their lawful
callings, laboring to have their minds retired, where true comfort and
instruction is to be witnessed; and that friends who are heads of families,
ought to wait for the movings of truth, to make way for them to call their
children and servants together; and if this was but the engagement of their
minds, way would be made for such opportunities beyond their expectation. On
which and some other subjects, he, at that time, spoke in a sensible humble
manner.

At other times he frequently mentioned his uneasiness in beholding, that many
of the professors of truth did not keep within the bounds of true moderation
respecting clothing and furniture, but rather pleased the natural disposition,
to no real advantage, and consumed much precious time that might be profitably
spent in doing good among mankind; saying, that if friends lived near enough to
the inward teacher that discovers things to be as they really are; there are
many things amongst us termed small or trifling, which would appear
inconsistent with the pure truth.

Notwithstanding his affliction was great, yet he bore it with remarkable
patience, appearing more concerned for the glory of God and the good of his
church and people, than any temporal considerations: And frequently expressed
his resignation to the divine will, being freely given up either for life or
death. The retired frame of mind he generally appeared in, was instructive;
often saying he felt easy in mind, having witnessed a comfortable refreshing
season, and expressed his thankfulness for such peculiar favor in so trying a
dispensation: Yet he had no other prospect but that he should recover, until a
few hours before his decease, when he signified, He had almost done with time.
And changing fast, he quietly departed, the 15 th of the tenth month 1765, in a
sensible composed frame of spirit. On the 17 th his corpse, accompanied by many
friends, was interred in friends burying-ground in New-Garden, after a solid
meeting.

A Testimony from the Quarterly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning our
esteemed friend MARGARET ELLIS, late of Radnor meeting, deceased.
SHE was born in the principality of Wales, of parents professing episcopacy,
and religious in that way. By a short memorial she has left, of some
occurrences in her life, we find, she was early visited by the almighty, which
she expresses in this manner. At fourteen years of age, the call of the Lord
was to me, when seeing some of my companions carri^ to the grave, a concern
came over my mind, with a consideration, whither their souls were gone, and
where mine would be, if I should then be taken away; and that followed and
remained with me for many days: But being young and not willing to bear the
cross, the witness for God was so far suppressed, that she gave way to follow
the vanities and diversions of the world; yet the Lord did not forget her; but
some years after, the visitation was renewed, and then, she says, I returned in
earnest to look within, to my own state and condition, and to the anointing
mentioned by the apostle John, which opened clearly in my mind. This brought
her to a close exercise, and often in secret prayer, that the Lord would be
pleased to manifest her duty. Soon after this, she went to visit a brother at
Dolobran, who had a short time before joined in communion with friends; and
being at a meeting, she was further reached unto, and the thoughts of her heart
declared by a worthy minister then present. Her father took pains to dissuade
her from joining friends, and got several priests to assist him with their
endeavors, but being enlightened to see the formality and deadness of the
profession of religion in which she had been educated, and the blindness and
emptiness of their priests, she aquainted her father, She would never come more
to their church, unless it was to his and her mother's burial.

In a few years after this, she found a concern to appear in public testimony
in friends meetings, and soon afterward removed to this province; in which she
apprehended a divine direction, believing the Lord would go along with her,
which she experienced to her comfort, and was cordially received by friends;
increasing in the gift bestowed on her.

She passed through various baptisms and trials in her young years in her
native land, and many conflicts and exercises afterward, yet experien^^ the
arm of the Lord revealed for her help and support.

She was a sincere hearted woman, diligent in the exercise of her gift, which
was in much plainness and simplicity. She visited the meetings frequently in
some parts of this province and New Jersey; and in the year 1752, with the
concurrence of friends, embarked in order to visit friends in some parts of
Great Britain, which she performed, and was in several places engaged to visit
many of the families of friends; which as we have understood, were acceptable
and serviceable. She was favored to return, and continued lively in the
exercise of her gift.

Being taken ill in Philadelphia, in the eleventh month 1765, immediately after
our quarterly meeting which she attended, after a few days illness, she
departed this life. She had diverse times, to her particular friends, expressed
her desire, if it was the Lord's will, to finish her days in this city; and in
her sickness expressed her willingness to depart, but requested she might be
favored with some interval of ease from extreme pain, that she might take her
leave of her friends, which was granted her. She uttered many lively and
savoury expressions in her sickness, was favored with an evidence of her
future well-being, and as she lived in the fear of God, we doubt not she was
accepted of him, and enjoys the reward of her faithfulness.

She died the 13 th of the eleventh month 1765, in a good old age; her body was
carried to our meeting house in High Street, and after a solid meeting, buried
the 15 th in friends grave-yard.

A Testimony from Nottingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning DINAH
JAMES.
SHE was born the 7 th of the sixth month 1699, near Chester, in the county of
Chester in Pennsylvania. When she was about five years old, her parents John
and Hannah Churchman, removed and settled at Nottingham, in the county
aforesaid; and she being religiously educated by them, soon became inwardly
sensible of the blessed truth; and taking heed to its teaching, was early
adorned thereby with a meek and quiet spirit; was a great lover of meetings for
the worship of God, and a humble exemplary waiter therein. About the
thirty-fourth year of her age she appeared in the ministry, and being faithful
in her gift, though she did not increase in many words, and but seldom appeared
therein, being rather a pattern of awful silence, yet her testimony when she
did appear, was remarkably seasoned with the baptising power of the spirit,
which made it truly acceptable to friends. She was often heard to express her
apprehension of the danger of words increasing in the church, without
sufficient weight and awfulness; and at different times, especially in the
latter years of her life, both in public testimony and in private, she spoke of
a winnowing time at hand, wherein she apprehended the chaff was to be blown
away, and the church restored to as great, if not a greater degree of purity
than heretofore; which is now fresh in the memory of diverse persons.

She was an example of plainness herself, and careful prudently to suppress the
contrary in her children, as long as they remained under her immediate care,
meekly dissuading in a moving manner, against any appearance of corruption in
conversation, as well as the world's vain fashions and superfluity in dress;
firmly maintaining parental authority in this steady resolution which she never
departed from, viz. that while her children were clothed at her expense, they
should submit to have their clothes fashioned agreeable to her mind. She was no
less remarkable for humility and charity, a promoter of good order in the
church, and of true peace upon the right foundation; for which virtues she
gained the general esteem of her friends and others.

Between the years 1742 and 1754, she visited most of the meetings of friends
in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Long Island and the Eastern-shore of Maryland. Her
care to attend meetings was memorable and worthy of imitation, even when under
great bodily weakness and infirmity, as she was for many years in the latter
part of her life, several of her joints being greatly affected with the
violence of rheumatic pains; all which she bore with such patience and humble
resignation of mind, as truly becomes a christian, and bespoke a well grounded
hope of a lasting habitation at the end of a weary pilgrimage in this world.

She was at meeting a few weeks before her decease, but feeling much bodily
weakness, she expressed her doubt of ever coming again; having at diverse times
before manifested a sense of her end being near. About five days before her
decease she was seized with a fever and inward pains, which weakened her very
fast. The night before she died she had several refreshing naps of sleep, and
on awaking was often heard quietly to repeat these words, A happy change, a
happy change; and about the 8 th hour on the 1 st of the first month 1766, she
quietly departed, as one falling asleep, being cheerful and sensible almost to
the last moments of life; in the sixty-seventh year of her age, a minister
about 33 years; and on the 3 d of the same month, was interred in the
burying-ground of friends at East-Nottingham.

A Testimony from Sadsbury Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning MARY
MOORE.
OUR well esteemed friend Mary Moore, late wife of James Moore, and daughter of
Joseph and Sarah Wildman, of Bucks county, was born the 8 th day of the eighth
month 1720, she was adorned with a meek and quiet spirit, favored with a gift
in the ministry, whose testimony was generally well received, her words being
few and savoury, and her awful deportment and exemplary conduct both at home
and abroad, worthy of imitation. About a year before her decease she was taken
with a lingering disorder, in which time of weakness she was often tenderly
affected, advising her children and others, To prepare for their latter end,
and not leave their work behind hand; observing, in an humble manner, what an
awful bowed people we ought to be.

About four hours before her departure many friends came to see her, whom she
earnestly beholding, desired they would sit down, that they might truly wait in
God's fear, and that those who knew how to wait would get deep in true silence:
At which time, notwithstanding her great weakness, she was divinely favored,
and her tongue loosed to leave her last testimony, saying, Friends, if you love
God, he will love you, and if you do not love God, how can you expect to be
beloved of him? Adding, If you would gather your families more often together,
and sit down in his fear, and wait in true silence, to have your minds drawn
from this world, you would grow in the truth, with more to the same effect,
desiring they might remember her words. After which she desired her husband
would freely give her up and not mourn after her, at the same time encouraged
him to faithfulness, and desired friends would be still and quiet until her
departure. Being sensible to the last, she quietly expired the 13 th of the
seventh month 1766, and was interred in friends burying-ground at Sadsbury,
aged forty-five years.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning THOMAS
REDMAN.
HE was born in the city of Philadelphia, the 31 st of the third month 1714,
and being stripped of his parents when young, was placed apprentice in said
city, after which he removed and settled at Haddonfield aforesaid. About the
twenty-second year of his age, he appeared in the ministry, and we believe
labored faithfully until the conclusion of his days. He traveled into
New England on a religious visit, in company with Edmund Peckover, of
Great Britain, who was here on a visit to the churches in America, from whence,
at his return, we received a good account of his services, which, with his
company, was very acceptable to us. He was often deeply exercised for the
growth and prosperity of truth, which we believe he truly loved. In family
visits he was much favored with divine ability, and had to deliver suitable
advice to the benefit and refreshment of many* His testimony was plain, sound
and edifying; a lowly minded seeker of divine help, which made him very useful
in the carrying on the affairs of the church. He ruled well in his own family,
bringing them up in moderation and plainness, and was a good example therein
himself. Although he did not travel much in distant parts, yet he visited most
of the meetings in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. He was sometimes fervently
engaged to call to the youth, for whom he was much concerned; he was prudent,
charitable and benevolent, whose house was open freely to receive his friends.
And although we sensibly feel the loss of so worthy a friend and member, we
desire to submit, believing our loss is his great gain, and that he now
inherits a place prepared for the righteous.

He departed this life, at his own house in Haddonfield, the 23 d day of the
ninth month 1766, in the fifty-third year of his age, and was interred the 25
th in friends burying-ground at Haddonfield, after a large and solid meeting on
the occasion.

A Testimony from Uwchlan Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning SAMUEL
JOHN.
HE was born in Pembrokeshire, in the principality of Wales, in the year 1680,
and educated in profession with the church of England, being (as we have been
informed by those who then knew him) a sober youth, religiously inclined, and
concerned for an inward acquaintance with the Lord, who had touched his heart
with a sense of his own state and condition, whence desires being raised after
that which is substantial, he continued seeking for many years, and among
diverse professions.

He came over to Pennsylvania, in the year 1709, and some time after settled at
Uwchlan aforesaid, and soon joined in society with friends, having for diverse
years before been under some convincement of the principle of truth as held by
us; and being measurably faithful to the manifestation of grace received, the
Lord was pleased to bestow upon him a dispensation of the gospel to preach, in
which we believe he labored faithfully, and became a sound and able minister:
His sitting in meetings for divine worship was solid and exemplary, often in
silence, though at times when moved thereto, doctrine has dropped from him as
the dew, and his speech distilled as the small rain, to the refreshing the
hungry and thirsty soul.

He was an example of plainness and moderation, his conversation weighty and
instructive, also very encouraging to such as were well minded; and diverse
small pieces sound among his papers, which appear as the produce of his private
meditations, manifest that his conversation was often in heaven, and his
meditation on heavenly things.

It was his lot to pass through diverse baptising and afflicting circumstances
(occasioned by the conduct of some who ought to have been a comfort to him in
his declining years) which he bore with becoming patience, and retained his
greenness to the last, appearing in a sweet comfortable frame of mind; he often
expressed himself in a deep, sensible and affecting manner, to some who visited
him daring his last weakness which continued a considerable time, being
confined at home through bodily infirmity and old age, for near two years before
his decease.

He quietly departed this life, on the 16 th of the tenth month 1766, in the
eighty-seventh year of his age, having been a minister about 54 years, and was
buried the 18 th of the said month; when a solemn meeting was held, wherein the
overshadowing of truth was measurably felt, under the influence whereof the
unruly were warned, and the feeble minded comforted and encouraged to persevere
in the way which leads to peace.

A Testimony from New-Garden Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
SMITH.
HE was born at Dartmouth, in New England, the 3 d of the fourth month 1681;
his parents were Presbyterians, but joined with friends in their latter years.
As he grew to years of understanding, the Lord was pleased to favor him with
the knowledge of his blessed truth, through the divine light shining in his
heart, whereby he became acquainted with the discipline of the cross, and was,
whilst young, in a good degree weaned from the vanities and perishing
enjoyments of this world.

About the twenty-second year of his age, he bore a testimony against wars and
fightings, for which he was fined and suffered seven months imprisonment. In
the twenty-fourth year of his age, he embarked for England, and on his arrival
there, was pressed on board a vessel of war, where he was kept about six weeks;
and for refusing to fight or be an assistant therein, he underwent sufferings,
trials and many exercises, but through the Lord's mercy and goodness, he was
preserved steady in his testimony, and sound peace and the presence of the Lord
to be with him in a large degree, rejoicing that he was accounted worthy to
suffer for the testimony of truth. He came over to Pennsylvania soon after, and
when married, resided several years at or near Chester, and about the year
1713, he removed with his family into East-Marlborough in Chester county, where
he dwelt upwards of 40 years. About the year 1714, a meeting for worship was
settled at his house, which continued until a meeting house was built in
London-Grove township not far distant.

He was one whom we think dwelt near the truth, having received the same in the
love of it. His ministry was savoury though not very eloquent, zeal us for good
order and serviceable in the discipline of the church. He often spoke of the
degeneracy from the primitive plainness conspicuous amongst friends, both in
dress and address, and the great need of a reformation; expressing his fervent
desires for the restoration of ancient purity; and being himself an example of
plainness, and in conversation cheerful, instructive and edifying; was often
concerned to stir up the negligent to their duty, both in respect to attendance
of meetings and humble waiting therein.

He cheerfully entertained his friends, whose company and conversation he
greatly desired; and though in the decline of life, he met with some afflicting
occurrences, yet he bore them with a good degree of christian fortitude,
looking over them to that which is invisible, having an eye to the recompense
of reward.

The last place of his residence, was within the limits of New-Garden
particular meeting, which he carefully attended when able; the Lord being
pleased to preserve him as a fruitful branch, fresh and green, which was
manifested by his conversation, solid deportment in meetings, and particularly
in his ministry; a sweetness of spirit and lively sense of truth apparently
attending him to the last.

His bodily infirmities gradually increasing, he departed this life, the 24 th
of the tenth month 1766, and was buried at London-Grove aforesaid, in the
eighty-sixth year of his age; and we trust he is at ^est, receiving the reward
of the faithful.

A Testimony from Warrington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning
ALEXANDER UNDERWOOD.
HE was born in Maryland in the year 1688, and being convinced of the truth
some time after he arrived to man's estate, was chosen an elder of the meeting
where he then resided; afterward removing to this then remote part of the
country, in the fifty-seventh year of his age he appeared in the ministry, and
traveled twice on that service to North Carolina, of which visits we received
comfortable accounts from friends there; and when at home was enabled to
minister suitably to the state of the church, to the comfort of the true
mourners in Zion, and encouragement of the faithful travelers. Toward the
latter part of his time, his bodily strength much failed, yet he visited some
of the neighboring meetings, and families of friends, to the comfort of the
faithful, his ministry continuing to be sound and lively.

In his last sickness he seemed much resigned, and at one time said, He had the
company of his good master to comfort him in his affliction. At another said,
That he could say with the Psalmist, that the good hand that was with him in
his young years, had not forsook him now in his old age. And diverse times
signified, 'He still felt the comforter with him;' saying, 'His day's work was
done.' A little before his departure, he sang praises and hallelujahs, to his
great Lord and master. Then prayed for the little handful; and taking leave of
all present, continued in a sweet frame of mind, singing praises until he could
not be understood, and quietly departed this life, the 31 st of the tenth month
1767, and was interred the 2 d of the eleventh month, in the seventy-ninth year
of his age. May we who are left behind, be engaged to follow his example, that
so our end may be like unto his.

A Testimony from Bradford Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ABRAHAM
MARSHALL.
WE understand he was born at Gratton, in Derbyshire Old England, and educated
in the profession of the church of England; in his youth he was favored with a
visitation of divine love, but not keeping close thereunto, when amongst his
companions he suffered loss. When about fifteen or sixteen years of age, our
worthy friend John Gratton being abroad in truth's service, was concerned to
have a meeting at a town called Alnwick, where this our friend then resided,
who so powerfully declared the truth, that he amongst diverse others was
convinced; and carefully abiding under the discipline of the cross, he in time
received a part in the ministry. About the year 1697, he came over to
Pennsylvania, and for some time resided near Derby, where he entered into a
married state, and in a few years afterward removed to the forks of
Brandywine, then a new settled part of the country, the nearest meeting being
about eleven miles, which he seldom missed attending when of ability of body;
he was also instrumental in settling this called Bradford meeting, within the
compass of which he resided the remainder of his days. He was an example of
plainness and self denial, and concerned for the support of the discipline. He
traveled into New Jersey and the southern provinces where his service in the
ministry was acceptable, his doctrine being sound, and his life, conversation
and deportment adorning the same. When far advanced in age, his hearing and
memory failing, rendered his usefulness not so extensive as in his younger
years. For some time before his decease, he seemed very desirous of his change,
often expressing, That people should so live in this world as to fit them for
another. About twenty-four hours before he died, he said to those with him, Let
me go, let me go. People should live in love: Then said, Farewell, farewell;
after three or four weeks illness or rather growing weaker with age, he
departed in a composed frame of mind, on the 17 th of the twelfth month 1767,
and on the 20 th was interred in friends burying-ground at Bradford. By the
general account, in the ninety-seventh year of his age, but we have some reason
to believe he was one hundred and three.

Mary Marshall, his widow was born in Kent in Old England, and came to America
with her father when about two years and an half old. She survived her husband
about fifteen months, and departed this life, after about four days illness,
quiet and easy, in the eighty-seventh year of her age, leaving a good savor in
our remembrance.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Friends in Philadelphia, concerning
BENJAMIN TROTTER, who was born in this city, in the ninth month of the year
1699.
HE was early visited, and reached unto by the reproofs of divine light and
grace, for those youthful vanities and corrupt conversation, which by nature he
was prone to and pursued, to the grief of his pious mother, who was religiously
concerned to restrain him; but as he became obedient to the renewed visitations
of the heavenly call, denying himself of those things he was reproved for, he
not only learned to cease from doing evil, but to live in the practice of doing
well; and continuing faithful, became an example of plainness and self-denial,
for which he suffered much scoffing and mocking of those who had been his
companions in folly; yet he neither fainted nor was turned aside by the
reproaches of the ungodly, which thus fell to his lot, for his plain testimony
against their evil conduct.

In the twenty-sixth year of his age, he appeared in the work of the ministry,
and labored therein in much plainness and godly sincerity, adorning the
doctrine he preached, by a humble circumspect life and conversation, being
exemplary in his diligence and industry to labor honestly for a livelihood,
though often in much bodily infirmity and weakness, desiring, as he sometimes
expressed, that he might owe no man any thing but love. His inoffensive
openness and affability, drawing many of different denominations to converse
with him, he had some seasonable opportunities of admonishing and rebuking the
evil doer and evil speaker, which he did, in the plainness of an upright zeal
for the promotion of piety and virtue, tempered with true brotherly kindness
and charity; respecting not the person of the proud nor of the rich, because of
his riches, but with christian freedom, declaring the truth to his neighbor,
and was thus in private as well as public, a preacher of righteousness.

In his public ministry he was zealous against errors both in principle and
practice, and constantly concerned to press the necessity of obedience to the
principle of divine grace; a manifestation of which is given to every man;
knowing, from his own experience, that it brings salvation to all them that
obey and follow its teachings, and was frequently enabled with energy and power
to bear testimony to the outward coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, his
miraculous birth, his holy example in his life and precepts, and his death and
sufferings at Jerusalem, by which he has obtained eternal redemption for us.

In his public testimony a little before his last sickness, he expressed his
apprehensions, that his time among us would be short, and fervently exhorted to
watchfulness and care, to keep our lamps trimmed, and our lights burning, and
urged the necessity of being prepared to meet the bridegroom, as not knowing at
what hour he will come.

He traveled several times, and visited most of the meetings of friends in
this province and New Jersey, and some in the adjacent provinces, but was not
much from home; being upwards of forty years a diligent attender of our
religious meetings in this city, zealously concerned for the maintaining our
christian discipline in meekness and true charity, careful in the exercise of
that part of pure religion, visiting the widow and fatherless in their
afflictions, and often qualified to administer relief and consolation to their
dejected minds.

Afflictions of diverse kinds, and some very deep and exercising, fell to his
lot through the course of his life, which he was enabled to bear with exemplary
patience and resignation, and particularly through his last illness, in which,
for upwards of six weeks, he underwent great difficulty and pain, being
afflicted with the asthma and dropsy, so that he suffered much, yet was never
heard to utter a murmur or complaint, but frequently expressed his
thankfulness, that he had not more pain, and often engaged in prayer, that he
might be preserved in patience to the end, which was graciously granted him; so
that he was capable of speaking to the comfort and edification of those who
visited him; and from the fervent love of the brethren, which evidently
appeared through his life, and most conspicuously during his last illness, and
even in the hour of his death, we have a well-grounded assurance that he is
passed unto life, and has received the reward of the righteouss.

His body was attended by a great number of friends and others, his
fellow-citizens of diverse religious denominations, to our meeting house in
High Street, on the 24 th of the third month, 1768, and after a solemn meeting,
was interred in our burial-ground in this city.

A Testimony from Richland Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning EDWARD
ROBERTS.
HE was born in Merionethshire, in the principality of Wales, in the third
month 1687, and came into Pennsylvania about the twelfth year of his age; was
early convinced of the principle of truth as held forth by friends, with whom
he joined in communion, and by his godly life and conversation through the
course of his time, was nearly united to them. His ministry was attended with
divine sweetness and energy, laboring faithfully therein to the comfort and
edification of the living whilst health and bodily ability continued; being a
lively example of humility, plainness, temperance, meekness and charity, and of
justice and uprightness in his dealings amongst men, which gained him the love
and esteem of people of all denominations. He was a tender affectionate husband
and father, earnestly concerned to train up his children and family in the fear
of God, and example and instruct them in the paths of virtue, and also
manifested a true zeal for promoting and preserving peace and good order in
society, wherein he was often singularly serviceable. His bodily strength
gradually diminishing, he was reduced even to a child's state, in which he
quietly departed this life, without much sickness, on the 25 th of the eleventh
month 1768, in the eighty-second year of his age; a minister above 40 years.

A Testimony from Abington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning MARY
KNIGHT.
SHE was the daughter of John and Mary Carver, who came from England in the
year 1682, and was born in or near Philadelphia soon after her parents arrived,
being one of the first children born of English parents in Pennsylvania. Her
parents settled at Byberry in Philadelphia county, and educated her in our
religious profession. When about eighteen years old, she married Isaac Knight
and became a member of Abington particular meeting: Some time after she
appeared in meetings in a few words in simplicity and innocence, and in the
exercise of her gift though small, visited diverse meetings in some of the
adjacent provinces, from whence she generally produced accounts of friends
acceptance of her services: And continuing in a steady perseverance, according
to her talent, as she advanced to old age, her zeal for the cause of truth and
good of souls manifestly increased; frequently recommending faithfulness, and a
daily watchfulness against the enemy of souls, whom she often said, Was
unwearied, and had followed her all her life long, being yet as busy as ever,
to draw her mind from off her watch; she would frequently express, that she had
great cause of thankfulness to the God and father of all our mercies, who had
supported her through many besetments, with his gracious promise, that if she
would be faithful according to the measure of grace bestowed, he would be with
her to the end.

Toward the close of her days, bodily weakness increased, yet she was
remarkably diligent in attending meetings, and with ardency exhorted all, To
come taste and see for themselves that the Lord is good, for he had been good
indeed to her soul, with other expressions tending to encourage well-doing. She
seemed so filled with love to God, love to her friends, and love to her fellow
creatures in general, that we have reason to believe God was with her, and that
her last days were her best days. A good end crowns all.

She departed this life, the 4 th of the third month 1769, and was buried at
Abington the 6 th of the same month, aged near eighty-seven years.

A Testimony from Abington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning THOMAS
WOOD.
OUR said friend was born in England, of parents not professing with us, who
brought him over with them when very young, and resided in New Jersey in the
early settlement of that province. Soon after he became capable of religious
consideration, he was convinced of the principle of truth as professed by us,
on which account he underwent the displeasure of, and some severities from his
father, but being steady and prudent in conduct, and faithful to his
convincement, he at length so gained on his father's affections, that after
some time he became reconciled and friendly to him*

He became a member of this monthly, and of Abington particular meeting, on or
about the thirtieth year of his age, and so continued to the end of his life,
being always, when at home and in health, a constant attender of those
meetings, though living at a considerable distance therefrom.

When about forty-eight years of age, he appeared in the ministry, and became a
faithful labourer therein according to ability. He had little or no school
learning, yet delighted much in hearing the scriptures read, and often promoted
the reading of them in his family; by means whereof and a retentive memory, he
sometimes, through the assistance of divine grace, quoted texts from them in his
ministry, which was not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the spirit, often administering comfort to, and true sympathy
with, the afflicted and mourners in Zion.

He diverse times visited most of the distant meetings of friends on this
continent, and on his return produced satisfactory accounts of his services in
those visits. He often communicated good and wholesome advice to his neighbors
of other religious denominations, amongst whom he was generally respected, as a
good neighbor, and an honest, innocent, inoffensive man.

Although he did not appear to be much gifted for the exercise of the discipline,
yet being a constant attender of meetings appointed for that purpose, and a
diligent waiter therein, there was a language intelligible in his solid
silence, which communicated instruction to his friends, who were always well
pleased with his company.

He was a promoter of that weighty service of visiting friends families,
wherein he was usefully engaged, even when through old age and bodily weakness,
it appeared to human probability too hard and arduous an undertaking; but
having discovered a willingness to make trial, he joined with some other
friends, and was supported with inward and outward strength to go through the
service, to his own and his friends great satisfaction. After which his
strength and faculties declining, he was mostly confined at home. On being
visited by his friends, he appeared much in the innocent and childlike state,
retaining his wonted mark of discipleship, viz. love to his brethren, in which
he continued to the last, and departed this life, the 7 th of the third month
1769; from the clearest information we could obtain, he was in or about the
ninety-fourth year of his age; having been a member of our meeting about 64 and
a minister upwards of 45 years.

A Testimony from Abington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning ISAAC
CHILD.
THOSE who die in the Lord, cease from their labors and the troubles of this
life, and ascend to the heavenly mansions, where they are forever blessed: And
all that can be said on their behalf, cannot in any degree advance their
happiness nor add to their worth; yet there is something due to the memory of
the righteous, such whose lives have been conspicuously virtuous, who have laid
down their heads in peace, are gone from works to rewards, and left a sweet
savor.

Our dear and well esteemed friend Isaac Child, having departed this life, we
find a freedom to give the following testimony concerning him while amongst us.

In the year 1764, he, with his wife and two children, came well recommended to
us from Buckingham monthly meeting; when he found a draught and freedom to come
and settle amongst us, and a favorable opportunity presenting, he was not
hasty in his determination, but, agreeable to the good and wholesome rule of
our discipline, laid the matter before the monthly meeting he then belonged to,
for their advice.

This worthy friend approved himself to be one who had submitted to the yoke
and cross of Christ in his youth, and by the influence and operation of truth
upon him, was made sensible of the necessity of living a circumspect and
self-denying-life; and as he yielded obedience to the dictates of grace, being
thereby subjected to the divine will and requirings, the Lord was pleased to
employ him in his vineyard, and to qualify him for service therein, both in the
exercise of the discipline of the church, and as a minister of the gospel.

He was exemplary in life and conversation, his deportment being meek, humble
and innocently cheerful, yet guarding against any thing that would tend to
lightness in behavior, his company was pleasant, and his words savoury and
edifying: A tender affectionate husband and parent, a kind friend and
neighbor; not of a murmuring disposition when he met with disappointments and
afflictions, but freely submitted to what was permitted to come upon him.

He was zealous for the cause of God, and the support of christian discipline
in its various branches, not hasty in giving his sentiments on matters relative
thereto; but after deliberately waiting for a proper qualification, he mostly
spoke close and pertinent, with clearness and soundness of judgment. He was
concerned for the close and due exercise of the discipline against offenders,
not willing that any part of it should be dispensed with, through partial
favor or affection, but that true judgment, according to their transgressions,
should be placed upon them, the church cleansed from defilements and
reproaches, and that the libertine professor and the circumspect walker might
be truly distinguished. Yet he was at times, led into sympathy and travel of
soul for such who through inadvertency had missed their way, and were in some
measure sensible of their error; to those he some times extended private
admonition and counsel, in love to their souls, and with desires for their
restoration. It may truly be said, he was endowed with a large share of natural
understanding, which being sanctified by divine grace, he became well qualified
for service in the church.

As a minister, be approved himself one rightly called to the work, having
experienced a growth from a good beginning to a large advancement, and at
times, through divine aid was enabled to deliver much excellent doctrine to the
comfort and edification of such whose minds were gathered into a true inward
worship of God in spirit: And the negligent were exhorted to more attention in
the great work of religion and their souls salvation.

He often sounded an alarm to the rebellious and gainsayers, with a warning to
repent and amend their ways, that their souls might be saved in the day of
trouble. He had a clear delivery and ready utterance, his style being familiar
to the lowest capacities, his matter well connected, his doctrine sound, his
powerful ministry having a great reach upon the people. He frequently attended
burials, both within the compass of our own meeting, and some more distant,
saying, It was better for him to go to the house of mourning than the house of
mirth; at which times there was often large gatherings of diverse sorts of
christian professors, where he frequently appeared in testimony, much to their
satisfaction; being favored with a clear sight of the states of the people,
and enabled faithfully to speak what was given him, in a close searching
manner, without affectation, and in that universal love which wishes well to
all men.

He traveled abroad but little, except to some neighboring yearly-meetings
and some other meetings adjacent. In his last public testimony, which was in
our monthly meeting, he was led to speak of the valleys that were to be raised
and the hills brought down; that when the Lord was pleased to raise some as out
of the low valleys and adorn them with his jewels, it made t^^m appear above
their brethren; but when those jewels were taken off, they were then on a
level; this was agreeable to his own experience, he having at times witnessed a
being baptized into lowliness of mind and nothingness of self; under which he
appeared much resigned to the divine will, often sitting in silence, as one who
had neither call nor commission to speak; for he never discovered a desire to
be heard in words, until he had received a renewed qualification, in pure love,
to speak to the people, and, as upon the walls of Zion, to proclaim the
everlasting gospel of peace, and the means of salvation through Christ our
Savior.

In the time of his last sickness (which was about nine days) he was preserved
in patience and resignation of mind; and near the morning before his departure,
being clear in his understanding, and sensible or death approaching, he was
drawn forth in fervent supplication to the Almighty: After which laying still
for some time, he departed like a lamb, without sigh or groan, on the 5 th of
the fourth month 1769, aged thirty-five years, having been a minister about 11
years, and a member of our meeting near 5 years. A large number of friends and
others paid their last office of love toward him, in attending his interment
at friends burying-ground at Abington, on the 8 th of the said month, at which
time a solid meeting was held.

An additional Testimony concerning ISAAC CHILD, from Buckingham
Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania.
NOTWITHSTANDING our much esteemed friend Isaac Child, removed himself and
family from within the compass of our monthly meeting near five years before
his decease, yet we find freedom to give this short testimony concerning him,
having been favored to sit under many living and powerful testimonies
delivered by him whilst among us.

We are fully satisfied he was one whom the Lord in his wisdom saw meet to make
use of for the work of the gospel, having fitted, qualified and called him
forth when but young, to publish the glad tidings thereof; to which divine call
and holy requiring, he gave up in obedience, and suffered not the things of
this world to take up his mind, but in true fervency of zeal and love for the
cause of truth, he spent much time in its service. His testimony was living,
sound and delivered with divine authority; for he handled not the word
deceitfully, nor endeavored to please itching ears; but as a true servant of
Jesus, waited to be renewedly endowed with power from on high, whereby he was
directed to divide the word aright, and speak home to the states and conditions
of the people: He was also zealously concerned for the promotion of discipline
and good order in the church; and for the management of the affairs thereof, he
appeared remarkably well qualified; his weighty admonitions being enforced by a
pious life and conversation. May we, under the consideration of the great loss
the church has sustained by his and some others decease, be excited so to
follow their footsteps, that with them we may be partakers of that
incorruptible inheritance which is reserved for the righteous, when time here
shall be no more.

A Testimony from Buckingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
SCARBOROUGH.
HE was born of honest parents, and educated within the compass of this
meeting; in his youth was somewhat airy, but when arrived to riper years he
embraced the truth and appeared closely to follow the dictates thereof to the
end of his life.

About the year 1740 he appeared in the ministry and experiencing a growth
therein, he at different times visited most of the northern colonies, in which
services he always had our concurrence, and at his return produced certificates
of friends unity with his ministry and labors of love; the remembrance whereof
yet lives as a memorial in the minds of many.

He earnestly labored for the good and salvation of men, and though not learned,
spoke with great propriety, yet plain and familiar, his doctrine being sound,
lively and edifying, which being adorned by a pious life and innocent
conversation, seasoned with true charity, made him justly esteemed by people of
all denominations.

He was steadily concerned to promote good order and discipline, and therein to
act uprightly for truth's cause without partiality. With great cheerfulness
giving up much of his time, and laboring for the restoration of such who had
missed their way; and although he used great plainness in admonishing
transgressors, seldom gave offense; being a man of remarkable self-denial and
endued with much mildness, made him very serviceable in the affairs of the
church in general, and tended to support the authority of truth.

In his declining years he was affected with bodily weakness, yet his zeal for
the cause of truth did not abate, but the life and power usually attending his
ministry rather increased. In his last testimony at our meeting, he was highly
favored, the power of truth rising into dominion; with much salutary counsel
and fatherly admonition he seemed to take a final farewell of his brethren, and
fervently prayed for our preservation. As his departure drew nigh, he often
expressed his willingness to leave this world, saying, He did not know any
thing that remained undone to complete his days-work, and that no cloud nor any
thing appeared in his way. He departed this life, the 5 th of the fifth month
1769, in the sixty-sixth year of his age; and as a good and faithful servant,
we doubt not, is entered into everlasting joy and happiness. The fresh
remembrance of his loving and kind deportment and many faithful services,
impress our minds with a deep sense of his worth and our great loss.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning MARY
EVANS.
SHE was born in Philadelphia, in or about the year 1695, her father dying when
she was young, she was educated by her mother in the principle of truth as
professed among us; in her young years she was sober and grave in her behavior
and deportment; and about the time she came forth in the ministry, she went
through close trials and deep conflicts, as we have frequently heard her
relate, in which the divine arm was her support, brought her through, and
qualified her for religious service.

In the year 1736, she was married to our worthy friend Owen Evans, and thereby
became a member of this meeting. Her public appearances were not very frequent,
but when she spoke, her testimony was fervent, sound and edifying, her conduct
and conversation being agreeable to her religious profession. She was several
times drawn forth in the love of the gospel, to visit friends in most of the
provinces on this continent, also the Island of Tortola, which she undertook
with the unity of her friends at home, and returned with clear and satisfactory
accounts of her labors amongst those whom she visited. She was a lover and
promoter of peace and good order in the church and amongst her neighbors, and
was frequently engaged in that weighty service of visiting friends families, to
good satisfaction. In the year 1757, she met with a close exercise, in the loss
of her husband, who was removed from her by death, which she bore with becoming
resignation. After which, she lived some years with her daughter, who was
married and settled in Philadelphia; but returned back again within the compass
of this meeting, frequently saying, She apprehended it to be her duty, to spend
the remainder of her days amongst us; laboring faithfully, as one that foresaw
her time was short. Her last illness was lingering, which she bore with
becoming resignation; a few days before her death, some friends had a sitting
with her in her chamber, when notwithstanding she was weak in body, she was
enabled to speak for a considerable time, in a lively and instructive manner,
much to their satisfaction. She departed this life, the 20 th of the fifth
month 1769, and was interred in friends burying-ground at Gwynedd, the 22 d of
the same.

A Testimony from Middletown Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning GRACE
CROASDALE.
AS memorials of the virtuous lives and acts of the righteous when deceased,
may afford matter of help and encouragement to survivors to follow their pious
examples; we are therefore engaged to give this short testimony concerning our
esteemed friend Grace Croasdale.

She was born the 6 th of the eighth month 1703, of reputable parents, members
of this meeting, who brought her up to industry and plainness in speech and
habit; being married young, she early entered into the cares of a family; and
being religiously inclined, and of a cheerful active disposition, approved
herself well qualified for such a charge; instructing her children and family
both by precept and example, in piety and plainness, as well as the necessary
cares of life. As she advanced in years, she grew in religion, and became very
serviceable in diverse stations in the church. About the year 1745 she first
appeared in the ministry, in the exercise whereof she was acceptable and
edifying, exhortimg all to the true love and fear of God, and a humble
attention to the divine principle of truth in themselves; adorning her doctrine
by a life and conversation answerable thereto. The latter part of her time,
when more disengaged from the cares of a family, she was much devoted to the
service of truth, and occasionally visited many of the meetings of friends in
our own and several of the neighboring provinces.

She was a peaceable kind neighbor, a visitor and sympathizer with the sick
and afflicted whether in body or mind; and appeared eminently qualified for
that weighty service of visiting families, in which she was often engaged, not
only within the compass of our own particular meeting, but of diverse others, to
general satisfaction.

Having lived in much love and unity with friends, she had to reflect thereon
with great peace and satisfaction of mind in her last illness, during which she
was signally favored with the incomes of divine love and heavenly consolation;
in the aboundings whereof, she was frequently drawn forth in thanksgivings and
living high praises to the Lord.

She departed this life, the 23 d of the tenth month 1769, and was buried the
24 th of the same, in friends burying-ground at Middletown.

A Testimony from Evesham Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOSIAH
FOSTER.
HE was born in Rhode Island, of honest parents, who died whilst he was young,
from which time until he came to man's estate, we have no account of him, only
that some of us have heard him say, he was much delighted with mirth and
vanity. Soon after his arrival at manhood, he came into New Jersey, where he
married, and settled at Evesham; not long afterward he was convinced, and
effectually reached with the power of truth, through the living ministry of
that eminent minister of Christ Jesus, Thomas Wilson; and by the operation of
divine grace in his heart, he gradually experienced a growth therein. Thus
advancing in true obedience, he witnessed an overcoming of his own strong will
(as some of us have heard him relate with awful gratitude to the divine hand)
and in due time he became a father and elder in the church; being tenderly
concerned for the promotion of the truth, which had in measure set him free
from the body of sin and death, communicating suitable advice and counsel to
such as were tender, and a sharp reprover of obstinate sinners; his advice
being much enforced by his upright uniform conduct.

In conversation he was free and open, and easy of access: In meetings for
worship and discipline (which he diligently attended whilst of ability) his
deportment was awful, reverent and unaffectedly grave, waiting for the arising
of life, which qualified him to be of great service in the society. He was of a
benevolent disposition, his heart and house being open to entertain strangers,
especially traveling friends; nor was his benevolence confined to those of our
own society; for, being blessed with affluence, many widows and fatherless
received his hearty assistance. He was well beloved by most or all who were
acquainted with him; his conversation and conduct truly demonstrated, that he
had learned to do to others, as he would be done unto; which is truly worthy
the imitation of all. Being desirous to retire from the cares of the world, he
removed to Mount-Holly, where he resided until he was taken with a paralytick
disorder, which much impaired his natural faculties, after which he returned to
his former settlement at Evesham under the care of his son. Although his disorder
rendered him incapable of much conversation, yet he gave evident signs of a
lively sense of divine goodness accompanying him to the last; and quietly
departed this life, the 9 th of the first month 1770, in the eighty-eighth year
of his age, and was buried the 11 th of the same month at Evesham.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Friends in Philadelphia, concerning
DANIEL STANTON.
WHEN John the Divine was in exile in the isle of Patmos, He heard a voice from
Heaven, saying, write, -- blessed are the dead, who die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them; which we believe now is the portion of our worthy
friend, concerning whose faithful services we are engaged from the united
motives of love and duty, to give this testimony; desiring, that all who read
it, and more especially the youth, may be excited, by his example, to seek an
early acquaintance with the Lord, and to take up their daily cross in the prime
of their days. Thus, they also, may become shining lights and instruments of
good to others.

He was born in this city, in the year 1708, and his father dying before his
birth, and his mother a few years after, he suffered great trials and hardships
when very young: Being early concerned to seek the knowledge of God, he had a
fervent desire to attend religious meetings, though subjected to many
difficulties and discouragements, before that privilege was allowed him; yet,
being earnest in his desires to obtain divine favor, he was eminently
supported under great conflicts and probations, and, continuing faithful to the
degrees of light and grace communicated, a dispensati- of the gospel ministry
was committed to him, sometime before the term of his apprenticeship was
expired; and abiding under the sanctifying power of truth, he grew in his gift,
and became a zealous faithful minister.

He was very exemplary in his industry and diligence, in laboring faithfully
at his trade, to provide for his own support, and after he married, and had
children, for their maintenance; and was often concerned to advise others to
the same necessary care; yet he continued fervent in spirit for the promotion
of truth and righteousness, so that he was soon engaged to leave home, and the
nearest connections of nature, to publish the glad tidings of the gospel, and
frequently visited most of the meetings of friends in this and the adjacent
provinces, and several times as far as the eastern parts of New England. Having
thus honestly discharged his duty among us above twenty years, and feeling his
mind constrained in the love of the gospel, to visit the few friends who
remained in some of the West India islands, and from thence the meetings of
friends in general through Great Britain and Ireland, he communicated his
concern to a few of his most intimate friends, who having unity therewith, he
was encouraged to lay it before our monthly meeting. Before he entered on this
weighty service, he passed through a near trial and affliction in the death of
his beloved wife; under which exercise he was graciously supported by the arm
of divine strength, which had often been revealed for his help, in times of
inward conflicts and outward distresses.

His concern to travel in the service of truth continuing, and the meeting
having full unity with him therein, he embarked in the fifth month 1748,
accompanied by our dear friend, Samuel Nottingham, in a vessel bound for
Barbados, and having visited the few meetings in that island, they went by way
of Antigua to Tortola, where they continued sometime, having some difficulty to
get a passage to Europe; and their voyage thither was attended with some
singular hazards and dangers, which occasioned their landing in Ireland; where
our friend Daniel continued some months, visiting the meetings of friends in
that kingdom; and after he apprehended himself clear, went over to England, and
visited the meetings generally in that nation, and in Wales and Scotland, where
his meek circumspect conduct and conversation, and lively edifying ministry,
rendered his visit very acceptable, and his memory precious.

In his return home, and for sometime after, he was in a low afflicted state of
mind; being apprehensive, that through diffidence, and the want of perfect
resignation to the divine will, he had omitted fully performing the service
required of him, by not visiting the few friends in Holland: Yet he was
mercifully preserved, and after a time of deep exercise, raised again to sing
of the mercies and loving kindness of God on the banks of deliverance.

He several times, with other friends appointed to that service, visited the
families of friends in this city, and between the years 1757 and 1760, being
accompanied by our friend John Pemberton, he visited the families of friends
generally within the limits of our meeting; which weighty exercising service,
he was enabled to perform to our edification and satisfaction. After which, he
was frequently engaged to excite friends to this useful and edifying practice.

In the twelfth month 1760, he set out on a visit to the meetings in the
western parts of this province, and from thence in Maryland, Virginia, and
North and South Carolina, and returned in the sixth month following; since
which he frequently visited many of the meetings near home, and some as far as
Long Island, and other parts of the province of New York. Within the last two
years, he visited the families of friends of some of the meetings in
West-Jersey, in the city of New York, and part of Long Island; and after his
return from this service, with great peace and satisfaction, he expressed his
apprehension that he was now clear of all places, and that his stay here was
near over; having an evidence, that he had been faithfully concerned from his
youth to fear and serve God.

His chief labor and religious exercises were in this city, where he was a
diligent attender of all our meetings, and often on committees appointed on the
services of the church; in which he was solid and weighty in spirit, waiting
for the springing up of life, being steadily concerned both in and out of
meetings, to live near the divine fountain: Thus he was very frequently
qualified, and enabled to stir up the pure mind, and to recount the gracious
dealings of God to mankind, and as a faithful ambassador to warn the negligent
to flee from the wrath to come, and to excite the people to bring forth fruits
answerable to the great mercies graciously bestowed on us; and was sometimes
constrained to declare in a prophetic manner, a day of trial, in diverse
instances, very shortly before such a season came to pass.

He was of late deeply exercised in consideration of the evils of the horse
races, stage plays, drunkenness, and other gross enormities encouraged and
increasing in this city; closely exhorting our youth against those pernicious
and destructive devices of the enemy of mankind; and under the awful sense that
God will judge and punish the wicked and evil doers, he was often fervent in
public supplications, that the Lord would lengthen out the day of his merciful
visitation, and yet try the people longer; which seasons were solemn and
humblingly affecting; manifesting, that although he was very close and sharp in
reproof against evil, yet most tenderly concerned, that the transgressors of
the righteous law of God might be prevailed with to repent, return, and live.

His love for the rising generation was very great; which he manifested by his
affectionate notice of them, and especially of those who were religiously
inclined, and his house was open to receive such, his conversation with them
being seasoned with grace, and his counsel instructive and helpful to those who
had seeking desires after the knowledge of truth, often lovingly inviting them
to come, taste, and see, that the Lord is good; greatly desiring, that all who
profess the truth, might walk agreeable to its dictates and be led thereby, as
our worthy predecessors were, into that meekness, humility, and godly
simplicity and plainness, which rendered them conspicuous and shining examples,
and that none might rest short of the enjoyment of the life or religion, his
zeal being great against such, who have the form of godliness, and by their
actions manifest they have not the power thereof; and he often fervently
advised and cautioned those who are eagerly pursuing the world, and by the
surfeiting cares, and grasping after earthly treasures, frustrate the good
purpose of the visitation of divine grace to them, and closely reminded those,
who in their small beginnings were low and humble, that now they were
abundantly favored, they should not set their affections on things below, but
remember the rock from whence they were hewn; and his concern was great that
those who had the glad tidings of the gospel to publish, might be true examples
to the flock, and adorn the doctrine they had to deliver by a circumspect life
and conversation, and where any by not steadily keeping to that which would
have preserved them, had involved themselves in difficulties, either by letting
their minds out to the gains and profits of this world, or otherwise, his
travail was great for such that they might be brought through, and every cloud
and mist removed.

He was much employed in visiting the sick and afflicted, to whom he
administered his spiritual advice and experience, and often engaged in humble
prayer for their support; and in the distributing to the necessitous according
to his circumstances, he manifested his benevolent disposition.

As he had been many years under great exercise and suffering of spirit on
account of the slavery of the poor Africans, and frequently bore testimony
against that unrighteous gain of oppression, he was of late somewhat relieved,
as he found the eyes of the people become more open to see the iniquity of the
practice; and he died in faith, that the light of the gospel will so generally
prevail, that the professors of christianity will find it their duty to restore
to these people their natural right to liberty, and to instruct them in the
principles of the christian religion.

On the 5 th day of the fifth month, he was violently seized with the bilious
cholic, and continued in great pain several days; but afterward being somewhat
easier, he was at our morning and evening meetings on firstday, the 13 th of
the month, in which he was much favored in his public ministry, and expressed
that he thought his time would not be long with us. After this day's labor, he
was again confined, yet being a little recovered he was at our meeting on
fifthday, the 24 th of the month, which being small, he expressed his sorrow
for it, and encouraged friends to diligence in the attendance of week day
meetings, the benefit of a faithful discharge of duty therein being great; the
next day he was at our monthly meeting, and to his own and our admiration was
enabled to stay through both our sittings, though the last of them was longer
than usual, and he afterward expressed that he thought himself better in the
meeting than when out; it was a season of divine favor, and some weighty
matters being before the meeting, he with great openness spoke pertinently and
clearly to them, encouraging friends to the supporting and maintaining our
christian testimony, against all that is contrary to i^ (...) ^s the last
public meeting he was a^ (...) ^ne next morning early seized with a renewed
attack of the same disorder, which increased on him several days, and was so
fixed, that all the endeavors of several skilful physicians and tender nurses,
were not effectual to remove it, though in some measure to mitigate the pain,
that he suffered much, not being able to lie down in his bed several weeks, yet
through all he was mercifully supported, in much resignation, and patience,
rather inclining, if it was the Lord's will, to be released.

For two or three weeks before his sickness, he appeared very desirous of
settling every thing he had to do respecting the affairs of this life, and
desired a friend to review and transcribe the short memoirs he has left of his
travels and religious services, and to write his will, which he executed the
day before he was first taken sick, and then appeared easy in his mind.

During the time of his sickness he often expressed his concern lest his
friends should be too anxious for his recovery, saying, if he should live
longer, and through any human frailty or infirmity occasion any reproach, it
would be a cause of sorrow to them.

By the desire of his friends who attended him, he rode out several times, though
not without much difficulty, and spent the two last days of his life at the
houses of two of his intimate friends. As he drew near his end, the strength of
his love to mankind in general, and his friends in particular, evidently
increased, much desiring the prosperity of truth, and when a meeting time came
had an earnest desire to be with friends, and particularly the day before his
departure.

During his sickness, he frequently expressed himself in a very seasonable,
instructive, and affecting manner; and the evening of the firstday before he
died, several friends coming in to see him, he spoke a co^siderable time to
them, having before bee^ desirous of such an opportunity of the company of his
friends, to sit down and wait upon God, which was his gr^^^ delight.

The last day of his life he sp^nt at the house of his friend Israel Pemberton,
at Germantown, and was unusually free and cheerful, even till ten o'clock at
night, when he undressed himself, and went into bed, remarking on lying down,
that he had not before been able to do so, for five weeks or upwards, and he
soon after fell asleep, but in a short time was awakened by the return of pain
and difficulty of breathing, which through his illness he had been much afflicted
with, so that he was obliged to set up in bed, and thus continued, at intervals
freely conversing with our said friend, who sat up with him, and he expressed
his great thankfulness that his head was preserved free from pain and his
understanding clear, and that though it had been a time of close trial and deep
probation, he could say he felt the evidence of divine support still to attend
him. After which, his pains increasing he got up and dressed himself, and
walking about the room sometime, sat down in an easy chair, in which he fell
into a sweet sleep, and in about three hours departed without sigh or groan.

Thus died this righteous man, who having fought the good fight and kept the
faith, finished his course in full unity with us, and universally beloved by
his fellow citizens, on the 28 th day of the sixth month 1770, in the
sixty-second year of his age and 43 d of his ministry. His body was the next
day attended by a large number of people of diverse religious denominations to
our meeting house, and afterward interred in friends burial-ground in this
city.

A Testimony (...) Warrington Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
THOMAS.
HE was born in Chester county Pennsylvania, in the year 1716, of believing
parents, and being religiously inclined from his youth, he received a part in
the ministry, whereto being faithful, he experienced a growth therein. In the
year 1766, he removed with his family, and settled in Warrington Township, York
county, within the limits of our meeting: And though his time among us was short,
yet we have this testimony to bear concerning him; that his labors of love,
accompanied with an exemplary conduct, were comfortable and instructing to us.

In his last illness (which was a consumption) he, at times in the beginning of
it, complained to some of his intimate friends, of great poverty of spirit, and
seemed deeply engaged to wrestle for strength, to bear with patience the
present dispensation: And in (...) ^^me it pleased the father of mercies who
hears the secret cries of his depending children, to cause the mists to be
dispelled, so that, in an opportunity which some friends had with him some
little time before his departure, he was much favored, and drawn ^orth to
Declare of the tender dealings of the Lord with him, from his youth unto that
time; earnestly exhorting friends to faithfulness, especially those on whom the
Lord had bestowed a gift in the ministry; saying, He had loved the Lord from
his youth, that he had a small gift in the ministry bestowed upon him, in which
he had been concerned to be faithful, and now he felt the comfort of it;
feeling the ownings of the divine presence, whereby he was enabled to bear with
patience his bodily affliction; having an assurance of immortal rest; and that
though in the beginning of his illness, from the poverty of spirit that attended
him, he was ready to conclude that the Lord had forsaken him, but now he
answered him to the joy of his heart, and he had to magnify his goodness,
seeing his wisdom therein, in weaning his affections more thoroughly from all
lower enjoyments, and placing them on things above.

He advised friends to humility, saying, The time draws near, that my body must
go down to the grave, wherein is no exaltation; and I have this testimony to
bear for the Lord, that as I have been engaged to love him and walk humbly
before him, desiring he might give me strength, not having any dependence on my
own wisdom, I have found him to strengthen me, and now find him to be near me
in this pinching time, and comfort me with the joys of his presence. Many and
comfortable were the expressions which flowed from him, though weak in body, and
scarcely able to speak intelligibly, yet strong and lively in the inward man.
In great sweetness of spirit he departed this life, the 9 th of the fifth month
1771, and on the 11 th of the said month, his corpse, accompanied by a large
number of friends and others, was interred in friends burying-ground at
Warrington, a solemn meeting being held, and diverse living testimonies borne,
to the efficacy of that divine power which gives victory over the world.

A Testimony from Salem Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning MARY
LIPPINCOTT.
FROM a motive of love and esteem, to the memory of this our ancient worthy
friend, and that survivors may be encouraged by such pious examples, to embrace
the truth and persevere in the way to salvation, we give forth this testimony.

She was the daughter of Henry and Elizabeth Burr, by whom she was religiously
educated, we believe to good effect; for in her very young years, she closed in
with the love and mercy of God extended to her, and did not incline to vanity
and lightness, but was a good example to other youths.

She married young, and with her husband Jacob Lippincott, settled among us.
Her exemplary conduct, as a wife and when a widow, both in the church, in her
family, and her neighborhood gained our great esteem; being given to
hospitality and liberal to the poor.

She was an earnest traveller in spirit for the cause of truth on earth, solid
and weighty in her deportment, affable and instructive in conversation,
frequently imparting seasonable admonition and counsel to her children and
others, and though endowed with superior natural understanding, was not exalted
therewith.

In the decline of life, she underwent much bodily infirmity, yet diligently
attended meetings when of ability, where she was a humble waiter for the
arising of the pure truth, traveling in the deeps for the exaltation thereof;
well qualified for services in the church, a true mourner in Zion, being
grieved for the corruptions, vain fashions, and customs of the times, and in
observing the gaiety and lightness apparent in some, when they came to places
for worship. It fell to her lot in the course of her time, to meet with a large
share of exercises and trials, which she bore with great resignation; and was a
true sympathizer with those under affliction in body or mind whom she often
visited. Sometime before her last sickness, she signified her apprehension,
that her day's work was near over; and departed this life, the 9 th of the
first month 1771, and on the 12 th was interred in friends burying-ground at
Pilesgrove; in the seventy-third year of her age, having been an elder many
years.

A Testimony from New Castle Monthly Meeting in Great Britain, concerning
WILLIAM HUNT.
OUR dear friend William Hunt, of New-Garden, in Guilford county,
North Carolina, accompanied by his nephew Thomas Thornborough, of the same
place, being on a religious visit to friends of this nation, departed this
life, at the house of a friend near New Castle upon Tyne. The deep regard we
bear to his memory and eminent services, engages us to transmit the following
testimony concerning him.

They arrived in London about a week after the yearly meeting 1771, and
attending several meetings in that city, proceeded northward, visiting friends
in diverse counties in England, and also in Scotland. The ensuing winter was
spent in visiting Yorkshire, Lancashire and Ireland, returning to London in
time to attend the yearly meeting there in 1772; then attending the
yearly-meetings in Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk, and proceeding through
Lincolnshire to Hull, they took shipping for Holland, and after visiting the
few friends there, they embarked for Scarborough, but by contrary winds landed
at Shields, the 25 th of the eighth month, and after being at their meeting on
the 26 th came that afternoon to the house of a friend near New Castle upon
Tyne.

From accounts received, and our own knowledge of his conduct and ministry, we
have good cause to believe, that in all his travels in Europe, he behaved as a
faithful minister of Christ, exemplary and uniform in conduct, of a weighty
deportment and retired spirit, his conversation was grave and instructive,
seasoned with love and sweetness, which rendered his company both profitable
and desirable, his ministry was living and powerful, deep and searching, an
excellent example in patiently waiting for the clear manifestation of the
divine will, and careful to move accordingly, so that his appearances in
meetings were mostly accompanied with great solemnity, in which he skilfully
divided the word, being to the unfaithful as a two edged sword, but to the
honest hearted travelers in Zion, and to such as were seeking the way to God's
kingdom, his doctrine was truly refreshing. He was a man of sound judgment,
quick of apprehension, and deep in religious experience; and although he was only
in the thirty-ninth year of his age, yet such was his experience and stability,
that he stood as an elder and a father in the church, worthy of double honor.

He attended the meeting at New Castle, on the 27 th of the eighth month 1772,
in which he delivered a short and living testimony in the love of the gospel to
his friends of that place; that afternoon he was cheerful, and expressed his
satisfaction in being there, and upon being asked what place they intended for
next, he replied, he saw no further at present than New Castle. Next day he was
taken ill, which was not apprehended to be the small pox 'till the fourth day
of his illness; when the eruption appeared, he said to his companion, This
sickness is nigh unto death if not quite; his companion signified his hope that
it might not be so, he replied, My coming hither seems to be providential, and
when I wait I am enclosed and see no further. At another time he made the same
remark to a friend, saying, It will be a sore trial to my companion if I am now
removed. He also mentioned in an affectionate manner his dear wife and children
to a friend who attended him, and requested some counsel and advice (which he
then communicated) might be transmitted to them, if it should please the Lord
to remove him, which was accordingly done.

On the third day of his illness, two friends from the country came to visit
him, to whom he thus expressed himself, viz. I have longed to see you and be
with you, but was put by, one of them said, I hope we shall have thee with us
yet; he answered, 'That must be left;' the friend said, that whatever
affliction we are tried with, we may yet see cause of thankfulness; he replied,
Great cause indeed, I never saw it clearer, O the wisdom! the wisdom and
goodness, the mercy and kindness has appeared to me wonderful, and the further
and deeper we go, the more we wonder; I have admired since I was cast upon this
bed, that all the world does not seek after the truth, it so far transcends all
other things. Two friends from Northumberland coming to visit him, he said, The
Lord knows how I have loved you from our first acquaintance, and longed for
your growth and establishment in the blessed truth; and now I feel the same
renewed afresh; and said, He much desired they might fill up the places
Providence intended, and lay up treasure in Heaven, adding, What would a
thousand worlds avail me now?

The disorder was very heavy upon him, having a load of eruption, under which
he showed great fortitude and patience even to the admiration of the physician
and surgeon who attended him; his mind being mercifully preserved calm, and
resigned to his master's will, whose presence he found to be near him in the
needful time, saying, It is enough, my master is here; and again, He that laid
the foundation of the mountans knows this, if it pleases him he can remove it;
at another time he said with great composure, The Lord knows best, I am in his
hands, let him do what he pleases.

Perceiving a friend to be diligent and attentive to do what she could for him,
he said, The Lord refresh thy spirit, for thou have often refreshed this body,
and whether I live or die, thou will get thy reward.

After the second fever came on, finding himself worse, he said, My life hangs
upon a thread. The doctor being sent for, he said, They are all physicians of
no value without the great Physician. A friend said, I know thy dependence is
on him, he answered, 'Entirely.' Understanding that two friends who had sat
much by him, did not intend to leave him that night, he very sweetly said, And
will you watch with me one night more?

On being asked how he did, he said, I am here pent up and confined in a narrow
compass, this is a trying time, but my mind is above it all; which was evident
to those about him, who were sensible of praises and sweet melody in his heart
when few words were expressed.

A little before he died, he said triumphantly, 'Friends, truth is over all;'
so in great peace departed this life, the 9 th day of the ninth month 1772, and
was interred in friends burying-ground in New Castle upon Tyne, the 11 th of
the same month, accompanied by many friends; upon which occasion a solemn
meeting was held, and diverse testimonies borne to the truth, in the service of
which he lived and died, an example to many brethren. A minister 24 years.

A Testimony from Burlington Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOHN
WOOLMAN.
HE was born in Northampton, in the county of Burlington, and province of
West-New-Jersey, in the eighth month 1720, of religious parents, who instructed
him very early in the principles of the christian religion, as professed by the
people called Quakers, which he esteemed a blessing to him, even in his young
years, tending to preserve him from the infection of wicked children; but
through the workings of the enemy, and levity incident to youth, he frequently
deviated from those parental precepts, by which he laid a renewed foundation
for repentance, that was finally succeeded by a godly sorrow not to be repented
of, and so became acquainted with that sanctifying power which qualifies for
true gospel ministry, into which he was called about the twenty-second year of
his age, and by a faithful use of the talents committed to him, he experienced
an increase, until he arrived at the state of a father, capable of dividing the
word aright to the different states he ministered unto; dispensing. milk to
babes, and meat to those of riper years. Thus he found the efficacy of that
power to arise, which in his own expressions, Prepares the creature to stand
like a trumpet through which the Lord speaks to his people. He was a loving
husband, a tender father, and very humane to every part of the creation under
his care.

His concern for the poor and those in affliction was evident by his visits to
them; whom he frequently relieved by his assistance and charity. He was for
many years deeply exercised on account of the poor enslaved Africans, whose
cause, as he sometimes mentioned, lay almost continually upon him, and to
obtain liberty to those captives, he labored both in public and private; and
was favored to see his endeavors crowned with considerable success. He was
particularly desirous that friends should not be instrumental to lay burdens
on this oppressed people, but remember the days of suffering from which they
had been providentially delivered, that if times of trouble should return, no
injustice dealt to those in slavery might rise in judgment against us, but,
being clear, we might on such occasions address the Almighty with a degree of
confidence, for his interposition and relief, being particularly careful as to
himself, not to countenance slavery even by the use of those conveniences of
life which were furnished by their labor.

He was desirous to have his own, and the minds of others, redeemed from the
pleasures, and immoderate profits of this world, and to fix them on those joys
which fade not away; his principal care being after a life of purity,
endeavoring to avoid not only the grosser pollutions, but those also which,
appearing in a more refined dress, are not sufficiently guarded against by some
well disposed people. In the latter part of his life he was remarkable for the
plainness and simplicity of his dress, and as much as possible, avoided the use
of plate, costly furniture and feasting; thereby endeavoring to become an
example of temperance and self-denial, which, he believed himself called unto;
and was favored with peace therein, although it carried the appearance of great
austerity in the view of some. He was very moderate in his charges in the way
of business, and in his desires after gain; and though a man of industry,
avoided, and strove much to lead others out of extreme labor, and anxiousness
after perishable things; being desirous that the strength of our bodies might
not be spent in procuring things unprofitable, and that we might use moderation
and kindness to the brute animals under our care, to prize the use of them as a
great favor, and by no means abuse them; that the gifts of Providence should
be thankfully received and applied to the uses they were designed.

He several times opened a school at Mount-Holly, for the instruction of poor
friends children and others, being concerned for their help and improvement
therein: His love and care for the rising youth among us was truly great,
recommending to parents and those who have the charge of them, to choose
conscientious and pious tutors, saying, It is a lovely sight to behold innocent
children, and that To labor for their help against that which would mar the
beauty of their minds, is a debt we owe them.

His ministry was sound, very deep and penetrating, sometimes pointing out the
dangerous situation which indulgence and custom leads into; frequently
exhorting others, especially the youth, not to be discouraged at the
difficulties which occur, but press after purity. He often expressed an earnest
engagement that pure wisdom should be attended to, which would lead into
lowliness of mind and resignation to the divine will, in which state small
possessions here would be sufficient.

In transacting the affairs of discipline, his judgment was sound and clear,
and he was very useful in treating with those who had done amiss; he visited
such in a private way in that plainness which truth dictates, showing great
tenderness and christian forbearance. He was a constant attender of our
yearly meeting, in which he was a good example, and particularly useful;
assisting in the business thereof with great weight and attention. He several
times visited most of the meetings of friends in this and the neighboring
provinces, with the concurrence of the monthly meeting to which he belonged,
and we have reason to believe had good service therein, generally or always
expressing at his return how it had fared with him, and the evidence of peace
in his mind for thus performing his duty. He was often concerned with other
friends in the important service of visiting families, which he was enabled to
go through to satisfaction.

In the minutes of the meeting of ministers and elders for this quarter, at the
foot of a list of the members of that meeting, made about five years before his
death, we find in his handwriting the following observation and reflections.

As looking over the minutes made by persons who have put off this body, has
sometimes revived in me a thought how ages pass away; so this list may probably
revive a like thought in some, when I and the rest of the persons abovenamed,
are centered in another state of being. The Lord, who was the guide of my
youth, has in tender mercies helped me hitherto; he has healed me of wounds,
he has helped me out of grievous entanglements; he remains to be the strength
of my life; to whom I desire to devote myself in time, and in eternity.

Signed, John Woolman.

In the twelfth month 1771, he acquainted this meeting that he found his mind
drawn toward a religious visit to friends in some parts of England,
particularly in Yorkshire. In the first month 1772, he obtained our
certificate, which was approved and endorsed by our quarterly meeting, and by
the half year's meeting of ministers and elders at Philadelphia. He embarked on
his voyage in the fifth and arrived in London in the sixth month following, at
the time of their annual meeting in that city. During his short visit to
friends in that kingdom, we are informed that his services were acceptable and
edifying. In his last illness he uttered many lively and comfortable
expressions, being Perfectly resigned, having no will either to live or die, as
appears by the testimony of friends at York in Great Britain, in the suburbs
whereof at the house of our friend Thomas Priestman, he died of the smallpox,
on the 7 th day of the tenth month 1772, and was buried in friends
burying-ground in that city, on the 9 th of the same, after a large and solid
meeting held on the occasion, at their great meeting house, aged near fifty-two
years; a minister upwards of 30 years, during which time he belonged to
Mount-Holly particular meeting, which he diligently attended when at home and
in health of body, and his labors of love and pious care for the prosperity of
friends in the blessed truth, we hope may not be forgotten, but that his good
works may be remembered to edification.

A Testimony from the Quarterly Meeting at York in Great Britain, concerning
JOHN WOOLMAN.
THIS our valuable friend having been under a religious engagement for some
time, to visit friends in this nation, and more especially us in the northern
parts, undertook the same in full concurrence and near sympathy with his
friends and brethren at home, as appeared by certificates from the monthly and
quarterly-meetings to which he belonged, and from the spring-meeting of
ministers and elders, held at Philadelphia, for Pennsylvania and New Jersey.

He arrived in the city of London the beginning of the last yearly meeting, and
after attending that meeting traveled northward, visiting the
quarterly-meetings of Hertfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire,
Oxfordshire and Worcestershire, and diverse particular meetings in his way.

He visited many meetings on the west side of this county, also some in
Lancashire and Westmoreland, from whence he came to our quarterly meeting in
the last ninth month, and though much out of health, yet was enabled to attend
all the sittings of that meeting except the last.

His disorder then, which proved the smallpox, increased speedily upon him,
and was very afflicting; under which he was supported in much meekness,
patience, and christian fortitude; to those who attended him in his illness,
his mind appeared to be centered in divine love; under the precious influence
whereof, we believe he finished his course, and entered into the mansions of
everlasting rest.

In the early part of his illness he requested a friend to write and he broke
forth thus.

O Lord my God! the amazing horrors of darkness were gathered around me and
covered me all over, and I saw no way to go forth; I felt the misery of my
fellow creatures separated from the divine harmony and it was heavier than I
could bear, and I was crushed down under it; I lifted up my hand, and stretched
out my arm, but there was none to help me; I looked round about and was amazed:
In the depths of misery, O Lord! I remembered that thou art omnipotent, that I
had called thee father, and I felt that I loved thee, and I was made quiet in
thy will, and I waited for deliverance from thee; thou had pity upon me, when
no man could help me; I saw that meekness under suffering was showed to us in
the most affecting example of thy son, and thou wast teaching me to follow him,
and I said, thy will O father, be done.

Many more of his weighty expressions might have been inserted here, but it was
deemed unnecessary, they being already published in print.

He was a man endued with a large natural capacity, and being obedient to the
manifestations of divine grace, having in patience and humility endured many
deep baptisms, he became thereby sanctified and fitted for the Lord's work, and
was truly serviceable in his church; dwelling in awful fear and watchfulness,
he was careful in his public appearances to feel the putting forth of the
divine hand, so that the spring of the gospel ministry often flowed through him
with great sweetness and purity, as a refreshing stream to the weary travelers
toward the city of God: Skilful in dividing the word, he was furnished by him
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, to communicate
freely to the several states of the people where his lot was cast. His conduct
at other times was seasoned with the like watchful circumspection and attention
to the guidance of divine wisdom, which rendered his whole conversation
uniformly edifying.

He was fully persuaded that as the life of Christ comes to reign in the earth,
all abuse and unnecessary oppression, both of the human and brute creation will
come to an end; but under the sense of a deep revolt, and an overflowing stream
of unrighteousness, his life has been often a life of mourning.

He was deeply concerned on account of that inhuman and iniquitous practice of
making slaves of the people of Africa, or holding them in that state; and on
that account we understand he has not only wrote some books, but traveled
much on the continent of America, in order to make the Negro masters
(especially those in profession with us) sensible of the evil of such a
practice; and though in this journey to England, he was far removed from the
outward sight of their sufferings, yet his deep exercise of mind remained, as
appears by a short treatise he wrote in this journey, and his frequent concern
to open the miserable state of this deeply injured people: His testimony in the
last meeting he attended was on this subject, wherein he remarked, that as we
as a society, when under outward sufferings, had often found it our concern to
lay them before those in authority, and thereby in the Lord's time, had
obtained relief, so he recommended this oppressed part of the creation to our
notice, that we may as way may open, represent their sufferings in an
individual, if not a society, capacity to those in authority.

Deeply sensible that the desire to gratify people's inclinations in luxury and
superfluities, is the principal ground of oppression, and the occasion of many
unnecessary wants, he believed it to be his duty to be a pattern of great
self-denial, with respect to the things of this life, and earnestly to labor
with friends in the meekness of wisdom, to impress on their minds the great
importance of our testimony in these things, recommending to the guidance of
the blessed truth in this and all other concerns, and cautioning such as are
experienced therein, against contenting themselves with acting up to the
standard of others, but to be careful to make the standard of truth manifested
to them, the measure of their obedience; for said he, That purity of life which
proceeds from faithfulness in following the spirit of truth, that state where
our minds are devoted to serve God, and all our wants are bounded by his
wisdom; this habitation has often, been opened before me as a place of
retirement for the children of the light, where they may stand separated from
that which disordereth and confuseth the affairs of society, and where we may
have a testimony of our innocence in the hearts of those who behold us.

We conclude with fervent desires, that we as a people may thus, by our
example, promote the Lord's work in the earth; and our hearts being prepared,
may unite in prayer to the great Lord of the harvest, that as in his infinite
wisdom he has greatly stripped the church, by removing of late diverse faithful
ministers and elders, he may be pleased to send forth many more faithful
laborers into his harvest.

The following Minutes of some of his Expressions in the time of his sickness,
were preserved by our friend Thomas Priestman and others who attended him, viz.
FOURTH-DAY morning, 30 th of the ninth month 1772, being asked how he felt
himself, he meekly answered, I don't know that I have slept this night, I feel
the disorder making its progress, but my mind is mercifully preserved in
stillness and peace: Sometime after he said he was sensible the pains of death
must be hard to bear, but if he escaped them now, he must sometime pass through
them, and he did not know that he could be better prepared, but had no will in
it. He said he had settled his outward affairs to his mind, had taken leave of
his wife and family as never to return, leaving them to the divine protection;
adding, and though I feel them near to me at this time, yet I freely give them
up, having a hope that they will be provided for. And a little after said, This
trial is made easier than I could have thought, my will being wholly taken
away; for if I was anxious for the event it would have been harder, but I am
not, and my mind enjoys a perfect calm.

In the night a young woman having given him something to drink, he said, My
child thou seems very kind to me a poor creature, the Lord will reward thee for
it. Awhile after he cried out with great earnestness of spirit, Oh my father!
my father! and soon after he said, Oh my father! my father! how comfortable art
thou to my soul in this trying season. Being asked if he could take a little
nourishment; after some pause he replied, my child I cannot tell what to say to
it; I seem nearly arrived where my soul shall have rest from all its troubles.
After giving in something to be inserted in his journal, he said, I believe the
Lord will now excuse me from exercises of this kind; and I see no work but one
which is to be the last wrought by me in this world, the messenger will come
that will release me from all these troubles; but it must be in the Lord's
time, which I am waiting for. He said he had labored to do whatever was
required, according to the ability received, in the remembrance of which he had
peace; and though the disorder was strong at times, and would like a whirlwind
come over his mind; yet it had hitherto been kept steady and centered in
everlasting love; adding, and if that be mercifully continued, I ask nor desire
no more. Another time he said, he had long had a view of visiting this nation,
and sometime before he came had a dream, in which he saw himself in the
northern parts of it, and that the spring of the gospel was opened in him much
as in the beginning of friends, such as George Fox and William Dewsbury, and he
saw the different states of the people, as clear as he had everseen flowers in
a garden; but in his going along he was suddenly stopped, though he could not see
for what end; but looking toward home, fell into a flood of tears, which waked
him.

At another time he said, my draught seemed strongest toward the north, and I
mentioned in my own monthly meeting, that attending the quarterly meeting at
York, and being there looked like home to me.

Fifth-day night, having repeatedly consented to take medicine with a view to
settle his stomach, but without effect; the friend then waiting on him, said
through distress, what shall I do now? He answered with great composure, Rejoice
evermore, and in every thing give thanks; but added a little after, this is
sometimes hard to come at.

Sixth-day morning he broke forth early in supplication on this wise, O Lord it
was thy power that enabled me to forsake sin in my youth, and I have felt thy
bruises for disobedience; but as I bowed under them thou healed me, continuing
a father and a friend; I feel thy power now, and I beg that in the approaching
trying moment thou will keep my heart steadfast unto thee. Upon his giving
directions to a friend concerning some little things, she said I will take
care, but hope thou will live to order them thyself; he replied, my hope is in
Christ, and though I may seem a little better, a change in the disorder may soon
happen, and my little strength be dissolved, and if it so happens, I shall be
gathered to my everlasting rest. On her saying she did not doubt that, but
could not help mourning to see so many faithful servants removed at so low a
time; he said all good comes from the Lord, whose power is the same, and can
work as he sees best. The same day he had given directions about wrapping his
corpse; perceiving a friend to weep, he said I would rather thou would guard
against weeping for me, my sister, I sorrow not, though I have had some painful
conflicts, but now they seem over and matters well settled, and I look at the
face of my dear redeemer, for sweet is his voice and his countenance is comely.

First Day, 4 th of the tenth month, being very weak and in general difficult
to be understood, he uttered a few words in commemoration of the Lord's
goodness; and added, how tenderly have I been waited on in this time of
affliction, in which I may say in Job's words, Tedious days and wearisome
nights are appointed unto me, and how many are spending their time and money in
vanity and superfluities, while thousands and tens of thousands want the
necessaries of life, who might be relieved by them, and their distresses at
such a time as this, in some degree softened by the administering suitable
things.

Second-day morning the apothecary who appeared very anxious to assist him,
being present, he queried about the probability of such a load of matter being
thrown off his weak body, and the apothecary making some remarks implying he
thought it might; he spoke with an audible voice on this wise, My dependence is
on the Lord Jesus, who I trust will forgive my sins, which is all I hope for,
and if it be his will to raise up this body again, I am content; and if to die,
I am resigned; and if thou can not be easy without trying to assist nature, I
submit. After which his throat was so much affected, that it was very difficult
for him to speak so as to be understood, and frequently wrote when he wanted
any thing. About the second hour on fourth-day morning he asked for pen and
ink, and at several times with much difficulty wrote thus, I believe my being
here is in the wisdom of Christ, I know not as to life or death.

About a quarter before six the same morning he seemed to fall into an easy
sleep, which continued about half an hour, when seeming to awake, he breathed a
few times with more difficulty, and expired without sigh, groan, or struggle.

A Testimony from Derby Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning WILLIAM
HORN.
HE was born in the county of Sussex, Great Britain, in the year 1714, and came
with his parents to Philadelphia about the year 1724; in 1736 he came to reside
in this township, where he continued the remainder of his life. He married in
1737, and in 1746 he appeared in public testimony in our religious meetings,
and being obedient to the heavenly call, became an able minister of the gospel.

In the year 1752 he visited the meetings of friends in New England; and in the
fourth month 1763 embarked for Great Britain, where he visited the meetings
generally in England and some part of Wales, returning home in the tenth month
1764, to the great satisfaction of his family and friends. He also, at several
other times, visited most of the meetings in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and
the back parts of Maryland and Virginia; it appearing, by certificates
produced, that his labors of love were acceptable to friends.

His ministerial labors were frequent, lively and edifying, adorning the
doctrine he preached by a circumspect life and conversation, being zealously
concerned for the maintenance of good order in the church, a good example in
his family, careful to bring up his children in diligently attending religious
meetings, and manifesting his care in diverse respects for their present and
future welfare. Kind and hospitable to friends, his house and heart being open
for their reception.

He departed this life, at his own habitation, the 11 th of the eleventh month
1772, in the fifty-ninth year of his age and the 26 th of his ministry, and was
interred in friends burying-ground at Derby aforesaid.

A Testimony from Little Egg-Harbour Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning
JOHN RIDGWAY.
HE was born in the county of Burlington, in West-New-Jersey, in the year 1705,
and soon after came with his parents and settled within the compass of this
meeting: He was religiously educated, which as he grew in years, had a good
effect, by his yielding obedience to the heavenly vision of light and grace in
his own mind, which weaned him from the vanities of the world. He was a steady
and constant attender of meetings when at home and in health; and although his
circumstances in life made him apprehend it necessary to follow the sea for a
time, yet by attending to the divine principle of grace, he was preserved from
that extravagance in his conduct and conversation too prevalent in men in that
business. He was early in life appointed to the station of an elder in the
church, in which he conducted with reputation; being of a benevolent spirit,
his heart and house were open to entertain his friends and others, cheerfully
and liberally assisting the poor in many respects; and in an extensive commerce
and conversation amongst men of various ranks, he demeaned himself with a
becoming gravity, which rendered him truly worthy of esteem. He was carefully
concerned that his children and other youth, might partake of the benefits of a
sober education; and in his declining years, was much afflicted with bodily
indisposition, which he was enabled to bear with patience and resignation;
often expressing a desire to be contented in the divine will.

He quietly departed this life, on the 21 st of the fifth month 1774, aged near
seventy years, and was buried at Egg-Harbour.

A Testimony from Plainfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOHN
VAIL.
OUR worthy and much esteemed friend John Vail, was born at West-Chester, in
the province of New York, and removed from thence while young to Woodbridge,
where he settled and married. He was when a youth, reached by the power of
truth, and submitting to the cross, he became sober and religious; and
continuing faithful and obedient to what he believed to be his duty, the Lord
in infinite mercy, was pleased to bestow on him, a gift in the gospel ministry,
and he proving faithful with the one talent, witnessed an increase and growth
in the truth, and was enlarged in his public testimony, whereby the church was
edified, and the faithful comforted. Having a regard to the putting forth of
the divine hand, he waited in meetings for proper qualifications to minister in
the ability that God gives, whereby he was often enabled, not only to reprove
the unrighteousness of men, but to speak comfortably to those who mourned for
the pride and abominations of the times. He often mentioned the plainness and
simplicity which our forefathers appeared in, and was sorrowfully affected for
many of the present generation, in that they slighted their good examples, and
indulged themselves in many things which those worthy men bore a faithful
testimony against. He was a diligent attender of meetings, and very exemplary
in being early there, even to old age, when of ability of body; often exciting
friends to that duty, not as formalists, but patiently to wait for
qualification to perform acceptable worship to the Almighty. His outward
circumstances being low, he was very industrious, laboring with his hands for
the support of himself and family, to an advanced age, being very loath to be
burdensome to friends.

He lived to a good old age, and on his deathbed, expressed his great
satisfaction, and resignation to the will of the Almighty, and said he had
often considered that passage of scripture, If our hearts condemn us not, God
is greater, adding, But my heart condemns me not, for I have walked in
innocence from my youth up: He diverse times signified his being ready and
willing to leave the world. As our dear friend walked in righteousness and
humility, he increased in divine experience, and his lamp shone bright to the
last. He departed this life, on the 27 th of the eleventh month 1774, in the
eighty-ninth year of his age, much beloved by his friends, neighbors, and
acquaintance in general, a large number of whom attended his corpse to the
grave, where, after a solid meeting on the occasion, it was interred in friends
burying-ground at Rahway.

A Testimony from Goshen Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning THOMAS
GOODWIN.
HE was born in the principality of Wales in the year 1694, and came over to
Pennsylvania with his parents about the year 1708; and according to the best
accounts we can collect, he appeared in the ministry near the fortieth year of
his age; and became a faithful labourer in the Lord's vineyard. He sundry times
visited friends in the adjacent provinces, several of which visits he performed
even in old age; and about the sixty-ninth year of his age visited friends in
many parts of England and Wales; and some years after, friends in Ireland;
which visits were acceptable, as appeared by several certificates given by
friends amongst whom he labored. He was zealous for the promotion of good
order in the church, and often fervently engaged in our meetings for
discipline, to recommend friends to a humble waiting for the pointings of
truth, as the alone safe guide and qualifier for every good word and work.

He was exemplary himself, and careful to bring up his family in the practice
of attending meetings on the first and other days of the week; was zealous in
promoting and faithful in performing that good work of visiting friends
families: His ministry was sound and edifying, being in the demonstration of
the spirit and power; and he may be said to be of the number of them that
through says have obtained a good report.

The last year of his life, he was prevented from traveling far abroad, by
reason of a lingering and painful disorder, but when able to attend his own
meeting, he frequently appeared in the ministry, though under much bodily
infirmity. And although he was as a shock of corn fully ripe, gathered in its
season, yet we are sensible of the loss the church has sustained by his
removal; but we trust it is his everlasting gain, and that he now enjoys the
fruits of his labors. His last expressions were, Lord Jesus receive my soul.

He departed this life, the 16 th of the fourth month 1775, and was buried in
friends burying-ground at Goshen, on the 19 th of the same, aged eighty-one
years, and a minister about 41 years.

A Testimony from Nottingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning JOHN
CHURCHMAN.
HE was born at Nottingham in Chester county, Pennsylvania, the 4 th of the
sixth month 1705, of religious parents, John and Hannah Churchman; and by his
own account, was remarkably reached and made sensible of the inward appearance
of grace and truth when very young; but through inattention thereto, suffered
loss. About the twentieth year of his age, through the great loving kindness of a
merciful God, the divine visitation was again renewed wherewith he closing in,
became subject to the Lord's hand, who was about to prepare him as a chosen
instrument for service. In his twenty-fifth year he married, and soon after was
recommended to the station of an elder, wherein we find, he acted with great
caution, humility and fear, and being qualified for the service of visiting
families, was employed therein.

His first appearance in public ministry, was in the year 1733, and by humble
obedience to the giver, he improved in the gift, and became an able minister of
the gospel; in which service he traveled much, having visited the meetings of
friends in this and several of the adjacent provinces, mostly several times;
and in the summer 1742, he performed a religious visit to friends in
New England, and the year following to New York and parts adjacent, which he
repeated in 1774. In the year 1750 a concern ripened, which he expressed had
for some years before, at times, rested with weight on his mind, to cross the
seas in the service of the gospel, wherewith he had the free concurrence of his
brethren at home (being always very careful in that respect;) and spent upwards
of four years on a general visit to the meetings of friends in England,
Scotland, Wales, Ireland and Holland, and also to the particular families of
friends within the compass of diverse meetings in different parts of Europe; and
by several certificates produced to our meeting after his return, the unity and
satisfaction of friends in those European countries with his exemplary conduct
and religious labors were fully expressed.

Although he was of a weakly constitution, and often infirm, especially in the
latter part of his life, yet he appeared to be much devoted to the service of
truth and the good of mankind, and gave up his time for that purpose, when he
apprehended it was required of him, being favored with a sufficiency of
outward things, and we believe he stood loose from the world and its
connections, not seeking, but refraining opportunities he might have had to get
outward riches; he visited neighboring yearly, quarterly, and other meetings
of friends at times to his last year, and was truly useful in the discipline of
the church, being eminently qualified for that service, and was a good example
in a diligent care to attend all the meetings both for worship and discipline
to which he belonged, cautious of being forward in his public appearances, and
for the most part exampled us to silence in our meetings at home, especially in
the latter part of his time; yet when he did appear in testimony, we think it
may be truly said, his doctrine dropped as the dew, being lively and edifying to
the honest hearted, though close and searching to the careless professors, as
well as to the profane and hypocritical. The elders who have ruled well are to
be accounted honorable, so the remembrance of the fatherly, diligent, humble,
upright, honest, and self-denying example of this our deceased friend, as also
his various services in our meetings and neighborhood remain fresh, and of a
pleasant savor to many minds.

In his last illness, which held him upwards of three weeks, he appeared mostly
sensible, and manifested much patience and resignation, uttering many lively
expressions to those attending him, and to diverse friends who came to see him;
some of which being taken down in writing, are hereunto subjoined, viz.

Some Account of the last illness of our friend John Churchman, and of diverse
of his weighty expressions, near the close of life.
ON the 11 th of the sixth month 1775, he returned home, after performing his
last journey, on a visit to most of the meetings on the Eastern-Shore of
Maryland, and attending the yearly meeting at Third-Haven in Talbot county. On
the 14 th of the same month, he went to the weekday meeting at London-Grove, to
meet with a committee of our quarterly meeting on particular business, and
returned to our meeting at Nottingham the next day, on the first day of the
week following was there also, in the same week he attended our preparative and
monthly-meetings, but a fever daily increasing upon him, he was afterward
chiefly confined at home.

On the 4 th of the seventh month he expressed himself thus, I am glad that I
am at home, I have ever found it best when my service abroad was over, to get
home as quick as might be, and though I have felt great inward poverty and
weakness since my last journey, so that I can neither see my beginning nor
ending, but seem as if all were hidden, yet I hope if Providence shall see meet
to remove me at this time, some light will appear again, and that it will be
otherwise before I go.

At another time he spoke to this purpose, I have found myself much stripped as
to a sense of good, and tried with poverty many days. I suppose I have been
accounted by some, as one of the better sort of people, but have seen great
occasion to beware of a disposition that would seek to feed upon the praise or
commendations of others; a carnal selfish spirit is very apt to present, and
creep in here if possible, and I have seen it hurt many who have had right
beginnings, it always introduces dimness, and oppression, to the pure,
precious, innocent life of truth, which only grows up into dominion, through
deep abasement of soul, and the entire death of self.

At several other times he signified to this effect, My present baptism of
affliction has tended to the further refinement of my nature, and to the
bringing me more perfectly into the image of my master.

He frequently expressed his full submission to the divine will either
respecting life or death, several times saying, I now experience my life and my
will to be slain, and I have no will left.

In the two last weeks of his time it appeared that his desire and hope,
mentioned in the forepart of his illness, for light again to appear, was fully
answered by the fresh influence thereof, so that although his pain was often
great, he would many times in a day break forth into a kind of melody with his
voice, without uttering words, which as he sometimes intimated, was an
involuntary aspiration of his soul in praise to the Lord, who had again been
pleased to shine forth in brightness after many days of poverty and deep
baptism, which though painful, had proved beneficial to him, being a means of
further purifying from the dregs of nature, saying he was at times afraid to
discover that melody in the hearing of some that visited him, lest they could
not comprehend its meaning, and might therefore misconstrue it.

On second day morning the 17 th of the seventh month, being asked by a friend
how he was, he replied, I am here in the body yet, and when I go out of it I
hope there is nothing but peace, and soon after further said, I have seen that
all the bustles, and noises that are now in the world will end in confusion,
and our young men that know not an establishment in the truth and the Lord's
fear for a ballast, will be caught in a trying moment. At another time he said,
I feel nothing but peace, having endeavored honestly to discharge myself in
public, and privately to individuals as I apprehended was required, and if it
be the Lord's will that I should go now, I shall be released from a great deal
of trouble and exercise, which I believe friends who are left behind will have
to pass through.

On the 20 th of the same month he thus expressed himself, I love friends who
abide in the truth as much as ever I did, and I feel earnest breathings to the
Lord, that there may be such raised up in the church who may go forth in
humility, sweetness, and life, clear of all superfluity in expressions and
otherwise, standing for the testimony, that they may be useful to the church in
these difficult times.

About three days before his death, several friends being in his room, he spoke
as follows, Friends in the beginning, if they had health and liberty, were not
easily diverted from paying their tribute of worship to the Almighty on week
days as well as first-days, but after awhile when outward sufferings ceased,
life and zeal decaying, ease and the spirit of the world took place with many,
and thus it became customary for one or two out of a family to attend meetings,
and to leave their children much at home; parents also if worldly concerns were
in the way could neglect their week day meetings sometimes, yet be willing to
hold the name, and plead excuse because of a busy time, or the like, but I
believe that such a departure from primitive integrity ever did, and ever will,
occasion a withering from the life of true religion.

To a friend who came to visit him on the 21 st of the seventh month he said, I
feel that which lives beyond death and the grave, which is now an inexpressible
comfort to me after a time of deep baptism that I have passed through, I
believe my being continued here is in the will of Providence, and I am fully
resigned.

His illness increasing he said but little on seventh-day the 22 d; in the
afternoon he was very low, and speechless about twelve hours; early on
first day morning he recruited a little, and gave directions about his coffin
to a friend who sat up with him, being a joiner; continuing rather easier the
forepart of that day and appearing cheerful, he expressed diverse weighty
sentences like farewell exhortations to some who came to see him; on second-day
morning he sat up a considerable time, in the afternoon he appeared lively and
sensible, though very weak, thus expressing himself, I am much refreshed with my
master's sweet air, I feel more life, more light, more love and sweetness than
ever before, and often mentioned the divine refreshment and comfort he felt
flowing like a pure stream to his inward man, saying to those who were with
him, I may tell you of it, but you cannot feel it as I do.

In the evening a young person coming into the room, looking at her earnestly
and affectionately, he said, Deborah arose a mother in Israel, and shortly
after, The sweetness that I feel; then his difficulty of breathing increased,
and being turned once or twice, he requested to be helped up, and was placed in
his chair, in which he expired about the ninth hour on second-day night the 24
th of the seventh month 1775, being aged near seventy, and a minister about 42
years, and was buried on the 26 th in friends grave-yard at East-Nottingham, a
large concourse of people attending, after which a solemn meeting was held.

A Testimony from New-Garden Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning SARAH
MILHOUSE.
SHE was religiously inclined from her youth, and when married, was a good
example in her family as a wife and a parent, of an inoffensive life and
conversation, and a diligent attender of religious meetings, until prevented by
age and bodily infirmity: Her appearances as a minister were not frequent, but
savoury and in few expressions.

In her last illness she seemed resigned either to live or die, and by her
sensible expressions and good advice to her children and others, she appeared
in a living humble frame of mind, and signified, She did not see any thing in
her way.

She quietly departed this life, the 26 th of the eighth month 1775, aged about
seventy-four years; and on the 27 th was interred in friends burying-ground at
New-Garden.

After her decease, was found, wrote with her own hand, as follows, Oh! that my
children would walk in the truth, the pure, inward, everlasting truth, which is
Christ; seek unto him in secret and great humility, who alone can preserve you
in every trying time which must be met with in this life, that we may be
prepared for that life which is everlasting; seek it before any earthly
treasure.

A Testimony from Gwynedd Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning WILLIAM
FOULKE.
HE was born of religious parents, early settlers of Gwynedd, from whom he
received a pious education, to which, with the visitation of divine grace, he
so far attended from early youth, that in the several characters of husband,
father, master, and neighbor, with his hospitality and charitable disposition
to the poor, he was much endeared to his family, friends and neighbors. Being
a man of integrity and a lover of peace, he endeavored to promote it in
others, and was remarkably ^ndued with a happy talent for composing differences
and reclaiming offenders, in which services he was much exercised.

In the stations of an elder and overseer which he filled for a number of
years, he was exemplary and serviceable. His health gradually declined for
several months; and though his disorder proved lingering, he was enabled to
bear it with resignation and patience, expressing the expectation of his change
with calmness.

The day before his decease, a friend who visited him, mentioned, what a
comfortable reflection it must be to him, when drawing near to the close of
life, that he had filled up the station alloted him in a good degree of
faithfulness; he replied, I have, no sight when my change may be, I endeavor
to be resigned, I have not any thing to boast of, I have not any thing to
expect from any works I have done, it was but little; but I have experienced
that the Lord is merciful, in whom I trust, having redeemed my soul from
destruction. I much desire to be within the pale of happiness, somewhere within
the door where I may find a quiet habitation.

He continued sensible to the last, and departed this life, on the 30 th of the
eighth month 1775, in the sixty-seventh year of his age, and on the 1 st of the
ninth month, was interred in friends burying-ground at Gwynedd.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning SARAH MORRIS.
SHE was born in this city, being the daughter of our ancient friends Anthony
and Elizabeth Morris, who were careful to instruct her in the fear of the Lord,
a diligent attendance of our religious meetings, and an early acquaintance with
the holy scriptures; the advantage whereof she at times expressed to be a great
comfort to herself, and of benefit to others. Her father died when she was
about seventeen years of age, and near his end gave this testimony respecting
her, That she had never disobeyed him, and was his comfort; which we insert
with desires it may so impress the minds of youth, that by duly regarding the
divine command of obedience to parents, they may be their comfort, merit the
like testimony, and secure peace to their own minds. She was endued with
understanding superior to many, which, with her sociable, agreeable
disposition, occasioned her conversation in the younger part of her life to be
sought and acceptable to such who were accounted wise in the estimation of the
world; but from her religious inclination prefering the company of those who
exceeded her in age and experience, she was mercifully preserved from the
snares and temptations to levity and vanity by which many of the youth are too
readily captivated.

The state of mind and religious exercise she was brought under, through the
early visitations of divine grace, being sensibly expressed in a short account
written by herself, we think worthy to be preserved, directed as follows,

To all to whose hands this may come, be it known,

That, I having been one who was born of religious parents, was by that means
favored with a sober and virtuous education, but what was far beyond all
outward blessings, the Lord in his mercy was pleased to make very early
impressions of religion on my soul, by his immediate grace and good spirit, and
made me sensible of the touches of divine love when very young, and at times
these merciful visitations were continued from my very infancy (and through
every part of life) by which I was in a good degree preserved from the evils
and vanities of the world, and not only so, but comforted and supported in
every time of trouble and difficulty, as there was a secret regard to that good
hand which is, and ever will be the help of all those who put their trust in
it. But though the Lord had so favored me that I was made capable of being in
some respects serviceable amongst my acquaintance and friends, from a
propensity in my natural disposition (which is likewise a blessing from Heaven)
to assist or oblige those with whom I conversed; yet after it pleased God, by
the death of a sister whom I entirely loved, to give me a fresh instance of the
uncertainty and unsatisfactoriness of all temporal blessings, he was pleased to
strengthen my desires after the enjoyment of that which is eternal and fades
not away; and strong cries were raised in my soul that I might be brought to a
nearer acquaintance, and a more constant abiding with him who is the beloved of
souls, and who, by the secret touches of divine goodness, had raised such a
hunger and thirst after righteousness, that my soul could not be satisfied
short of it: I say, after it had pleased God thus to incline my mind to seek
after a more full enjoyment of that inward life and virtue which is
communicated and conveyed to the soul through the illumination of the holy
spirit, I was visited with sickness, in which I had so a near a prospect of
eternity, that I seemed just entering into it; O! then, the emptiness and
vanity of all the world; the pleasures and friendships of it appeared in a
clear and strong light; nothing then but the hope of an entrance into the
kingdom of Heaven seemed of any value, and that hope the Lord was at that time
pleased in some degree to afford me; but yet I thought I saw a great
deficiency, and was made to desire of the Lord, that if it was his will to
restore me, he might enable me to live more close to his teachings, and follow
him more fully than I had hitherto done; but in order to this, a work of
greater mortification than ever had been experienced by me, was necessary.
Great distress of soul and affliction of body was I brought into, insomuch that
I knew not where, or what I was; such temptations and buffetings of Satan that
I had till now been a stranger to, were suffered to beset me, in the absence of
spiritual comfort: and refreshment, yet in all this the Lord was very merciful,
and let me see that his dealings with my soul were in order to qualify and fit
for some further service; O! then the solemn engagements my soul was willing to
enter into at this Bethel! If thou O Lord! will be with me in the way that I
go, and give me bread to eat and raiment to put on, in a spiritual sense, and
bring me to my heavenly father's house in peace, thou shall be my God, and I
will serve thee! And the Lord, who knew the tenderness of my heart (at that
time, for it was his own work) was pleased graciously to shower down of the
heavenly rain of his kingdom, by which my soul was greatly comforted and
refreshed in his presence; and in a true sight and sense of my own nothingness
and inability to do any thing that was acceptable in the sight of God without
his assistance, was my spirit greatly humbled before him, and a resignation
wrought in my will to be given up in all things to him, who had thus enabled my
soul to praise his name upon the banks of deliverance from great and sore
conflicts and troubles, which were unknown to any in that day, for then was the
Lord my refuge and sure hiding place, and under the shadow of his wing was I
kept, and in the sweet enjoyment of divine love, light and life, at times was
made to say, surely nothing shall ever be able to make a separation from the
love of God in Christ Jesus: But alas! this lasted not long, for when it was
clearly shown me what was required of my hands, which was to bear a public
testimony for God, and to declare unto others what he had done for my soul,
then consultations with flesh and blood began, though the merciful visitations of
love were long continued unto me; yet doubts, fears and reasonings increased,
so that great darkness and distress came upon me, nor could I now apply with
that confidence and trust as formerly, to him alone who can help, but began to
disclose something of my condition to others, from which time I was sensible
that my strength decreased; yet all this while I was willing to hope that a
fresh visitation might be sometime afforded, for without it, I saw my state
very dangerous; what would I not then have done to have recovered my former
condition? I went under great distress and perplexity day and night for some
months, the comfortable refreshments and divine opening with which I had been
so plentifully favored, were withdrawn, and I left in unspeakable anguish and
distress; under this sense of terror I cried to the Lord to show me his will
and enable me to perform it, but the sense of his love was so far withdrawn,
and fears and doubts had so prevailed, that I began to question every thing,
and by degrees the unwearied adversary has so prevailed, or it is so suffered
for ends I know not, that I am at this time, according to my weak apprehension,
left very much to myself without the sensation of divine love upon my soul, or
the ability to seek after it, or rightly to wait for it, or to stir or move any
way as to my soul, but, in a stupidity not to be described, stripped of all
inward comfort, and not able to take pleasure in any thing this world can
afford.

Being, through the mercy of the Lord, preserved under this close probation,
and, in his time, graciously relieved by the quickening virtue of his divine
presence and power, she, in great abasement and humiliation, became resigned to
his holy requirings, and appeared in public testimony in one of our religious
meetings; being thus brought forth in the ministry, through great mortification
of her own will, her appearance was much to the comfort and satisfaction of
friends, it being evident to the sensible and judicious members of the church,
that she was rightly called to this weighty work; and diverse nearly
sympa^^izing with her, were spiritual helpers, watching over her in much love
and tenderness; and through faithfulness to her gift, she increased in
knowledge and experience, and became an able gospel minister, being found in
doctrine, pertinent in exhortation, clear and audible in utterance, and careful
to adorn the doctrine she preached by a pious exemplary life and conversation.

Her first journey in the service of truth was to some adjacent meetings as
companion to our valuable friend Margaret Ellis; being afterward, through the
efficacy of divine love, drawn forth to visit many of the meetings in this
province, New Jersey and the yearly-meetings in Maryland and Long Island; and
in the year 1764, in company with our friends Joyce Bene^et and Elizabeth
Smith, attended that at Rhode Island; though her religious labors were chiefly
in this city, manifesting among us a steady uniform concern for the cause of
truth, and preservation of true christian fellowship, not only in the exercise
of her gift in the public ministry, wherein she was eminently favored, but
also of our christian discipline among friends of her own sex, for which she
was well qualified and of real use.

After the decease of her ancient mother, who, in the ninety-fourth year of her
age, departed in a calm and peaceful state of mind, toward whom she had
manifested a filial affection and care, an exercise which she had many years
been under to visit friends in Great Britain now reviving, the weight of the
service, and her apprehension of being disqualified therefore, affected her so
deeply, that she was reduced to such a low state of mind and body, her recovery
appeared doubtful; but after a distressing season of conflict, she was favored
with strength to communicate her concern to this meeting, and obtaining a
certificate of the near sympathy and concurrence of friends, she was left to
proceed, with their free approbation, as the Lord might be pleased to furnish
ability; and her affectionate niece Deborah Morris's offer to accompany her,
being also concurred with, they embarked for London, in the third month 1772,
where being arrived, though continuing in a weak state of health, she was enabled
to perform her visit to friends in most of the principal counties and towns
from Exeter in the west as far north as Cumberland, and those called the
Eastern-Counties; attending two yearly-meetings in London, and diverse general
meetings in other parts of the nation; and being favored with strength beyond
expectation, and with that wisdom which truth gives to those who faithfully
resign to its holy requirings, discharged her religious duty to the edification
of the churches and her own peace; returning h^^e in the ninth month 1773,
accompanied by her said niece, who had been truly helpful to her, and three
friends from Great Britain on a religious visit; her having been thus
mercifully sustained through this weighty service, and under such apparent
infirmity, advanced to the seventieth year of her age, was both matter of
comfort, and occasion of grateful admiration to friends.

Having, soon after her return, attended the general meeting at Shrewsbury, the
quarterly meeting of Bucks and some other meetings, she united that winter with
our valuable friends, M. Leaver and E. Robinson, from Great Britain, in
visiting many of the families of friends in this city, being eminently favored
with divine help therein, as she had been at times before in the like service.

In the fifth month 1774, she visited friends at New York and Long Island,
attending the yearly meeting there, and diverse others; and in the same summer
and fall, visited some meetings in New Jersey and this province, besides
diligently attending those in this city as she was enabled, being favored in
most of them with a lively edifying testimony.

For about six months before her departure, a dropsical disorder subjected her
to great bodily weakness; yet her love to God, his truth and people, was so
prevalent, that when unable to walk to a meeting, she was diverse times carried
to her seat; one of the last she attended in public, was on the 4 th of the
sixth month 1775, to which she was with great difficulty brought, and was
enabled to bear a lively testimony; affectionately expressing her great concern
for the welfare of the people, that they might be gathered to God, and
mentioning the passage of our blessed Savior weeping over Jerusalem, tenderly
exhorted the rising youth to embrace the call of the Lord, submit to his
teaching, and thereby experience preservation.

During her illness, she had to endure great bodily pain, and at times,
depression of spirit; yet was at seasons much favored, and uttered many
comfortable and edifying expressions, some of which being noted down, are as
follows, vi^ sixth month 1775. On hearing the sound of a drum passing, it being
a time of great commotion, she said, Oh, it is the spirit of Christ that is the
christians glory and strength! It makes us humble, meek and wise, it is this
teacher that cannot be removed; a guide into that righteous way, which if but
lived in, would have kept off this impending storm. O! that they would even now
but humbly seek to learn the christian warfare, and be earnestly engaged to
fight under the banner of Christ, to know their own hearts lusts totally
subdued. At another time being in great pain, she cried out, O sweet Lord
Jesus, that thou would be pleased to give me a little ease, who am an
unworthy creature, undeserving thy sweet presence; but thou art merciful, and
thou, 0 Lord! know that nothing less can ease and comfort me; thy living
presence is all I want. And after the favor was granted, which for an hour she
enjoyed, she said, Oh! how good is my God, thus to hear my feeble cry; O how
sweet is this ease! All my pains are eased by one secret look from thee; O!
that I could be thankful enough for this favor; this sweet though short quiet,
which we cannot get at but when thou, O father! pleases. O! that the people
would but believe, that in thy peace their strength consists; and that they
would more generally seek to know it before it is too late; but too many are
contented without witnessing the frequent renewings of divine love, in which
only there is life, if they are but preserved from gross evils and go on in
prosperity, they sit down easy and think all is well; but O! that they may not
too late find their mistake, and that they have pleased themselves with favors
which they have unthankfully received, and so stopped short of greater, by not
desiring them, and more frequently than the day, waiting to know the renewings
of that life, without which there is no life to the truly begotten children,
and which would show them, not only what they ought to do, but would give them
strength to do it.

Seventh month 2 d; in a quiet sitting of some friends in her room, she said in
substance, If I may take the freedom to express my experiences of the Lord's
gracious dealings with me, when in a land of darkness and drought, where no
water is, a land of pitts and deserts, beset as with noxious creatures, and
amongst serpents and scorpions, from whence none could deliver but him who can
open and none can shut; I have seen the necessity, after having done the will
of God, to wait with patience to receive the promise of him who is the same
today as yesterday, and will so continue forever. Many are the comfortable
assurances in holy writ to those who keep the word of his patience; I will keep
such in the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the earth, to try
them that dwell therein; I have many times, my dear, may I not say my beloved
friends, for so at seasons you have been to me, though at other times I hardly
dare say so; I have many times been glad to feel a little opening of strength
with my friends, and may say, I am thankful for this quiet solemn opportunity,
for great have been and still are my trials, and close may be your provings; I
don't speak it to discourage any, but I find without the renewings of divine
love and life, we are incapable of keeping the word of his patience, being so
frequently beset and surrounded with weakness and infirmities; O! may you, my
dear friends, who have been called and anointed for services, witness a renewed
supply of holy oil, whereby your lamps may be kept burning, and your lights
shining; and experience the law to go forth, from Zion, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem, and remember your covenants made in the day of deep
distress; may you be supported through every future difficulty and trial, and I
through the present conflict; that when every pool and channel of comfort shall
be dried up, and all human help found unavailing, we may witness him to be
near, who has promised, for the cry of the poor and for the sighing of the
needy he would arise; therefore, cry mightily to him, that we may know him to
do so for us; for I find, without sensibly feeling the drawing cords of his
love, which opens and enlarges the heart, we cannot apply those gracious
promises to our comfort; and when he draws, let not the cares of this life, nor
slavish and unnecessary fears, prevent your following him faithfully, whatever
afflictions may attend; O! may we be so preserved in his holy hand, as that
nothing may be suffered to pluck us out of it, and so assisted to conduct, as
to be found among that happy number who have come through many tribulations,
where all sorrows and sighing will be done away and all tears wiped from our
eyes, to join those who can acceptably sing the song of praise, having had
their robes washed in the blood of the lamb and made white. And on the 3 d,
though with some difficulty of utterance, said, Though the floods beat high at
times, and the waves roared, she was then sensible of the divine love being
present, and in that love saluted her friends, as she hoped each one there had
in a greater or lesser degree, known the sanctifying power of religion on their
minds; she very earnestly and affectionately urged them to a more close and
solemn attention to this important work, not to rest satisfied short of
witnessing daily advancing forward on the way; that when this earthly
tabernacle was dissolved, we might have a well grounded hope of a house eternal
in the Heavens, whose maker and builder was God. That our blessed Savior had
told his immediate followers, in his father's house were many mansions, and
that he went to prepare a place for them, that where he was they might be also;
and that though the sensible enjoyment of divine love was much withdrawn from
many who had formerly been eminently favored with its living influence; yet
not to be discouraged, as living faith in Christ Jesus (though but in a small
degree) was abundantly sufficient for our strength and safety; and as his
divine love still continued with those who are far advanced and as on the verge
of time, it would also be the guide and blessed guardian of the younger in
years, as they humbly and steadily kept upon their watch, and paid a due
obedience to the divine instructions of his holy spirit.

The last night of her life, being in bodily pain, and under some
discouragement of mind, she was reminded of some late favors or divine love
extended to her; after laying sometime in awful silence, she replied, Now I see
it to my comfort, that the Lord has been with me through all this illness, and
I, at times, knew it not, such was my distressed situation, it was hard for me
to believe it. Afterward falling into a sweet sleep, she in about two hours
awaked much refreshed, and remarked, she had not slept so sweetly in all her
illness, for she had been in company with her father's God, mother's God and
her God; asked her niece (Deborah Morris) who had with abundant care attended
on her, if she thought life would hold all night, who answering, she thought it
might, as the night was far spent, she desired her said niece would sit by her
until the Lord came, (meaning to close her life) then slumbered again, and
awakening, admired, saying, It is strange I should sleep at such a time as
this. Being told her work was done, and it was a favor to her she could sleep,
she replied, I believe it is, and am thankful; inquiring what time it was, on
being told it was after three o'clock, she lifted up her hands as engaged in
mental prayer; soon after uttered some words but not intelligibly, and seeming
again to drop into a sweet sleep, neither stirred or spoke more, but continuing
till between eight and nine o'clock, passed easily away, on the 24 th of the
tenth month 1775, in the seventy-second year of her age, and 31 st of her
ministry, fitted, (...) ^joyment of that rest, (...) ^pared for the righteous,
having accomplished her warfare in the church militant.

Her burial on the 26 th, after a solemn meeting, was respectfully attended by
many friends and others of her fellow-citizens, to our grave-yard in this city.

A Testimony from Wrights-Town Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning
ZEBULON HESTON.
HE appeared early in the ministry, continued faithful, and died in good unity
with the church. His ministry was lively and edifying, in the exercise whereof,
he several times traveled through this and the neighboring colonies: And at
the age of near seventy-years, performed a religious visit to the Delaware
Indians, residing to the westward of Pennsylvania, which visit was cordially
received, as appears from a copy of a speech made by one of their chiefs
(captain White Eyes) and the delivery of a belt at the same time in token of
friendship, at a meeting for worship in their town on the river Muskingum,
which were produced to our meeting at his return.

In his last illness, he expressed his satisfaction with the dutiful deportment
of his children toward him as a parent, and gave them salutary advice;
exhorting them, Not to give their minds too much to temporal things, nor seek
after worldly enjoyments, but learn to get wisdom and understanding, which
would make them shine as stars in the firmament; and to remember their several
duties, and be ready at the cock-crow, or at midnight; praying his God and
father to be with them and bless them. After a time of silence, he said, I am
at peace with all men. Lord thou have been with me in times past, be with me in
my last moments, and I pray my God and father, that he will bear me up as in
the hollow of his hand, to my everlasting home.

In regard to outward affairs, he expressed himself in the following manner, If
the world would have lived in love and unity one with another, it appears to
me, that no good thing would have been withholden from us, but it seems to be
dark times, and things lay very wide. But it looks to me, there will be a
gathering home from off the barren mountains and desert hills, of them that are
little thought of at this time. Lord, let thy will be done and not mine. If it
be thy will that I must depart from my brethren in the time of their trouble, I
willingly yield in obedience. If it be thy will that I should be spared a while
longer, I willingly bear my part of the burdens whatsoever thou please to lay
upon me. Many more similar expressions, he frequently uttered during his last
illness, under which he was supported in a truly pious and resigned state of
mind.

He departed this life, the 12 th of the third month 1776, in the
seventy-fourth year of his age.

A Testimony from Kingwood Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning MARY
HORNER.
SHE was born at Mansfield, in the county of Burlington, New Jersey, in the
year 1736, of parents in membership with friends, and was educated in the
profession of the truth as held by us. Her tender mind while in her minority,
was sensibly reached with a divine visitation of the love of God, and as she
grew to riper years, she was preserved in a good degree of circumspect walking
in the fear of the Lord; her conversation being serious, sensible and guarded,
and oftentimes her grave deportment was useful as a check to her companions. In
the year 1757 she was married to Isaac Horner, and filled the station of a
faithful and prudent wife and mother. In the beginning of the year 1768, she
appeared in public as a minister, her testimony being short and lively. In the
year 1770, she removed with her husband and family, to settle within the
compass of this meeting, and has since resided among us. She was remarkable for
her unreserved charitable openness and innocent freedom of deportment toward
all; and through the influence of the love of God shed abroad in her heart, by
a life of unaffected piety, and a godly circumspection of conduct and
deportment, she obtained a good report. She was diverse times, with the
concurrence of her friends, engaged in gospel love, in visiting meetings
abroad, and had good service in visiting families, not only within the compass
of this monthly meeting, but others.

Having taken a cold, it brought on a decay, under which she languished upwards
of eight months, near half of which time she nevertheless attended meetings.
During her indisposition, her quiet composure of spirit, and cheerful
resignation to the will of her heavenly master was truly edifying. She told a
friend who visited her not long before her departure, that Though death
appeared a dark passage, yet all was light beyond it. And to another, who at
parting, bid her farewell, she said, I shall fare well when I am rid of this
body. She was remarkably clear in her understanding, and said, Though bodily
weakness prevailed, yet her spirit felt no diminution of strength; and exhorted
those about her, to place their reliance on the Lord alone, 'A confidence,'
said she, In which I have never been disappointed.

One evening near her close, she broke forth into expressions of praise to the
Almighty, and humble acknowledgments, That he had to her, performed all his
promises, had prepared and sanctified her, and brought her to that hour; and
that she should praise him as long as she continued in the body, and at the
conclusion, cheerfully surrender husband and children, and all that he had
given her, into his hands.

In or near her last hour, she beckoned her husband, to come and take his leave
of her, and then composedly said, Thou art a welcome messenger, thou art
welcome, take me quickly.

She died the 31 st of the fifth month 1776, in the fortieth year of her age,
having been engaged in the ministry upwards of 8 years.

A Testimony from Salem Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JAMES DANIEL.
HE was born of pious parents, and thereby knew the advantage of a religious
education, which he frequently expressed by way of encouragement to parents and
youth, as a means by which he had in a good degree been guarded in the time of
his youth, from the vanities of the world. Yet as he grew in years he clearly
saw he wanted the experimental part of the christian religion, without which he
could not attain to that which his soul exceedingly longed for; and under a
sense of this want, was brought at times very low, and for some years had to
pass through a state of mourning and deep exercise, being baptized as under the
cloud and in the sea in a spiritual sense; which brought him to a passive
submission to the divine will, so that it pleased the Lord, in the returns of
his favor, to visit him with the day spring from on high; and having learned
obedience through the things that he suffered, he gave up to the heavenly
vision, and came forth in the ministry in a few words, mostly in scripture
language, in great simplicity; and although not eloquent, yet being faithful in
the little, he became much enlarged in his gift, having clear openings in the
scriptures, and at times much favored with clear prospects of the states of
meetings and individuals, that he had to speak to secret and hidden things, in
the demonstration of the spirit and with power, which reached the witness in
many hearts. He was a father to the young in experience, and zealous to reprove
lightness and vanity where he saw occasion.

He traveled in the work of the ministry, in several of the American
provinces, and once to England, of which services we had comfortable accounts.
He was zealous for the support of our christian discipline, was favored with a
good understanding, exemplary in his life and conversation, and lived much in
the simplicity of the truth, which made him near to his friends, and a useful
member in society. Being weak in body, a considerable time before his decease,
he said, It seemed as if his day's work was done, and nothing lay upon him;
observing that some worthy friends had of late been removed without much
foresight of their latter end, and had not much to communicate, he said, If it
should be his case, he would not have it looked upon as in displeasure, for he
was clear and easy in his mind, and that he believed his stay would not be
long; which proved according to his prospect; for being taken with something of
a quinsy followed by an ague, he said, He thought that would be his last
illness, adding, I have never been desirous to know when my time was near at an
end, but have long been desirous to live so as to be ready, and I think I am
ready. I have endeavored to be faithful in the discharge of my duty in every
respect, and have nothing lies against me, but seem at quiet. I have in other
illnesses been pretty much resigned, yet there seemed something of a choice to
live, but in this I have not that choice, but I am ready. He quietly passed
away, after a short illness of about fifteen hours, on the 18 th of the twelfth
month 1776; aged seventy-two years. Having been a minister about 40 years.

A Testimony from Evesham Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning HANNAH
FOSTER.
SHE was the daughter of Enoch and Sarah Core, of Evesham aforesaid, and was
born the 17 th day of the tenth month 1710; her father dying while she was very
young, left her and three other children under the care of their mother, whose
religious concern for them was very great; as some of us have heard our said
friend often express both in public and private.

She was naturally of a cheerful disposition, and at times when young in years,
she suffered an airy spirit to prevail so far as to lead her into lightness,
yet, through divine favor, the solid instruction and example of her mother, had
such influence on her mind, as to preserve her from gross evils; which we have
often heard her express with awful reverence.

In the year 1729, she was married to our friend William Foster, and entered
into the care of a family, at which time, the cares of this world had great
effect on her mind, as some of her last expressions herein after mentioned will
more clearly evince.

Some time after her marriage, it pleased the Lord to renew his visitation of
love to her soul, and to show her the vanity of all temporal enjoyments without
his love; and she yielding obedience to the heavenly vision, and being given up
to serve the Lord, had a gift in the ministry committed to her, in which we
have reason to believe, she was in a good degree faithful to improve, and
through divine aid, became a lively minister.

She visited most of the meetings on the continent of America, except some part
of Virginia and Carolina; and the accounts received of her religious labor in
the ministry, were comfortable and satisfactory. Her humble awful waiting in
religious meetings was edifying; she was much concerned that good order might
be preserved, and careful to example and admonish her offspring in the fear of
the Lord, more than to influence their minds to seek after the treasures that
are transitory and perishing. A near sympathizer with the afflicted, either in
body or mind, often visiting such and administering to their relief.

Toward the latter part of her time, her health was much impaired, yet she
grew more lively in the ministry, and in some of the last meetings she
attended, was enabled in a solemn manner, to invite the youth to join the
heavenly call of God, and to be faithful in their gifts, and then they would be
raised like an army in his power, to subdue the works of darkness, which she
saw much prevailed amongst them; remarking some parts of the epistle from our
last yearly meeting, respecting some hopeful youths who attended that solemn,
service.

In her last sickness, which though short, was sharp, she was preserved in much
patience and stillness; and when it was apprehended she was near expiring, a
friend who came to visit her, taking leave of those attending her, she held out
her hand to the said friend and desired to be raised up, when with considerable
difficulty she said, That there was a time when her heart and mind was much set
on the world and the things of it, and it prospered with her according to her
desire; but she blessed the name of the Lord, who soon let her see the vanity
and emptiness of all worldly treasure, and that she was thankful he had enabled
her to yield obedience to the heavenly visitation, and in some degree to answer
his requirings, for it now yielded her more peace, than if she had possession
of the whole world, if it was of tenfold more value than it is; and that her
prayers had often been to the Lord, that he might yet favor the rising
generation with the like visitation of his love, with some other words which
could not be understood. She appeared in a sweet frame of mind, and after a
short pause, took her solemn leave of the said friend; after which she lay
still, and in a few hours quietly departed this life, on the 14 th of the first
month 1777, and was buried in friends burying-ground at Evesham the 17 th of
the same, where a solemn meeting was held; aged sixty-six and a minister
upwards of 40 years.

A Testimony from the Falls Monthly Meeting in Bucks county, concerning JOSEPH
WHITE.
AS the memory of the just is pronounced blessed, we think it expedient to give
forth a testimony concerning this our esteemed friend.

He was born at the Falls the 28 th of the eleventh month 1712-13; being young
when his father died, he was brought up under the care of his relations and
friends: And through the early extendings of heavenly regard whilst young, and
attending to the teachings of divine grace, he was led and preserved from many
of the follies and extravagances incident to unthinking youth. About the
twentieth year of his age he appeared in public testimony in our religious
meetings, and continuing in a good degree faithful to the measure of light and
grace communicated, he grew in his gift, and became a lively and able minister.

He was naturally of an open cheerful disposition, and honestly concerned for
the promotion of piety and virtue, and for the support and maintenance of good
order in the church; for which service he was eminently gifted, and truly
serviceable amongst us, being often concerned that the authority of truth might
be kept up in all our meetings of discipline, and that true judgment might be
placed upon the disorderly and irreclaimable. He was exemplary in his life and
conversation, a diligent and timely attender of our religious meetings when
health of body permitted; and was often favored therein in public testimony
and supplication, much to the comfort and edification of the truly humble
waiters. And although he had a large gift in the ministry, he many times sat
meetings in silence, waiting upon the Lord, not being hasty or forward in the
exercise of his gift; but careful not to minister without the heavenly life and
power that first raised him up in the ministry, whereby his public service was
greatly to the consolation and refreshment of many.

He several times had a concern to visit the churches abroad, and with the
concurrence of this meeting, visited many of the meetings of friends in this
and several of the adjacent provinces, and once through some parts ot Maryland,
Virginia and North Carolina: And having for some considerable time been under a
weighty concern to pay a religious visit to friends in several parts of Europe,
he with the concurrence and unity of his friends took shipping for that purpose
in the year 1758, and after a short passage landed in England, and having
pretty generally visited friends meetings in England and Ireland, and some
parts of Wales, he returned to his family and friends, having been from home in
truth's service near three years: And at his return from these visits produced
certificates of friends unity and good satisfaction with him, and his public
service amongst them.

He was diverse times appointed and engaged in the service of visiting families,
being well qualified for that weighty service.

He much loved the company and conversation of his friends; was a loving and
affectionate husband, a tender parent and a good neighbor, generally beloved
by his friends and others that knew him, being in several respects useful and
serviceable in the neighborhood where he lived.

He was attended from his youth at times, with a pain at his breast, with
intermissions of health, sometimes for years, and at other times but short; but
as he advanced further in age, intermissions of health grew short and pain
increased, which brought on other bodily infirmities, which he bore with
patience and resignation, often craving he might not be off his watch when his
pains were exquisite, nor his faith fail in the time of trial, believing it to
be the goodness of God, through his thus dealing with him, more and more to
wean him from all outward connections and nearest ties of nature, that being as
the pure gold, refined through the furnace, he might with triumph join the
redeemed that were gone before, which he at times had a foretaste and evidence
of; but the time when, as he himself sometimes expressed, he did not then see,
believing it to be consistent with divine wisdom to keep it hid from him.

The latter part of his time for several months, he slept but litte in the
night season, being at times engaged in reverent intercessions and divine
contemplation, and appeared to be waiting for the solemn moment.

He lived in the compass of the Falls particular meeting until a few years
before his death, and then removed to Makefield, (a branch of the same
monthly meeting,) and having for some months felt strong desires (if favored
with health) to go to the Falls meeting, and on a monthly meeting day set out
to go there; but the weather being cold and he in a weak state of health, soon
found himself unable to perform the journey, and returned home. But sometime
after feeling his bodily strength somewhat restored, and love renewed, he set
out, in company with his wife, one first day morning, and got to the meeting
where he was favored with an open time in public testimony, much to the
satisfaction of those present. After the meeting was over and friends gone out,
a friend being desirous of speaking to him, not seeing him out of doors,
returned into the house, and found him sitting on a seat, unable to move
without help; the friend assisted him, and took him to his house, where he was
taken care of: The fit being of the paralytick kind, was much more favorable
than at some other times, though it continued ebbing and flowing for several
hours; in which time he expressed several things, some of which being then
taken down, are nearly as follows.

Being asked by his son Samuel how it was with him; he answered, I don't know
but that I am near my end. My desire at this time for thee is, that thou seek
unto the Lord for assistance, to govern thee in thy conduct in this fluctuating
life, for I have found him to be a sure help and counselor to me; and if thou
follow after him in truth and sincerity, as I have endeavored to do, he will
be unto thee a sufficient director, a teacher that cannot be removed into a
corner: I have not been anxious to gather a portion of this world, nor make to
myself mammon of unrighteousness, for I think I have seen a snare that has
attended many young people on these accounts. I have ever from my youth had a
desire to be more in substance than in show: Let me appear as I might in the
sight of men, their praise I sought not for; but I have sought the honor of
God, therefore there is a place where no trouble shall annoy, prepared for me
as a reward for obedience: You that stay, be more humble, and when trouble
awaits you, look not upon nor trust to the arm of flesh for assistance, but
stay yourselves upon him who suffered for you, for me, and for all mankind; for
I have for sometime believed, and lived in the hopes thereof, and am now in
measure confirmed, of more glorious things yet to be revealed to the church of
Christ, and that further and greater discoveries will yet be made, with respect
to the christian religion than ever yet has been since the apostasy.

And after a short pause he broke forth in these expressions, The door is open,
I see an innumerable company of saints, of angels, and of the spirits of just
men, which I long to be unbodied to be with, but not my will, but thy will be
done O Lord! I cannot utter nor my tongue express, what I feel of that light,
life and love that attends me, which the world cannot give, neither can it take
away from me. My sins are washed away by the blood of the Lamb that was slain
from the foundation of the world: All rags and filthiness are taken away, and
in room thereof love and good will for all mankind: O that we may become more
united in the church militant, and nearer resemble the church triumphant! O
that we all might make such an end as I have in prospect, for its all light,
all life, all love and all peace, the light that I see is more glorious than
the sun in the firmament; come Lord Jesus Christ, come when thou pleases, thy
servant is ready and willing; into thy hands I commit my spirit, not my will,
but thy will be done O Lord! Let this mortal body be committed to the dust, be
with me, with my children and my grandchildren; be with all them that love
thee, that love thy appearance. O the pains that I feel, that attend this
mortal body, they are more comely to me than jewels! I rejoice in my sighs and
groans, for to me they are most melodious; I am near to enter that harmony with
Moses and the Lamb, where they cry holy, holy, holy, I cannot express the joy I
feel. My heart (if it were possible) would break for joy: If any inquire after
me, after my end, let them know all is well with me.

Many more weighty expressions he spoke, which not being taken down, cannot be
recollected.

The next day his pain abating, and finding himself somewhat relieved from his
disorder, he was taken to his own house, where he remained in a weak state of
health for sometime, being unable to go much abroad. And one night some short
time before his death, his pain had been sharp the forepart of the night, but
the latter part it abating, his wife lay down by him, and fell asleep, but he
as usual slept not, but after sometime called to his wife in these words: My
dear, I believe I must take my leave of thee. I have never seen my end till
now, and now I see it is near, and the holy angels enclose me around, waiting
to receive me; his wife asked him if she should call up the children, he said,
he did not see any thing further he had to say to them, except to his son
Joseph, who being called, and he having expressed what he had on his mind, was
much spent, and appeared as though he was near his desired port; but after
sometime he revived, with these words, Life is yet strong in me and will not
yield; thus he continued the few concluding days, waiting in resignation and
retiredness of mind, until the repeated returns of the paralytick complaint
reduced his faculties and senses so, that he knew not what was done for some
days, and departed in much stillness as in a sleep, the 10 th day of the third
month 1777, and was decently interred in friends burying-ground at the Falls
meeting house, the 12 th of the same; his body being attended to the grave by a
number of friends and neighbors.

May we under the consideration of our great loss of him, and many other
faithful laborers in the Lord's vineyard, now removed from us, be excited so
to follow their footsteps, that with them, we may be partakers of that
incorruptible inheritance, which is reserved for the righteous, when time here
shall be no more.

Aged sixty-four, and a minister about 44 years.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning JOSEPH
GIBSON.
PRECIOUS is the memory of the righteous, those who have been bright examples
of holiness in their day, and therein preachers to others in life and
conversation: It lives in our hearts to give this short testimony, that such
was our ancient and beloved friend Joseph Gibson, an elder of this meeting. He
was born at Woodbury in the year 1690, and became early acquainted with the
seasoning virtue of truth, which preserved him in a good degree, from the
vanities of youth, and made him in love with plainness and sobriety while
young; by a watchful attention to this divine principle, he attained a pious
and innocent stability of conduct through life, not often equalled; that it may
be justly said, he was An Israelite indeed in whom there was no guile. A
diligent attender of meetings, and a lively example there, in awful humble
labor for that bread which strengthens and nourishes the soul; wherein he
continued steadfast to his concluding period. We could enlarge, but conclude
with the words of the Psalmist, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
for the end of that man is peace; which we believe was in an eminent degree the
case of this our friend, who "Being dead, yet speaks."

He departed this life, after a short illness, on the 9 th of the fourth month
1777, and was buried the 11 th, in friends burying-ground at Woodbury
aforesaid; aged about eighty-seven years.

A Testimony from Pipe-Creek Monthly Meeting in Maryland, concerning RACHEL
FARQUHAR, late wife of William Farquhar junr.
SHE was born at Castleshane, in Ireland, in the year 1737, and removed to
Pennsylvania with her parents, John and Elizabeth Wright, who, after some
years, settled in York county, within the compass of Warrington
monthly meeting, of which she was a member, till her marriage and removal with
her husband to Pipe-Creek.

She was religiously inclined when young; and about the fifteenth year of her
age, by a fresh visitation of divine love, was engaged to seek after divine
wisdom; so that she became an early example of piety and virtue; an encourager
and promoter of virtuous inclinations in her companions and acquaintance; her
steady conduct, and kind and exemplary conversation, gained the love and esteem
of her friends and neighbors*

After her marriage, which was near the beginning of the twenty-third year of
her age, she continued a diligent attender of meetings for worship and
discipline when ability of body would admit; and when there, was of an
exemplary solid deportment, so that she was favored to become a useful member
of society, of sound judgment.

She first appeared in the ministry in the second month 1771, and though not
large was pertinent in testimony; often admonishing such as were forgetful of
their known duties, and sharply reproving where a wrong spirit prevailed: Yet
frequently speaking comfortably to the bowed down mourners in Zion, with whom
she often traveled in spirit, endeavoring according to her ability, to lend a
hand of help to such.

The last meeting she was at, was on a first day, about a week before she died,
in which she was much favored, and spoke concerning Israel's journey from
Egypt to Canaan, advising not to settle short of a possession in the promised
land. As she was walking home with her husband in a solid frame of mind, she
said, In my father's house are many mansions; signifying, If she might be
favored with one of the least of them, she would be content.

She departed this life, the 19 th of the fourth month 1777, and was interred
in the family burying-ground on the 21 st of the same month; in the fortieth
year of her age and 7 th of her ministry.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning MARY EMLEN.
THIS our beloved friend arrived in Pennsylvania, with her parents Robert and
Susannah Heath, from Great Britain, about the year 1701, in the ninth of her
age; and in 1716, was married to George Emlen and settled in this city.

About the year 1728, a remarkable visitation being extended to friends in this
city, the hearts of diverse were humbled, and, in the efficacy of divine love,
several were constrained to open their mouths in our religious assemblies, in
public testimony, and acknowledgments of the Lord's goodness and gracious
dealings with their souls.

Our worthy friend Daniel Stanton, in his journal, mentions this as a memorable
time, and names the several friends who then came forth in the ministry, of
which number this friend was one; who being faithful, grew in her gift, and not
only labored in this city, but diverse times was drawn forth in the love of the
gospel, to visit the meetings in other parts of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
And in the year 1744, in company with our dear friend Mary Evans, visited the
meetings of friends in New England; and was several times engaged with others
in the weighty and profitable work of visiting the familes of friends in this
city, and through diverse meetings in the country; in which services, her
labors were acceptable, being qualified in a peculiar manner for that work.

Her ministry was lively, and delivered in much innocence and brokenness of
spirit. Being a woman of integrity, she loved christian candor and plain
dealing, and was preserved clear in her understanding, and in her love to
truth. During her illness, which was short, she was favored with an earnest of
that divine peace and rest which is prepared for the righteous.

She departed this life, in this city, on the 1 st of the sixth month 1777, and
was interred in friends burial-ground the 3 d following, attended by many
friends and others; aged eighty-four years.

A Testimony from Wilmington Monthly Meeting in the county of New Castle on
Delaware, concerning ELIZABETH SHIPLEY.
OUR beloved friend Elizabeth Shipley, daughter of Samuel Levis, was born in
the Township of Springfield, and county of Chester in Pennsylvania, on the 26
th day of the tenth month 1690. She was led in the prime of youth to deny
herself, take up her cross, and follow Christ; and being found walking in a
good degree, in obedience to the measure of grace received, about the
twenty-fourth year of her age she appeared in the ministry; and being faithful
in the improvement of her talent, it pleased the Lord to make her an able and
skilful minister of the gospel. She traveled in the service thereof in this
land, both southward and northward in the early part of her time, and visited
Barbados in company with Jane F^nn, in the year 1725; but as she kept few
minutes, we have little account of her labors abroad.

In the year 1728, she was married to William Shipley, near Springfield
aforesaid, where they lived until the year 1736, about which time they removed
with their family to this place; and we believe she was an instrument in the
Lord's hand, to settle a meeting here, and gather many to it. In 1743, she
embarked for England with our friend Esther White, and the vessel going by way
of North Carolina, while there, they visited some meetings in that province;
after which they sailed again, and arrived at Liverpool on the 26 th of the
seventh month, and in gospel love, visited generally the meetings of friends in
England, Scotland and Ireland, to their own satisfaction; and, as appears by
accounts from friends there, to the comfort of many. She also made several
short visits to the neighboring provinces; and in the seventieth year of her
age, in company with our friend Hannah Foster, visited several of the northern
provinces. She was several times exercise^ in that important service of
visiting families, in which her company and labor was very acceptable.

Her deportment in meetings was grave and solid, her gift in the ministry
lively and edifying, in prayer awful and weighty, not being forward in
appearing.

Although her natural strength was much abated in the latter part of her time,
yet her faculties remained bright, and her ministry accompanied with life and
power.

In the time of her last illness, as several friends who came to visit her were
sitting by her, she appeared filled with divine power, and spoke in a lively
manner, of the drawings of the father's love to bring her to settle in this
place, and said, that his promises had been fulfilled to her; advising to
faithfulness in doing the work of their day; that for her own part, she was as
a shock of corn fully ripe, and should shortly be gathered to the haven of rest.

In a little time after this, she was removed to West-Marlborough; at which
place she finished her course, on the 10 th day of the tenth month 1777, in the
eighty-seventh year of her age, a minister about 63 years. She was interred in
friends burying-ground on the 12 th of the same month, where a solemn meeting
was held on the occasion.

A Testimony from Wilmington Monthly Meeting in the county of New Castle on
Delaware, concerning ESTHER WHITE.
OUR beloved friend Esther White, daughter of Thomas Canby, of the county of
Bucks in Pennsylvania, was born in the second month 1700. In her young years
she loved to attend religious meetings, and to see friends behave solid
therein, being herself an example of piety. She married John Stapler, of the
county aforesaid; and being called to the work of the ministry, she became a
faithful labourer. About the thirty-fourth year of her age, her husband was
removed by death; after which she married John White, and in the year 1739
removed with their family to this place.

In the spring of the year 1743, she, in company with our friend Elizabeth
Shipley, sailed for England by way of North Carolina, and while there, visited
some meetings in that province, then embarked, and arrived at Liverpool in the
seventh month following, and in gospel love, visited the meetings of friends
generally through England, Ireland and Scotland, to their own satisfaction,
and, as appears by accounts received, to the comfort and edification of many;
and returned home in the latter part of the year 1745, to the joy of her
friends and family.

In the year 1750, she visited most of the meetings of friends in Maryland,
Virginia and the Carolinas; and in 1756, in company with Grace Fisher, those in
New Jersey, and New York Government: And in 1760, in company with Hannah Foster
junr. those on the Eastern-Shore of Maryland, and the counties on Delaware: She
also often visited the neighboring meetings; and in 1776, and the
seventy-seventh year of her age, after a long time of sickness, she, in great
bodily weakness, attended the quarterly meeting at Fairfax in Virginia, much to
her own peace and friends satisfaction.

She was an useful member of society, and a woman of uncommon cheerfulness of
spirit, although largely experienced in afflictions; through which she was
mercifully supported by divine sufficiency; and being instructed in sorrow, had
a sympathizing heart with the afflictions of others, and was ready to
communicate to their relief both in spirituals and temporals. Her deportment
was grave and solid, her ministry lively and edifying, even to old age. She was
frequent in exhorting and encouraging friends to faithfulness in these times of
great trial and outward commotion; that they might, with the wise builder, dig
deep, and experience their foundation to be laid sure, that neither winds nor
floods might move them. She was careful to maintain brotherly love, sometimes
saying, that Love was her life, that she could not live without it; and being
livingly sensible of the preciousness thereof, was desirous to promote it in
others.

After a life in which she had to endure several long and trying seasons of
sickness, and to pass through many deep baptisms of sorrow, through which she
was supported with becoming cheerfulness, patience and resignation; she
departed this life, on the 5 th day of the twelfth month 1777, in the
seventy-eighth year of her age, having been a minister upwards of 50 years; and
on the 7 th of the same month and 1 st of the week, was interred in friends
burying-ground in Wilmington; being much beloved by her neighbors, her funeral
was accompanied by many friends and others, and was a solemn opportunity.

May the great Lord of the harvest, who is removing many eminent ministers from
his churches, be pleased to raise up others to stand faithful witnesses for his
name and truth in the earth.

A Testimony from Deer-Creek Monthly Meeting in Maryland, concerning JOSEPH
JONES.
HE was born in the city of Worcester, in Old-England, in the year 1686. His
parents being of the church of England, educated him in that way during his
abode with them, which was until he was about fourteen years of age. In the
year 1700 he arrived at Philadelphia, and going into New Jersey, there resided
until twenty-one years of age.

He was convinced of the truth about the year 1708, and in 1712 appeared in the
ministry, being then in the twenty-sixth year of his age: Having, since his
convincement, undergone many sore conflicts, by reason of a backwardness to
comply with the Lord's requirings whereunto he had diverse times been
disobedient through diffidence and weakness, but at length he gave up, and
therein found peace.

After his marriage, he resided about twelve years at Nottingham, in Chester
county Pennsylvania, and then removed to Deer-Creek where he continued. He was
of an innocent life and harmless conversation; and in him were blended those
truly christian virtues which render religion lovely and desirable; even the
irreligious esteemed him an ornament to the christian profession. Being very
conversant in the holy scriptures, and favored with a retentive memory, he was
enabled to quote them with propriety, and very often suitably apply them to
instruction and edification.

Divine love, as witnessed by the believers in Christ, was a subject upon which
he frequently expressed himself, in engaging and persuasive terms; inviting
others to come and be made partakers of so glorious a treasure; adding, It had
been the crown and joy of his life, the comfort and support of his old age, and
was p^esuaded would not forsake him in death.

Of earthly treasure he possessed little, but he appeared to be one of those
poor of this world, whom the apostle James mentions, as Chosen by God, rich in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him.
In this happy situation he was supported with christian fortitude, through
times of adversity and deep affliction.

His wife dying in the ninth month 1777, to whom he had been an affectionate
companion upwards of sixty years, he did not long survive her, but, about four
months afterward, was visited with his last illness, in which he suffered much
pain, but was composed; some days before his departure he grew easy, and in his
latter moments, when exhausted nature scarcely left him strength to utter
himself intelligibly, he lamented the state of the careless and unconcerned,
who did not duly and timely consider their latter end.

He seemed very desirous to be dissolved and be with Christ; and on the 8 th of
the first month 1778, as a shock of corn fully ripe, he was removed from works
to rewards, in the ninety-third year of his age; leaving behind him the savor
of a good name, being generally beloved by people of all ranks and
denominations who knew him. On the 11 th of the same month, he was interred in
friends burying-ground at Deer-Creek.

A Testimony from Uwchlan Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning GRIFFITH
JOHN.
HE was born (by his own account) in Pembrokeshire, in the principality of
Wales, in the year 1683, and was in his youth an earnest seeker after
righteousness among diverse forms of religion, until he became measurably
convinced of the principle of truth as held by friends, by perusing William
Penn's key to christian knowledge, before he had much if any outward
acquaintance with them: And coming over to this country when a young man, he
soon after joined with friends in religious fellowship; and being faithful to
the manifestations of divine grace in his heart, he had a gift in the ministry
bestowed upon him; and though not large, was savoury and edifying; which,
together with his exemplary life and conversation, manifested him to be an
heavenly minded man, much redeemed from the love and spirit of this world.

He was not anxious about the increase of outward riches, but easy and content
with a small share thereof; so much as served for bodily support in great
simplicity and plainness, he thankfully received; having a testimony against
all superfluity, and every thing tending to exalt the mind of man, or promote
worldly greatness in any degree; seeking above all, the kingdom of Heaven and
the righteousness thereof.

He was a lover of peace amongst brethren and in his neighborhood; and by
precept and example, labored to promote it; being at times concerned to travel
about on foot, even in advanced age, to his friends houses, and pay short
visits in true christian love, and drop weighty and edifying hints, tending to
stir up the pure mind; and scarcely any thing was said by him at any time but
what had a tendency that way.

He was a remarkable and worthy example, in constantly and early attending our
religious meetings, until upwards of ninety years of age; when through weakness
and infirmity, he was confined at home, and underwent great bodily affliction
with true christian fortitude and resignation to the divine will, patiently
waiting his change; which was on the 29 th of the sixth month 1778; aged about
ninety-five, and a minister near 70 years.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Friends of Philadelphia for the
Southern-District, concerning JOHN HALLOWELL.
HE was exemplary in a diligent attendance of our religious meetings and solid
patient waiting therein, and serviceable among us according to ability, in the
support of the discipline; of a meek and quiet spirit, careful not to give just
occasion of offense to any. He was appointed an elder in the year 1772, in
which station he conducted to good satisfaction.

In the early part of the eighth month 1777, he was taken unwell, and being
under great bodily pain, often begged for patience, saying, he was afraid to
ask for any thing else. After he had been confined about two weeks, his pain
somewhat abating, he called his children together, and spoke to them as
follows: It looks as if I may shortly be taken from you, and I think I have
nothing to charge myself with, in regard to bringing you up; I have with great
care watched over your morals, and anxiously endeavored by example, to teach
you to walk in the fear of the Lord; but a backward disposition prevailing,
which I fear, has sometimes kept me from doing the good I might have done in
the world, has at times, when my heart has been earnestly engaged for you,
caused me to keep silence, when it might have been profitable to have thus
addressed you: Look to the Lord my children, and ask of him to direct your
ways. He must be the support of youth as well as of old age. It is him, and him
alone you must cleave to, if ever you expect to find peace that will be
lasting. It is not moral rectitude, going to meeting, or any outward acts of
devotion only, that will do for you. Religion is an inward work, and true
worship must be performed in the heart, by quietly waiting on him who is the
rock of ages. I know by experience what I say, therefore earnestly desire you
to look to the Lord, live near him, and let his fear direct you in all you
undertake. Keep out of the noises and confusions that are in the world, it is
all delusion. To be blessed with the presence of the Lord in a dungeon, is
preferable to liberty enjoyed in palaces without it. And if it should please
the Lord to take me from you, though we may part for a season, yet if we walk in
his ways, we shall hereafter meet in eternal bliss.

His disorder increasing, his pain at times was very great, which he was
enabled to bear with a good degree of christian resignation; often desiring he
might be endued with patience to hold out to the end. And although his outward
tabernacle gradually decayed, yet the seasonable and lively expressions which
he at times uttered, evidenced that his inward man was frequently renewed.

A few weeks before his departure, several friends coming to visit him, after a
seasonable time of silence, he spoke as follows.

I have often of late been led to examine myself, to see what it is that keeps
me back, sometimes I think I see death advancing swift, and at other times
quite gone; at this time in particular, I have been led to consider whether
there remains any thing for me to do, and if I have any thing in my heart
against any person, that my love is not yet perfect; and upon a strict
examination, I find nothing but love to mankind universally. I have been
greatly tried with pain of body, and poverty and barrenness of spirit, but
through mercy have been preserved from murmuring; and I have a hope, that when
I put off this body, I shall be at rest; and that hope is an anchor to the
soul.

A day or two before his departure, his pain much abated, and though he was
reduced very low, yet was preserved in much calmness and serenity of mind,
saying, He thought his dissolution was near; that he had done with every thing
below, and expected the change to him would be a happy one, believing a place
of rest was prepared for him.

He quietly departed this life, the 26 th of the seventh month 1778, in the
sixty-fourth year of his age, and his body was interred the day following in
friends burying-ground in this city.

A Testimony from Pipe-Creek Monthly Meeting in Maryland, concerning WILLIAM
FARQUHAR.
HE was born in Ireland the 29 th of the seventh month 1705, and came to
America about the sixteenth year of his age, and settled in Pennsylvania, where
he was convinced of the truth, and married among friends. In the year 1735, he
removed and settled at Pipe-Creek, when there were very few inhabitants in
those parts. Some years afterward he was concerned that a meeting might be
settled, which was allowed to be held at his house at times for several years;
when the number of friends increasing, they concluded to build a meeting house,
which our said friend zealously promoted. His house was much resorted to by
traveling friends and others, both in that early period and since, to whom he
was courteous and kind.

Some years after the settlement of a monthly meeting at Fairfax, of which he
was a member, he was appointed to the station of an elder, which he filled with
propriety and reputation; being an example of plainness, and anxiously careful
for the education of his children. He was, at times, concerned in meeting, to
exhort friends to keep to the testimony of truth, and particularly the youth,
for whom he seemed zealously concerned, that as they grew in years they might
grow in grace.

For some months before his decease, he was in a weak state of body, yet
frequently attended meetings, and the last time of his being there was about
four days before he died; the night following being in much pain, he several
times cried out, O Father! mitigate my pain if it be thy will; and was favored
to keep in the patience and resignation, waiting for his change. The day before
he died, his wife leaning over him mourning; he said to her, Weep not for me,
but for thyself and others. The Lord is near.

He departed this life, the 21 st of the ninth month 1778, and was buried in
the family burying-ground on the 23 d of the same month; aged near
seventy-three years.

P. S. I am willing to communicate a few hints of what has often passed through
my mind concerning my dear husband, whose memory, to me, remains precious. He
was much concerned for the welfare of the young and rising generation, often
cautioning and exhorting friends in their several stations, strictly to examine
the great duty and charge committed to their trust; and in a particular manner,
his offspring, that they would mutually live in love with each other, and that
they might be careful to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord.

ANN FARQUHAR.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning MARY
PEMBERTON.
SHE was the daughter of Nathan and Mary Stanbury, of this city, who were
removed by death in her tender age, after which she was put under the care of
our friends Richard and Hannah Hill, by whom she was religiously educated: She
was endued with good natural understanding, and being obedient to the
discoveries of divine grace in her own mind, she experienced a growth and
advancement in the life of religion, and through its gradual work, became a
useful and active member in the church, being many years in the station of an
elder and overseer. Her conversation was lively and instructive, her deportment
solid and exemplary, and in our religious meetings, it was often apparent she
was favored with the preparation of a broken heart and contrite spirit for the
solemn performance of divine worship. She felt the affliction of others with
tender sympathy, and was enabled through divine help to bear her own, which
were various and proving, with great resignation and christian fortitude. She
was first joined in marriage to Richard Hill; and sometime after his decease,
to our worthy friend Robert Jordan; and lastly, in the year 1747, to our valued
friend Israel Pemberton lately deceased; and through the several vicissitudes
of life, she was favored to persevere with great stability and prudence.

The following was found among her papers after her decease, by the date
whereof it is supposed to have been wrote on an occasion of very deep and
uncommon affliction.

Fourth month 16 th 1761. This being a day of great salvation, wherein the
divine power has manifestly appeared in bringing relief and succor to my
distressed soul, and working deliverance for me which no human means could have
effected; I earnestly desire, in the depth of humility and awful reverence,
that it may be a day never forgotten by me, but that thanksgivings and
living-praises may fill my heart to the Lord Jehovah, in whom is everlasting
strength, whose arm alone has brought salvation, blessed be his name, his
faithfulness fails not those whose trust and confidence is in him.

The removal of her dear husband, into a state of exile in the ninth month
1777, was a renewed affliction to her, which she apprehended, as she expressed
to a friend, might tend to shorten her stay in this world.

She fell into a gradual decline and weakness of body during his absence,
which, though it increased upon her, she did not keep her bed but about four or
five weeks, in which time she often expressed herself in a lively manner. On
the 23 d of the ninth month in the morning, her husband sitting with her, she
said, It is now evident to me, my dear, we must soon part, we have passed
through many deep trials; there is nothing between us but true love and great
affection, I hope thou will be kept in true resignation; I had some hope of
continuing sometime longer, both on thy account and for the sake of our dear
granddaughter, but I am not solicitous about it, not very solicitous.

The afternoon of the same day, being in a sweet frame of mind, she said, They
who live near the spring of life, are sensible their change will be for the
better, a happy change from a state of deep affliction; and sometime after
said, The spring of life is often opened for the refreshment of the weary
travelers.

Tenth month 17 th. Being low in body and mind, one of her daughters present,
she said, Whenever my mind is turned to think of getting better, I am engaged
to desire to be kept under the Lord's notice, who has been good to me; the
wonderful counselor, the everlasting father, the prince of peace; few women,
have had such s^enes to pass through as I have had, but I have been favored
beyond what I expected. About an hour before her departure, she said, Blessed
father, look down upon me if it be thy holy will. And shortly after said,
Dearest Lord, take me to thyself; there is joy in Heaven, there is joy in
Heaven. After which she fell into a sweet sleep, and peacefully breathed her
last, on the 25 th of the tenth month 1778, aged seventy-four years. And on the
27 th was interred in friends burying-ground in this city.

A Testimony from Mount-Holly Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning RACHEL
LIPPINCOT.
A FEW years before she died, she removed from Haddonfield to live within the
limits of this meeting. She was an exemplary sympathizing friend; her testimony
in public meetings was short, yet savoury and seasonable. She was afflicted
with a cancer in her breast, and in her illness expressed herself on this wise,
Oh! if it be thy will, dear father, remove me before I be offensive to my
friends, and grant me patience to bear all that thou in thy wisdom may see meet
to afflict^^^ with. To a friend present, she said. Oh! that love may increase
and abound in (...) ^y of outward trials, and faithfulness be kept to, is my
sincere (...) my trials through life have been many, but blessed be the Lord's
holy name, when he has appeared, all darkness has vanished.

She departed this (...) ninth month (...) and (...) friends burying-ground in
Mount-Holly; aged eighty years.

A Testimony from Wilmington Monthly Meeting in the county of New Castle on
Delaware, concerning DAVID FERRIS.
HE was the son of Zachariah and Sarah Ferris, and was born in Stratford, in
Connecticut government, New England, the 10 th of the third month 1707. His
parents being presbyterians, brought him up in that way, his mother being
religiously disposed, and much concerned for her offspring, frequently gave
them good advice and admonition, which had some good effect with this our
friend, as he has often been heard to express.

We find by some remarks he left, that about the twelfth year of his age, he
was frequently visited and called unto by the divine monitor in his heart, to
forsake evil and youthful vanities which he delighted in, and by being in a
good degree faithful thereto, was for a time, preserved from them; but for want
of attending to that which would have continued to preserve him, the pleasures
and vanities of this world got hold of his mind, so that he took much delight
in airy and vain company, music and dancing, and such like amusements, until
about the twentieth year of his age; when it pleased the Lord to visit him with
a sore fit of sickness, which proved of lasting advantage to him, as it
occasioned him to take up a fresh resolution, to forsake the evil of his ways,
and turn to the Lord with full purpose of heart, which he was, through mercy,
favored with ability in measure to perform.

He still continued in profession with the presbyterians, not having any
knowledge of friends; although by attending to the teachings of divine grace,
he became convinced of the principle we profess; and hearing of a
yearly meeting of friends to be held on Long Island, went to it, with desires
to discover whether they were a living people or not, for such he desired to
find; where he met with what he often longed for, (a people that worshipped God
in spirit and in truth) which was a great strength and confirmation to him, in
forsaking the errors of his youth, and by yielding obedience to these inward
motions, he gained strength, and was more and more enabled to bear a faithful
testimony to the truth as it was made known to him.

In the sixth month 1733, he removed to Philadelphia, where he joined in
religious fellowship with friends; in 1735 he married Mary the daughter of
Samuel and Sarah Massey; and in 1737 removed to Wilmington in New Castle
county, where he resided the remainder of his days.

He made some appearance in the ministry about the year 1734, but through
unfaithfulness to the divine call, he from time to time put it off, and
remained in a neglect of duty therein upwards of twenty years; although he was
often warned both immediately and instrumentally in a remarkable manner, which
at length produced a submission to the divine will, so that in the year 1755,
he was made willing to give up thereto, and therein found great peace.

He traveled through diverse parts of this continent in the work of the ministry,
and by certificates produced on his return home, it appeared, that his conduct,
conversation, and labors abroad were exemplary and edifying, tending to the
advancement of truth and righteousness. His doctrine was sound, and acceptable
to the honest hearted, though sharp against the hypocrite and rebellious, yet
tender to the mourners and disconsolate.

He was very serviceable in our meetings for discipline, which, with other
meetings, he diligently attended, not suffering his outward affairs to hinder
him from what he believed to be his religious duty. And although he followed
shop-keeping for a living, it was his practice to shut up his shop and take his
family with him to week day meetings, often expressing for the encouragement of
others, that he believed it was attended with a blessing. He was free and open
hearted to entertain friends, and concerned to bring up his children in
plainness, and instruct them in the fear of the word, believing that to be the
best portion they could inherit; remarkably charitable to the poor, and often
administered to their necessities.

Bodily weakness attended him during the last three years of his life, and near
the close of his days, he was much afflicted with sickness, which he bore with
patience, often expressing his prospect of his approaching end, and his
resignation therein; saying, 'All is well.' Several friends being present,
after a time of silence, he in a lively manner repeated the expressions of the
apostle, To me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.

He departed this life, the 5 th of the twelfth month 1779, aged upwards of
seventy-two, a minister about 24 years; on the 7 th of the same month, his
corpse was interred in our burying-ground in Wilmington.

A Testimony from Chester Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning NATHAN
YARNALL.
HE was born in the Township of Edgemont, in Chester county Pennsylvania, the
27 th of the twelfth month 1707-8, and continued a member of this
monthly meeting to his end. In the days of his youth he had a strong bias to
the diversions of the times, which when given way to, he felt the secret
reproofs of divine grace accompanied with great fervency of spirit, to witness
forgiveness through Christ Jesus, by the operation of whose spirit, he obtained
so great a victory, that he was (after a season of probation) entrusted with a
dispensation of the gospel ministry, in the exercise of which, his doctrine was
sharp against a state of lukewarmness about religion as well as open
profaneness, seasonably instructive to the sincere seekers, exhorting them not
to be satisfied short of witnessing a state of regeneration. He was often led
to sympathize with the afflicted in spirit, unto whom his doctrine dropped as the
dew, and was by many esteemed a nursing father in the meeting to which he
belonged. He several times, with the concurrence of his friends, visited the
churches in this and the adjacent governments; was zealously concerned that
meetings for discipline might be maintained in the same authority wherein they
were first established; and diverse times was engaged in visiting families, for
which weighty service he was well qualified. His concern for his children was
great, which at times he expressed under the power of divine love, adopting the
language of David, viz. My children, know ye the God of your fathers, and serve
him with a perfect heart and willing mind; if ye seek him, he will be found of
you, but if ye forsake him, he will cast you off forever.

For several years of the latter part of his life, he was afflicted with
weakness of body, but not so as wholly to prevent his attending meetings, in
which he was at times, powerfully drawn forth in testimony, and publicly
expressed at Middletown a few weeks before his confinement, an apprehension
that his work was nearly over. He was confined at home near three months, in
which time he was visited by many friends, often had refreshing opportunities
in his room; in one of which, (being about a week after his confinement) he was
led to speak of the precious effects of unity; at another time, diverse friends
being present, after some silence, he expressed himself on this wise, How many
opportunities of this sort I may yet have is unknown to me; this morning as I
lay in bed, meditating on the things of God, it appeared to me as though my time
in this world would be but short; earnestly exhorting those present, to labor
that they and their children might be prepared to meet with death. At several
times he signified, He was like one that was waiting for his change, expressing
his resignation, and said, Whenever he turned his mind inward he felt great
peace, and that the thoughts of the grave was no terror to him. He graduall^
weakened without much pain, till about two days before his departure, and
continued sensible to the last, which was on the 10 th day of the first month
1780, and on the 13 th his body was interred in friends burial-ground at
Middletown, attended by a large number of friends and neighbors; aged near
seventy-two, a minister about 35 years.

A Testimony from Nottingham Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning RACHEL
BROWN.
SHE was the wife of Thomas Brown, of West-Nottingham, in Chester county
Pennsylvania, and daughter of Ralph and Phebe Needham, of Kent county on
Delaware, educated amongst friends, showing in her younger years an inclination
toward piety, and after her marriage was concerned at times to speak in
testimony in our religious meetings, and though not large, yet frequently,
especially in the latter part of her time, her appearances were attended with a
lively favor, which, with her exemplary conduct, and zeal for the attendance
of our meetings for public worship and maintaining good order in the church,
rendered her services useful and acceptable among us; and toward the
conclusion of her life, she appeared to be favored with an increase of
solidity and weight.

In her last illness which continued about three weeks, we believe she was much
blessed with the incomes of divine love, uttering many weighty expressions,
some of which being wrote down, are in substance as follows; Oh! that I had but
power to express the love I feel to flow toward the church, and those who are
really joined thereto. Oh! the wonderful love of the father which I feel to
flow even to the outcasts of the house of Israel. At another time, Oh! the
straitness and refinedness of the path that leads to life and happiness,
repeating her sense of the wonderful love of our Lord Jesus Christ to his
church, which seemed then remarkably opened to her, in an explanation of those
expressions in the eighth verse of the fourth chapter of Solomon's Song, Come
with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon; look from the top of
Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions dens, from the
mountains of the Leopards; the mystery of which invitation, we understand she
spoke of at diverse times in her sickness in a lively manner, as it appeared to
her applicable to the divine call of our Savior to his followers, to come out
of all high things, and for his sake who was plain, meek and lowly, to leave or
forsake the loftiness and grandeur of this world, things desirable to the proud
fleshly part in us, to cease also from spotted things, and those of a fierce
devouring nature: And, as her last testimony against the superfluity crept in
among friends in relation to coffins and dressing the bodies of the dead, she
earnestly desired that her coffin might be quite plain, and that no needless
things might be put on or about her.

She desired her love to her friends, saying, I have frequently desired your
prayers for me, that I might have an easy passage, and now I am resigned, and
desire to have no will of my own, but to wait with patience the Lord's time,
and also for his salvation. Remaining sensible after her speech failed, she
quietly departed this life, the 11 th of the fifth month 1780, in the
fifty-third year of her age, and was interred in friends burying-ground at
East-Nottingham on the 13 th of the same month.

A Testimony from Haddonfield Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning EPHRAIM
TOMLINSON.
OUR said friend was born the 29 th day of the eighth month 1695, and his
parents settling somewhat remote from the then settlement of white inhabitants,
it appears by a manuscript account he has left, that he used to walk on foot
about ten miles to meeting, and being faithful to the manifestations of truth
in his young years, was enabled to encourage his brothers to go with him to
wait upon the Lord.

He makes mention of diverse besetments and exercises he met with in his
spiritual journey, but by waiting in stillness upon the Lord, he was pleased to
appear for his help; and he was often drawn to retire in the woods and solitary
places, when his mind was at times enlarged in prayer for himself and mankind
universally.

He was a diligent attender of religious meetings whilst of ability of body,
seldom suffering the extremity of weather or his temporal concerns to prevent
him from the discharge of his duty in this respect, although he lived at a
considerable distance from the particular meeting to which he belonged, and was
an exemplary humble waiter therein, for the arising of that life which is the
crown of our assemblies.

He was an appointed elder for the meeting at Haddonfield, and conducted
uprightly in his station, which rendered him acceptable to his friends, being
often employed in the affairs of truth; and was several times engaged in that
weighty service of visiting families, in the performance whereof, he was
sometimes fervently and awfully drawn forth in supplication to the father of
mercies.

He was just in his dealings among men, remarkably cautious in expression,
which, joined with a meek and pious life, rendered him a pattern among his
fellow-believers worthy of imitation; and his light so shined forth before men,
that others seeing his good works, were made to acknowledge he had attained the
marks of a true disciple and believer in Christ.

He departed this life, on the 2 d of the eighth month 1780, having left a good
savor, and we doubt not is made an inheritor of that incorruptible crown of
righteousness, which is laid up for all those who keep the faith, and love the
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

He was buried in friends burial-ground at Haddonfield, attended by a
considerable number of friends and others, on the 4 th day of the same month;
being in the eighty-fifth year of his age.

A Testimony from Uwchlan Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning SUSANNA
LIGHTFOOT.
BY accounts we have had, she was born at Grange, in the county of Antrim, in
the North of Ireland, the 10 th of the first month (old style) 1719-20,
descended of religious parents professing the truth (John and Margaret Hudson.)
Her father dying in low circumstances when she was young, she was placed out by
her mother to earn her living by her own labor; who nevertheless sought a
portion in the truth for her daughter, esteeming it the best riches; and lived
to see the desire of her heart in that respect in a degree accomplished; for
the tendering visitations of divine love being mercifully extended to this our
dear friend early in life, she happily closed in therewith, and witnessed an
advancement in piety and godliness; such was her love to the truth and zeal for
the attendance of meetings when young, she would go many miles on foot to them,
and being an honest servant, labored hard to make up the time to her employer.
In these times, her cup was often made to overflow with the goodness of the
Lord to her soul, which she has frequently been heard to speak of with
tenderness of spirit, for the encouragement of servants and others in low
circumstances; and that the rich and full who have horses to ride on, and are
blessed both with the necessaries and conveniences of life, might prize their
time and privileges, and bring forth fruits adequate to the favors conferred
on them.

A dispensation of the gospel was committed to her to preach, to which she gave
up in the seventeenth year of her age; and we have reason to think, she grew
therein as a willow by the water course; for in the exercise thereof, with the
unity of her friends at home, she came over to this country with Ruth Courtny,
in the latter part of the year 1737, and paid a religious visit to friends
generally on this continent, we believe to good satisfaction; some of us having
cause to remember her, and the sweetness of her spirit at that time. With the
same friend she also traveled in England and Wales, in 1740, spending upwards
of fifteen months there in the service of truth.

On the 25 th of the ninth month 1742, she was married to Jesse Hatton; in
which state, she for many years, underwent great outward difficulties, as well
as inward exercises and trials on account of the cause and testimony of truth
which she had espoused, and was favored with firmness to hold her integrity
thereto; which she has been heard to commemorate with thankfulness to the Lord
her deliverer, rendering the praise to him alone, who, even during that trying
dispensation, opened her way to labor considerably in his cause in many
places, as in Ireland, Scotland, and again in England.

About the year 1754, she removed with her husband and family, and settled in
Waterford, where she was made truly near to friends and useful in the Lord's
hand.

In the year 1759 her husband died; and in 1760, being constrained by the love
of truth, and having the concurrence of her friends at home and of the meeting
of ministers and elders in London, she entered on a second visit to America,
which for many years had rested weightily on her mind. In the ninth month of
the same year she arrived here, and visited friends meetings gegenerally
throughout this continent, as far southward as Charleston, in South Carolina,
and to the eastern parts of New England, to the comfort and satisfaction of
friends, leaving seals of her ministry in many places; and after a labor of
upwards of two years, embarked for England. In the summer following she visited
Munster province in Ireland. And on the 25 th of the ninth month 1763, she was
married to our friend Thomas Lightfoot; and continuing servent in spirit for
the discharge of her religious duties, finished her visit to that nation by
midsummer following.

In the beginning of the eighth month 1764, she embarked at Cork with her
husband and family in order to settle here, and arrived in the ninth month
following, from which time she belonged to our monthly meeting, whereof she was
a serviceable member; likewise was engaged in the love of the gospel, to visit
many of the meetings of friends in this and the adjacent governments, also the
neighboring yearly-meetings, and in the year 1774, went into New England, with
our friend Elizabeth Robinson from Great Britain; in which visits her company
and services were weighty, strengthening and establishing to friends.

At diverse meetings previous to the breaking forth of the present calamity, she
had, in an awful manner, to proclaim the approach of a stormy day, which would
shake the sandy foundations of men; and many of the formal professors in our
society should be blown away.

The last journey she took, was to the yearly meeting at Third-Haven, in
Maryland, held in the sixth month 1779, wherein deep wading and wasting
exercise, with feebleness of body was her lot. Soon after her return home, a
fit of illness contributed much to the breaking of her constitution; but the
balm of sweet peace of mind was still her comfort and support. She recovered so
as to get abroad again to her own and many other meetings about the country,
and to our last yearly meeting in Philadelphia, though in a weak state of health;
the last she attended was our select meeting at Uwchlan, the 27 th of the first
month 1781, under an increasing weakness of body, but to the comfort of friends
then assembled.

She was an excellent example of steady waiting upon the Lord in silence, and
out of meetings solid and grave in her deportment, instructive and weighty in
conversation, watchful over her own family for their good, bearing her
testimony against wrong things in them as well as others; of a discerning
spirit; and when her lot was cast in families as well as meetings, was often
led to feel for and sympathize with the hidden suffering seed. Having passed
through the deep waters of affliction herself, her eye was not unused to drop a
tear for, and with others in distress either in body or mind, and she rejoiced
in comforting and doing them good.

She was a living and powerful minister of the word, careful not to break
silence in meetings, until favored with a fresh anointing from the holy one,
whereby she was preserved clear in her openings, awful and weighty in prayer,
her voice being solemn and awakening under the baptizing power of truth.

Many were the heavenly seasons with which she was favored during a lingering
illness, in some of which she was led to express herself in a lively edifying
manner, and often, with divine pertinence to the states of those who were
present; as also her belief that she should join the spirits of the just made
perfect, in that city whose walls are salvation, and her gates praise.

One evening, after a solemn silence, she broke forth in a sweet melody,
saying, I have had a prospect this evening, of joining the heavenly host, in
singing praises to Zions king, for which favor my soul and all that is
sensible within me, magnifies that arm which has been with me from my infant
days, and cast up a way where there was no way, both by sea and land. She then
signified what an exercise she had labored under for the good of souls, and
how it wounded her very life, to behold the professors of christianity acting
inconsistent with the example of a crucified Savior.

She frequently supplicated the Lord for the continuance of his help, and that
she might be endued with patience, adding, Oh! what would become of me now, if
I had a wounded conscience? The work with me is not now to do: This winnowing
day must come closer to the dwellings of some than ever it has done, even to
the shaking of them from the gods of silver and of gold, hay or stubble.

The quarterly meeting being nigh, she urged her husband to leave her, saying,
There is nothing yields such comfort on a languishing bed as an evidence of
having performed our religious duties to the best of our understanding, I can
speak it at this time by experience. She spoke of the necessity there was for
friends to guard against keeping in their families persons of corrupt morals
and evil communication, which has a tendency to poison the tender minds of
their children; and signified her apprehension, that some parents were stained
with the blood of their offspring thereby. At another time, she encouraged some
that were present, to be faithful to the Lord, and to keep to their gifts,
adding, Oh! what a fine thing it is to sit lively in meetings, and to witness
the holy oil to run as from vessel to vessel. Feeling herself grow worse, she
gave directions about the laying-out her body, that it should be with exemplary
plainness.

One morning, in the hearing of a few friends, she cautioned against a light
chaffy spirit getting up in a show of religion, and was led in a remarkable
manner, to utter reproofs against the ungodly Quaker, signifying a terrible day
would sooner or later overtake such.

She expressed herself one day nearly as follows, When I have sat down in our
meetings, and cast my eye over the people, how have I been grieved to see the
haughtiness of the young men, and the folly of the young women, looking one
upon another, as if there was nothing to do; coming to meetings just to see and
be seen: Oh! will not the Lord visit for these things? Yea, surely he will, and
call to an account those haughty sons and forgetful daughters; I have been
grieved with it when I have sat as with my lips sealed; and yet there is a
remnant that are near to my life among the youth.

At another time, being raised by divine aid from great weakness, she thus
expressed herself, The Lord will search Jerusalem, he will blow away the chaff;
but the wheat, Oh! the weighty wheat he will gather into his holy garner. It
seems to me, that many of the better sort are hastening to their graves. I do
not repine at my afflictions, for how small are they, compared with his who
suffered for us all, when he said, "My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?"
Oh the professors of truth! How often have I thought of their great privileges!
How often have they been called unto and watered! And yet remain unredeemed;
there is much impurity about the skirts of some; if they refuse they will be
rejected and others called in; he will have his table filled, he will have a
people that will stand for his name. After sometime, asking for a friend, she
said, I have something to say to thee about the city; the folly, I would not
willingly call it iniquity, but upon a strict examination I believe it may be
so called, of laying out their dead, has been a burden to me many times of late
when I have been there, I have wondered at the pomp and vanity, and the cost,
how much for no good purpose at all, but to be buried with the mouldering body.
How much better it would be, to spare this expense for the benefit of some poor
families? I did not know but I should have mentioned it at the yearly meeting,
but I got enfeebled, and I prayed it might rest on some others, that it might
be done then or at some other time.

In the afternoon of the same day, she mentioned some of the words of Amos, I
was no prophet, nor a prophet's son, but I was a gatherer of sycamore fruit;
low employments, said she, But the Lord raises the poor out of the dust, and
lifts up the beggar from the dunghill to set them among princes. I have been
one of sorrows, and much acquainted with grief. It is true, this has been a
pleasant spot to live in, and with an agreeable companion, and it was nothing
short of the good hand that thus provided for me, but I have never forgot the
wormwood and the gall.

She continued quiet and sensible the remainder of her time, saying, Oh dearest
Lord! take me to thyself, even into thy heavenly kingdom; take me into
Paradise, for I long to be with thee there. After expressing the desire of her
soul respecting one of her sons, she took leave of her husband and others
present with a look of endearing love, and expired about the fourth hour in the
morning, like one falling into an easy slumber, on the 8 th of the fifth month
1781, and was interred the 11 th at Uwchlan, attended by a very great concourse
of people; on which occasion a meeting was held, and was indeed a good meeting,
agreeable to a prospect she had in the early part of her illness; aged
sixty-one, and a minister 44 years.

A Testimony from Evesham Monthly Meeting in New Jersey, concerning THOMAS
EVANS.
HE was born the 12 th day of the second month 1693, and descended from parents
professing the truth, whose religious care over him, cooperating with the
principle of divine grace implanted in his mind, was the happy means of fixing
his attention, not on a corruptible inheritance, but on that which is
incorruptible, eternal in the heavens, and fades not away. And as he was in a
good degree faithful to the manifestation of light afforded him, about the
twenty-fifth year of his age, he entered on the work of the ministry, in which
he diligently labored, visiting, with the concurrence of his friends, diverse
parts of this continent. He was often led sensibly to declare of the love and
goodness of the Lord to those who diligently wait upon and seek him; and is
worthy of remembrance for his steady example in the attendance of meetings.

In his advanced years, he had diverse painful times of illness, but was
admirably preserved through them without the help of medicine. He was temperate
in his living; and that innocence of life, meekness and love which attended him
in his early years, shined clear in his latter days, being often favored (when
his understanding in worldly matters appeared to fail him) in a lively manner
to speak to the states of the people when religiously assembled, which made him
near to many friends. He was a peacemaker amongst his neighbors and friends,
and earnestly engaged for the universal advancement of true peace amongst
mankind; bearing a faithful testimony against war, and against the unnecessary
distillation and use of spirituous liquors, and the prevailing and foolish
customs and fashions of the world.

In his last illness, he was preserved in great patience and resignation
through much bodily pain, signifying his Satisfaction in having discharged his
religious duty; and that all looked pleasant before him, and nothing remained
for him to do, unless the Lord should again please to raise him, which was hid
from his sight, but that he was quite resigned to his will in all things.

In these trying hours, wherein he was enabled to drop many comfortable and
edifying sentences to those who visited him, he appeared to be favored with a
foretaste of that true peace which is laid up in store for all them who hold
out to the end in well-doing.

He departed this life, the 21 st of the first month 1783, and was interred at
Evesham on the 24 th, aged near ninety, and a minister about 65 years.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Philadelphia, concerning ANTHONY
BENEZET, an elder, deceased.
ON this occasion, we may pertinently adopt the lamenting address of the
disciples at Joppa, to the apostle Peter, on the death of Dorcas their sister,
who had been Full of good works, and alms deeds which she had done. And all the
widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas
had made while she was with them. Acts ix. 37.39.

He was born in France, at a town named St. Quintin, in the province of
Picardy, on the 31 st of that now called the first month, 1713. At which time
romish bigotry and superstition subjected the protestants in that kingdom to
very rigorous persecutions, which occasioned many thousands of them to leave
it, among whom were the parents of our deceased friend, who removed from thence
on the 3 d of the second month called February, 1715, and after spending a few
months in Holland, proceeded to London, where they resided about sixteen years,
and in the month called November, 1731, they arrived in this city, being well
recommended by diverse friends.

In the fifth month, 1736, he was married to our friend Joyce Marriott, of this
city, in whom he experienced a truly religious help-meet, almost to the end of
forty-eight years. Being dissatisfied with following mercantile business, to
which he was brought up, he declined that occupation and sought other
employments for the maintenance of his family, and they also engaging more of
his time and attention than he found consistent with his peace of mind, he
willingly embraced an opportunity which offered favorable to his inclination
and concern for the instruction of youth in useful learning, by supplying a
vacancy which happened in the year 1742 in the English-school under the
direction of friends in this city; which by their encouragement he undertook,
and continued in this employment through the remaining part of his life, except
a small intermission of less than two years which he spent at Burlington, where
he sought for greater retirement, and more leisure to attend to his religious
concern for the general good of mankind: But did not find his mind at the ease
he desired, until he returned to resume his employment of school-keeping in
this city* where he experienced greater opportunity of extensive usefulness, in
which he was assiduously diligent, suffering a small portion of natural rest to
satisfy him; employing his pen day and night in the compilation of books and
other writings for profitable instruction on religious subjects, chiefly
extracted from various authors of eminence, particularly to inculcate the
peaceable temper and doctrines of the gospel, in opposition to the spirit of
war and bloodshed, as also to expose the flagrant injustice of slavery and the
abomination of the African-trade; lamenting the sorrowful defection of
professed christians in these respects, which deeply grieved his tender heart.
The distribution of his labors have been found productive of much good, to
render which more extensive, he held a correspondence with such persons in
various parts of Europe and America, as united with him in the like concern, or
were so circumstanced as to be likely to promote his pious well-meant views.

On the late cessation of war between Great Britain and America, apprehending
the revival of commerce would be likely to renew the ignominious trade to
Africa for slaves, which had been in some measure obstructed, among other
endeavors to disuade from this cruel traffic, and having entertained a
favorable opinion of the disposition and sentiments of the queen of
Great Britain, hoping her influence might be useful to discourage it, he was
religiously induced to transmit her a letter in 1783 on the subject, with a
present of a few books of a pious tendency, which he committed to the care of
two of his friends in London, to deliver in such manner as they should judge to
be most suitable; this service being performed soon after his decease; one of
them, by a letter received within a few days past, informs his friend here,
that the letter from him with the books, had been delivered to the queen, who
on her reading it, expressed her persuasion, That the writer was truly a good
man, and that she kindly accepted his present, engaging also to read the books.

(A copy of the letter is hereunto annexed.)

He was employed the two last years of his life, as teacher in the school for
the instruction of the black-people and their offspring, established and
supported by the voluntary contributions of friends in this city, which by the
indisposition of the former teacher, had lain sometime vacant, undertaking this
employment from an apprehension of religious duty, and an earnest solicitude
that they might be better qualified rightly to enjoy the freedom to which great
numbers of them had been of late restored; for which purpose he surrendered,
with the consent of his friends, his other school, though to the manifest
disadvantage of his worldly interest.

His confinement by his last illness was not of long continuance, although he
had not been in perfect health for more than a year before, but being of a
lively disposition, and remarkably temperate in his food, which was principally
vegetables, he attended his school and other affairs until the increase of his
disorder disabled him.

He endured the bodily pains he suffered with much patience, and was favored
with great calmness and composure, being sensible of his approaching
dissolution, receiving his numerous visitors with much kindness, but expressed
little to any of them concerning himself, abiding under that humble diffidence
which was conspicuous in his conduct through life, considering himself but as
an unprofitable servant. A short time before his confinement, in a familiar
conversation, he took occasion to remark, that had he attended with due care to
the prospects of duty given (...) in his younger years, he thought it was
probable he might have been made instrumental for more extensive usefulness to
mankind.

On the day preceding his death he took an affecting farewell of his wife, who
was then also in a weak infirm state, when he reminded her of the affection and
concord which had been maintained between them through the course of their
union; and having sometime before reviewed and executed his will, in which he
had devised his whole estate to her during her natural life, (excepting his
small library and other books) and on her decease to certain trustees, the
income thereof to be applied to the use and support of the Negro-school. He had
in the time of his illness added a codicil, confirming the same, with a
reservation of some small legacies to a few of his relations, indigent widows,
and other poor persons; and having copies transcribed, with instructions for
the distribution of the books he had on hand, and for binding diverse tracts on
religious subjects which remained in sheets, he delivered them to some of his
executors for their government; the last of which he put into the hands of one
of them not more than three hours before he departed, which was about sunset
on the 3 d day of the fifth month 1784, being the day of our quarterly meeting;
and on the 5 th day of the same he was buried in our grave-yard in this city;
on which solemn occasion, a great concourse of inhabitants of all ranks and
professions attended, manifesting the universal esteem in which he was held,
among whom also several hundred black-people in like manner testified the
grateful sense they had of the benefits derived to them, through his acts of
friendship and pious labors on their behalf.

Unwearied in his endeavors to promote the essential interest and well-being
of men, it seemed as his 'Meat and drink' to tread the path of his divine
master, in Going about, doing good. His labors for the relief of the afflicted
and oppressed, particularly that much injured people, the enslaved Africans and
their descendants, having been unabated and successful, beyond almost any
advocate they have had in his time, devoting no small portion of his life and
worldly substance, in vindication of their violated rights as men, and their
instruction in things relating to their temporal and everlasting interest.

By an innocent unreserved affability, he gained esteem and acceptance among
all classes of men; that love of his neighbor which was conspicuous throughout
his communication, having a softening effect, even on rough untractable
spirits, and so generally did his useful life and inoffensive demeanor engage
the affections and regard of all ranks of the people among whom he dwelt, that
at his decease, they seemed to unite in one common sentiment and declaration,
of Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

He wanted neither abilities nor opportunity for using endeavors in the
acquirement of wealth; but his moderation in this as in other respects, was
uniformly manifest to all observers; being with little more than a bare
competency, rich and liberal beyond most of those who are encumbered with the
superabundant goods of this life.

This is a summary narrative of the useful life of our valuable friend, and as
we mean not to extol the instrument, but to render to the Lord our creator the
praise of his own works; let this account suffice, and excite in each mind a
due observance of that gospel monition, Go and do thou likewise.

The following is a copy of his letter to the queen, mentioned in the foregoing
testimony, viz. To CHARLOTTE, Queen of Great Britain.
IMPRESSED with a sense of religious duty, and encouraged by the opinion
generally entertained of thy benevolent disposition to succor the distressed,
I take the liberty, very respectfully, to offer to thy perusal some tracts
which I believe faithfully describe the suffering condition of many hundred
thousands of our fellow creatures of the African race, great numbers of whom,
rent from every tender connection in life, are annually taken from their native
land, to endure in the American islands and plantations, a most rigorous and
cruel slavery, whereby many, very many of them, are brought to a melancholy and
untimely end.

When it is considered, that the inhabitants of Britain, who are themselves so
eminently blessed in the enjoyment of religious and civil liberty, have long
been, and yet are, very deeply concerned in this flagrant violation of the
common rights of mankind, and that even its national authority is exerted in
support of the African slave trade, there is much reason to apprehend, that
this has been, and as long as the evil exists will continue to be, an occasion
of drawing down the divine displeasure on the nation and its dependencies. May
these considerations induce thee to interpose thy kind endeavors on behalf of
this greatly oppressed people, whose abject situation gives them an additional
claim to the pity and assistance of the generous mind; inasmuch as they are
altogether deprived of the means of soliciting effectual relief for themselves.
That so thou may not only be a blessed instrument in the hand of him By whom
kings reign, and princes decree justice, to avert the awful judgments by which
the empire has already been so remarkably shaken, but that the blessings of
thousands ready to perish, may come upon thee, at a time when the superior
advantages attendant on thy situation in this world, will no longer be of any
avail to thy consolation and support.

To the tracts on the subject to which I have thus ventured to crave thy
particular attention, I have added some others, which at different times, I
have believed it my duty to publish, and which I trust will afford thee some
satisfaction; their design being for the furtherance of that universal peace
and good will amongst men, which the gospel was intended to introduce.

I hope thou will kindly excuse the freedom used on this occasion, by an
ancient man, whose mind for more than forty years past, has been much separated
from the common course of the world, and long painfully exercised in the
consideration of the miseries under which so large a part of mankind equally
with us the objects of redeeming love, are suffering the most unjust and
grievous oppression, and who sincerely desires the temporal and eternal
felicity of the queen and her royal consort.

ANTHONY BENEZET.
Philadelphia the 25th of the eighth month 1783.



A Testimony from Concord Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning PHEBE
TRIMBLE.
THE memory of the just is pronounced "Blessed;" which we wish to be verified
in the following memorial of this our esteemed friend, by affording an
excitement to survivors to walk in her steps.

The days of her youth and early periods of maturer age, were attended with
close trials, stripping seasons, and deep baptisms, through all which the Lord
her gracious helper (whose tender regard is ever manifested toward his humble
depending children) preserved her, and raised her up to be a vessel in his
house. About the forty-second year of her age, being in 1759, she settled with
her husband William Trimble within the limits of this meeting, to which she was
recommended by certificate from Goshen monthly meeting, as an approved
minister, which character she justly retained during her stay in mutability.

Her public appearances, though generally in few words, were truly acceptable and
edifying, being clear, pertinent, comprehensive and savoury, and accompanied
with deep humility and gravity of deportment. She was not forward in the
exercise of her gift, but appeared desirous to proceed therein under divine
direction. At two different times she visited friends in Maryland and Virginia,
and once in North and South Carolina, in which visits her gospel labors were
well received.

Her common deportment was instructive; evidencing lowliness, meekness and
self-denial; that it may just be said, her Adorning was that of a meek and
quiet spirit. Her conversation, though pleasant and cheerful, was accompanied
with that sweetness and gravity which rendered it both agreeable and
profitable. Her heart and house were open to the reception and entertainment of
her friends; nor was her benevolence and humane feelings circumscribed to those
in religious communion with her; but the poor, we believe, of all denominations
in the neighborhood where she lived, partook of her kindness, and by her
removal have lost a sympathizing friend.

During the time of her last illness, she was much given to stillness and
retiredness of mind, being sometimes uneasy with friends conversing on temporal
subjects in her presence. Her hope and faith in her dear redeemer, we believe
did not fail her in this her last and trying period; though she was very lowly
and humble in her own estimation, and at times almost diffident of her being
worthy of divine regard: Thus in her case may be applicably revived, the
ancient interrogation, If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
ungodly and sinner appear? May this awaken profitable reflections in the minds
of all, especially the careless and indifferent.

On the 14 th of the sixth month 1784, she quietly departed this life, in the
sixty-seventh year of her age; and on the 16 th was buried at Concord, attended
by many friends and others, at which time was held a large and solemn meeting.
And we doubt not but she is gone from works to an happy reward.

A Testimony from the Monthly Meeting of Friends of Philadelphia for the
Southern-District, concerning JOHN REYNELL.
THOUGH none of us were acquainted with him whilst he resided in Great Britain,
the land of his nativity, yet we have cause to believe, from what himself has
expressed, that he was early visited with the offers of divine love, and by
wisely closing in therewith, he came to experience preservation from many
temptations and allurements wherewith the minds of unwary youth are liable to
be ensnared.

To several of his particular friends, he, at times, mentioned some
transactions previous to his coming to this country, which containing matter of
encouragement to faithfulness in others, we apprehend may not improperly be
here inserted, viz.

When about eighteen years of age, purposing to embark on a voyage to Jamaica,
and being thoughtful lest he might lay down the body at that place, as had been
the case with many, he received, as he believed, a divine assurance that his
life should be preserved. During his residence there, he had a sight given him,
of a grievous calamity by means of a violent hurricane, to befall the
inhabitants of the Island as a chastisement for their iniquities, which came to
pass according to his prospect. Soon afterward an occurrence happening which
occasioned his being called upon to give evidence in a court of judicature, he
was required to take an oath, which he conscientiously refusing, it proved for
a time, no small trial of his faithfulness; and although he had few or none
outwardly to look to for strength and encouragement under that exercise, he was
nevertheless favored to experience divine support to be near, so that neither
threatening nor persuasion could prevail on him to deviate from our christian
testimony in that respect. Very few of the members of our religious society
then resided on that Island, yet a meeting house belonging to friends still
remaining in Kingston, he was not easy to omit attending at the times appointed
for meeting, though he sometimes sat alone therein.

About the twentieth year of his age he came to Pennsylvania, and after
settling in this city, he became a serviceable member among us both in a
religious and civil capacity, cheerfully employing his talents and much of his
time to beneficial and laudable purposes, and was often engaged as a peacemaker
in reconciling differences.

As an elder, he approved himself in faithfulness and uprightness in the
discharge of that important trust, being well qualified for the station he
filled. A good example in diligently attending our religious meetings as long
as ability of body permitted, and very useful in the exercise of the
discipline. A man of integrity and sound judgment.

Being favored with an affluence of temporal riches, he endeavored to fulfill
his duty as a good steward, by liberally communicating of his substance to such
as stood in need. Besides his repeated acts of liberality throughout the course
of his life, the many charitable legacies he bequeathed by his will, are
further proofs of his benevolent disposition. So that we believe it may justly
be said, he was one that Feared God and hated covetousness.

In the spring of the year 1784, his natural strength evidently impairing, he
beheld the prospect of his approaching dissolution with the serenity and
composure of a christian; and continued gradually declining for several months,
during which time he did not impart much respecting his own spiritual state,
being desirous to be more in substance than show, yet found it needful to keep
up a steady watch until his warfare should be accomplished. Two friends
visiting him one evening, he mentioned, That on looking over his past life, he
was sensible of many deficiencies, yet expressed A hope that all would be well.
On the evening previous to his departure, he said, I am ready. I feel myself
happy, and surrounded with divine glory; and expired the 3 d of the ninth month
1784, aged seventy-six years. His corpse being interred the day following in
friends burying-ground in this city, a solemnity covered the minds of many at
the grave which was truly consolatory.

A Testimony from New-Garden Monthly Meeting in Pennsylvania, concerning
WILLIAM and KATHARINE JACKSON.
THEY were born in Ireland, came into this country with their parents, and
settled within the limits of New-Garden meeting. About the year 1733 they were
joined in marriage, proving true help-meets to each other; and as they advanced
in age, grew in grace, and a qualification for service in the church in the
prime of life, being of a meek and inoffensive disposition, well beloved and
truly useful members in the meeting to which they belonged; in dealing with
offenders, endeavoring to convince and restore, yet careful that the testimony
of truth might be preserved blameless.

Notwithstanding their beginning in the world was small, a blessing attending
their industry and frugality, they got a comfortable subsistence for
themselves, and to bring up their family; cheerfully and kindly entertaining
many friends in those early days, and having a near sympathy with the
messengers and servants of the Lord, who were tried and proved with humbling
baptizing seasons, were often enabled to speak a word of comfort and
encouragement to such; affectionate and helpful to those in affliction,
charitable and considerate to the poor, many partaking of their bounty, they
were nearly united with friends.

Their care over their family, and concern to bring up their children in
plainness, simplicity, industry, and the attendance of religious meetings, was
great. Katharine through weakness and infirmity, particularly in old age, often
endured much pain in riding to meetings, yet when there, her solid innocent
countenance and deportment therein were edifying. When near her end, during
several weeks painful sickness, she retained her innocent sweetness of
disposition, expressing resignation to her allotment; often advising her
children and those about her to live in love. Some of her last expressions that
could be understood, were, There is rest and peace prepared for me, where I
shall sing hallelujahs to the highest! And after a little pause, said, Thy
sweetness, O Lord! is great. She quietly departed the 2 d of the fourth month
1781, in the sixty-eighth year of her age, and on the 5 th was interred in
friends burying-ground at New-Garden.

William was supported under the trial of this separation, with becoming
resignation to the divine will; having through life been an example of
punctuality, justice, temperance and brotherly kindness.

On account of bodily infirmity, which at times made riding hard to bear, he
often went on foot, when above seventy-five years of age, upwards of four miles
to meeting; his faithfulness and example wherein, the becoming manner of his
sitting there, evidencing a watchful solid frame of mind, was very instructive.
On the 22 d of the tenth month 1785 (having been for sometime much confined at
home) he was taken ill, and though afflicted with much pain of body, his
understanding was preserved sound, and faculties clear. In the morning of the
23 d to two of his children he said, There is always something comes to take us
out of the world, and if we are but prepared it is the less matter; one of them
expressing a hope that he did not feel any thing to the contrary; he replied
No, no, I don't, I have a comfortable hope and belief that all will be well.
Remarking some little time after, on the settlement of his affairs, his small
beginning, and how he had been favored through life; he expressed his concern
and sympathy for diverse friends in straitened circumstances, and that he had
been much exercised at times on account of many in society who appeared forward
and zealous, but through neglect or mismanagement of their outward affairs, had
ministered cause of reproach; observing that it was wisdom not to appear in
show more than in substance, either in our religious or temporal concerns. The
night of the 25 th he communicated to some of his children much seasonable and
heart-tendering advice; recommending above all things to strive for an
everlasting inheritance, whereinto they might enter when done with time;
concluding in these words, Love truth, love one another, love friends and all
good people, even all mankind, and be careful to hurt none, no not the very
meanest, if ye can do them no good, ye should do them no harm. Then mentioning
the uncertainty of his continuance here, gave directions that his coffin should
be plain, no polish or stain upon it.

Being very low on the 28 th and apprehensive of his end being near, he spoke
to some of his children, desiring, when the change came, all might keep still
and quiet; adding, it was an awful time, and ought to be so to those about him.
Some hours after, saying, it would be a relief if he might be favored in his
passage, his bodily distress being great; But I must not complain, it don't
become us to complain, but we may tell each other of our afflictions without
complaining or murmuring; for the Almighty has been good to me in my
affliction, so that we have great cause to love him. A few hours after said,
What manner of persons ought we to be, to bear every dispensation of affliction
and trial that comes upon us, as we ought to do? Saying at another time, Many
tedious days and wearisome nights had been his lot these eighteen months past.
His son expressing his belief that rest would be very acceptable, he replied,
Yes, an everlasting rest. On the 13 th of the eleventh month he uttered the
following supplication, O Lord God Almighty! if it be thy blessed will,
mitigate my affliction, and relieve me in my distress; not my will but thine be
done. And a little after said, The appointed time will come, and it must be
waited for, he knows best the right time; his wisdom is very great, and care
and providence over his poor creatures very great indeed. To one of his
children, taking leave of him, he said, in substance, There is great corruption
in the world amongst mankind, and need there is of care in bringing up
children, and young people, to restrain them; for many are running as the wild
asses upon the mountains. A few days before he departed he said, It is a
comfort to me to have my children with me, and it may be a satisfaction to them
to see me go; I feel easy in mind on looking backward and forward, I see
nothing in my way, the Lord has been good to us, and especially to me in my
affliction. Much more he expressed at sundry times, continuing sensible, but
gradually weakening, he departed this life, on the 24 th of the eleventh month
1785, in the eighty-first year of his age, having been an elder upwards of 40
years, and having ruled well was worthy of double honor, his memory being of
good savor. On the 27 th he was interred in friends burying-ground at
New-Garden; attended by a large number of people, with whom a solid meeting was
held.

Some expressions of JOSEPH HUSBAND, before and in his last sickness, read and
approved in the Monthly Meeting of Friends at Deer-Creek in Maryland, and
directed to be forwarded to the Western Quarterly Meeting.
A CONSIDERABLE time before his decease, when in health, he sometimes mentioned
to his friends, and frequently to his wife, his prospect that his time would
not be long here, and in or near his last sickness, told her that he felt easy,
and believed he should soon be taken from her. Some days before his death he
appeared exceeding low in mind attended with many doubts respecting his past
and then situation, remaining several days in great distress; after which it
pleased the Lord to manifest himself to him in so extraordinary a manner, that
his wife perceiving a change, asked him how he was; he answered I am better
than I expected ever to be, my mind is now relieved, and, as a morning without
clouds, all appears sushine, mentioning to her and a friend present, many
trials and temptations he had experienced; at another time saying, deep has
been the baptism I have passed through, my soul has been dipped into a feeling
sense of the state of unbelievers, yea, I have passed through the valley of the
shadow of death, which I am now convinced we must do before we can experience a
glorious resurrection unto eternal life. And frequently said, my dear I feel
thy sympathy and love, and ah! how precious do I feel the unity of the church;
often mentioning diverse of his near friends, and continuing in a sweet frame of
mind, not complaining of pain (though the nature of his disease must have
occasioned much) his countenance remaining serene and pleasant to the last; a
few minutes before his death he spoke to this purpose, Give my dear love to
friends, and tell them I die in the faith which I lived in, and firmly believe
I shall soon enter into the mansions of eternal happiness prepared for the true
believers in Christ; and although I never did much for the cause and testimony of
truth, I shall be with the believers, and that is enough; soon after which he
quietly departed this life, on the 6 th day of the fifth month 1786, about the
fiftieth year of his age; being the next day interred in friends burying-ground
at Deer-Creek.

To which the Quarterly Meeting held at London-Grove, the 21st of the eighth
month 1786 add.
THE foregoing account concerning our friend Joseph Husband, being communicated
to us, was read here and approved; and from the knowledge and sense many of us
had of him for a number of years, this meeting is free to add, that it appears
he was born in Cecil county, Maryland, came into religious membership with
friends after he arrived to man's estate, having been convinced of the
principle of truth while young, more by inward conviction than instrumental
means, as he was educated in the way of the episcopal church (so called) and
even when a lad, had to pass through many trials under his father, for
declining that way of worship; and (as he related to his wife and others) he
frequently felt great tenderness toward the negro children with whom he was
brought up, from the prospect of their state of slavery, which much affected
him at times before he was ten years of age. He conducted with reputation and
stability as a useful friend, manifesting a lively unshaken concern for the
maintenance of our discipline, the furtherance of our testimony against an
hireling-ministry, and slave-holding, as well as for the doctrine of peace,
especially through the difficulties which occurred in the late times of public
requisitions for the purposes of war; showing christian fortitude, humility and
resignation under sufferings and close trials of different kinds which fell to
his lot. Sometime before his decease he appeared in public testimony, in which
he was not forward, but mostly brief, pertinent and acceptable to friends;
being remarkably open to receive counsel as well as to give; we find the
remembrance of his disposition and service is satisfactory, both among the
members of the monthly meeting he belonged to, and this meeting.

Abstract from the Testimony of Concord Monthly Meeting as read and approved by
Chester Quarterly Meeting, held at Concord the 14th of the fifth month 1787,
concerning our dear friend EDITH SHARPLES, deceased.
SHE was born the 13 th day of the fifth month 1743; her parents Nathan and
Rachel Yarnall, members of Middletown particular meeting, having been careful
to educate her in plainness and a diligent attendance of religious meetings,
she retaining a thankful remembrance of their care over her, has been often
heard to bless the Lord on their account, as by their good counsel and
wholesome restraint, they contributed to her preservation out of the vain
fashions and customs of the world.

By her own account, her mind was early in life accompanied with earnest
desires after the knowledge of truth, and that she might never do any thing to
offend him whom she often found near to her comfort, or that might bring a
reproach on the profession she made; but giving way to her natural vivacity,
she frequently indulged herself in what with some is accounted i^cent pastime,
for which she was often b^^^ght under condemnation; and about the twenty-fourth
year of her age was plunged into great distress, being closely beset with the
wiles of an unwearied adversary; but the Lord, who will not suffer his people
to be tempted beyond what they through his grace are enabled to bear, made way
for her escape from under the power of temptation, for which she had, in that
day, as on the banks of deliverance, to sing to the praise of his holy name;
saying, It is in my heart to praise thee O my deliverer! for thy manifold
kindnesses unto me a poor unworthy worm; for although, for disobedience, thou
have seen meet t^ hide thy face for a moment; yet my s^s humbly bowed before
thee, rendering unto thee the praise of all thy works; having witnessed the
fulfilling of thy promise. But with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee says the Lord thy redeemer.

In the twenty-sixth year of her age she was married to Joshua Sharples,
settled within the compass of New-Garden monthly meeting, of which she became a
useful member, being qualified for service in the church, whereto she attended
with much satisfaction to friends, filling the stations of overseer and elder
with diffidence under a sense of the weight thereof.

In the thirty-first year of her age she appeared in the ministry, and being
faithful, grew in her gift, was sound in doctrine, accompanied with a degree of
heart-tendering authority to the careless and indolent, yet edifying and
consolatory to the refreshment of the mourners in Zion. In her approaches to
the throne of grace in public supplication, she was awfully attended with deep
solemnity.

She was a great lover of the scriptures, and well qualified to apply them to
edification and instruction, being concerned to invite friends and others to a
more frequent reading of them. The doctrines of the principle of truth as held
by friends she was skilful in explaining, and was often exercised therein in
mixed auditories, endeavoring to lead out of forms to the substance of true
religion. Much of her time was thus employed in the public service of her Lord
and master, cheerfully giving up to his holy requirings, but carefully
concerned to wait for his putting forth.

Having peculiar service in visiting families, she was often usefully engaged
therein; and about the year 1778 with diverse other friends under appointment
from the Western quarterly meeting, in a general visit to all the meetings
belonging thereto, she was exercised under a deep concern to labor that a
reformation in life and manners might be really effected amongst the professors
of truth. Soon after, being removed within the compass of our meeting, she
engaged in a like visit to the meetings in our quarter, wherein, as in other of
her gospel labors, she manifested an ardent desire for the promotion of the
cause of truth, and that she might be favored to do her days work in the
daytime. And since, with the concurrence of friends, visited most of the
meetings in the Southern governments; being diligent in the improvement of her
time for the service of truth, often drawn into family visits, and to the
afflicted either in body or mind, who experienced the consoling sympathy of her
tender spirit, in which and other gospel labors she reaped the reward of peace
and comfort to her own mind. When at home she was not only diligent in
attending meetings herself, but careful to encourage and assist her family in
their duty therein; in herself an example of plainness, and mindful to promote
a like simplicity in those under her direction, manifesting much concern that
her children might be brought up in the truth, frequently retiring with them
for their improvement, her faithfulness against wrong things in them being
consistent with the tenderness of an affectionate mother. Great was her
exercise for the rising generation, that their hearts might be early dedicated
to the Lord, and they thereby preserved in a conduct consistent with our holy
profession. Open and hospitable in her house, a true help-meet and affectionate
wife.

Shortly after her return from a visit to friends on the Eastern-Shore of
Maryland, in the sixth month 1786, she was brought very low through bodily
indisposition, but favored with inward consolation and true peace, expressing
that she felt her mind much weaned from the things of this world, and if it
should please the Lord to call her hence she found nothing in her way. On a
first day afternoon, diverse friends being present, after a time of silence, she
spoke to this effect, I am glad of this opportunity; as I lay on the bed this
morning, my mind was carried away to meeting with friends, and I thought if I
had wings I could have flown thither for the great love I feel for the members
of that meeting. Indeed we have had many favored opportunities together; and
you see I am in a poor weak way, and whether I shall get out again I have not
seen, but am resigned, and feel the reward of peace; but if some friends of
that meeting are not more faithful to the many gracious visitations which have
been in mercy to them extended, weakness will overtake them, and they be in
danger of missing the answer of well done. She recovered and afterward had
many heart-tendering opportunities with friends there, and others not in
membership with us, toward whom she was remarkably led in testimony, in order
that they might be gathered to the fold of rest.

About two weeks before her decease she attended several of the neighboring
meetings, expressing her satisfaction therewith; and on the first day before
her departure, was at New-Garden meeting and had acceptable service, having
also a favored opportunity the same evening in a friends family where she
lodged on her (...) home, at which time she was concerned to revive these
expressions of the Psalmist, Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of
my days, what it is, that I may know how frail I am: Behold thou have made my
days as an hands breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee. Which she
enlarged on to edification. Next day she got home somewhat indisposed, but held
up till the day following in the evening of the 16 th of the first month 1787,
when she was confined to her bed, and lay in a sensible resigned frame of mind,
being, as we believe, well prepared for her awful change, appearing to have
nothing to do but to die. Some of the last words she was heard to say were, 'I
believe I am going,' and in about fifteen minutes after, quietly breathed her
last on the 18 th, and on the 20 th was interred at Birmingham, aged
forty-three years and seven months, a minister upwards of 12 years.

FINIS.

