CHARGES AND PROOFS RESPECTING THE CONDUCT OF PETER LANDAIS.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S.

INTRODUCTION.
NEW YORK, November 10, 1787.
THE following Charges and Proofs respecting the Conduct of PETER LANDAIS, when
he commanded the Frigate Alliance while joined with the Squadron that was, by
his Most Christian Majesty supported in Europe in the late war, under the Flag
and Commission of the United States, were officially transmitted to this
country (soon after the date) in order to be laid before the Sovereignty. But
as he (PETER LANDAIS) was broke at Boston, and rendered incapable of public
service by a Court Martial, for matters totally different, and of a subsequent
date, it is to be presumed that the Beard of Admiralty had not, at that time,
received the Proofs now in question. They were lodged for safety, by the owner,
in the Office of Foreign Affairs, where they still remain, in original. They
would have been buried in oblivion, if he (PETER LANDAIS) had not published in
the New York papers of the 31st October, 1787, that their existence was "AN
UNTRUTH." They are now made public, that the world may judge respecting his
Character, and what Credit may be given to his assertions.

CHARGES AND PROOFS RESPECTING THE CONDUCT OF PETER LANDAIS.
(COPY.)
WE, the Officers, etc. of the American squadron now at the Texel, this 30th
day of October, 1779, do attest and declare, upon our words of honor, as
gentlemen, that all the following Articles, which we subscribe, respecting the
conduct of PETER LANDAIS, Captain of the frigate Alliance, are really and truly
matters of fact. In Witness whereof, we hereunto sign our names and qualities;
and will, at any time hereafter, be ready to prove the same upon oath, if
required.

1. The Captain of the Alliance did not take the steps in his power, to prevent
his ship from getting foul of the Bon Homme Richard, in the Bay of Biscay; for,
instead of putting his helm a-weather and bearing up, to make way for his
Commanding Officer (which was his duty), he left the deck to load his pistols.

2. When in chase of a ship (supposed an English East-Indiaman), on the -- day
of August, 1779, Captain Landais did not do his utmost to overtake that ship,
which he might easily have done before night; but put his helm a-weather, and
bore away several times in the day, after the Alliance had gained the wake of
the chase, and was overtaking her very fast.

3. Captain Landais behaved with disrespect and impertinence toward the
Commander in Chief of the squadron, on frequent occasions.

4. He disobeyed his signals.

5. He very seldom answered any of them.

6. He expressed his fears and apprehensions of being taken on the coast of
Ireland; and insisted on leaving sight of it immediately, when we had cruised
there only two days.

7. His separation from the squadron, the first time, must have happened either
through ignorance or design; because though he distinctly saw the signal for the
course before night, yet he altered it, first two, and then four points of the
compass before morning.

8. His separation from the squadron, the second time, must also have happened
through ignorance or design; because, the wind being at N. W. and the other
ships, to his knowledge, lying to, and being astern of the Alliance, what less
than separation could be the consequence of his obstinacy, in ordering the
weather main brace to be hauled in, and the ship to be steered S. W. and S. W.
by S. in the trough of the sea; which was done from ten at night 'till morning:
and he would not then permit the ship to be tacked, in order to rejoin the
squadron, as was proposed to him by the officers.

9. On the morning of the 23d Sept. when the Bon Homme Richard, after being off
the Spurn, came in sight of the Alliance and Pallas, off Flamborough Head,
Captain Landais distinctly told Captain Cottineau, that if it was, as it
appeared, a fifty-gun ship, they must run away; although he must have been sure
that the Pallas, from her heavy sailing, must have fallen a sacrifice.

10. In the afternoon of the same day, Captain Landais paid no attention to
signals, particularly the signal of preparation and for the line, which was
made with great care, and very distinctly, on board the Bon Homme Richard.

11. Although the Alliance was a long way ahead of the Bon Homme Richard, when
bearing down on the Baltic fleet, yet Captain Landais lay out of gunshot to
windward, until the Bon Homme Richard had passed by and closely engaged the
Serapis; and then, instead of coming to close action with the Countess of
Scarborough, the Alliance fired at very long shot.

12. He continued to windward, and, a considerable time after the action began,
fell astern and spoke the Pallas; leaving the Countess of Scarborough in the
wake of the ships engaged, and at free liberty to rake the Bon Homme Richard.

13. After the Bon Homme Richard and Serapis were made fast along-side of each
other, as in the margin, (which was not done till an hour after the engagement
began) Captain Landais, out of musket shot, raked the Bon Homme Richard with
crossbar and grape shot, etc. which killed a number of men, dismounted sundry
guns, put out the side-lights, and silenced all the twelve-pounders.

14. The Alliance then ran down toward the Pallas and Countess of Scarborough,
that were, at the time, engaged at a considerable distance to leeward of the
Bon Homme Richard and Serapis, and Captain Landais hovered about there out of
gunshot, and without firing, 'till some time after the Countess of Scarborough
had struck; and then bore down, under his topsails, and spoke, first the
prize, and then the Pallas, asking a number of questions.

15. At last Captain Landais made sail, under his topsails, to work up to
windward, but made tacks before he (being within the range of grape shot, and,
at the longest, three quarters of an hour before the Serapis struck) fired a
second broadside into the Bon Homme Richard's larboard quarter, the latter part
whereof was fired when the Alliance was not more than three points abast the
Bon Homme Richard's beam, although many tongues had cried from the Bon Homme
Richard, that Captain Landais was firing into the wrong ship, and prayed him to
lay the enemy along-side. Three large signal lanthorns, with proper signal wax
candles in them, and well lighted, had also, previously to his firing, been
hung over the bow, quarter and waist of the Bon Homme Richard, in a horizontal
line, which was the signal of reconnoisance; and the ships, the one having a
high poop, and being all black, the other having a low stern, with yellow
sides* were easily distinguishable, it being full moon.

16. The Alliance then passed at a very considerable distance along the
larboard or off-side of the Bon Homme Richard, and having tacked and gained the
wind, ran down again to leeward, and, in crossing the Bon Homme Richard's bow,
Captain Landais raked her with a third broadside, after being constantly called
to from the Bon Homme Richard, not to fire, but to lay the enemy along-side.

17. Sundry men were killed and wounded by the broadsides mentioned in the two
last articles.

18. Captain Landais never passed on the off-side of the Serapis, nor could
that ship ever bring a gun to bear on the Alliance at any time during the
engagement.

19. The leaks of the Bon Homme Richard increased much after being fired upon
by the Alliance; and as the most dangerous shot which the Bon Homme Richard
received under the water, were under the larboard bow and quarter, they must
have come from the Alliance, for the Serapis was on the other side.

20. Several people on board the Alliance told Captain Landais, at different
times, that he fired upon the wrong ship; others refused to fire.

21. The Alliance only fired three broadsides while within gunshot of the Bon
Homme Richard and Serapis.

22. The morning after the engagement, Captain Landais acknowledged on board
the Serapis, that he raked each time with grape-shot, which he knew would
scatter.

23. Captain Landais has acknowledged since the action, that he would have
thought it no harm if the Bon Homme Richard had struck, for it would have given
him an opportunity to re-take her, and to take the Serapis.

24. He has frequently declared that he was the only American in the Squadron,
and that he was not under the orders of Captain Jones.

25. In coming into the Texel, he declared that if Captain Jones should hoist a
broad pendant, he would, to vex him, hoist another.

I attest the articles number 2, 4, 5, 10, 11, 15, 16 and 22, to be matters of
fact, and I believe all the rest.

ROBERT CORAM, Midshipman of the late Ship the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 10, 21 and
22, to be matters of fact and I believe all the rest.

J. W. LINTHWATE, Midshipman of the late Ship the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21 and
22, to be matters of fact, and I believe all the rest.

JOHN MAYRANT, Midshipman of the late Ship the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 22, 23 and 24, to be matters of fact, and I believe all the rest.

Lieut. Col. WUBERT, American Engineer, and Commanding Officer of the
Volunteers on board the Serapis, late of the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3 and 11, to be matters of fact, and I believe
all the rest.

BENJAMIN STUBBS, Midshipman of the late Ship Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16 and 17, to be
matters of fact, and I believe all the rest.

THOMAS POTTER, Midshipman of the late Ship of war the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 13, 15 and 19, to be matters
of fact, and I believe all the rest.

NATH. FANNING, Midshipman of the late Ship the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 19, and 21 to be
matters of fact, and I believe all the rest.

THOSE. LUNDY, Midshipman of the late Ship Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, and 17 to be
matters of fact, and I believe all the rest.

BEAUMONT GROU^E, Midshipman of the late Ship Bon Homme Richard.

We attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 18, The Alliance never
passed on the off-side of the Serapis.
20, and 21 to be matters of fact.

JAMES DEGGE, Lieut. Alliance. JOHN BUCKLEY, Master, Alliance. JOHN LARCHAR,
Ma. Mate Alliance.
I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 23 to be
matters of fact.

STACK, Lieut. of Walsh's Regt. and Officer of Volunteers on board the Bon
Homme Richard, by conge from Court.

I attest the articles 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11, 13, 15, 19, 23, and 24 to be
matters of fact.

MACARTHY, Officer of Walsh's Regt. and Lieut. of Volunteers on board the Bon
Homme Richard.

I attest to the articles 11, 12, 14, and 24; as to the 4th article, I know
that he refused to obey the signals for going on board the Bon Homme Richard;
and with respect to the 9th article, I recollect that he said, "If it is a ship
of more than fifty guns, we have nothing to do, but to run away."

De COTTINEAU de KLOGUENE, Captain of the Pallas.

[The original of this last is in French.]

I attest the articles number 2, 5, 11, 12, 20, and 22 to be matters of fact.

M. PARK, Capt. of Marines on board the American Frigate Alliance.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 21, to be
matters of fact. RICHARD DALE, Lieut. of the late ship of war the Bon Homme
Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 11, 14, and 22, to be matters of fact.

HENRY LUNT, Lieut. of the late ship the Bon Homme Richard.

I attest the articles number 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and
21, to be matters of fact.

SAMUEL STACEY, Master of the late ship the Bon Homme Richard.

No. II.
Commodore, Texel, 23 d Oct. 1779.
THE moment I was going on board your ship, I was just informed from shore,
that Mr. Landais was there, with the American Lieut. Col. Spencer, of
South Carolina.
and that they were determined to speak with Mr. De Cottineau. As he is not in
a condition to support such an interview, I am instantly going to him.

Landais is a madman, from whom every thing is to be feared; against which I am
now preparing myself.

I have the honor to be, with the greatest respect, Commodore, your humble
servant, P. RICOT. He was Captain of the Vengeance, a small tender.


No. III.
I THE under-signed Philip Ricot, Captain of a vessel in the service of the
United States of America, and Commander of the Tender Vengeance, in conformity
to the request of Commodore Paul Jones, my Commander, do communicate to him,
and affirm to the different circumstances hereafter declared; in which M.
Landais, Captain of the frigate Alliance, has, in this cruize, appeared to have
deviated from that subordination which the service requires.

I observed, that, on the 31st of August, at half past four in the afternoon, a
signal was made him by the Commodore to chase a sail in sight, which M. Landais
did not obey.

The next day, Sept. 1st, the Commodore made him a signal to come under his
stern, that he might speak with him: this M. Landais did not do.

The 5th of Sept. the Captains of the division being on board the Commodore,
according to his orders, M. Landais was the only one who refused to go; and
although Messrs. de Chamillard and Cottineau went on board the Alliance, to
persuade him to it, he persisted in his refusal.

That, in the night of the 23d and 24th of said month, during the engagement
between the Bon Homme Richard and the Serapis, the Alliance remained within
cannon-shot of the enemy's ship, from about half after eight till ten o'clock,
without my having seen her fire. I shall add, that, Oct. 1st, at eight at
night, I received orders from the Commodore to go and tell M. Landais, who was
to windward, to take post a-stern of him; to which I received this answer, and
which was repeated by M. Landais himself: "Go, tell the Commodore, that he may
go where he pleases."a The inconsistence of this answer, and his rudeness to
me, have since obliged me to testify my dissatisfaction to M. Landais, who
appeared to have forgot it.

I affirm to the facts above declared.

Texel, 25th Oct. 1779. P. RICOT.

[The Vengeance was to windward, just out of gunshot, during the whole action
between the Bon Homme Richard and the Serapis. The Captain was a sensible man,
and a good Officer.]

IV.
THESE are to certify, that I, Henry Lunt, Second Lieut. of the American ship
of war, the late Bon Homme Richard, but now of the Serapis, commanded by the
Honorable John Paul Jones, having, on the 23d day of Sept, 1779, been ordered
in a pilot-boat, with a party of men, after a brig; but, some time after I set
out from along-side, a signal was made for me to return back to the Bon Homme
Richard, she being then in chase of two British ships of war, the Serapis and
Countess of Scarborough; and before I could get on board the Bon Homme Richard,
she commenced engagement with the British ship of war Serapis. It being night,
I thought it not prudent to go along-side in the time of action. Being in this
boat near, I had an opportunity of seeing some part of the Alliance's
behavior, above three quarters of an hour after the action began with the
Richard and Serapis. The Alliance was to windward of them, and appeared to be
lying to, about one mile distance. At the same time, the Pallas was engaging
the Countess of Scarborough to leeward of the Alliance, out of my sight.
Presently, after the Pallas and Countess of Scarborough had ceased firing, the
Alliance bore down for them, and disappeared out of my sight. What she did
there, I cannot tell; but she was gone, as near as I can judge, one hour and
three-quarters, and then appeared to me to be going up to assist the Bon Homme
Richard, but was half-an-hour from that time before she fired; and, after she
got up to the Richard and Serapis, she fired, and then stood off from them to
the Eastward some ways and, as near as I can judge, was gone better than half
an hour, then returned back to the Richard and Serapis, and fired again.

(Signed) HENRY LUNT.
On board the Serapis, at the Texel, 25 th Oct. 1779.
[This Certificate of Lieut. Lunt, who was a near spectator, is of great weight
and importance; it being only in the power of this gentleman, or of Captain
Ricot (who, in the Vengeance, was also a near spectator) to give a true account
of the respective positions and maneuvers of the ships engaged.]

V.
WE, the under-signed Officers on board the Tender La Vengeance, certify that,
Oct. 1st, at eight at night, we received orders from the Commander of the
Squadron, Commodore Paul Jones, to go and order the Frigare Alliance, which was
to windward, to join the fleet, and to form the rear of the Squadron; at half
past eight we communicated the Commodore's orders to the Alliance; and a voice,
which we knew to be that of M. Landais, Captain of the said Frigate, answered
us twice, bidding us tell the Commodore to go where he pleased; after which,
without further answer we went to resume our station. In witness whereof we
have signed these presents, to serve as a proof of the above.

Done on board the Vengeance, 26 th Oct. 1779. VINET. GAUGUET. FESNEAU.


No. VI.
I, THE under-signed, certify, that I was extremely surprised in the evening of
the 23d of September, when I did not hear the Alliance begin the engagement,
either with the Serapis or the Countess of Scarborough; having remarked, just
before I went to the main-top (where I commanded a detachment during the
action), that she appeared to me to be very near them. M. Landais had pressed
sail, during the whole afternoon, without orders. M. Cottineau hailed us, and
asked what station he should take during the action, and complained to M.
Jones, that M. Landais, instead of forming the rear, as it had been agreed,
took the van, which was his (M. Cottineau's), from him. M. Jones, however, made
the signal for forming the line; and I well recollect that he caused a
maneuver to be made, in order that the Alliance might clearly see his signal;
but M. Landais, as usual, paid no attention to it; and we all thought the
Alliance engaged a long time before us.

After taking my station in the main-top, I thought no more of the Alliance,
because the main-top-sail hid her from me. A little while after the Serapis
hailed us, and I then perceived the Serapis and the Countess of Scarborough
pretty nigh each other. We immediately began the engagement with the Serapis,
and I did not perceive the Alliance till about two hours afterward, when I saw
her rake us with her whole broadside, a little to larboard of us; and, at the
same time, I heard a hundred voices hailing the Alliance, and telling them,
that it was on board the Bon Homme Richard that she was firing; a moment
afterward she passed us on our larboard side, and it was with difficulty, that
I hindered the people whom I commanded from firing on her. I hailed M. Landais
as loud as I could, saying to him, "I beg you will not sink us." I at the same
time thought that M. Landais was taking the advantage of our circumstances to
destroy M. Jones, and thereby save himself the trouble he must have expected
for having disobeyed M. Jones, in chasing without orders, and in edging off, to
shape a contrary course, when the signal was made to chase; and on several
other occasions, such as refusing to come on board the Bon Homme Richard to
consult on the necessary operations, etc.

The Alliance then came athwart our bow, and began afresh to cannonade us very
smartly; I then had not the least doubt of his intention to sink us, and should
have fired on the Alliance, in preference to the Serapis, but that the
main-top-sail and other sails concealed her from us. At the instant when they
cried that the Serapis had struck, I came down, and was informed that the
Alliance had killed us a number of people, and, amongst others, an Officer who
was on the forecastle. In my opinion, there was not a soul on board the Bon
Homme Richard, who did not believe that M. Landais knew us before he fired, as
we were higher out of water than the Serapis; that it was moonlight, and that
we had made the signal by which we must have been known, during the action.

The First Lieutenant of the Countess of Scarborough told me, some days since,
that he had remarked, during the action with the Pallas, that the Alliance was
for some time athwart and to windward of them; that as soon as the Scarborough
had struck, the Alliance came and hailed them, and asked them, what vessel that
was, which was engaged? He was answered, that it was the Serapis. He asked her
force, but they would not tell him; he then tacked and shaped his course, under
his topsails only, to join us.

Done on board the Serapis, in the Texel, this 27 th Oct. 1779. EDWARD STACK,
Lieut. du Regt. de Walsh.

[Mr. Stack had the distinguished advantage of commanding in the main-top, and
that post was essentially useful in the engagement. His merit obtained such a
certificate from his Commodore, as, being presented to the Minister of War, at
Versailles, procured him promotion from Sub-Lieutenant to the rank of Captain,
with a pecuniary gratification for the loss of his effects, when the Bon Homme
Richard sunk; and, since the war, his Most Christian Majesty has, for his
behavior in the Bon Homme Richard, granted him an annuity of four hundred
livres for life.]

No. VII.
WHEREAS since the campaign of 1779, there have been various and partial
reports secretly spread against the private and social character of Commodore
Paul Jones, formerly commanding the squadron of the Bon Homme Richard; and as,
among other hearsays and groundless stories, I have sometimes heard that the
abovementioned Officer had formally given the Lie to M. Landais, formerly
Captain of the Alliance, relating to the loss of a boat in sight of the coast
of Ireland: -- Therefore, I declare and affirm, that the aforesaid Commodore
did not say to M. Landais, "You Lie," but no more than these very words, "It is
an untruth;" which M. Landais was pleased to interpret as a formal giving the
Lie; who was never able to overcome his peevish, obstinate, turbulent and
ungovernable temper, which he constantly showed during the whole of the
campaign. Moreover, I certify, that Commodore Paul Jones, far from commanding
with haughtiness or brutality, as certain persons have endeavored to circulate,
was always (though very strict and sharp in the service) affable, genteel, and
very indulgent, not only toward his Officers, but likewise toward the sailors
and soldiers, whom he ever treated with humanity. -- As I was a witness to the
abovementioned quarrel, I must in conscience confess, that M. Landais gave, at
the time, great cause for it, by the arrogant manner which he assumed toward
his Commander, ^n answer to the peaceable, good and fair ^easons, to which he
would never yield; ^o far to the contrary, that he (M. Landais) answered the
Commodore (I and Lieutenant Colonel Chamillard both being present) in the most
gross and insulting ^erms -- at first in English, which he immediately rendered
in French, that M. Chamillard might not be ignorant of any thing that passed.
The whole of the aforesaid quarrel happened in the round-house of the Bonne
Homme Richard, the 23d or 25th of August, in the abovementioned year. I
conclude by saying, that M. Landais accompanied or affirmed his offensive and
very scandalous discourse, by the most provoking gestures.

Philadelphia, 28 th Nov. 1781. Lieut. Col. WUIBERT, of the Corpse of American
Engineers, and formerly Commandant of the Volunteers on board the Bon Homme
Richard.
Marines. His conduct in the action was cool and brave.

No. VIII.
Extract of a Letter from Captain Paul Jones, of the American Navy, to Mr. Le
Ray de Chaumont Mr. Chaumont was honorary Intendant of the Royal Hospital of
Invalids at Paris, and afterward Superintendant of the expense of the squadron
that was put under the flag of America, by his Most Christian Majesty.
, dated Breast, Nov. 16, 1778.
"I thank you, with all my heart, for your promise of attention to my last, as
well as for your assurance that the Indien is not to be armed before the
spring. You know that I have remained in Europe on the faith of commanding that
ship. I have on that account, and to show my gratitude to France, lost so much
time, and with it such opportunities as I cannot regain. Give me but an
assurance that the Indien will be reserved for me, and bestowed on no other
person, and I will say I am satisfied. This, I pledge myself, will be no loss
to France: America is not ungrateful. The noble-minded Congress know not the
little mean distinctions of climate, or place of nativity; nor have they
adopted any rule, which can preclude them from encouraging and rewarding the
merit of a stranger, by raising him even to the first posts of honor. In the
army there are many instances of this. In the navy, young as it is, it gives me
particular pleasure to inform you, that Congress have given the command of the
best ship in the service to a French Officer, and called the ship the Alliance."

NOTE to No. VIII.
On the 9th of May, 1777, Mr. Paul Jones was directed to proceed to France (by
the Marine Committee) and to obey the orders of the Secret Committee. Being
arrived in Europe, it was the intention of Congress, "that he should be
invested with the command of a fine fast-sailing Frigate or larger ship." In
pursuance of this plan, the Secret Committee of Congress wrote to the Hon.
Benjamin Franklin, Silas Deane, and Arthur Lee, Esqrs. Commissioners, etc. at
Paris, as follows, viz.

"Philadelphia, 9 th May, 1777. "Honorable Gentlemen,
"This letter is intended to be delivered to you by John Paul Jones, Esquire. an
active and brave Commander in our navy, who has already performed signal
services in vessels of little force; and, in reward for his zeal, we have
directed him, etc." -- "You will assign him some good house or agent to supply
him with every thing necessary to get the ship speedily and well equipped and
manned: somebody that will bestir themselves vigorously in the business, and
never quit it until it is accomplished." The letter concluded thus: -- "You see
by this step how much dependence Congress place in your advices, and you must
make it a point not to disappoint Capt. Paul Jones's wishes, and our
expectations, on this occasion. We are, Honorable Gentlemen, your obedient
humble servants,

(Signed) Robert Morris, Richard Henry Lee, William Whipple, Philip Livingston."


The ship in question was the Indien, then on the stocks at Amsterdam,
belonging to the United States. But this having been discovered to the British
Minister by some of Mr. Arthur Lee's papers, of which they had got possession
just before Mr. Paul Jones arrived at Paris, and the Treaty of Alliance being
on the point to be concluded, he consented to their assigning over the property
of that ship to the King of France. Among the political reasons which operated
this arrangement, was the great opposition made to the equipment of the Indien,
by the British Ambassador in Holland. The command of the Indien was, however,
reserved for Mr. Paul Jones, till (subsequent to his campaign of 1779) he had
made an arrangement of a plan with the Count de Maurepas, which promised much
greater importance to the common cause, and required his immediate return to
America. After this, his Majesty lent the use of the Indien to the Prince de
Luxembourg for three years, and the Prince chartered her, for the term
prescribed, to Mr. Gillon, of South Carolina, under the commission of that
State. This was the ship that Mr. Gillon came in to Philadelphia, under the
name of the South Carolina, in the year 1782.

No. IX.
Extract of a letter from Captain Paul Jones, of the American Navy, to the
Honorable J. Adams He was then, and had been for some time before on board the
Alliance.
, dated L'Orient, May 13, 1779.
"You will confer a singular obligation on me, by favoring me with your opinion
and advice respecting the unhappy misunderstanding, which I am told prevails on
board the Alliance. I ask your advice, because, though I am determined to
preserve order and discipline where I command, yet I wish to reprove with
moderation, and never punish while there remains a good alternative. -- It
appears that there is a fault at least in one of the parties, and I wish much
to know where the fault lies; for without harmony and general good will among
the officers, I cannot proceed with a good prospect."

No. X.
Extract of a letter from the same to his Excellency Benjamin Franklin, Esquire.
dated on board the Bon Homme Richard, at anchor in the road Groix, June 18,
1779.
"I have had a most disagreeable talk to compose affairs on board the Alliance.
The two principal officers, Lieutenants Hill and Adams, have at last left her
without a conge The Commodore winked at their leaving the Alliance, because he
found it impossible (though he had been aided by Mr. Adams, and a number of
American gentlemen then at L'Orient) to persuade them to live in the same ship
with Captain Landais, whom they detested. Captain Landais was not then
suspended; and the service suffered the loss of two old and good officers, for
no other reason than to preserve to him the command of the Alliance.
, and I believe in consequence, that a better understanding will subsist
between the officers that remain."

No. XI.
I The Subscriber, being sent for by the Commodore on the 23d day of September,
to repair immediately on board his ship (the Bon Homme Richard) there to
examine and find out the leaks of his ship; which was within an hour after the
engagement with the Serapis, an English ship of war. I accordingly obeyed the
Commodore's orders, and repaired on board his ship; when, after searching
diligently without, and within the said ship, I found it was impracticable to
stop the leaks, the ship's bottom being so much shattered. Therefore I solemnly
protest, that the said ship's bottom was so much damaged, that I found it
impossible to repair it in such a manner as that the said ship might be kept
above water any considerable time. -- The above I can attest to as a fact.

Dated on board the ship Serapis at sea, September 24 th, 1779. Per JAMES
BRAGG. He was the Master Carpenter of the Alliance.


No. XII.
I The Subscriber, late Midshipman on board the American ship of war, the Bon
Homme Richard; but now act in that capacity on board the ship of war Serapis,
which ship was taken by the Bon Homme Richard, on the night of the 23d of
September last, the same night I was stationed in the Bon Homme Richard's
main-top the whole of the action. And about two hours after the engagement
first commenced, I saw, to my great surprise, the Alliance come under the Bon
Homme Richard's stern, and fire her whole broadside into the Bon Homme Richard;
she then came along the off side of the Bon Homme Richard, and came under the
Bon Homme Richard's bow, when she discharged another volley of both grape and
round shot, which I heard strike the rigging, masts, etc. on board the Bon
Homme Richard.

Though previous to the Alliance's firing the second time into the Bon Homme
Richard, I heard some of our officers and men call to the Alliance (which was
not then without hail) for God's sake not to fire into the Bon Homme Richard,
for, said they, you have killed several of our men already. Notwithstanding all
this, she fired a number of shot afterward into the Bon Homme Richard. But as
to the number of men the Alliance killed on board the Bon Homme Richard, I
cannot ascertain; however, as to what I have written here, I can attest to as a
fact.

Given under my hand, this 23 d day of October, 1779. NATHANIEL FANNING. An
intelligent sensible officer. He had the good fortune, and the merit of aiding
to overcome the enemy stationed in the main-top of the Serapis.


No. XIII.
I, late Midshipman on board of the Bon Homme Richard, and Aid-du-Camp to the
Honorable John Paul Jones, in the action of the 23d of September, off
Flamborough Head, do certify, that an hour after the commencement of it, I was
on the main deck, where there was a brisk firing kept up until a ship raked us,
when I saw two men drop dead, and several running from their quarters, crying
out that the Alliance is manned with Englishmen, and firing upon on us. I went
up immediately, and saw her pass by us. She then, in about two hours' time,
came under our stern, and while we were hailing her, she fired into our
larboard quarter, and went ahead of us; then came before the wind, athwart our
bows, when she was hailed, by Capt. Jones's orders, to lay the enemy on board;
but they returning no answer, were hailed once or twice again, to which they
answered ay, ay, and immediately fired several guns, but they being at too
great a distance to damage the enemy, without hurting of us, when she might
have come half as near again without any danger of running foul of us, or
damaging us. But, previous to the abovementioned engagement, a signal was hove
out from the Bon Homme Richard, to form a line of battle, to which the Alliance
paid no attention, but during the whole cruize, the Alliance very seldom
attended to any of Capt. Jones's signals. It is my sincere opinion, on the
conduct of the Commander of the said ship, together with her maneuvers during
the time of action, on the 23d of last September, that his motive must have
been to kill Capt. Jones, and distress the Bon Homme Richard, so as to cause
her to strike to the Serapis, that he might himself be able to take the
Serapis, and honor himself with laurels of that day.

In Witness whereof, I have hereunto subscribed my name on board the Serapis,
lying the Texel, 24th Oct. 1779. JOHN MAYRANT A young gentleman of fortune, of
South Carolina, whose conduct in the engagement did him great honor.
.

No. XIV.
I, late Midshipman on board of the American Ship of War, Le Bon Homme Richard,
commanded by the honorable John Paul Jones, Esquire, at present on board of the
Serapis, prize to the above Ship, do certify, that while at my station in the
mizen-top, after we had engaged about two hours and a half, I saw, to my great
surprise and astonishment, the Alliance Frigate fire several guns into our
larboard quarter. Some time after, I being ordered from my station in the
mizen-top on deck, I saw, from the forecastle, the Alliance standing athwart
our bows before the wind; Mr. Linthwaite was then hailing her, by Captain
Jones's orders, to lay the enemy on board, but hearing no answer to his
repeated hail, I hailed her in the same words, "lay the enemy on board;" no
answer being yet made, I asked them if they heard us, to which they replied ay,
ay, and fired several guns at that distance, that part of her grape and
cannister shot damaged us as well as the enemy; whereas, it is my opinion, had
the Alliance came half the distance nearer the Serapis than she did, she might
have cleared the enemy's decks, and not have raked the Bon Homme Richard.

Previous to the aforementioned engagement, a signal was hove out by Captain
Jones's orders, to form a line of battle, to which no attention was paid on the
part of the Alliance. If I may be allowed to give my opinion on the general
conduct of the Commander, together with the maneuvers of the said Ship during
the action, it appears to me his motive must have been to have distressed the
Bon Homme Richard, so as to have caused her to strike to the Serapis, and by
boarding the Serapis, to retake the Bon Homme Richard, and thereby claim the
laurels of that day.

In Testimony whereof, I hereunto subscribe my name on board of the Serapis,
lying in the Texel, 24th October, 1779. ROBERT CORAM. A brave, steady Officer,
of South Carolina, whose conduct in the engagement did him much honor.


No. XV.
I, late Midshipman on board the Bon Homme Richard, and Aid-du-Camp to the
Honorable John Paul Jones, Esquire, in the action of 23d of September, off
Flamborough Head, do certify, that about an hour after the commencement of it,
I heard some of the men that were stationed on the forecastle cry out, the
Alliance rakes us, and has wounded Mr. Caswell, the Master's Mate, with several
men; this report was afterward confirmed by Mr. Caswell, abovementioned; and
he declared in his last dying words, he received his wound from the Alliance.
This Ship then disappeared, and did not return until an hour and a half; as
soon as she was discovered, Captain Jones ordered the signal lanthorns of
reconnoissance to be placed at proper distances from each other, on the
larboard side, which order was obeyed by the Master, notwithstanding, she came
up to our larboard quarter and fired into us, then shot ahead and stood
athwart our bow, when I hailed, by order from Captain Jones, to lay the enemy
on board, to which no answer was made: Mr. Coram also repeated the same order,
then asked them if they heard us, their reply was ay, ay, the instant after,
she raked without apparently drawing any nearer the distance than being only
within the range of grape shot, and the two ships lying parallel with their
sides touching each other, several of his shot were drove into the Bon Homme
Richard. The conclusion I shall make, relative to Captain Landais' conduct on
the 23d of Sept. and previous to that time, is, that his principal object was
to kill Captain Jones, cause the Richard to strike, that he might step in and
claim the honor of the day.

Given under my hand, on board the Bon Homme Richard's prize the Serapis, of 44
guns, at the Texel, the 27th of Oct. 1779. J. W. LINTHWAITE A brave officer, of
South Carolina, whose conduct in the engagement did him great honor.
.

No. XVI.
BEING on board the Alliance on the 23d September, 1779, and stationed on the
quarter deck in the time of the action with the Serapis and Countess of
Scarborough, do certify, that I saw the Countess of Scarborough rake The Bon
Homme Richard and Serapis had been from the beginning, and still were closely
engaged, broadside to broadside. The Alliance being just within long
cannon-shot to windward of the Countess of Scarborough, could easily have
prevented that ship's raking fire into the stern of the Bon Homme Richard. --
The Pallas was at this time to windward of the Alliance, of course out of
gunshot of the enemy. But Capt. Cottineau bore down, and having spoken to the
Alliance as he passed that Frigate, he engaged, and after a considerable action
took the Countess of Scarborough.
the Bon Homme Richard, but cannot say whether she raked her more than once.

JOHN SPENCER. He said he was a Lieut. Colonel, in the service of the State of
South Carolina.

30 th October, 1779.
No. XVII.
CAPTAIN Landais has oftentimes, in my presence, spoken disrespectfully and
even impudently of Captain Jones. On one occasion, about the beginning of
September last, on the coast of Scotland, I went on board the Alliance frigate,
by desire of Captain Jones, and told Captain Landais, that he requested of him
to be furnished with the names of the Officers and men he had, a day or two
before that, put on board the prize ship the Union, Captain Johnston, that he
(Captain Jones) might be enabled to dispatch her; or to be informed what
directions he had given, if any, as well with respect to that vessel, as also
with respect to the prize ship, the Betsey, Captain Fisher, which also had been
manned from the Alliance. Captain Landais, in reply, told me very pertly, that
Captain Jones had no business at all to give orders, or to concern himself with
any of those vessels, for that both of them had already received proper
instructions from him; and that the orders he had given were agreeable to the
direction he had received from Captain Jones. I told him I was of opinion no
Commander in the squadron, except Captain Jones, was authorized to send away a
prize, or otherwise dispose of her, when in his presence, but by virtue of
particular orders obtained from him for that purpose. Captain Landais, in a
sneering manner, again replied, that he would let Captain Jones know, that he
had as good a right to dispatch prizes as he had; that they were Captains of
equal rank; and that the only difference between them was seniority on the part
of Captain Jones, which he held of little consideration: and at last Colonel
Wibert, who had accompanied me on board, and myself returned on board the Bon
Homme Richard, totally unable to inform Captain Jones what Captain Landais had
ordered with respect to those two ships. A short time after this, a signal was
made on board the Commodore's ship, for the Captains of the squadron to come on
board. Captain Cottineau and Captain Ricot accordingly came on board. Captain
Landais not obeying, Captain Jones desired me to go again on board the
Alliance, and deliver Captain Landais a letter which he then handed to me, and
which I understood contained an order for him to come immediately on board;
accordingly I went on board the Alliance, and delivered Captain Landais the
letter, which he took with him to the cabin, and in a few minutes returned and
delivered me another for Captain Jones: this I brought instantly on board, and
delivered to him. It contained a second refusal on the part of Captain Landais,
and very much offended the gentlemen who had politely obeyed the signal, and
were then waiting for him. Captain Jones, chagrined by the obstinacy or that
Officer, would have proceeded to the business he had in view, without paying
any further attention to him; but being still anxious to have his opinion on
and approbation of the measure, conjointly with the other Officers of the
squadron, a further attempt to obtain his company was resolved on; for this
purpose (at the desire of Captain Jones) Captain Cottineau, Mr. Chamillard and
myself went on board the Alliance, to try the effect of persuasion upon Captain
Landais; but in vain did those gentlemen represent to him the absolute
necessity there was for his joining in consultation with his brother Officers;
that the good of the service demanded his compliance, as an enterprise of some
moment was to be deliberated on; but, alas! in vain did they waste an hour and
more in arguments to this end; in vain did they attempt to persuade him; in
vain did they entreat him; in vain did they tell him what he had to dread from
the consequences of his obstinately persisting to disobey the orders of his
Commanding Officer. Instead of paying polite attention to the advice given him,
he, on the contrary, not only disregarded it, but gave himself the liberty to
speak of Captain Jones in terms highly disrespectful and insolent, and said he
would see him on shore, when they must kill one or other, etc.

On the 23d September last, when the signal for a general chase was given to
pursue the Baltic fleet, the Alliance Frigate was the headmost ship of our
squadron, and continued to keep ahead until she began to near the enemy, when
Captain Landais very unexpectedly and agreeably surprised Capt. Jones by
hauling his ship's wind, thereby politely leaving room for his commander to
approach the largest ship, which he instantly engaged; Capt. Landais still
keeping at a respectful distance from his commander, which respect he however
continued to preserve, mal-a-propos, until very late in the engagement. The
action had lasted more than an hour, and the Serapis and Bon Homme Richard had
been made fast along-side each other by Captain Jones, head and stern together,
for some time before I received the wound which obliged me to quit the deck, at
which time the Bon Homme Richard still continued alone with a force much
superior to herself; and although she had been most severely treated by her
enemy, she nevertheless continued to hug her in close embrace. The behavior of
our consorts upon this day was very mysterious, but that of Captain Landais was
of such a cast, as, in my opinion, must unavoidably announce him to the public
a man devoid of conduct -- a man of infamous principles -- or, a rank coward.

MATTHEW MEASE. Mr. Mease, of Philadelphia, was a gentleman of a worthy
character. He was not bred a seaman, but had many times crossed the ocean,
being a merchant and owner of ships. His love for America (his country) induced
him to embark in the Bon Homme Richard, and, the other offices being previously
filled, he accepted the place of Purser. In the engagement with the Serapis, he
commanded the quarter deck guns of the Bon Homme Richard, and behaved with
distinguished coolness and intrepidity, 'till he was dangerously wounded in the
head by a grape shot. The next day his skull was trepanned in six or seven
places; but, immediately after the Surgeon had tied up his head in the action,
which lasted three hours after his misfortune, he returned again upon deck, and
was witness to all the conduct of the Alliance.

Serapis, at the Texel, November 13, 1779.
[N. B. The Alliance having received no shot from the enemy, her Captain had
the advantage to have none of his men either killed or wounded during the whole
engagement. And it is highly worthy of remark, that before the Alliance raked
the Bon Homme Richard by firing alternately into her head and stern, the enemy
had been dislodged and driven from the tops and quarter deck of the Serapis to
her first and second batteries, where they were under cover; whereas, the
discharge of the second battery aforesaid having beaten in one side of the Bon
Homme Richard and blown out the other, so as to make a breach from before the
mainmast to the stern, inclusive of the stern-post and rudder, which were cut
off, had ferreted out and dislodged all the persons who had been there
skulking: They had taken a new post for safety, on the forecastle of the Bon
Homme Richard, where they could not be fired upon from the Serapis, but were
exposed to the fire of the Alliance, as well as the officers and men who had
behaved gallantly from the beginning.]

No. XVIII.
The following extract of a Letter from Dr. Franklin to Capt. Landais, dated
Passy, March 12, 1780, and which he has published, will serve to give a further
insight into his character:

NO one has ever learned the opinion I formed of you from the enquiry made into
your conduct -- I kept it entirely to myself -- I have not even hinted it in my
letters to America, because I would not hazard giving to any one a bias to your
prejudice. By communicating a part of that opinion privately to you, I can do
no harm, for you may burn it. I should not give you the pain of reading it, if
your demand did not make it necessary: I think you then so imprudent, so
litigious and quarrelsome a man, even with your best friends, that peace and
good order, and consequently the quiet and regular subordination so necessary
to success, are, where you preside, impossible; these are within my observation
and apprehension: -- Your military operations I leave to more capable judges.
If, therefore, I had twenty ships of war in my disposition, I should not give
one of them to Captain Landais: The same temper which excluded him from the
French marine He imposed himself on America as having been Captain of a ship of
the line, in the navy of France; but the fact rather appears to be, that having
been placed under the Captain du Port, or Master Attendant of the Port of
Breast, he was not in the line of promotion of the corpse of Officers of the
marine, (Captain de Brulot, and several other subaltern grades, having no
affinity to the respective duty required of those under officers in that
service, are in the same predicament) and therefore he never had, and could not
have attained the rank of Lieutenant de Vaisseau, or even Ensign in the Royal
Navy. After he had given ten years trial of his temper and talents, he had been
dismissed from the service of France without honors or a pension; and was
adrift for several years, when, in the year 1777, he prevailed on Mr. Deane, by
constant application, to take him into the service of America. He told Mr.
Deane he had been formerly appointed Captain of a ship of the line, and had
been sacrificed by jealousy. But this pretended line of battle ship was nothing
but an old transport vessel that had been condemned and disarmed, as unfit for
war. Mr. Landais was employed to bring a transport vessel from France to
America, with a brevet of Captain in the American navy, and an extra
gratification of twelve thousand livres -- he arrived in America about the time
when the alliance was concluded with France; and Congress not only confirmed
his brevet, but also appointed him Captain of the best frigate in their
service, then just launched, and named her the ALLIANCE. This was intended as a
compliment to his Most Christian Majesty, therefore Congress had been grossly
imposed upon. Since he has been turned out of the American service, it is said,
and believed, he has been constantly complaining, abusing the most respectable
characters, and saying he has been again "sacrificed" by a general combination;
beginning with Dr. Franklin. He has attacked the justice of Congress, and of
all persons in authority under the sovereignty: Yet his pecuniary advantages
have not been less considerable (exclusive of the twelve thousand livres
gratuity) than if he had left the service of his own accord, and with honor.
would weigh equally with me; of course I shall not replace him in the
Alliance.

FINIS.

