Alphonso and Dalinda: OR, THE MAGIC OF ART AND NATURE. A MORAL TALE.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY MADAME LA COMTESSE DE GENLIS. TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY
THOMAS HOLCROFT.

A NEW EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, IN SECOND-STREET, BETWEEN MARKET AND
CHESNUT-STREET. M,DCC,LXXXVII.

INTRODUCTION.
THE duties of a soldier obliged the Marquis de Clemire to quit his family and
join the army. His Lady retired to her estate at Champcery, in the remotest
part of Burgundy, accompanied by the Baronness her mother, and the Abbe
Fremont, who was tutor to her son Caesar* a youth of about ten years old.
Pulcheria was about seven years of age, and her sister Caroline eighteen months
older.

Champcery soon became agreeable to its inhabitants; the children wondered why
they were sorry to leave Paris; to give variety to their amusements, the
Baronness and Madame de Clemire, after supper, that is, from half after eight
to half after nine, promised to relate Tales for their recreation and
instruction: This gave the children great pleasure, and occasionally introduced
conversations highly entertaining and instructive.

One day, after dinner, Madame de Clemire, having a letter to write, left her
children in the hall with the Abbe during the hour of recreation: in a quarter
of an hour, having finished her letter, she returned, and perceived Caroline
and Pulcheria sitting together reading in a corner.

What are you reading there, my dears? said Madame de Clemire.

It is a book, mamma, that Mademoiselle Julienne has lent us.

Mademoiselle Julienne, is she capable of directing you in the choice of books!
And besides, ought you to borrow books without informing me?

That Is what I told these young ladies, said the Abbe, who was playing at
chess, with the Curate, at the other end of the room, but they would not
believe me. Master Caesar is more rational, he is overlooking our game, and
reading the Journal de Paris.

Let me see what book it is, said Madame de Clemire.

It is Le Prince Percinet, and La Princess Graciouse, mamma.

A Fairy Tale! said the Baronness. How can you be pleased with such a book?

I see, mamma, I have done wrong; but I confess I am fond of fairy tales; they
are very amusing; they are so mavelous, so extraordinary, and have so many
changes from crystal palaces to golden castles, that it is quite delighting to
read.

But don't you know that all these miracles are false.

To be sure, mamma; they are fairy tales.

How does it happen, that this idea does not disgust you then?

We own, mamma, the stories you tell us are a thousand times more interesting.
I could hear them for ever, and I should soon be tired of fairy tales.

But if you are so fond of the mavelous, you might far better fatisfy that
inclination by reading books which are instructive.

How so, mamma?

It is your ignorance only, that makes you suppose the mavelous exists no
where but in fairy-tales. Nature and art afford phenomenon as surprising, as
the most remarkable incidents in Prince Percinet.

Is it possible, mamma?

I will prove it is; and for that purpose undertake to write a tale the most
striking and singular you ever heard; the mavelous of which shall all be true.

Caesar, who had overheard in part the conversation, left chess and the Journal
de Paris, and approaching Madame de Clemire said, are you in earnest, mamma?

You shall judge yourself: I must have imaginary persons, and fabulous
incidents; but observe the mavelous shall all be true: every thing that shall
wear the face of prodigy or enchantment I will take from nature; the events
shall be such as either have happened, or do daily happen at present.

Well, that now appears incredible.

But I am sure of one thing, mamma; which is, that you will have no crystal
palaces, with pillars of diamond, in your tale.

Yes, since you defy me to it, I will have crystal palaces, with pillars of
diamond; and what is more, a city all of silver.

What, without the assistance of magic, fairies, and necromancers!

Yes, without magic, fairies, or necromancers; with other events still more
surprising.

I shall never recover from my amazement* Dear, dear, how impatient I am to
hear your tale, mamma!

It will take me three weeks at least to write it, for I must look over several
voyages and works of natural history.

What can you find in those instructive books, things more mavelous than in
Prince Percinet? How does it happen then, that fairy tales are not out of
fashion?

Because the kind of tales I speak of, require previous knowledge, which is
only to be gained by study.

But how then, mamma, shall we be able to understand your tale?

I will employ no technical terms, and only relate the effects without
explaining their causes; so that if you had not been told it should be all
truth, you would have supposed it absolutely a fairy tale; but you must wait
three weeks, during which time our evening and morning stories shall all be
suspended.

O dear, O dear, three weeks!

Do yourselves justice, Caroline and Pulcheria; have I not forbid your ever
looking in a book that was not given you, either by me or your grandmamma.

That is very true, and we deserve a longer penance.

The three weeks being expired, Madame de Clemire promised, in the evening, to
read them the tale she had written. After supper they ran immediately into the
hall, and Madame de Clemire, sitting by the side of a table, took her
manuscript from her pocket.

Before I begin, said she, you ought to recollect, that I have undertaken
chiefly to relate extraordinary, yet possible events; incidents which to you
shall appear incredible, but which, however, have, or might have, all happened:
in a word, phenomenon, the existence of which, past or present, is well proved.
I have only invented the plot of the story, that is to say, the sole part which
to you shall appear credible; while all that you will think mavelous, all
that will recall to your minds your fairy tales, is precisely true and natural

O, that will be charming!

You will think my incredible truths, a thousand times better than your common
well confirmed every day truths.

But what, mamma, must we continually believe what we cannot comprehend?

Do not think yourself humbled by that, Caesar; that is a destiny common to
manhood, as well as to infancy; our capacities are too confined to comprehend
all the truths which are demonstrable; and it would be absurd to affirm a thing
does not exist, because it is beyond the limits of our understandings. Let us
not adopt errors, but let us not give way to that vain and ridiculous
presumption which rejects, with disdain, and without examination, every thing
that reason cannot conceive.

Well, mamma, you have told us that every thing in your tale is well
authenticated; therefore we may blindly believe and take the facts for granted,
and that is as much as I desire.

I wish to understand what I hear, mamma; and therefore shall be glad of your
explanations.

I will willingly explain whatever I can; but that will not be much. I am not
learned: besides, as I have said, there is an infinity of phenomenon in
existence, of which the most learned men cannot explain the causes.

And will you interrupt your tale, mamma, at each mavelous circumstance, to
give us an explanation?

O no^ for, as you may well think, such interruptions would spoil my story. I
have written notes, which we will read with attention another time. At present;
if you will listen, I will begin.

Ay, that we will, willingly, dear mamma. So saying, they drew their chairs
neare^ to Madame de Clemire* who opened her manuscript, and read aloud the
following tale:

ALPHONSO AND DALINDA: OR, THE MAGIC OF ART AND NATURE. A MORAL TALE.
It is not by walking in our cultivated ^ields, it is not in riding post
through any (...) country, that the great varieties and effects of nature may
be known, but in transporting one's self from the ^^^ning sands of the torrid
zone, to the icy mountains of the poles. M. DE BUFFON.
ALPHONSO, the hero of my history, was born in Portugal. His father, Don
Ramirez, enjoyed riches and preferment because he was a favorite. Born of an
obscure family, but with a subtle intriguing, and ambitious character he
introduced himself at court, found protectors, formed partisans, and became at
last the idol of his sovereign. The young Alphonso was educated at Lisbon, in
the sumptuous palace of his father: an only son to the richest and most
powerful man in the kingdom, adulation kneeled at his cradle, accompanied and
corrupted his youth.

Don Ramirez, occupied by great projects and little cabals, could not be at the
same time an assiduous courtier and a vigilant father; he was therefore obliged
to commit the care of his son's education to strangers. Alphonso had teachers
of languages, history, geography, mathematics, music, and drawing, all of whom
wondered, or pretended to wonder, at his prodigious capacity and strength of
genius. Notwithstanding which, Alphonso learnt little, except to draw flowers,
and play a few airs on the guittar.

This was sufficient to charm all the ladies of the Court, especially when he
gave them to understand he was also a profound mathematician, an excellent
naturalist, and a great chemist. Neither did he tell them any thing he did not
himself believe; for his governor, his teachers, his valets, and the crowd of
complaisant people that paid their court to his father, all declared he was a
miracle, so repeatedly, he could not doubt of its being a certain fact.

He not only supposed himself the most distinguished young man at Court, by his
talents, beauty and knowledge, but he likewise believed his birth to be as
illustrious as his fortune Don Ramirez, during his leisure moments, had
invented a list of his forefathers, as far back as the fabulous times of Lusus
The Portugueze were anciently called Lusitanians, from Lusus, or Lysias, one of
their kings, who, according to the fable, was either the son or companion of
Bacchus.
; which genealogy, every body but his son laughed at; the world is not apt to
credit old titles, never heard of till the pretended owner is become rich.
Alphonso, however, too vain not to be credulous on such a subject, saw no one
superior to his father, except his sovereign, and the branches of the royal
family; and yet Alphonso, inebriated with pride, full of ignorance, folly, and
presumption, spoilt by pomp, flattery, and fortune's favors; Alphonso, I say,
was yet not lost past retrieving: he was possessed of courage, a feeling heart,
and a good understanding; and the inconstancy of fortune was preparing a
lesson, that would teach him to know himself.

As Don Ramirez owed his elevation only to intrigue, so a new intrigue
unexpectedly changed his destiny; he was disgraced and stripped of all his
employments, just as Alphonso was seventeen. This unforeseen revolution not
only deprived Don Ramirez of titles that flattered his pride, but also of a
great part of his wealth; and (...) was one of those little ambitious people,
who equally regret titles and riches: besides he was in debt, and his disgrace
made his creditors as pressing and importunate, as they had been formerly
moderate and forbearing; in fine, Don Ramirez saved nothing of all his fortune,
except his magnificent palace at Lisbon.

It is true, that this palace contained immense riches, in furniture, plate,
paintings, and especially in diamonds* all which Don Ramirez only waited for a
favorable opportunity to sell, when a dreadful adventure happened, which gave
the finishing stroke to his misfortunes. He had not yet ventured to tell his
son, that the state of his affairs forced him to sell his palace, and return in
the country. At last he determined to declare his real situation, and
accordingly sent for him one morning, to open his heart to him on that subject.

As soon as they were alone, tell me, Alphonso, said Don Ramirez, what effect
has my disgrace and the loss of my fortune had upon you? I have always thought,
my father, said Alphonso, from having always heard, during your prosperity,
that never ministry was so glorious as yours, nor ever minister so loved and
respected by a nation: the love of the people, therefore, and the glory you
have acquired, ought to console you for your unjust disgrace. Besides, you have
many friends, who, no doubt, will all return as usual, the moment you shall
wish them so to do. Don Nugnez, Don Alvarez, and many others, whom I have met,
have all protested as much to me; ^everal of them have even told me, that they
have only seemed to absent themselves, the better to serve you in secret; add
to which, you still have an immense fortune, and an illu^^^o^s birth; and in
spite of the snares of envy, will ever remain the first peer of the realm.

You are deceived, Alphonso, interrupted Don Ramirez; what, are you ignorant
that the name of my father was absolutely unknown?

I know it was replied Alphonso; but I also know that the old titles which you
have re^^^ed in our family, make it equal to any in the kingdom. You yourself,
my father, have deigned to read those precious proofs of honor, which are
contained in the casket that is locked up in your cabinet.

Don Ramirez listened and sighed; he had had the ridiculous vanity to purchase
a genealogy, and never sufficiently felt, till his disgrace, how superfluous,
unworthy, and contemptible is such deceit. At last he saw what flattery till
then had hidden, which was, that, except his son, every body knew his birth,
and laughed at his silly pretensions. He wished to undeceive Alphonso, but
could not resolve to confess a falsity which must make him appear so mean.

He was in this mournful perplexity and silence when he was suddenly staggered,
and saw Alphonso reel; the color forsook his cheeks, and he rose; save
yourself, my father, cried Alphonso, support yourself on my arm, follow -- come
--

So saying, he impetuously hurried his father away; at the same instant a
thousand confused cries were heard; they ran toward the staircase, and as
they ran, the floor opened beneath the feet of Alphonso, who, that he might not
drag his father down to destruction, quitted the arm of Don Romirez, instantly
sunk, and seemed buried in the ruins.

Alphonso had the good fortune, however, to be only slightly wounded; he rose,
and found himself in his father's cabinet: amongst the rubbish which surrounded
him, were two caskets, one containing the jewels of his father, the other, the
so much vaunted genealogy. Alphonso did not hesitate: willing to save, amidst
this dreadful disaster, that which appeared to him most precious, he s^ized the
box of titles, and fled into the garden; but recollecting the danger of his
father, was determined, at the hazard of his life, again to enter the house,
when he heard Don Ramirez calling him at the other end of the garden.

It was not without difficulty they rejoined each other; the earth on which
they trod, like the sea agitated by a violent tempest, rose in mountains, or
sunk in dreadful valleys beneath Alphon^o's feet. His ear was struck (...) a
subterranean found, like the roaring of waves (...) breaking upon the rocks; he
staggered, fell, got up, and fell again, and, unable to keep upon his feet,
crept on all sours, with great difficulty, toward his father. He saw the earth
open on all sides, and forming gulphs, whence issued ^ire and flame, which rose
and vanished in the air; the heavens became dark, the pale and livid lightning
pierced through the black clouds that covered them, the deep thunders rolled,
and Alphonso beheld the bolts of heaven ready to fall upon his head, and hell
opening beneath his feet.

Often when he imagined himself within a step of his father, a new shock threw
them at a distance; the sweat ran down his face, his clothes and hair were
covered with sand and dust: yet, amidst the scene of horrors, he never
abandoned his dear casket; ^he imagined Don Ramirez would receive it with
transport: that idea sustained his courage and his strength. At last he
rejoined his father, who re^eived him with open arms, though with an aching
heart. Oh my father! cried Alphonso, look, I have saved the casket.

The jewels! hastily interrupted Don Ramirez.

No, no, replied Alphonso; I knew better how to choose; it is your genealogy.

Don Ramirez, in dreadful consternation, raised his eyes to heaven: I am justly
punished, said he, for my ridiculous vanity. He could say no more, his tears
interrupted his speech. Alphonso, too much prepossessed and agitated to
comprehend the meaning of these words* continued in his former error, and
thought only of saving his father. A moment's calm left them time to consider
the mournful objects that surrounded them.

They sat down opposite their palace, now half destroyed: that magnificent
palace, built within the last ten years, that palace so new, so rich, so
admired, is now only a heap of ruins. He who had beheld the bare walls, the
mouldered columns, the glassless windows, must have believed that time alone
could have produced so terrible a revolution! Ages seemed necessary to destroy
a monument built with so much solidity, and yet the fearful destruction is the
work of a few minutes!

The garden too, that masterpiece of art and nature, is now an unmeaning chaos
of dust, mud, and mouldered leaves. In the morning there was seen a superb
cascade, where is it now? In the very spot where an artificial mount was
raised, at a prodigious expense, gapes a dreadful gulf. What are become of the
citron groves, the marble statues, the vases of alabaster and of porphyry? A
few vestiges still remain, a few broken fragments; the rest is swallowed up and
lost!

Don Ramirez looked at the surrounding dissolution; he was sitting near a
little wood that had risen beneath his own eyes; the trees are all torn up by
the roots, scattered here and there, buried or extended in the mire: those
trees, destined to survive the hand that planted them, are torn from the bosom
of the earth, with as much ease and rapidity, as the verdure and yielding
flowers that grew beneath their shade.

Oh! day of horrors! cried Don Ramirez aloud, loft labors, treasures interred
in this place of terrors; why did not I make a better use of the money this
building and this garden have cost? But the earthquake is abated (2), let us
endeavor to regain the ruins, let us save my diamonds, if possible.

So saying, he arose, and at the same instant a new and dreadful shock extended
him again upon the ground: the remaining walls tumbled, the rubbish was
ingulfed, and the palace disappeared; a whirlwind, and cloud of ^moke and dust
rose as it were at his feet; yet, amidst this scene of desolation, Don Ramirez
perceived a moment after a band of hardened wretches, bearing lighted torches,
and creeping toward the ruins of the palace, with an intent, before the last
shock, to pillage (3).

Alphonso wished to punish such unbridled villainy, and would have rushed upon
them, had not his father caught and retained him in his arms. Oh! my son, said
Don Ramirez, bathing him with a deluge of tears, let us fly from this scene of
horrid destruction; we are near the banks of the Tagus, let us seek shelter and
safety on board the ships.

Alphonso gave one arm to his father, held the casket in the other, left the
garden, and entered one of the public squares: the houses were all in ruins,
overthrown, or consumed, by the flames of a general conflagration. After a
thousand fearful risks, Don Ramirez and the young Alphonso, at last, found
protection on board a vessel, commanded by the brave and generous Fernandes.
The same Fernandes, who formerly had so much cause to complain of Don Ramirez,
but who, in this time of public calamity, saw, only, in an ancient enemy, an
unhappy man, to whom his assistance was become necessary. He ran to Don
Ramirez, embraced and consoled him; for compassion in great minds is so
forcible and so delicate, that it can soften woes the most cruel. In the mean
time, as Fernandes did not once bewail his own situation, Don Ramirez
questioned him concerning it. You had, said he, a great fortune, is it not all
lo^t in this dreadful day?

My house at Lisbon is consumed.

The loss is, no doubt, considerable.

No; the building was small and simple.

Your jewels and diamonds; are they saved?

I had none.

You had a garden.

Yes; but far removed from Lisbon, where I passed the greatest part of my time;
it is in Alentejo A province of Portugal, between the Tagus and the Guadiana.
Evora is the metropolis.


I have heard of it, and hope to God the earthquake has not ravaged that
province. Is your country house a fine one?

No; but it is convenient.

Have not you formed some advantageous establishments there?

Some satisfactory ones; a manufactory, and a hospital. (Don Ramirez sighed.)

Is your manufactory profitable?

Yes; it gives subsistence to a number of workmen, and defrays, in part, the
expenses at the hospital.

I see you make a worthy use of your wealth; heaven preserve it to you. It is,
indeed, horrible, to be ruined with a benevolent heart, and to be obliged to
relinquish such honorable, such glorious establishments.

One should then find consolation in the remembrance of the good one had
formerly done.

Don Ramirez again fetched a profound sigh, and bitterly regretted the use he
had made of his fortune; his eyes at last were opened; but too late, alas!
either for his glory or repose.

Thus totally ruined, Don Ramirez received from his sovereign, thanks to the
solicitations of the noble Fernandes, a small pension, though sufficient to
a^^ord the means of subsistence. With this he determined to retire to the
province of Beira, whither he departed with his son, and settled in an obscure,
but pleasant retreat, on the agreeable banks of the Mondego; but, followed by
deep regret, and incessant recollection, he found not the tranquillity he
sought.

Alphonso, devoted to ambition, and nothing abated in presumption and pride,
consoled himself for the loss of fortune, by the hope, that in time, he should
establish a more brilliant, and far more solid one than what his father's had
been. He formed a thousand extravagant and chimerical projects, the absurdity
of which his ignorance and vanity did not suffer him to perceive: incapable of
reflecting and employing his time in a useful and rational manner, he passed a
great part of it in reading romances; these frivolous and dangerous books
heated his imagination, and gave him false ideas of men and things.

Not far from the retreat he inhabited, was the famous Fountain of Love; a name
it owed to two unfortunate lovers, who, in ancient times, often met on its
brinks, drawn thither by an imprudent passion. There it was that Don Pedro, and
the beautiful, the tender Ines, a thousand times discoursed of their secret
loves Such is the tradition. This fountain still exists in Portugal, near the
Mondego, and is called the Fountain of Love. Camoens, in his beautiful poem of
the Lusiad, gives birth to this fountain, from the tears which the nymphs of
the Mondego shed at the death of Ines.
. Two antique palm trees overshaded the Fountain, united to each other by a
flexible garland of vine branches and ivy. The water rises impetuously from a
majestic rock, returns in a cascade, and forms, upon a bed of shells, a large
rivulet, which slowly winds, and gently murmurs, among eternal verdures, shrubs
of myrtle, of citron, and the laurel rose.

Thither Alphonso often went to read and ruminate. One morning, happening to go
later than ordinary, he heard, as he drew near the Fountain, two persons
speaking in an unknown tongue: in one of their voices Alphonso found an
inexpressible sweetness, which wonderfully excited his curiosity; he hid
himself, with emotion, behind a myrtle bush, through the branches of which he
discovered an object most worthy of fixing his attention; a young nymph, for so
she seemed, scarce fifteen, of the most perfect beauty, was sitting on the
banks of the Fountain, beside a man, who appeared to be her father; to him she
was listening with the utmost attention, and by her looks it was evident he was
reciting some interesting event.

As he proceeded, he often pointed to the palm trees and the fountain, whence
Alphonso supposed he was relating the history of the unhappy Ines. The angelic
listener had fixed her eyes upon the unknown relater, and kept a profound
silence; but, from the expression of her countenance, her thoughts might easily
be divined; curiosity, fear, and pity, were successively painted in her eyes;
and with so much energy, that Alphonso imagined himself was hearing a tale that
she was telling; he saw her tears, and wept with her the death of Ines.
Presently her eyes became suddenly dry, her cheeks pale, and terror and
indignation succeeded to pity. Alphonso shuddered in sympathy, detesting the
excess to which passion, and a desire of vengeance had carried the unfortunate
Don Pedro.

The history of Ines is ended, and yet the stranger continues speaking; no
doubt he is making prudent reflections on the danger of the passions, and on
the criminal and fatal imprudence of a young woman, who, without the consent of
her parents, dared to choose for and dispose of herself.

The beauteous hearer ran to the arms of the stranger, with all the expression
of the strongest feeling: then turning her glistening eyes toward that
Fountain, which had formerly been a witness of the indiscreet vows of love; she
sighed, fell on her knees, raised her clasped and eager hands to heaven, and
seemed to promise the author of her days ^n eternal obedience; her beauty, in
that attitude, had something celestial and angelic.

Alphonso could not contain his extatic transports; an exclamation escaped
aloud, and fearing to be discovered, he hastily fled from his hiding place,
full of the idea of what he had seen. He followed the first path he found, but
presently awaking from his dream, again returned toward the Fountain. The
beauteous stranger was gone, and Alphonso contemplated with grief the place
where she had sat, and thought he still saw her on her knees before her father.
The next moment he remembers her absence, his heart is oppressed, his eyes
filled with tears, he is plunged into a profound and melancholy meditation,
when suddenly he hears a cry of terror, which pierces him to the very heart.

He runs, he flies; but what does he behold! It is the stranger, alone, pale,
dishevelled, and flying from a mad bull that pursues her. Alphonso darts
toward her, seizes her in his arms, and bears her off, at the very moment,
when, overcome by the excess of fear, she was fallen, not ten pa^es from the
furious animal.

Alphonso, charged with a burden so precious* ra^^ly turns aside behind the
palm trees of the Fountain, and bears her senseless in his arms in safety upon
a high rock.

Here he perceived the father of the stranger, running, wild, and, as soon as
he saw his daughter in safety, blessing God and her deliverer. At the same
instant the bull returned, and bent his course toward the father, who had not
time to avoid him, or mount the rock. In vain did Alphonso still hold his
senseless prize in one arm, and extend the other toward her father; the latter
cried aloud to him in Portuguese, not to abandon his daughter on that dangerous
summit, and ran himself immediately behind one of the largest of the palm trees
of the fountain.

The bull endeavored to pass between them; the passage was narrow, he was in
full speed, his body became fixed between the trees, and his head and horns
entangled in the festoons of ivy and vine-trees. The stranger seized the
advantage of the moment, drew an etwee case from his pocket, opened it, took
out a pin, and rain it in the back of the bull; but how great was the surprise
of Alphonso! when he heard the bull bellow dreadfully, saw him drop, struggle
to rise, again fall down, and, after a few vain efforts, expire.

Nay now, but sure, cried all the children at once, that is not possible.

Pardon me, said Madame Clemire, but it is.

What, mamma! cried Caroline; a bull killed by the prick of a pin!

Yes, my dear; it is very true.

Then I hope you will not say, said Pulcheri^, (...) was so very wrong, to cry,
when the r^se-(...) pricked my fingers.

That thorn was not quite so dangerous as the pin of the stranger.

Was it very long, mamma?

Much shorter than the pins with which I pin on my hat.

This seems incredible. Shall we find the explanation of this prodigy in your
notes?

Assuredly.

That will be very curious.

Oh, I have many other things, far more astonishing to tell you yet.

It is a delightful story: do, dear mamma, have the goodness to go on; we will
not interrupt you any more.

Alphonso, continued Madame de Clemire, was not less surprised than you are, at
the sudden death of the bull; amazement rendered him motionless, while the
stranger ascended the rock, and took his daughter in his arms, just as she
began to recover the use of her senses and look around. Alphonso was not an
unfeeling witness of the pure joy testified by the father and daughter; the
latter did not understand Portuguese, therefore could not thank Alphonso; but
she related to her father, in a few words, the dreadful danger from which she
had been delivered.

The stranger testified a lively sense of gratitude (...) the generous
protector of his dear Dalinda (...) was the name of his lovely daughter; and
while (...) spoke, Dalinda cast a tender glance at Alphonso, (...) more
expressive than the thanks of her father. Alphonso, penetrated and enraptured,
endeavored (...) prolong a conversation so sweet, by questioning the stranger,
concerning the manner in which he had been separated from his daughter: he
replied, that he had been culling simples; that Dalinda, occupied after the
same manner, was at some distance from him, but not out of sight; that lifting
up his head, he had seen her running with incredible swiftness; that she had
already got above six hundred yards from him, and that at the same moment be
perceived the bull pursuing her; that he ran after her with all his power, but
had stumbled over the stump of an old tree, and fallen.

Having finished his recital, Alphonso asked if he intended to stay long in
Portugal? No, answered the stranger, we set off immediately for Spain, being
desirous of seeing as much of that kingdom as possible. This intelligence threw
Alphonso into the utmost consternation! He hung down his head, and was
mournfully silent; the stranger, after again repeating his thanks and gratitude
in the most affectionate terms, rose, took his leave, and disappeared with
Dalinda.

Alphonso remained, some time, petrified, and scarcely seeming to breathe; at
last, coming to himself, he flung impetuously from the fountain, and flew to
find the stranger once again, to ask him a thousand ^^^tions, and especially to
enquire what was his (...), (...) what his country. He wondered how it was
^^^^^ble he could have let him depart without first gai^^^^ such interesting
information. He ran here and the^^ like a madman, but all his searches were in
vain.

Overcome with fatigue and despair, he returned once more to the Fountain. As
he drew near, he saw something shining in the path, and approaching, found it
was a large blue ribbon embroidered with gold, his heart beat, he knew it to be
the scarf of Dalinda. It was in that very place that Dalinda, overcome with
terror, had fallen senseless; and there it was that Alphonso, raising her in
his arms, had untied the ribbon that girded her waist.

Alphonso affected, stooped with transport and respect, to take up a ribbon so
precious; the sash of Dalinda was the cestus of innocence, and the girdle of
the graces. He sighed, and vowed for ever to preserve a pledge so dear to his
heart, which he had thus acquired by chance. In the mean time the hours glided
away, Alphonso could not tear himself from the Fountain; and night and darkness
had surprised him, still plunged in his reverie, if Don Ramirez had not come to
search for him himself.

Don Ramirez had never taken any part in his son's education; had never asked,
nor ever possessed his confidence. Alphonso did not mention his adventure to
him; but, on the contrary, carefully concealed the thoughts and emotions of his
soul. Devoted to the romantic ideas which seduced his imagination, he had only
one pleasure, that of passing his hours at the Fountain, where he first beheld
Dalinda; there every thing recalled the object, which reason ought to have
erased from his memory; here Dalinda, at the knees of her father, was retraced
in his fancy; here, in his fixed thoughts, she still lived in all her bloom of
beauty, adorned with every charm of innonocence and virtue; near this
shrubbery, Dalinda owed to him her life; upon that rock she opened her eyes,
and cast a look of sweet thankfulness upon Alphonso; beneath these palm trees
did she sit, and that clear water once reflected her seraphic form.

Thus did Alphonso consume his days, in vain regrets upon the dangerous brink
of this fatal spring. Such does fable paint the wretched Narcissus, a feeble
victim of insensate love; and so did Alphonso, pale, dejected, without force,
without courage, fix his eyes, drowned in his tears, upon the Fountain of Love.
The echoes of this solitary place, which anciently so often resounded with the
name of Ines, repeat at present, only that of Dalinda. Dalinda is carved upon
every tree, even on the very palm trees, on which formerly Ines alone was read.
Alphonso sung to his guittar the verses he had written on Dalinda, and engraved
upon the rocks the rhymes that love and melancholy dictated.

These romantic follies totally occupied him for some time: but as the
pleasures which reason disapproves are never durable, his imagination cooled by
degrees, and wearisome disgust succeeded enthusiasm; his songs and complaints
began to cease, the echoes of the Fountain became mute, and the trees, the
streams, and verdure, no longer could inspire him with poetry and profound
reveries.

Don Ramirez observed the alteration of body and mind which had happened to his
son; he questioned him, and Alphonso confessed himself dissatisfied and
consumed with ennui. He had not forgot, that the stranger told him he should
remain some time in Spain; and Alphonso added, he ardently desired to travel
through, and become acquainted with that country. Don Ramirez, who, for his own
part, had none of those resources in himself, which make men fond of solitude,
gladly seized this proposition, and two days after they departed for Spain.
After traversing the province of Tralos-Montes, they entered Spain by Galicia;
they then traveled through the northern part of Spain, the Asturi^s, Biscaye,
Navarre, Arragon, and arrived at last in Catalonia (4).

Alphonso's passion for Dalinda was rekindled by this voyage; the hope and the
desire of once more finding her, acquired new force from thoughts, which an
enthusiastic imagination had at first produced. He was impatient to arrive at
Madrid, thinking he could not fail to meet her in this metropolis, but Don
Ramirez would absolutely remain some time in Catalonia, in order to visit the
famous Mont-Serrat; this mountain, composed of steep rocks, is so high, that,
when arrived on its summit, the neighboring mountains that surround it, seem
so diminished, as to look little more than mole-hils; and the views from thence
are the most majestic and extensive possible It is said you may see the islands
of Majorca and Minorca from this place, which are more than sixty leagues
distant. See Nouveau Voyage en Espagne, Tom. 1.


At the foot of one of these solitary rocks is an antique monastry Saint
Ignatius there devoted himself to penance, and there formed the design of
founding the Society of Jesuits.
. But the most interesting part of the mountain is the desert, in which are
several hermitages, affecting asylums in the eyes of true philosophy: each of
these retreats contain a chapel, a cell, a small garden, and a well, dug in the
rock. The Hermits who inhabit them, are most of them gentlemen, who, disgusted
with the world, come to this place of tranquillity and rest, and give
themselves up entirely to meditation See the work last cited, Tom. 1.
.

At break of day, Don Ramirez and his son began to ascend Mont-Serrat; the
aspect of the mountain, might well have made them renounce their design; its
prodigious elevation, and the enormous and craggy rocks which projected on
every side, promised no agreeable walk; but in travesing these menacing steeps,
delicious valleys, meadows, enamelled with a thousand flowers, thickets formed
by the simple hand of nature, and cascades, which throw themselves from the
white and stoney ridges with animating tumult, give a thousand varieties, and
embellish this solitude, which is become the fortunate refuge of peace and
virtue (5).

Don Ramirez, on entering the desert, met one of these Hermits reading as he
walked. He was struck by his noble and venerable figure; he passed near them,
and as Don Ramirez was speaking with his son, the Hermit, hearing the
Portuguese tongue, took his eyes from his book, and approached the strangers.
He told Don Ramirez, how happy he was once more to meet a countryman, and
invited them both to rest a while in his hermitage. The proposition was
gratefully accepted, and the venerable Recluse brought them vegetables and
fruit.

After the repast, Alphonso, desirous of continuing his walk, left them,
telling his father he would wait for him in the desert. The old man led Don
Ramirez to his garden, and there they sat themselves down beside a gentle
water-fall, upon a rock overgrown with moss.

Don Ramirez, then addressing himself to the Hermit, said, what revolution,
what cruel reverse of fortune, my father, can have torn you from your native
country, and fixed you in this desert? It is easy to see by your manners you
were not born to end your days in a wilderness like this.

No, replied the Hermit, it has been my misfortune to know the world, and the
Court.

These words inspired Don Ramirez with the most ardent curiosity, which the
Hermit consented to satisfy.

It imports you but little, said he, to know my name: I have been twelve years
an inhabitant of this mountain. By this time they believe in Portugal that I am
dead. I have devoted myself to oblivion, therefore I will not speak of my
family, but in as few words as possible relate my deplorable story.

Madame de Clemire was continuing to read, but the Baronness gave the signal of
retreat; in vain were several voices at once heard, entreating for one quarter
of an hour more; the rule was absolute.

The following evening Madame de Clemire again opened her manuscript, and said,
we left off yesterday where the Hermit was going to recount his history. Don
Ramirez listened; the Hermit sighed, and thus he said:

My family is one of the most ancient in all Portugal. I received a good
education, inherited a tolerable fortune, and by my success in war, obtained
the esteem and benefactions of my sovereign, married a woman whom I loved,
became a father, and of course became happy.

Such was my situation when the late King died. This event deprived me of a
beloved master, a protector, and a father; for to a faithful subject a good
King is all these. I retired from Court to an estate in the country, and
dedicated my time solely to the education of my son. This son, the object of a
most tender affection, was superior even to my hopes.

As soon as he was of an age proper to appear at Court, I entrusted him to the
care of a relation, sent him to Lisbon, and remained in my country solitude. I
was now, for the first time, separated from my son, and yet never was happier.
I imagined his future success, and indulged the fondest hopes of his rising
fame. -- Hope, though the most uncertain, the most deceitful, is yet, perhaps,
the greatest of blessings, and which the heart of a father only can properly
estimate. When our own interest produces the flattering illusion, it is
moderated, enfeebled, or, perhaps, dispelled by fear; but what father ever yet
prescribed bounds to the hopes he conceived of his son; Alas! I thought to have
beheld some of mine realized!

My son set out with the most brilliant success. His name, his family, my
services, which his presence brought again to remembrance, but especially his
understanding, good temper and accomplishments, obtained that respect at Court,
which the jealousy of courtiers looked upon as the beginning of favor.

He saw a young lady of Lisbon, who, in addition to personal attraction,
talents, and virtue, was of a noble family, and large fortune. My son aspired
to her hand, I approved his choice, and this attachment, authorized by my
approbation, ^ixed the short destiny of his life. Her parents consented to an
union, by which his happiness would be ensured, but on condition that he
obtained a place at Court. My son asked a place, and he was promised one in
three months; it was only required he should keep his success a secret, for
reasons assigned, till the moment of actual possession; with permission,
however, to inform the parents of his mistress of the event, which he instantly
did.

He was accordingly presented to the young lady as her future husband, and she,
at this interview, thus authorized, confessed an affection for him, which
crowned his felicity.

As the marriage was of course deferred, till the period when he should be in
actual enjoyment of his promised place, he tore himself from Lisbon, and came
to tell me all his happiness. I had then the pleasure to hold in my arms, and
press to my bosom, the child whom I so dearly loved, and whom I considered as
at the summit of all his wishes. Alas! while I supposed myself the most
fortunate of fathers, a Barbarian, a Monster, was forming the black plot, which
at once deprived me of wi^e and son.

My son's natural candor, prevented him from suspecting the probity of a
traitor, who only wished his confidence, that he might ruin him with greater
certainty. This wretch, who had been dragged from obscurity, by the caprice of
his Sovereign, imagined he beheld in him a dangerous rival; but, dissembling
his jealousy, he sought, and soon obtained the friendship of the unsuspecting
youth.

Don Ramirez was greatly disturbed at this part of the Hermit's recital, but
the old man perceived not his emotion, and continued his story.

When my son solicited the place of which he was desirous, he trusted the
secret to that abominable man; who, not having, just at that instant, the power
to injure him, pretended to second his request, and participate his joy; but
the absence of my son, gave him an opportunity to exercise his fiend like
malignancy. He knew his own ascendancy over the King; he calumniated my son,
and inspired a young and inexperienced Prince with false fears; the gift was
revoked, the place given to a creature of this unworthy favorite, and my son
exiled the Court. By his Majesty's order, I was first informed of this terrible
calamity, which forbade my son to quit his country-seat; and my son, at the
same time, received a letter from the young lady he loved, which contained
these few words:

You have most unworthily deceived us; we know, from the best authority, the
place now disposed of, was never promised you; forget therefore, the name of
one, who will never forgive herself for having once esteemed you.

After having read this fatal billet, my son exclaimed, Thus then I have lost
the woman I loved, and am dishonored! In saying this, his knees knocked
violently together, the blood forsook his face, and he dropped into my arms. He
was taken to bed, whence he never rose; a violent fever for ever deprived me of
him in less than a week. O horrible remembrance! Oh most unfortunate father!

His unhappy mother, a witness of the violent emotions of her son, seemed
equally struck; her reason became disordered, in a few hours she lost the (...)
it, yet appeared sensible of her afflictions, and at last, a victim to maternal
love, sunk into the same grave with her son.

Condemned to live, I supported life only by the hope of vengeance. O thou^
cried I, Sovereign Arbitrator of the fate of miserable mortals! Being Supreme!
whose heavy hand has fallen upon me! deign, at least, from the bottom of that
abyss in which thy wrath has plunged me, deign to hear the cries of my despair!
The voice of the oppressed can reach thee, and never have thou rejected his
prayer. I aspire not to happiness, that is for ever lost; it is vengeance I ask,
it is justice I implore. May the perfidious wretch, whose infernal arts have
robbed me of my wife and son, lose at once fortune and favor. He is a father;
let him weep bitterness like me, and may he, above all, be unhappy in his son!

The Hermit stopped, he saw Don Ramirez look wildly round, and rise from his
seat. You tremble, said he; my excess of hatred, and desire of revenge, has
made you afraid of hearing the remainder of my story; but fear not, I have
nothing farther of tragic to tell. Heaven converted my heart; I soon abhorred
the revenge which religion condemns.

Don Ramirez again moved, without answering; and, after a few minutes,
astonishment and terror made him motionless; then suddenly starting -- Where am
I! cried he, in what asylum!

What is the meaning, sir, said the Hermit, of that fearful agitation in which
I see you? What imprudence have I been guilty of; Is my persecutor known to
you? Is he your friend?

This Persecutor! this Barbarian! this Monster! was Ramirez!

It was, sir, I confess it; he was the author of all my misery.

This Ramirez! this --

Repeat not that dreadful name, sir; I shudder when I hear it.

Unhappy Alvarez! Learn, at least, heaven has punished your enemy.

What say you? Does he no longer govern Portugal?

Ruined, stripped, without relations, without friends; he has little left but
vain regret, and never-ending remorse.

Does he suffer! I am sorry!

Sorry! Is it possible?

Doubt it not. But wherefore do you weep, sir? What ray of light breaks upon my
mind? Oh God! Can it be?

Yes! -- I am that wretch, cried Don Ramirez, casting himself at the Hermit's
feet, who, penetrated with involuntary horror, drew back. Oh! reverend father;
continued Don Ramirez, following on his knees, and seizing his vest, Stop, hear
me, holy man! I own I have merited thy hatred; no words can express the horror
with which my presence ought to inspire thee, but remember I now an
unfortunate. And yet I have a son, who might console, might -- Oh! cease, holy
father! to curse me! Cease to pray my son may make me more miserable!

Oh God! cried the Hermit; Don Ramirez! in this place! beneath this poor roof!
a suppliant at my feet, and giving me the sacred title of father! a title
formerly my greatest glory and my bliss! a title which he robbed me of! -- *Yet
-- fear nothing, said he, casting a look of compassion on Don Ramirez; I again
repeat it, hatred has long been banished this bosom. Thou call thyself
unhappy; complainest of fortune! Art thou persecuted? Art thou proscribed?
Speak -- This grotto shall become thy place of refuge; in partaking it with
thee, I shall observe the holy rites of hospitality. Fear no unworthy
reproaches; if my succor be necessary to thee, thou (...) in me only the
father and the friend.

Oh! greatness of soul, which confounds me! exclaimed Don Ramirez Can man then
elevate his soul to so sublime a degree of virtue?

No, Ramirez, answered the Hermit; seek not for that generosity in the heart of
man, which is not in nature; admire not the feeble Alvarez, but acknowledge and
adore the high hand of heaven.

Thus saying, he held out his arms, and advanced to embrace Don Ramirez, whose
tears bedewed the bosom of the virtuous man; that bosom, which formerly he had
so cruelly torn.

A quarter of an hour after this reconciliation, Alphonso returned to the
Hermitage. Don Ramirez took his leave of the Hermit, and quitted the mountain,
bearing with him remorse the most grievous, and apprehensions the most fearful;
he could not remove from his mind, the malediction so solemnly pronounced
against him by Alvarez; he saw its effect already in the loss of his fortune;
and notwithstanding the generous pardon he had received, he felt himself too
guilty not to dread the wrath of heaven, and its injustice toward the injured
Alvarez. Alas! cried Ramirez, in his height of anguish, he remitted vengeance
to the arm of God! Such vengeance must be terrible! Oh my son! tho^ art to
become the instrument of my punishment; Alphonso must chastise his father; he
is the avenger of Alvarez!

Full of these melancholy thoughts, Don Ramirez became absent, silent, and
gloomy; often as he looked at his son, would the tears rush to his eyes: a
vague dread would come over him, and an inexplicable terror seize his heart. He
no longer felt the happiness of being a father.

They left Catalonia, after having visited Tarragona and Tortosa (6), and went
to Madrid, where Alphonso vainly hoped once more to meet Dalinda. He learnt,
however, from the description he gave of her, she had been there; that her
father was a Swede, his name Thelismar; that he intended to remain some time in
Spain, and that he had then taken the route to Grenada.

This intelligence, which he had been careful to procure unknown to his father,
gave him an ardent desire to go to Grenada; and Don Ramirez, who every where
carried his inquietude with him, readily consented to leave Madrid sooner than
he had intended.

They went first to Toledo, where they saw the Alcazar, or ancient Moorish
Palace There is also an Alcazar or Moriscan Palace at Seville, but not so
beautiful as that of Toledo.
; the architecture of which, is a mixture of the Roman, Gothic, and Moriscan.
What they most admired in this palace, was a hospital for the poor of the city
and it is environs, established by the Archbishop of Toledo. This hospital
contains manufactories and drawing-schools. They educate about two hundred
children, to whom they give a habit of labor, and a love of virtue. Old men
and women likewise find an asylum in this ancient palace, thus consecrated by
religion to suffering humanity (7).

After a short stay at Toledo, our travelers went to Cordova, in their route
to which they crossed the Sierra-Morena A long chain of mountains so called, for
that being, covered (...), holly, and other ever-greens, it appears black at a
distance.
, a wild and uncultivated tract of land, which the active and beneficent genius
of an individual (8), has since metamorphosed into an habitable and agreeable
country.

Cordova is built upon the borders of the Guadalquivir, and is overlooked by a
chain of mountains, continually covered with verdure, which are a part of the
Sierra-Morena. This city, formerly so famous, retains little of (...) ancient
grandeur, except a large extent of ruins, and a superb Mosque, built by
Abderama (9).

Don Ramirez staid three days at Cordova, and continued his journey. Alphonso
saw not the walls of Grenada without emotion (10); he flattered himself he
should find Dalinda in that city, but he did not long preserve that hope.
Notwithstanding the cares of love, he was forcibly struck with the delightful
situation of Grenada, the beauty of it is buildings (11), and the antique and
curious monuments, the remains of which, at every step, recall the remembrance
of Moorish magnificence. Alphonso visited, with rapture, the Alhambra and
Generalif, and amused himself in places full of inscriptions and verses, which
retraced to his memory the ancient gallantry of Grenada's Kings, the
Misfortune's of the Abencerages, the persecutions and triumphs of a virtuous
Queen (12), and all the mavelous adventures with which history and romance
abound.

Alphonso, however, more and more uneasy about Dalinda and her father, soon
learnt they had left Grenada almost a fortnight, and were gone to Cadiz; and
that they talked of staying there six weeks, and afterward of embarking for
the coast of Africa. This news afflicted him much; he endeavored not to
persuade his father to go thither, for Don Ramirez had declared Grenada should
be the last place he would wander to, and that he would afterward return to
Portugal.

The desire of traveling, of finding Dalinda, the hope of making a great
fortune, ambition, love, and especially pride, idleness, and curiosity,
inspired the culpable Alphonso, with the imprudent and cruel resolution of
secretly flying to Cadiz, and abandoning his father. He felt great uneasiness
in coming to this determination, but he suppressed such salutary remorse which
he could not help feeling, and employed all his powers to find specious reasons
that might excuse, and even dignify this criminal act.

My father, said he, has lost his fortune; he has only a small pension, not
sufficient for both of us; in taking half his expense away, I shall double his
income. I feel I am a charge to him; I even perceive my company is not so
agreeable to him as formerly; he is become pensive and silent, my conversation
fatigues, and my presence lays him under restraint. Besides, in seeking to
distinguish myself, and emerge from obscurity, is it not for him I labor? If I
can procure wealth, to him shall it be dedicated. My absence may give him some
uneasiness for a time, but my return will ensure his felicity.

Such were the reflections of Alphonso, who sighed while thus he reasoned, and
his cheeks were bedewed with tears. Had he consulted his heart, duty, honor,
and reason would soon have resumed their functions; but he endeavored to
deceive himself, and he succeeded; without the power, however, of totally
stifling the voice of conscience.

He had taken care to seduce one of the servants into his design, and had
consulted with him on the means of flight. It was agreed that Alphonso should
go off in the evening; that the servant should wait for him at the city gate
with two horses, on which they should ride without stopping as far as Loxe, to
which place the servant knew the road.

Alphonso had no money. Certain jewels which he happened to have about him on
the day of the earthquake had been saved, all of which his father sold, except
two diamond rings which he had given his son. One of these Alphonso privately
sold for four hundred piastres (about seventy guineas) which he thought a sum
sufficient to make the tour of the world, if he pleased.

The day fixed for his flight he pretended a violent headache, in order to
conceal his own anxiety, and induce Don Ramirez to go betimes to bed.
Accordingly, about eight o'clock, his father retired. Alphonso's heart was
ready to burst when he bade him good night, and he ran, and shut himself in his
chamber, whither he was pursued by his remorse.

Bathed in tears, he wrote to his father, to inform him of the motive of his
flight, without mentioning what route he should take, or his passion for
Dalinda. He sealed the letter, and left it on the table, that his father might
find it on the morrow; then wrapping himself in a countryman's cloak, he put on
thick-soled clouted shoes, took a staff in his hand, with his purse, and a
pocketbook that contained his other ring, and Dalinda's sash properly
concealed, opened a window, leaped into a courtyard, and went out of a private
door, of which he had procured the key. He passed hastily along the streets,
got through the city gate by means of his country disguise, found his servant
waiting a little way out of town, mounted his horse, followed his guide, and
proceeded toward Cadiz.

The darkness of the night would not permit him to travel as fast as he wished,
while the fear of being pursued, the grief of leaving his father, his
inquietude, remorse, and repentance, all stung him to the heart, and inspired
him with a certain insurmountable terror, which was doubly increased by the
blackness of the night.

He had quitted Grenada about two hours, when he was awakened from his gloomy
reverie by a most surprising phenomenon: surrounded as it were by the deep,
the profound obscurity of night, darkness in an instant disappeared, and light
the most radiant, dazzled the astonished eyes of Alphonso. He raised his head
amazed, and beheld a globe of bright and shining fire in the heavens,
precipitating itself somewhat horizontally toward the earth, and augmenting as
it fell. It exhibited a thousand dazzling colors, and left a long train of
light that marked its path in the atmosphere. Having traversed a part of the
horizon, it began to rise again by degrees, and shot forth on all sides sparks,
and blazing sheaves, that seemed like vast artificial fireworks. At length the
enormous ball opened, and sent forth two kind of volcanos, which formed
themselves into two prodigious rainbows, the one of which vanished in the
north, the other in the south; the fiery globe became extinct, and the most
impenetrable darkness instantly succeeded to daylight the most fervent (13).

Alphonso was forcibly and irresistibly alarmed by this prodigy. All uncommon
accidents are ill omens to a troubled conscience. This was highly so to him;
his grief and doubts were doubled, he increased his pace to get rid of his
fears, and galloped the rest of the night without stopping.

At daybreak his Valet perceived they had lost their way, and had struck into
a cross road. Alphonso looked round, and saw a barren mountaneous country
covered with rocks. Unable to discover any beaten track, he alighted, tied his
horse to a tree, and followed by his Valet, went toward one of the highest and
nearest rocks, hoping to discover from its summit the town of Loxe, from which
he imagined they could not be far distant.

Observe his country shoes were clouted with hob-nails all over; and his staff,
being a peasant's, had a thick iron ferrule at the end.

Scarcely had Alphonso proceeded twenty paces upon the rock he meant to ascend,
when he felt his feet fixed to the stone! he could not lift! he could not stir
them! and his staff, too heavy to move, stood upright, and seemed to take root
on this fatal rock (14)!

Oh, my father! cried he, heaven has undertaken to punish my ingratitude by a
new, an unheard of miracle.

He could say no more. Remorse, astonishment, terror overwhelmed him; took away
what little strength he had left, made him immovable and mute, caused his hair
to stand erect, and spread a death-like paleness upon his cheeks.

Oh dear mamma! cried Pulcheria, is he changed to a statue?

Not entirely, answered Madame de Clemire, smiling; though he himself dreaded
he was, for that idea struck him as well as you.

And well it might, mamma. That invincible power that fixed him to the rock,
might make him expect worse.

However, my dear, that invincible power was not supernatural. You remember I
told you, the seemingly mavelous in my story should all be true.

And yet the globe of fire, and the fatal rock, appear so extraordinary! But
tell us, dear mamma, what became of poor Alphonso.

He remained petrified with terror in the situation I have described, when the
sky became covered with clouds, the winds howled in the air, and the rain began
to shower. But how was the terror, how was the horror of Alphonso increased,
when he beheld that dreadful rain! When he saw, what he thought millions of
huge round drops of blood, instantly cover the white rocks that surrounded him;
felt them run in streams from his face, hands, and all parts of his body, and
viewed rivers of blood descend on all sides to the green valleys (15)!

Uncommon terror gave uncommon strength. Alphonso quitted his staff, which
remained erect, planted on the rock, and with violent efforts wrenched his feet
from the adhesive stone, and fell almost senseless on the sand.

His Valet soon after, shocked with the miraculous shower, came running, and
assisted his master. He had been seeking a track which he had discovered, and,
as soon as they could sufficiently recover their strength and recollection,
they once more mounted their horses, and left this scene of horrors.

Arrived at Loxe, he staid two or three hours to recover, then ordered mules
and a guide, and pursued his journey. He crossed Mount Orespeda (16), passed
the ancient city of Antequerra, and did not stop till he came to Malaga. He
arrived without any remarkable accident at Cadiz In going to Cadiz, it is
necessary to take a boat at Port Sancta-Maria, a pretty town two leagues from
Cadiz. The passage is dangerous, and the boats are frequently lost.
and put up at the first inn he came to.

As he was going up stairs he heard a female singing, and accompanied by the
harp. Alphonso trembled, and guided by the sound, approached the door of the
appartment whence it issued. It was sure an Angel singing, and the harmony was
heavenly! He could not mistake the voice, it went to his heart. Delighted,
ravished, astonished, he hastily descended the stairs, enquired for the master
of the house, questioned him, and learnt his heart had not deceived him.
Dalinda and Thelismar inhabited the house whither he had been conducted by
chance.

Transported with the discovery he went into the courtyard, was shown which
were the windows of his Love, and then went and locked himself in his own room,
that he might enjoy his unexpected felicity without restraint.

In the afternoon he sent for a guittar, and in the evening, after supper,
planting himself under Dalinda's window, with a trembling hand he ventured to
strike a few arpeggios. The window opened, and fearing to be overheard by
Thelismar, who understood Portugueze, Alphonso durst not sing the verses he had
written on Dalinda at the Fountain of Love; but, in timid accents, and an
irresolute voice, he sang the Torments of Absence.

In about a quarter of an hour the window was shut, and on the morrow Alphonso
again began to sing, but in vain, it opened no more: and this rigor afflicted
him as deeply, as though it had destroyed hopes that had some foundation.

Alphonso formed a thousand projects relative to his passion, and executed none
of them. He ardently longed once more to see Dalinda, but never could determine
to present himself as an adventurer. His intention, when he left his father,
was to offer himself as a companion to Thelismar during his travels, not
doubting but his knowledge and talents would make this proposition very
acceptable; and supposing likewise that gratitude, for having saved the life of
Dalinda, would put his reception out of doubt.

When passion forms projects, it is blind to all obstacles, will hear no
objections; but fearing all reasons which may deter it from what it is
previously determined to do, it never discovers it is own folly and imprudence
till they are past remedy.

Full of fear, incertitude, and hesitation, Alphonso could resolve upon
nothing. He had carefully concealed himself from Dalinda and her father, when
one night he was informed that Thelismar had prepared every thing for his
departure, and that he was to go on board the Intrepid at break of day, which
vessel was to carry him to C^uta A town in Africa, opposite Gibraltar. John,
King of Portugal, took it from the Moors; after which i^ belonged to the
Spaniards, to whom it was ceded by the treaty of Lisbon, in 1668.
.

This intelligence determined the irresolute Alphonso; he sold his remaining
ring, went to the captain of the ship, obtained his passage, got on board
before daybreak, and took possession of his little cabin. He had not been
there a quarter of an hour, before he heard the voice of Thelismar, and
presently afterward the anchor was weighed, and the vessel set sail.

Before dinnertime, when the passengers must meet at the captain's table,
Alphonso collected force enough to desire a moment's audience of Thelismar,
which was immediately granted; and with an anxiety and agitation impossible to
paint he entered the cabin. Thelismar was alone, and turning his head at the
creaking of the door, he beheld Alphonso. He could not forget the deliverer of
his daughter; he instantly rose, ran to Alphonso, and embraced him with all the
warmth of the most tender friendship.

Transported with joy, Alphonso felt hope spring in his heart! He answered the
questions of Thelismar, however, with more embarassment than truth. Afraid to
confess his faults, my father, said he, had formerly an immense fortune; but
now, with barely what is necessary, he lives retired on the peaceful banks of
the Mondego. He approves my desire to travel, and hopes, with the education he
has bestowed on me, I may become known, and acquire fame, and --

What is your age! And what are your projects in quitting your country, and
your father?

I knew, sir, you were in Spain, heard you intended to go to Africa, and
flattered myself you would permit me to follow you as a companion in your
travels.

You were not deceived in me; I mean to traverse a great part of the known
world; if you will be the associate of my labors, I joyfully consent.

Here Alphonso, at the height of his hopes, embraced Thelismar with transport,
and swore never to forsake him.

But, continued Thelismar, my travels will not end less than three or four
years at soonest, how do you know your father will consent to this long absence?

Oh, I am very certain --

Well, if you love study, if, as I have no doubt, you possess noble and
virtuous sentiments, you shall find in me a faithful friend, and a second
father, happy, too happy, if by my cares and affection I may show a part of my
gratitude. Dalinda owes her life to you, and your empire over me is absolute.

Alphonso blushed at the name of Dalinda, and too much affected to reply, was
silent.

I have need, added Thelismar, of consolation, and hope to find it in your
friendship.

Of consolation! Are you then unhappy?

I am separated, and for four years, from objects the dearest to my heart! from
my wife and daughter!

From Dalinda!

Yes. I durst not expose her to the fatigues and dangers I shall undergo. We
traveled through a great part of Europe together, I parted from her at Cadiz,
and while we are riding toward the African coast, she is returning with her
mother into Sweden.

Oh heaven! cried Alphonso in anguish; Africa and Sweden! What immense! what
dreadful distance between her and -- you! How I pity you! --

Alphonso could no longer restrain his tears, and the conversation being
interrupted by the entrance of the Captain, Alphonso went into his cabin to
hide and assuage the agitation of his heart In despair to think he must be four
years absent from Dalinda* he yet was in some measure consoled by the
friendship of her father, and determined to neglect nothing, by which it might
be confirmed and increased.

Thelismar put several questions to him in the evening, and asked if he
understood the elements of any of the sciences?

Oh yes, answered Alphonso, with great self-sufficiency. There is nothing I
have not been taught.

Do you know any thing of geometry?

I had a mathematical master ten years.

Have you any acquaintance with natural history and philosophy?

Every thing of that kind is familiar to me: besides, I am passionately fond of
the arts, understand music, and delight in drawing. I draw flowers charmingly.

Flowers! Do you love reading?

Very much.

Your language is not rich in good authors; but you know the Latin?

Oh perfectly! as you may imagine, for my teachers said I construed Virgil and
Horace well at ten years old; so that I left the study of the classics at
twelve, and have not looked at them since, having had other employment.

And I warrant you left mathematics also soon after?

I did. I then read generally, and soon began to write verses.

And from a scholar became a wit. The metamorphosis is not always successful.

My poetry was very successful.

Among your friends, I suppose.

Oh universally.

How do you know?

Every body who visited my father told me so.

Alphonso's answer made Thelismar smile, and he changed the conversation.
Presently afterward the youth retired, persuaded he had given Thelismar a high
opinion of his knowledge and genius. The next day Alphonso recollected the
adventure of the mad bull, killed by the prick of a pin, at the Fountain of
Love, and asked Thelismar the meaning of so extraordinary a death.

Thelismar replied, he had that very day received from an old friend just
returned from America, a poison, so powerful and subtle, as to produce the
effect of which he had been a witness; that this friend had given him a case,
which enclosed the fatal pin that had been dipped in the poison, and designing
to make an experiment of its power, he happened to have it in his pocket (17).

But what surprises me, said Alphonso, is, that I have never heard speak of
this poison.

I do not think that so very surprising, replied Thelismar; for, if I am not
mistaken, there are many other extraordinary things of which you have never
heard.

I will not say there are none, answered Alphonso, but I dare presume their
number is very limited; for I have had teachers of all forts, and am not
ignorant; add to which, I have read much, and seen and remarked more.

What prompted Alphonso to brag with greater confidence was, he supposed he
might do so without danger of detection; he looked upon Thelismar as a plain
man, who had only one pursuit, that of botany, and imagined him to be
exceedingly ignorant of every thing else; in which he was frequently confirmed,
by the natural reserve and modesty of Thelismar.

Here Madame de Clemire stopped, put up her manuscript, and ended that
evening's entertainment.

The next night, at the usual hour, after having begged her children not to
interrupt her any more by their questions, Madame de Clemire thus continued her
narration.

At length they landed at Ceuta, and Thelismar hired a lodging for himself and
Alphonso, at one of the best houses they could find.

Alphonso's first care on his arrival, was to write to his father a long
letter, very contrite and submissive. In this he made a faithful confession of
all his proceedings, implored his pardon, and permission to follow Thelismar in
all his travels; and as the latter intended to stay at Ceuta long enough for
Alphonso to receive an answer, he conjured Don Ramirez to fend his orders
instantly, promising they should be obeyed, be they what they might. Not
doubting his father had returned to Beira, his letter was directed accordingly.

Something easier, after thus in part relieving his conscience, Alphonso fell
into his customary habits, sung, played on his guittar, and drew various
flowers, which he thought masterpieces, and which he constantly carried to
Thelismar, who, he continued to believe, was highly delighted with his talents.

Thelismar sent for him one morning, and said, as I know you are exceedingly
fond of music and drawing, I thought I might do you a favor, by bringing you
to see two very extraordinary children. One is a little boy, who draws
astonishingly in your style, and the other a girl, who plays charmingly on the
harpsichord; come and see them.

So saying, he conducted Alphonso into another room, but desired him to stop at
the door; for, said he, youth you know is timid; and as you are a connoisseur,
you might disturb them were you too near.

Very true, answered Alphonso; the girl blushed as we entered.

And can you then observe her emotion, added Thelismar?

Oh very plainly; she can hardly breathe, though her bosom heaves.

All this passed at the far end of the room from the young artists, and
Alphonso, happy in the supposition of his own repute, encouraged the musician
as she played, calling out bravo! bravo! with as much pedantry and pride as any
other demi-connoisseur, who supposes a word like that from him confers fame and
satisfaction.

When she had finished her sonata, the little musician made a low courtsey;
Alphonso applauded, and Thelismar advanced.

Come, said he, now let us ^ee the boy draw -- stand there, behind him, and
then you will overlook his work with more ease. Alphonso followed his
directions, and remarked, it was odd enough the child should keep his gloves
on, and surprising enough that he should design from his own invention, without
any drawing to copy from.

And yet, said Thelismar, see how that flower gro^^, as it were, and is
embellished beneath his fingers.

Wonderful! cried Alphonso; astonishingly correct! Courage, my little fellow!
There, shade that outline a little; that is it! The little angel! I declare I
could not do better myself.

All these praises gave no disturbance to the child, who continued his work
without remission, except removing it, to observe it at a distance
occasionally, and blowing away the light dust of the crayon.

When the flower was finished, Alphonso ran directly to kiss the child, and as
suddenly started back with an interjection of astonishment.

Gently, said Thelismar, laughing, take care lest you should demolish the young
artist.

Good heaven! It Is a doll! a figure!

It is an automaton Every body at Paris, in 1783, saw the Automatons, of which
this is a description. Another has since been shown still more remarkable, for
it plays at chess with any person.
.

And the musician, what is she?

Own sister to the designer.

But did I not see her breathe?

You thought so; and you really saw her play with her singers upon the
harpsichord. Hence you may learn, Alphonso, that it is unreasonable to place
too high a value upon accomplishments which automatons may possess.

I will break my guittar directly, and burn my drawings.

That would be wrong, answered Thelismar. We should be astonished to see a man
pass his life in* playing on the guittar, and designing flowers; but no one
would blame you, when you use such things only as recreations, by way of
agreeably saving time which would otherwise be lost, and without being proud of
such trifling accomplishments.

This lesson made some impression upon Alphonso; but it was necessary he should
receive many more, before a thorough reformation could be effected.

Thelismar was ready to depart from Ceuta, yet Alphonso had received no letters
from his father: imagining, therefore, that Don Ramirez approved his projects,
by his not being in any haste to recall him home, he determined to proceed with
Thelismar.

Some days previous to their departure for the Azore Islands, Alphonso, who had
observed workmen busy about raising a kind of machine in the garden, the use of
which he did not comprehend, learnt that it was done by the order, and under
the direction of Thelismar, of whom he therefore enquired its use. The
proprietor of this house has told me, said Thelismar, that the lightning has
twice, within these twenty years, fallen upon, and damaged the building, and I
have promised him it shall do so no more.

And which way can you prevent it?

By means of the thing you have seen.

I confess I do not comprehend.

That I can readily believe; and yet it is not the less true, that the
lightning will now fall at the other end of the garden.

Four or five days after, there was a violent thunderstorm; Thelismar went to
the window, and pointing with his cane toward a black cloud, which was seen
over the house, look, said he, to Alphonso, at that cloud, it is going soon to
remove from us, and follow the path which I shall direct: I intend that it
shall open, and be dispersed at the end of that walk; so saying, Thelismar
raised his cane toward the sky, while the cloud seemed obedient to his will,
and durst not depart from the path which he prescribed in the air; at that
instant he had the appearance of an enchanter, who, by the power of his magic
wand, commanded the elements.

Good God! cried Alphonso, what do I behold! You direct the clouds, and they
obey, they go to the spot that you ordain.

You see them assembled, said Thelismar, and now they shall descend, and the
lightning shall fall not thirty feet from yonder spot. Scarcely had he spoken,
before the thunder began to roar, and its bolts were discharged exactly as
Thelismar prescribed (18); who then shut his window, and went out of his room,
leaving Alphonso petrified with astonishment.

The next day Thelismar, in presence of Alphonso, read aloud a letter he had
received from Dalinda. Alphonso had by this time learnt the Swedish language,
to the study of which he had applied with great assiduity, ever since he had
first been told Dalinda was a Swede; and since he had traveled with Thelismar,
his progress in that language had been astonishing. He was enchanted at the
letter of Dalinda, and could not repress his feelings while he heard it read;
he found an inconceivable delight in understanding words traced by the hand of
Dalinda; he heard the ingenuous detail of her thoughts and sentiments, and
imagined he heard her speaking; he obtained a knowledge of the goodness of her
heart and understanding, and that knowledge fixed for ever in the bosom of
Alphonso the most inconstant of all the passions.

Alphonso was very desirous of having the letter in his own possession, and
seeing Dalinda's writing; but Thelismar, after having read, put it in the
drawer of his bureau. Alphonso, with his eyes fixed upon this drawer, heard no
longer the discourse of Thelismar, but fell into a profound musing; Thelismar
therefore took up a book, and Alphonso recollecting himself, left the room.

In the evening Alphonso returned to the same chamber, and Thelismar rising as
he saw him enter, said, As you know we shall embark tomorrow morning for the
Azores The Azore Islands are situated between Africa and America, about two
hundred leagues from Lisbon. Gonzallo Vello first discovered them about the
middle of the fifteenth century, and called them Azores, o^ Hawks, from the
number of those birds he saw there. They are nine in number; the town of Angra,
in the Island of Tercera, is the capital.
, I have various orders to give; if you will stay here I shall be back in half
an hour. So saying, he left Alphonso sitting opposite the bureau.

This bureau enclosed the letter of Dalinda, and the key was not taken out of
the drawer: Alphonso felt a temptation, which at first he did not give way to;
he passionately desired to open the drawer, and once more read the letter. He
felt how much such an action was to be condemned, and yet, said he, this is not
to pry into the secrets of Thelismar; he has read me the letter, I shall learn
nothing new; I only wish to see, to contemplate the writing.

At last, after various struggles, Alphonso stifled his scruples, approached
the bureau, and tremblingly took hold of the key; but scarcely had he touched
it, before he received a stroke so violent that he thought his arm was broken
Alphonso terrified, started back, and fell into an arm chair. Just heaven!
cried he, what invisible hand is it that strikes (19)?

The door opened, and Thelismar appeared; what have you done Alphonso! said he,
with a severe tone of voice.

Oh, sir, replied Alphonso, you, whose supernatural art produces so many
prodigies, you surely have the power to penetrate my most secret thoughts, read
them at the bottom of my heart.

I can read nothing there, answered Thelismar, that can excuse an act like
this. Remember Alphonso, to betray a trust is unpardonable, and that a second
fault of this kind would for ever deprive you of my esteem. As for the
mysterious key, cried Thelismar, it is only hostile to indiscretion; it strikes
none but those who would turn it without my leave. I now give you my permission
to open the drawer, which you may do without danger.

Alphonso advanced, as he was desired, toward the bureau, opened the drawer,
and cried, yes, Thelismar, I see that nothing is impossible to you; your
discourse is full of wisdom, and your actions of astonishment: deign sir, ever
to be my guide, my tutelar genius! My submission, affection, and gratitude,
will, I hope, render me worthy of your cares. So saying, Alphonso, with a
tender and respectful ^ir, drew near to Thelismar, who only answered him by
holding out his arms, and embracing him with affection.

The next day, after this adventure, Thelismar and his young traveling
companion embarked for the Azores. After a happy voyage, they landed at the
island of St. George Twelve leagues from Angra.
, where they rested for some days.

Thelismar lodged in a small house, the aspect of which pleased him; the owner
was a Swede, who had been six years in the island. As they had only one
agreeable apartment, Thelismar partook his bedchamber with Alphonso, and had a
bed made up for him beside his own. One night as Alphonso and Thelismar were in
a sound sleep, they both awakened, and leaped up at the same moment; they
imagined they felt the violent shock of an earthquake, and fled into a small
garden, whither the master of the house, and several servants, who had likewise
experienced the same sensation, ran for refuge; the latter brought flambeaux,
for the darkness of the night was extreme; and in expectation of a disaster,
like that of Lisbon, they remained there in great anxiety for the space of
three hours; not having, however, felt the least emotion during this whole
time, they determined then to return again to the house. Thelismar and Alphonso
did not go to bed, but conversed till daybreak.

Alphonso, who now no longer hid the name of his father from Thelismar, and who
had often related to him the circumstances of the earthquake at Lisbon, did not
let this occasion slip; but again gave a pompous description of the magnificent
palace of Don Ramirez, and an emphatic enumeration of the jewels and diamonds
he possessed before that catastrophe.

When day began to appear, Thelismar and Alphonso went to the window, whence
they had an extensive, and most unusual prospect; how great was their
astonishment, to see the house they lived in, and the garden totally separated
from the land, and forming a small island in the midst of the sea; they
shuddered at the danger they had been in, and could not conceive by what means
the house, which had been thrown several fathoms from the main land, could
sustain so violent a shock without being destroyed. It is no doubt, said
Thelismar, the humble dwelling of a virt^ous man, preserved in so miraculous a
manner by the justice of a divine Providence.

As Thelismar was speaking, his chamber door opened, and the master of the
house entered. This venerable old man, as he approached Thelismar, fe^ched a
deep sigh, and said, I come to implore your protection, sir -- not for myself,
but for my son. Though six years an exile from my native land, I have not
forgot those men who are an honor to it; your name, sir, is not unknown to me.
Our Monarch is the protector of genius and science; he honors you with a
particular esteem, and I come to beg you will give me letters of recommendation
for my son.

You intend to return into your own country then?

Yes, sir.

What accident first brought you out of it?

I was born in an humble condition: but, notwithstanding the smallness of my
income, I found the means to give my son a good education, much superior to my
rank of life. This son answered my expectations and cares so well, that he
obtained by his merit, at five and twenty, an honorable and lucrative
employment. Some time after he fell in love with an amiable, rich young woman,
and was upon the point of marrying her, when a dreadful accident obliged me to
quit my country. There was a rich merchant who lodged in my house; this unhappy
man was found one morning murdered in his bed, and his coffers broken open and
robbed; all his servants were taken into custody; and I, of my own accord,
delivered myself into the hands of justice. The wretch who had committed the
crime was my accuser; I had enemies, and the affair took an ill turn. Thanks,
however, to the cares and protectors of my son, as they had not sufficient
proof, I obtained my liberty: but I could not recover my character, I could not
endure to live with ignominy, in a land where I had been generally beloved, and
determined to become a voluntary exile. I endeavored to conceal my intentions
from my son; but he guessed them too certainly from my prepa^^tions* I sold the
little I possessed, and secretly departed by night; I regretted only the loss
of my son. I left him, however, in possession of a good post; and knew that,
notwithstanding our misfortunes, the young woman whom he loved still preserved
her first affection. Consoled by such ideas, I endeavored to support the
excess of my misfortunes. I traveled in a post-chaise, and at daybreak
perceived myself escorted, as it were, by a stranger galloping on horseback at
some distance from my carriage; I looked out -- but what was my surprise at the
sight of my son; it is impossible to express what I felt; I stopped, jumped out
of my carriage, and was instantly in my son's arms. What have thou done cried I?

My duty, answered he.

But what is thy design? said I, bathing him with my tears.

To follow you, to consecrate the life you gave to your service.

But thy post, thy future fortune.

I have left them, abandoned all for your sake; all, even the woman I love: you
see me weep, yet do not suppose, my father, but that I gladly sacrifice every
thing to you.

Since thou saw my fatal resolution, wherefore did^^ thou not oppose it;
know thou not the ascendant thou have over me?

Appearances condemn you; and though you are dearer than ever to me by your
misfortunes, yet having lost your honor, your present flight is necessary; be
comforted, you are still innocent and virtuou^.

And do thou not complain of thy own fate?

My own fate! can it be happier! have not I now an opportunity to prove my
gratitude and filial affection? To comfort my father in his distress? Shall not
my hand dry his tears? Shall not my zeal and tenderness dry their source? Oh,
Yes, my father; suffer the love and reverence of a son to drive from your
memory an unjust country, ungrateful relati^^s, and faithless ^^iends. Heaven
has destined me to fulfill the sacred duties of nature in all their extent; and
should I, should you, complain of my fate? No; you, my father, who are a model
for parents, you should enjoy the solid glory, the (...) happiness of having
formed by your own instruction^, and your own example, a son worthy of yourself.

You, sir, are a father, continued the old man, therefore can easily imagine
how readily I ^^^^ed myself thus supported to my destiny. We traveled for some
time before we ^ixed (...) abode here. My son undertook some branches of
commerce in partnership, and bought this house, where we have lived in a
contented mediocrity.

It was my intention here to have ended my days; but the intelligence which I
received about two months since, has made me change this resolution. My
innocence at length is fully acknowledged; the monster, who had been guilty of
the murder, having committed new crimes, was apprehended and condemned. Before
his death he publicly acquitted me, by confessing himself to be the murderer.
We learnt at the same time, the young lady my son loved was still unmarried.
This has made me wish once more to return to my native land. We intended to
have departed in half a year; but the disaster of last night, and the loss of
my house, which, though not destroyed, is no longer habitable, must hasten my
departure. It is therefore I come to ask recommendatory letters of you, sir.

I will give them you with pleasure, answered Thelismar, with emotion, and such
as I would give a dear friend or brother. Oh, yes; doubt not but our just and
beneficent sovereign will worthily reward the virtue of your son.

Oh, sir! cried the old man, with tears of joy in his eyes, permit me to bring
him hither that he may thank you himself.

So saying, he went out without waiting for an answer; and Thelismar turning
toward Alphonso, saw him mournfully leaning over a chair, and covering his
face with his hands. Thelismar perceived he was weeping; wherefore, said he,
would you hide your tears from me? Let them flow freely, they are an honor to
your heart.

Thelismar was mistaken: he attributed those tears to compassion, which
repentance and bitter remorse made flow. How criminal did Alphonso feel, when
he compared his own conduct with that of the young man whose history he had
just heard. This touching recital had torn his very heart, and made painful and
afflictive the sweetest of all sensations, the admiration of virtue.

The old man returned, leading his son by the hand; Thelismar clasped the young
man to his breast; renewed the promises he had made his father, and dismissed
them, penetrated with gratitude and joy.

Several inhabitants of the island soon arrived in light boats, to inquire the
fate of those who inhabited the small house, which they had seen so suddenly
thrown, as it were, into the sea; they told Thelismar, that all the
neighboring houses had been destroyed, while that belonging to Zulaski (for
that was the name of the virtuous young man) had been thus miraculously
preserved.

Thelismar and Alphonso went on board the boats, and desired to be conducted
toward that part of the island which had suffered least from the earthquake.
^^arce had they made a quarter of a league, before they were petrified with
astonishment, at beholding eighteen islands newly risen from the bottom of the
ocean (20).

Ye new creations of a just and beneficent God! cried Thelismar; ye new born
isles, how does your aspect move my heart! Human industry will soon make you
fertile. Oh, may you never be inhabited but by the virtuous!

After having coasted along some of the islands, Thelismar landed, and was
received in a house where Zulaski came to rejoin him the same evening. As
Zulaski embarked on board a vessel bound for Lisbon, in his return to Sweden,
Alphonso committed two letters to his care; the one for his father, in which
was set down their route, and the places they meant to stop at, earnestly
conjuring him to write, and inform Alphonso of his will and pleasure; the other
for a young man, who lived in the province of Beira, whom Alphonso entreated to
write him news of his father, and to whom Alphonso likewise sent an exact
itinerary of his travels.

Zulaski, after receiving these letters and those of Thelismar, departed
without delay; and a few days after, Thelismar and Alphonso embarked for the
Canary Islands The number of these islands is seven, Teneriff, Great Canary,
Gom^ra, Palma, Ferro, Lancerrotta, and ^uerta-Ventura. Their first discovery
was strongly contested by both the Spainards and Portugueze, each of which
nations claimed the exclusive honor. It is, however, certain, the Spaniards,
assisted by the English, first subdued them. Beside these seven, there are six
smaller ones which surround Lancerrotta: the Canaries were not unknown to the
ancients; they called them the Fortunate Islands.
. Thelismar made a long stay at Teneriff; his first object was to go and admire
the delightful district that lies between Rotava Two towns of Teneriff. Laguna
is the capital of the island, and stands near a lake so named. At the time of
the conquest, about 1417, the Spaniards called the natives Guanches; and the
town of Guimar, in the island of Teneriff, is peopled chiefly by the
descendants of these ancient Guanches.
and Railejo: nature seems there to have assembled all she has of pleasant,
useful, and majestic. Mountains covered with verdure; rocks which cast forth
pure water; fertile meadows, fields of ^ugar-cane, vineyards, woods, and shades
for ever green See Abrege de I'Historie Generale des Voyages, par M. de la
Harp, Tom. 1.
. Thelismar and Alphonso knew not how to tear themselves from the enchanting
spot; they passed an entire day there, sometimes walking, sometimes sitting
beneath the shade of the plaintain-tree, reading passages from Ovid, or
Camoen's Lusiad.

Alphonso's imagination full of the agreeable ideas of fable, wished, before he
quitted that charming place, to carve four verses he had just written upon the
bark of a tree: he, for this purpose, went to one much like the pine in
appearance, drew his knife, began to cut, and saw the blood follow the wound
(21); tempted to suppose he had wounded a nymph, metamorphosed to a tree, he
recoiled with terror, and the murderous weapon dropped from his hand. Thelismar
smiled, and encouraged him, by protesting there was nothing miraculous, nothing
wonderful in this seeming prodigy.

Thelismar passed some days at Laguna, a large and beautiful town, the houses
of which are most of them embellished by parterres and terraces, intersected by
immense walks of the orange and lemon trees; its fountains, gardens, and
groves, its lake and aqueduct, together with the cool winds by which it is
refreshed, render it a delicious habitation.

Thelismar passed through several other towns, till he came at last to one
called Guimar, where are still found many families, the descendants of the
Guanches, the ancient inhabitants of these i^^es. These people, though they
have renounced the idolatry of their savage ancestors, have yet preserved much
of their wild superstition, and many of their old customs.

One day, as Alphonso was walking alone by the environs of Guimar, he strayed
thoughtlessly into an unfrequented wood, in which he was soon lost. In
searching his way out, he got entangled in a thicket, which he could scarcely
make his way through, and which led to a kind of desert, without trees, shrubs,
or verdure, a dry plain covered with shells, and bounded by a mountain. As he
beheld this dismal place, he recollected that Thelismar had more than once
advised him never to walk in strange places without a guide, but this
recollection came too late.

Night drew on, and Alphonso walked a little farther; at last, overcome with
fatigue, he stopped near a hill, surrounded with briars, underwood, and huge
stones, heaped confusedly on each other. In sitting down on one of these stones
he destroyed the equilibrium of others, which began to roll with considerable
noise. Alphonso sprang from his seat to avoid being hurt, and turning round, he
observed that the stones, by being removed, had discovered a cavity large
enough for a man to enter.

He again drew near, and looking down the cavity, saw, with surprise, steps
like a staircase: incited by unconquerable curiosity he entered the
subterranean grotto, and descended by steps exceedingly steep: when at the
bottom he looked upwards, but could no longer see the light of day. He was
inclined to reascend, had he not perceived a light very distinctly at a
considerable distance. The sight of this determined him to accomplish an
enterprise which promised something extraordinary, and he pursued his road. He
proceeded to a kind of obscure alley, at the end of which he found a spacious
cavern, lighted by lamps suspended from the roof. Alphonso looked round, and
saw himself in the midst of two hundred dead bodies, arranged, standing against
the walls of this dreary vault.

Into what place of death has my temerity brought me? cried Alphonso; it seems
to be the cave of Polyphemus, or perhaps a robber, still more inhumane, and the
dead here, have no doubt been the victims of his monstrous cruelty. Well, if I
have not the prudence of Ulysses, at least I have his valor.

Alphonso drew his sword, and determined to sell his life dearly; he would not
attempt to fly, lest he should be assaulted in the obscure narrow passage; he
thought he might more easily defend himself in the cavern: besides, he supposed
it certain the assassins had already closed the mouth of the cave. A profound
silence, however, reigned in the dreary vault, and Alphonso had time to
consider the dismal and surprising objects by which he was environed.

He remarked, that none of the bodies seemed to suffer putrefaction, or sent
forth the least smell, but that they had all preserved their features. Alphonso
was lost in these reflections, when he thought he heard the trampling of feet;
he listened attentively, and soon distinguished the voices of people speaking
in an unknown tongue,

Alphonso would not begin the combat, on a supposition that it might not be
their intention to attack him, but placed his back against the wall, hid his
sword, and was silent; he soon saw twelve men appear, walking slowly two and
two, and clothed after a strange fashion. Their peaceable and grave
countenances did not announce any thing inimical; but no sooner did they see
Alphonso, than uttering shrieks of horror, rage, and indignation blazed in
their countenances. They drew the long daggers which they carried at their
girdles, and fell instantly altogether, on Alphonso, who, brandishing his
sword, received them with intrepidity,

The combat was obstinate and bloody; the address and valor of Alphonso
triumphed over numbers, and though alone against twelve enraged foes, he was
the conqueror. He received two slight wounds, but his sword was mortal to some
of his adversaries, and the rest fled, terrified and howling.

Once more alone in the cavern, Alphonso tore his handkerchief, applied it to,
and bound it on his wounds with his garter: then cutting with his sword the
thong by which one of the lamps was suspended, he took that lamp, and returned
without delay; he again followed the dark alley, arrived at the staircase,
hastily asceneded, found the cavity, and leapt from this frightful gulf with
transport.

He imagined himself leaving the gates of hell, and returning again to life,
when he breathed the pure air, and once more beheld the starry heavens. Oh! my
father! exclaimed he; Oh! Dalinda! and you dear Thelismar, shall I enjoy the
happiness of seeing you once again: you alone make life dear to me, and should
I not preserve it, since with life I may perhaps attain what most I love?

It was the decline of day when Alphonso entered the cavern, and near midnight
when he left it; guided by the brightness of the moon and stars, Alphonso fled
this fatal cave, and after wandering full three hours, stopped, as day began to
break, near a lake, adorned by the lemon-tree, and poplar: tormented by
excess^^e thirst, the sight of limpid water rekindled his power and courage; he
drank heartily, and eat of the wild fruits; yet found himself afterward so
feeble and exhausted, he could no longer continue his route, but laid down upon
the grass, opposite to a mountain covered with verdure, and here and there a
tree. He reposed about three quarters of an hour in this wild and solitary
place, when the heavens became cloudy, the wind began to rise, and some drops
of rain to fall; the rain soon ceased, but the wind continued with redoubled
fury. Alphonso rose, looked toward the mountain, and saw a sight that ^illed
him with astonishment.

On the summit of the mountain he beheld an enormous pillar rise, the color of
which seemed gold toward the base, and at the top a beautifully deep violet.
This pillar descended with impetuosity, from the mountain, breaking and
overturning the trees that stood in its way, attracting and engulphing leaves
and branches, and tearing up some by the roots; at the bottom of the mountain
it passed over a ditch, which it filled with stones and earth; its passage was
marked by deep furrows, and during its dreadful and rapid course, it made a
noise like to the bellowing of a bull.

The formidable column directed its way toward the Lake, pumping up the water,
and leaving the vast basin dry; then turning toward the north, it was lost in
a neighboring forest (22).

To this phenomenon succeeded a destructive hail, the stones of which were
enormously large; they seemed cut in the form of a star, and were accompanied
with long splinters of ice, like the sharp blades of poinards (23). Alphonso
took refuge under a tree, and preserved himself as well as possible with his
^^t, which he h^ld at some distance from his head, though he received several
wounds on his hands.

The tempest at length ceased, the sky became calm, and Alphonso, full of
amazement, wounded, bruised, famished, and fatigued, once more pursued his
sorrowful way. In about a quarter of an hour, he perceived, with excessive joy,
a human habitation; it belonged to a Spaniard, who received him with humanity.
Alphonso informed him he had been attacked by assassins, and learnt in return,
he was not more than two leagues and a half from Guimar.

Not in a condition to continue his route on foot, he determined to repose for
a few days, and wrote a letter to Thelismar, which the Spaniard kindly
undertook to send: After which Alphonso, profiting by the humane offers of his
compassionate host, accepted food, suffered him to dress his wounds, and was
put into an excellent bed made up for his reception.

After sleeping three or four hours, he awoke, rose, and dressed himself; the
first person he met, at leaving the chamber, was Thelismar; he ran to his arms,
Thelismar received him with a tenderness as sincere as his heart could wish. He
was going to begin the recital of his adventures, when Thelismar interrupted
him, by telling him he would hear nothing thing then, but must think only of
his cure. A carriage waits for us, said he; come, let us take leave of the
generous and hospitable Spaniard, and return to Guimar.

As he said this the Spaniard returned, followed by the messenger, who had
brought back Alphonso's letter to Thelismar; he gave it to Alphonso, telling
him that Thelismar had just left Guimar as he got there. How then, said
Alphonso to Thelismar, did you know I was here, if you have not received my
letter? Of that I will inform you another time, answered Thelismar, smiling; at
present it is time we should depart.

Alphonso turning now toward his host, testified the warmest gratitude; then
mounted the carriage with Thelismar, and took the road to Guimar. Thelismar
would not allow him to exhaust himself with speaking, but as soon as they got
home, put him to bed, where he slept twelve hours, and awoke in perfect health.
Thelismar then desired an account of what had happened to him. Alphonso began
his recital, with informing Thelismar the things he had to relate were so
extraordinary and (...), he was afraid they might be thought fabulous; and yet
Thelismar heard the whole history of the cavern, without seeming to show the
least surprise; which did not fail, however, greatly to excite the admiration
of Alphonso, and which he could not re^rain from testifying.

Dear Alphonso, said Thelismar, had you a little more thought, and a little
less vanity, you had not, in the first place, ran the terrible risk you speak
of, and in the next, it would cease to surprise you.

I can easily imagine, answered Alphonso, had I been more prudent I had
followed your advice, and not have wandered in a strange country without a
guide; but which way has my vanity contributed to my astonishment?

Were it not for that, I repeat, you would not have been in any danger. In
every place you have come to yet, I have seen you occupied by one sole idea,
that of being very desirous to inform and astonish all the world by the recital
of the wonderful things you have seen. We have met with many men of merit,
Botanists, Astronomers, Mathematicians, and Mechanics, to whom you have spoken
a great deal, and listened very little. When you come to a strange country, if
you find any person to whom you can make yourself understood, you are careful
not to ask them a single question, but very anxious they should learn all, you
can teach them. This kind of folly gives no one an opinion of your great
capacity, but deprives you of the fruits of all your travels. If, for example,
since you have been here, instead of amusing yourself so repeatedly by telling
what happened to you at the Azores, you had asked the people concerning the
curious things in their own country, and its ancient inhabitants, you would
have known your cavern had nothing miraculous about it, and that to enter it
must be at the hazard of your life.

Which way, sir?

By being told the cavern is one of the sepulchral deposits of the Guanches.
These ancient caves are dispersed in the deserts, and are only known to the
Guanches, who carefully conceal the entrance to them. They visit them only in
secret; and if they find a stranger there, they hold him sacrilegious, a victim
devoted to death; and from motives of barbarous superstition, think it their
duty to kill him (24).

Well, sir* said Alphonso, a little piqued, I owe, at least, to my ignorance
and want of thought, the advantage of having seen one of these curious caverns.

I have killed no man in my own defense, answered Thelismar; I have suffered
neither hunger nor thirst; I have not lain in the inclement air, nor have I
afflicted my friend by the most cruel anxiety; and yet I have, as well as you,
been in a sepulchral cave of the Gaunches.

Have you! How did you get admittance?

I knew these caverns existed, had a strong desire to see them, found an
opportunity of effectually serving a Guanch, and prevailed on him to secretly
conduct and show me one of them.

Alphonso had nothing to answer, but held down his head, and was silent;
recollecting himself a little after, he continued thus: I flatter myself that
what I shall farther relate may yet incite your wonder. After quitting the
cavern, I ran, at first, where chance directed me; coming to the banks of a
Lake --

You need say no more, interrupted Thelismar, I ^n^w the rest.

Know the rest! how can that be? I was alone, and I have told nobody!

After drinking the water of the Lake, you gathered some wild fruits, laid down
on the grass, and a dreadful tempest arose. --

Good heavens! by what magic, what enchantment, can you tell all this?

The column descended from the mountain, the Lake was dried up, and --

What do I hear! exclaimed Alphonso; condescend, sir, to explain this new
miracle; who can have told you these things?

No one; I beheld them all.

Beheld them! where were you?

Here at Guimar, upon my terrace.

That was three leagues distant from me!

Very true; and yet I repeat it, I saw you all the while.

I can no longer doubt! O Thelismar! you are some supernatural being!

A man, my dear Alphonso; and by no means one of the wisest.

Explain then this strange enigma!

A day would not be sufficient; I might easily teach you terms and names, and
show you certain effects, but this would be treating you like a child. If you
wish to know causes, you must gain more solid instruction.

It is what I wish; instruction, such as yours, which can make me comprehend
your actions.

Well, I will lend you books: and when you have read them with attention, we
will converse together. I will then begin to unveil some of those mysteries at
which you are so much surprised.

Oh give me those precious books; see with what ardour I will study them; how
utterly I will reject all other books.

I do not wish you so to do; but the contrary. You love poetry; cherish that
predilection; but read none but good poetry; leave novels, and read books that
shall teach you to know yourself; dedicate two hours a day to the books I shall
give you; think much, speak little, and be attentive to others; this is all I
ask.

Thelismar then took Alphonso to his closet, and gave him a few books; when you
have read those, said he, I will communicate a treasure to you, which will
finish the work of instruction. Look at that chest; it contains the treasure I
talk of.

Ah! said Alphonso, sighing, must I never hope for other reward! -- He stopped,
and blushed, and the tears gushed in his eyes.

Alphonso, replied Thelismar, I do not pretend to deny that I love you; but to
obtain the reward ^o which you aspire, you must become worthy of my esteem.

Oh my father! cried Alphonso, falling at the knees of Thelismar; yes! my
father! permit me the use of a word so dear, and expect every thing from me; I
will obtain that precious esteem, that esteem, without which I could not live:
what must I perform? Speak.

Correct yourself of a thousand defects, and especially of your ridiculous
vanity; rid yourself of ignorance, and acquire useful knowledge.

Every thing will be easy to me.

Know then, I have read your heart. I authorize your hopes; but I require you
should never converse with me on that subject.

Never! Oh heaven! -- Nor of the object of --

Never pronounce her name.

Dreadful sentence!

To which you must submit: and remember if you would gain my esteem, you must
begin by proving the empire you have over yourself.

Well; I submit with joy -- but suppose you mention her name?

You then may answer; otherwise never utter a word, which can be construed into
the least reference.

I obey; happily you have not forbade me to think.

No; I permit you sometimes to think of her.

Sometimes! Ever; not a moment of my life, but --

What, retracting already?

Which way?

Have not you promised me seriously to follow your studies?

Most certainly.

And how may that be, if you always think of Dalinda.

Dalinda! heaven be praised! I did not first pronounce her dear name.

Is it thus, Alphonso, you keep your engagement? Is it thus you will drive
Dalinda from your imagination, every time we read or speak together?

Not mention her! nor think of her! how is it possible?

Every thing is possible to reason*

But the effort will be so painful, so cruel: however, I will endeavor; my
submission to you is unbounded, for there is nothing you have not the right to
exact, and the power to obtain.

Here Madame de Clemire broke off for the evening, and sent her children to
rest, who dreamt all night of nothing but walking pillars and enchanted
caverns; they supposed that Madame de Clemire had told, by this time, every
thing she could collect that was mavelous and extraordinary; but she assured
them, what they had heard was little in comparison to what she should relate,
for she had reserved for the denoument incidents still more surprising. This
assurance redoubled the extreme curiosity of her little family, which Madame de
Clemire satisfied in the evening by thus continuing her tale:

Alphonso, notwithstanding the laws prescribed by Thelismar, thought himself
the happiest of mortals; his passion was authorized by the father of Dalinda,
he might reasonably entertain the fondest hopes. Nothing* was wan^^^g to his
felicity, but a letter from Don Ramirez, containing a grant of the pardon he
had implored.

Thelismar did not leave the Canary Islands, without first visiting the famous
Peak of Teneriff This mountain ri^es in the form of a sugar loaf in the middle
of the (...) of Teneriff; its height is so prodigious, that the length of the
road, which winds along the mountain to attain its summit, is said to be 15
leagues; and (...) they say, the mountain called Chimbo-Raco, one of the (...)
in (...), is much higher.
; after which he embarked for the Cape d^ Verd Islands. During the voyage,
Alphonso followed with ardour the plan Thelismar had prescribed for his
studies; but he had great difficulty to suppress his continual inclination to
speak of his passion, he was prevented only by the fear of offending Thelismar;
and still he would occasionally hazard some indirect allusions, the true sense
of which Thelismar would not understand.

At last Alphonso, unable longer to endure this constraint, imagined a means to
break silence, which appeared to him sublime. He preserved the sash of Dalinda,
as a thing the most precious in his possession; this, notwithstanding the
greatness of the sacrifice, he determined to give back to Thelismar; the
supposition that he should thus enjoy the pleasure of speaking of his passion,
and of Dalinda, the hope that Thelismar would consider this act as proceeding
from an estimable delicacy, and the possibility that he might therefore refuse
the sash, were his inducements. Full of these ideas, Alphonso entered one
morning, with a triumphant air, the apartment of Thelismar. I come, said he, to
make a confession, which must be followed by a painful sacrifice.

Of what nature?

You must first give me your permission -- to speak of her -- I only ask to
accuse myself, to repair my fault,

Well, well, let us hear; explain, explain; though I dare engage the fault is
not very important.

In my eyes it is; feelings the most forcible, the most affectionate, on which
the destiny of my life depend.

Come to the point, what have you to tell me?

You know to what excess I love Dalinda.

Your preface displeases me, Alphonso.

But it is necessary; it leads to the confession of my fault. The day on which
I first faw Dalinda, on which I received a new existence, after your cruel
departure, overcome and lost in grief, I wandered like one distracted, seeking
in vain some traces of the celestial Being I had beheld: conducted at last by
some secret charm, I returned, approached the Fountain of Love, where chance,
or rather the God of the Fountain, moved by my despair, gave into my hands a
pledge the dearest, the most precious.

Dalinda's sash, you mean, interrupted Thelismar, I recollect she lost it.

Behold it here, cried Alphonso, with emphasis, drawing it from his pocket;
behold that sash, the ^ole consolation of an unfortunate lover; I possessed it
without your knowledge; it was wrong; I have not the happy right to keep it; a
well founded delicacy obliges me thus to surrender it.

Your scruples are very just, replied Thelismar; give it me, give it me, added
he, taking the sash; and I promise to return it, Alphonso, the very first proof
I shall receive from you of real sincerity and confidence.

How! cried Alphonso, thunderstruck, do you doubt my sincerity?

I have great right so to do, at the very moment you employ artifice.

Artifice!

You blush, Alphonso, and well you may; but I dare hope, had you succeeded in
deceiving me, your confusion would have been still greater; had you seen me
delighted with your candor, your delicacy, your generosity, tell me how you
would have looked, how you would have behaved, while hearing your own false
prai^es?

Alas! said Alphonso, and shed the tear of repentance, you know my heart better
than I do myself: I own, I only sought a pretext to speak of Dalinda.

And you hoped I should be your dupe; hoped I should return the sash.

I was deceived; convinced by false reasoning.

No; it is now you are deceived; you never were convinced; we cannot hide from
ourselves, what is in its own nature blameable: in vain would specious reasons
gloze over actions, and call them noble, delicate, refined; the heart and the
conscience give such reasonings the lie!

What have I done! Oh Thelismar! has this fault, the whole extent of which I
now perceive, has it deprived me of your esteem without return?

No; your ingenious manner of acknowledging it; the sincerity of your
repentance, the neglected education you have received, and your consequent want
of reflection, all plead in your excuse. Did I think cunning a part of your
character, I should then hold you past hope; but, notwithstanding the unworthy
subterfuge you have just been guilty of, I read frankness and candor in your
bosom; and I am certain, Alphonso, you will yet vanquish your defects.

The concluding sentence gave a little satisfaction to Alphonso, who promised
within himself to let no occasion slip of demonstrating his reformation to
Thelismar.

Our travelers landed first at the island of Goree; from thence they went to
Ru^^sco, and afterward by land to Fort St. Louis, on the Senegal. They saw the
Sereres, a Negroe nation, whose hospitality, simplicity, and gentleness, they
admired; these virtues are undoubtedly the effect of their love of labor and
agriculture, which particularly distinguishes them from most other savages, who
are generally indolent, and disdain to cultivate the earth.

One night as Thelismar and Alphonso, with their guides and companions, were
rambling in a sandy and desert place, they saw a miraculous tree, the height of
which did not exceed sixty or seventy feet, while its monstrous trunk was above
ninety in circumference; its lower branches projected almost horizontally, and
as they were prodigiously large and long, their own weight bent them almost to
the ground; insomuch that they found beneath this single tree, a vast and
extensive kind of grove, which might easily give shelter to three or four
hundred men (25).

After having admired this astonishing production of nature, o^r travelers
continued their route. A few paces from the tree they beheld a lion, extended
on the ground, and seemingly dead. Alphonso was determined to examine the
animal nearer, and Thelismar followed. When they came up to him, they found he
still breathed, but was without power and motion, and apparently expiring; his
jaws were* open, full of pismires, and bloody.

Alphonso pitied the creature, wiped away the insects that tormented him with
his handkerchief, then taking a bottle of water from his pocket, poured it all
down his throat, while Thelismar held the end of a pistol to the entrance of
that terrible jaw, in case of a too sudden recovery. The lion was greatly
relieved by the water, and seemed with his languishing eyes to thank, with
great expression and gratitude, the compassionate Alphonso, who did not leave
him till he had administered every succor in his power.

Alphonso and Thelismar rejoined their small company, and followed a path that
led through some excessively high grass. As Thelismar was walking on before, at
the end of the meadow he fell into a kind of pit, and suddenly disappeared.
Alphonso ran and saw him sitting in the pit. Thelismar said he had got a
sprain, and that it was impossible he should rise and walk without his
assistance. As Alphonso was going to descend and take him in his arms, he
suddenly heard a dreadful hissing, and saw a monstrous serpent, at least twenty
feet long, in the pit, with head erect, making toward Thelismar, who, after an
effort to rise, fell helpless again among the grass (26).

Alphonso instantly leaped into the pit, placed himself between Thelismar and
the serpent, drew his sword, attacked the horrid reptile, and with a vigorous
and firm stroke, severed his head from his body; then turning to Thelismar, he
helped him up, and lifted him out of the pit.

Thelismar embraced Alphonso; you ^ave saved my life, said he, I could neither
defend myself nor fly; the serpent was coming to attack me, and his bite is
mortal. I promise you, Dalinda shall be informed of this. Alphonso was too much
agitated to answer, but pressed Thelismar with transport to his bosom. Gently,
said Thelismar, smiling, take care of my right arm, it is broken.

Broken! cried Alphonso; good God!

Had it not, do you think I would not have defended myself?

And you have not uttered the least symptom of complaint or pain!

You, dear Alphonso, have no right, at least, to be surprised at the fortitude
of others.

Oh my father! replied Alphonso, I want the fortitude to see you suffer; come,
let us join our company. He then raised Thelismar gently on his shoulders, and,
in spite of all he could say, carried him, without stopping, to where their
companions were waiting.

Thelismar was obliged to remain in one of the Negro buts, where he was
humanely received. He had a surgeon with him, who ^et his arm, and in about
eight or ten days he continued his route.

They came to the country of Foulis. The king of these savages calls himself
Siratick, and some travelers give this name to his kingdom. He entertained
Thelismar and his companions with great hospitality, and proposed they should
accompany him to the chase of a lion, which, within a few days, had committed
great ravages in his states.

The king, young, courageous, and desirous to show the company his valor and
address, ordered his followers and the strangers to stop; and, mounted on an
excellent horse, galloped to attack the furious animal, which, perceiving him,
leaped to the combat. The Siratick let fly an arrow, and the lion, wounded,
advanced with a dreadful bellow.

Alphonso now forgot the orders of the king; he darted like lightning, thinking
him in danger, and flew to his succor: he had drawn his sword, and galloping
with incredible swiftness, passed near a tree, against which, by accident, his
sword struck, and snapped short in two. Alphonso himself, shaken by the
violence of the shock, could hardly keep his seat: his horse fell, and the same
instant, the lion seeing a new enemy coming armed, had abandoned the Siratick,
and rushed toward him; his dreadful claws were instantly buried in the sides
of the horse, and Alphonso, disarmed, and without defense, thought his death
inevitable. The Negroes, fearing to kill him, durst not shoot at the animal.

Thelismar, the same moment that Alphonso had galloped to the combat, wo^ld
fain have followed; but the Negroes, already irritated at the young man's
disobedience to the orders of their king, angrily and violently held him,
notwithstanding his cries, his fury, and despair. What were his feelings, when
he saw the lion bounding to devour the overthrown Alphonso? Oh! unhappy young
man! cried he.

But, oh! what surprise! Oh! joy unhoped!

No sooner had the lion beheld the face of Alphonso, than all his rage was
lost; he crouched to him, and lifting up one of his bloody paws, wounded by an
arrow, laid it gently on the hand of Alphonso, and seemed to show him his hurt,
and ask his assistance.

Alphonso shuddered, and remembering the adventure of the dying lion, cried, Oh
noble animal! I recollect thee: may thy example ever confound ingratitude, and
bring to shame those who would erase from their memory the good which others
have done them! -- Yes, since thou have so nobly granted me my life, I will
save thine in my turn, and defend thee, be the consequence what it will.

Alphonso then staunched the blood of the wound, and tearing his handkerchief,
made a bandage which he fastened round the paw.

Thelismar and the savages beheld this spectacle with astonishment. His
chirurgical operations ended, Alphonso rose; his horse lay wounded and dying.
The lion once more approached him, licked his feet, and caressed him a thousand
times. Alphonso retreated gently: the lion stopped, looked after him, then
suddenly turned about, directed his course toward a neighboring forest, and
disappeared, leaving the spectators of this strange adventure motionless with
amazement (27).

Thelismar, after having pressed Alphonso to his bosom, after having embraced
him with the dear affection of a father, reproached him for his temerity, and
imprudence. Had you, said he, asked the nature of this chase, or rather, had
you listened to the account which others gave of it, you would have known the
Siratick was in no danger; but that, used to these kind of combats, he waited
for the lion to bury his javelin in his throat; that he would have afterward
leaped off his horse, and ended him with his sabre.

I promise, my father, said Alphonso, I will be more attentive another time,
and more prudent; at present I have saved the life of my lion, of my generous
and noble animal, and I am happy.

Yes, replied Thelismar, but the Siratick is little pleased with your disregard
of his orders; and though your motive was his preservation, he will not pardon
you, for having robbed him of the honor of the victory; it will be therefore
prudent not to stay long in his territories See I'Abrege d I'Histoire des
Voyages, Tom. II.
.

Accordingly the next morning, Thelismar, Alphonso, and their followers,
quitted Gihorel, and continued their passage up the Senegal, as far as the
village of Embakana, near the frontiers of the kingdom of Galam; they
afterward crossed the Gambia, traversed the States of Farim Or Saint Domingue.
, and, after having traveled a great extent of country, arrived at Guinea.

Here it was, that Alphonso met with a thing which surprised him exceedingly.
As he was walking through a wood with Thelismar, their conversation turned on the
immortality of the soul. Would you believe, said Thelismar, that there are men
so deprived of sense, as to maintain we have no other advantage over inferior
animals, than that of a more perfect conformation; and who have said in express
terms, that if the horse (that intelligent animal) had, instead of a hoof, a
hand like ^s, he would perform whatever we do This strange reasoning is found
in a work, entitled De I'Esprit.

The Translator cannot forbear to enter his protest here, against the
inconclusiveness of the arguments he is obliged in this passage to translate;
without meaning to insinuate thereby any opinion of his own.


.

What! would he draw? would he design?

What think you?

I do not think he could; he might, perhaps, trace some unmeaning imitations.

The parrot, the pie, the jay, and various other birds, have the faculty of
speech; that is, can learn a few words, but can neither comprehend their
meaning, nor, consequently, apply them justly: besides, there are many existing
animals, the conformation of which, both interior and exterior, is perfectly
similar to that of man; they walk like him, and have hands like his, and yet
they neither build palaces nor huts; nay, they are even less industrious than
many other animals.

Monkies, you mean; in fact, they are very adroit. And pray what say those
authors to this, who desire the horse to have hands?

They acknowledge that the monkey might, from his conformation, be capable of
doing the same things as man, and that his natural petulance is an impediment;
that he is always in motion; and could you deprive him of that restlessness,
that vivacity, he would be man's equal All this is found exactly in the same
work De IN Esprit.
.

And yet he does not speak.

No; though in certain species the tongue and the organs of voice are the same
as in man; and the brain is absolutely of the same form, and in the same
proportion See M. de Buffon on Quadrupeds, Tom XVI. Edition in ^2^o.
.

The brain in the same proportion! how can that be? The monkey is so small!

Do you think yourself acquainted with all the species?

Why -- Yes.

Those you have seen were restless and turbulent.

Certainly; for which reason, the objection of the authors you mention seems
just; in my opinion, beings which are perpetually in motion, however excellent
their conformation, cannot learn, cannot become perfect.

But suppose the objection you think so striking, should originate only in a
profound ignorance of things which are known to the whole world.

How* People who write books ignorant of things known to all the world* --

Your doubt, dear Alphonso, proves how little you have read.

Just as Thelismar said this, Alphonso gave a start of surprise, and jogging
Thelismar, cried softly, Look, look -- there -- right before you; what strange
creature is that sitting under the tree?

Here let us break off, said Madame de Clemire, interrupting her narrative, I
feel myself a little hoarse this evening.

This was sufficient to stop every entreaty to continue, though her young
auditors were very desirous to hear an explanation of what this strange
creature might be.

The next day, a quarter before nine, Madame de Clemire indulged the ardent
curiosity of her children, by taking up her manuscript and reading as follows:

Thelismar looked first at the animal, and afterward at Alphonso. What do you
think of that figure, said he?

It is a savage, replied Alphonso, but exceedingly ugly. He rises! holds a
staff in his hand! he avoids us!

And you take it for a man?

Certain^^ I do.

It is a monkey.

A monkey! what, of that size! he is higher than I am; he walks upright like
us, and his legs have the form of ours.

Notwithstanding all which, it is a beast The Orang-Outang, some of which are
above six feet high.
; but an exceedingly singular one, and which man cannot see without looking at,
without knowing himself, without being convinced, his body is the least
essential part of himself M. de Buffon.
.

How you astonish me! but is this monkey, who was sitting with so much
tranquillity at the foot of a tree, as restless and precipitate in his motions
as the small monkies?

No; his walk is grave, his actions circumspect, his temper gentle, and very
different from that of other monkies In speaking of a monkey of another
species, called Gibbon, M. de Buffon says, this monkey seems to us to have
natural tranquillity, and gentle manners; his motions are neither too sudden,
nor too restless; he takes kindly whatever is given him to eat, etc.
; -- he has not the hoof of a horse, he is higher than we are, formed as we
are. -- The Creator would not form the body of a man absolutely different from
all other animals; but at the same time that he has given him a material body,
a form similar to that of the monkey, he has breathed his divine spirit into
this body; had he done the same favor, I do not say to the monkey, but to that
species of beast which seems to us the most ill organized, such species would
soon have become the rival of man; quickened by his spirit it had excelled
others, had thought, had spoken. Whatever resemblance there may be then between
the Hottentot and the monkey, the interval which divides them is immense; since
the Hottentot within is filled with thought, and without by speech M. de Buffon.
.

Alphonso listened to this discourse with admiration. At present, said he, I am
desirous to learn how those authors, who pretend that it is our form only which
makes us superior to other animals, will answer these arguments.

They do not know the animal that we have just seen, nor many other species
nearly like him, described by all travelers; yet their works are modern, and,
as I have said, these are facts known to all the world.

Thelismar here fat down near a lake surrounded by rocks; their guide proposed
they should wait for the rest of the company, whom they had left at a
considerable distance. He had seated himself under the shade of some trees, and
taking two books from his pocket, gave one of them to Alphonso, pointing out a
chapter, which he de^ired him to read with great attention.

Alphonso promised he would; adding, that he would go farther off and sit down,
to be free from all disturbance. This he accordingly did, and sat down at about
two hundred yards distance, on the banks of the lake.

Instead of reading, he fell into a profound reverie: the murmurs of the water,
the fresh verdure, the rocks, all retraced a scene which he had not the power
to banish from his mind: it recalled to memory the Fountain of Love; the form
of Dalinda was present, he could think of nothing but her, and at last could
not refrain from repeating a name so dear.

Certain that Thelismar could not hear him, he sang in an under voice a song he
had made to her memory. As he finished the last line of his song, he heard
footsteps, and turning his head, saw Thelismar coming; he took up his book and
was silent, but the instant he had done, a soft, though sonorous, voice seemed
to issue from the rocks, and again repeated the couplet he had sung.

Thelismar heard the name of Dalinda as he aproached, and his astonishment was
excessive, when he found it was not Alphonso who was singing. As soon as the
air was ended, he was going to question Thelismar concerning this prodigy, when
another voice began the same couplet; scarce had this second voice ceased
singing, but a third, from the opposite side, again repeated the same words,
and the same sounds: silence then succeeded, and the concert ended (28).

What enchantment is this? cried Alphonso.

We must confess, said Thelismar, smiling, the fawns and sy^^ans of these rocks
are dangerous confidents; the nymphs of the Fountain of Love were more
discreet; but come, give me my book, and tell me if you are satisfied with the
chapter I desired you to read. Alphonso blushed, and answered only with a sigh;
and Thelismar changing the conversation, rejoined the rest of the company.

Thelismar continued his route by the Gold Coast, the kingdom of Ju^da, and the
kingdom of Bennin: in this latter co^ntry he found the natives less savage, and
more civilized than their neighbors. He next traversed Congo, and here it was
that Alphonso had nearly lost his life, in consequence of his natural
imprudence and impetuosity.

The small caravan of travelers being on their march, Alphonso was walking
about two or three hundred yards before the rest. They approached a large pond
surrounded by the huts of savages; and Alphonso looking forward thought he saw
on the other side of the pond, a long brick wall built upon the border: not
conceiving what could be the use of this wall, he hastened forward to examine
it; but as he drew near, perceived this imaginary wall had motion.

He then thought, that instead of a wall, he distinguished warriors clothed in
red, and ranged in order of battle; he presently after observed sentinels
stationed in advance, and soon saw he was discovered; for the moment the
sentinels perceived him, the alarm was given, and the air resounded with a
noise much like the sound of a trumpet.

Alphonso stopped, and while he was deliberating whether he should proceed or
go back, he saw the army begin to move, rise from the earth, and at last to fly
away. Alphonso then learned with extreme surprise, that this formidable
squadron was nothing but enormous red birds, of so bright a color, that when
they took flight, their wings absolutely seemed inflamed.

Alphonso had a gun, and being desirous of taking one of these extraordinary
birds to Thelismar, he fired at the flock and killed one. Several Negroes, on
hearing the firing, immediately came out of their huts, which stood by the
pond, hastily running. As soon as they saw Alphonso dragging away the bird he
had killed, they sent forth the most horrible cries, when instantly all the
other Negroes left their habitations, and came in crowds to attack Alphonso,
who saw himself assaulted on all sides by a shower of stones and darts.

Had it not been for the arrival of Thelismar and the other travelers,
Alphonso could not have escaped with life; but at sight of them the savages
fled, and he came off with a few slight wounds, and a severe reprimand from
Thelismar, who informed him, that the Negroes held the bird he had killed in
such veneration, they would not suffer any one to do it the least injury, but
thought themselves obliged in conscience to revenge the death of a creature
which they held sacred.

Alphonso learnt also from Thelismar, that the noise which he had compared to
the sound of trumpets, was nothing but the cry of the birds, which is so loud
and shrill, that it is heard at more than a quarter of a league distance (29).

Thelismar continued his journey, only stopping occasionally among various
hordes of savages, whose manners he wished to know. Of all the barbarous people
of Africa, the nation which he thought most interesting was that of the
Hottentots: their virtues surpassed their vices: they fulfilled, in their whole
extent, the duties of friendship and hospitality; and their love of justice,
their courage, benevolence, and chastity, rendered them far superior to other
savages See l' Abrege de l' Histo^^^ Generale des Voyages, Tom III.
.

It is remarkable, that among the Hottentots, the education of youth is
committed to the mothers, till the age of eighteen, after which the males are
received to the rank of manhood; but before that period, they have no
communication with the men, not even with their own father See the same work,
and the same volume.
.

During their sojourn among the Hottentots, Thelismar was walking one day with
Alphonso: their guide carried a wallet with provisions, it being their
intention to dine during their walk. As they were crossing the rustic bridge of
a small river, the guide let the wallet fall, and fearing probably the anger of
of the travelers, took to his heels and disappeared. This event was very
disagreeable to Alphonso, he being exceedingly hungry.

I am certain, said Thelismar, I can find my way; but before we walk any
farther, let us rest a little under the shade of these trees. They sat down on
the grass, and Alphonso continued to complain of having a great way to go, and
nothing to eat, when Thelismar cried silence, let us listen. Alphonso presently
heard a very shrill cry, which, to his great astonishment, Thelismar answered
in a graver tone: then rising, said, Since you are so very hungry, Alphonso,
come with me, and I Will give you a dinner.

Thelismar then uttered several successive cries; and Alphonso perceived a
green and white bird, which hovered round them. Let us follow this new guide,
said Thelismar, he will recompense us for the carelessness of the other who has
run away.

Alphonso knew not what to think, but walked silently, and looked attentively
at the bird, which, in a few minutes went and rested itself upon a large hollow
tree: Stop, said Thelismar, the bird will come and seek us, if he has any thing
good to discover. As he said, so it happened, the bird seeing they did not
approach redoubled his cries, came back to them, then returned to his tree,
where he fluttered and perched.

Come, said Thelismar, he invites us to dinner with so good a grace we cannot
refuse him. So saying, he went to the tree, and, to the extreme astonishment of
Alphonso, found a bee-hive in it full of honey.

While our travelers were eating the honey, the bird, having fled to a
neighboring bush, appeared greatly interested at all that had passed; it is
but just, said Thelismar, to give him his share of the booty: Alphonso,
therefore, left a spoonful of honey upon a leaf, which as soon as they were
gone from the tree, the bird came and eat. In the course of half an hour, the
bird showed them two other hives; and Alphonso, satiated with honey, merrily
continued his route (30).

Thelismar quitted the country of the Hottentots, and embarked for the island
of Madagascar; after wards he journied through all the eastern coast of Africa;
then quitted that part of the world, and after a short stay in the island of
Socotora, landed in Arabia Felix. He visited Mecca (31), and Medina (32),
traversed a part of the Desert, entered Africa again by the Isthmus of Suez,
and came to Cairo (33); here he admired the famous Pyramids of Egypt (34), from
thence he went to Alexandria, where he found a vessel ready to set sail for the
island of Thera An island of the Archipelago, to the north of Cand^^; it is a
part of the islands called San^orin, or Santori^^, from Saint Iren^, the patron
of them.
.

Thelismar, within the last two months, had several times read over with
Alphonso translations of the Iliad and Odyssey. Alphonso, joyfully leaving the
burning and barbarous climates of Africa, was delighted to find himself once
more in Europe, beneath the azure skies of Greece, in places where all the
pleasant fictions of fable may be traced* and among people whose manners Homer
had described.

Before they left Thera, Thelismar and Alphonso learnt that the Volcano, which
is situated in that island, began to give great uneasiness to the inhabitants,
by appearing to re-kindle, smoke, and cast forth stones.

The next morning our travelers rose with Aurora, and were conducted toward
the Volcano; when they were at a league's distance their guide stopped, telling
them he thought he heard a very uncommon noise; our travelers listened, and
heard a kind of bellowing, which seemed to arise out of the earth* They
proceeded, however, about a quarter of a league farther; in proportion as they
approached the bellowing increased, and was soon accompanied with frightful
hissings; at the same time they observed, that the smoke of the Volcano grew
thicker, and became of a deeper red.

Let us return, said Teelismar.

Scarcely had he spoken, before a horrible noise was heard; and as they turned
their heads to look, while flying toward the seacoast, they saw the mountain
all on fire, covered with flames, which rose to the clouds, and casting forth
on all sides volumes of red hot stones, and blazing matter. The terrified
guide, losing all recollection, led them astray, and took them a road which
brought them back toward the Volcano.

As they now stood fronting this fearful mountain, they saw, with horror,
torrents of fire running impetuously down its sides, and spreading over the
plain: these destructive rivers burnt, and overthrew every thing that opposed
their passage: at their approach the herbs and flowers withered, the leaves
grew instantly yellow, and dropped from the trees; the brooks disappeared, the
fountains were dried up, and the birds dropped breathless from the scorched
branches.

At the same time vast clouds of hot ashes and cinders, burnt white, obscured
the air, and fell like rain upon the earth, breaking the branches, rooting up
trees, and rolling, with horrid din, from the mountain to the plains, echoing
far and near among the resounding rocks.

Thelismar and Alphonso fled from these desolate places, and after long
wandering in unknown paths, came at length to the sea side; they judged, when
at a distance, by the roaring of the waves, that the sea was violently
agitated. They judged rightly; it was dreadfully tempestuous, though the air
was entirely calm.

They were considering this phenomenon with an astonishment, which was soon
redoubled. Suddenly there appeared in the middle of the waves incredible
volumes of flames, which, instantly spreading and dissipating in the air, were
succeeded by an innumerable quantity of burning rocks, that were projected from
the deep abyss of the ocean, and raised above the waters (35).

The tempest after this decreased, the sea was appeased, and some of the
Islanders who passed that way, informed Thelismar that the Volcano no longer
vomited flames. When the eruption was ended, Alphonso and Thelismar returned to
their lodgings, and two days after this memorable event left that unhappy
island.

From hence they went to the island of Policandro One of the Cyclades to the
south of Paros and Anti^aros.
, where they found a Swedish traveller, a former friend of Thelismar's, who
offered to accompany and guide them in their walks through the island. He
brought them to his house, which he would partake with them; and after supper,
addressing himself to Alphonso, said, My dwelling you see is simple, devoid of
ornaments; but if you love magnificence, I have the means of gratifying your
taste. I am so happy to see my old friend once more, that I have formed the
project of giving him an entertainment in a palace, the richness and brilliancy
of which may well surprise you.

Frederic, for that was the name of Thelismar's friend, then rose, called his
servants, who came with torches, and went forth with Alphonso and Thelismar.

They came in about half an hour to an enormous mass of rocks. Behold my
palace, said Frederic: the aspect, it is true, is a little wild, but we must not
always judge from appearances. Stop here a moment, if you please, and let the
servants enter first.

The servants then distributed torches to about a dozen men who had followed
them, each of whom lighted his flambeau, and proceeded forward. When Frederic
saw them at a certain distance, he and his company began to follow.

They had not gone above a hundred paces, before they perceived an immense
arcade, and their eyes were immediately dazzled by the splendour of light. Come
in, said Frederic, this is the peristyle of my pa^ace; what think you of it?

The question was addressed to Alphonso, but he was too busy in considering the
brilliant spectacle before him to reply. The walls of this vast peristyle
seemed covered with gold, rubies, and diamonds; the ceiling decorated with
waving garlands, and pendant ornaments of crystal; nay, the very floor on
which they trod, was paved with the same rich materials (36).

Pardon me, my dear mamma, cried Caroline, for interrupting, but I can hold no
longer. Were these pure diamonds?

No; they only seemed such; but the resemblance was so perfect, as to deceive
the eye most accustomed to consider such objects.

Well, that is very singular; and is it true, dear mamma, that such a palace
once existed?

It exists still.

Oh dear, still!

Yes; in the island of Policandro.

Oh the charming island! Will you show it us tomorrow, mamma, in the map?

Yes; willingly.

Mamma, if you will permit me, my next geographical lesson shall be to trace
upon the maps all the travels of Alphonso; for I can remember them all
perfectly, and so I can all the extraordinary things he has seen.

So be it: but in the mean time, let us continue our tale.

Frederic showed Alphonso how extensive this superb palace was; and after
having passed more than two hours in examining and contemplating the wonders
before them, they once more returned to the house of their host. Alphonso
learnt from Thelismar, that the pretended palace of Frederic was all the work
of nature; and the knowledge of this increased his admiration*

Thelismar having formerly made the tour of Italy, had no intention of
returning thither,; but his friend Frederic, who was going to Reggio, entreated
his company; to which Thelismar the more readily consented, because it was the
only part of Italy he had not seen.

Frederic, Alphonso, and Thelismar, left Policandro, and sailed for the Morea
The large peninsula of ancient Attica.
. Here they beheld the ruins of Epidaurus and Lacedaemon. From the Morea they
went to the island of Cephalonia, where, once more embarking, they sailed for
Reggio Appertaining to the kingdom of Naples, in Calabria Ulterior; there is
another city of the same name in Italy, in Modena.
. The day after their arrival in that city, our three travelers brekfasted in
the chamber of Thelismar, the windows of which looked toward the sea; their
conversation was interrupted by a thousand shouts of joy, heard from every
part. Alphonso ran out instantly, to know what was the reason of such noisy and
animated acclamations: he asked several passengers, who all answered, still
running as they spoke, We are going to the seaside to see the Castles of the
Fairy Morgana.

Alphonso returned, and gave an account of this strange answer; our travelers,
therefore, opened their windows, and beheld a sight, the beauty and singularity
of which surpassed every thing they had hitherto seen.

The sea which bathes the coast of Sicily, began to swell and rise by degrees;
in a little while the huge waves formed a perfect representation of an immense
and dark chain of mountains; while the surges which washed the coasts of
Calabria, remained with a tranquil and smooth surface, like to a vast and
shining mirror, gently inclining to the walls of Reggio. This prodigious
looking-glass soon reflected a most miraculous picture; millions of pilasters,
of the most elegant proportion, and ranged with the utmost symmetry, were
distinctly seen, reflecting all the bright and varied colors of the rainbow;
scarcely did they retain this form a moment, before these supberb pilasters
were bent and changed into majestic arcades, which likewise soon vanished, and
gave place to an innumerable multitude of magnificent castles, all perfectly
alike; while these palaces were succeeded by towers, colonades, and afterward
by trees and immense forests of the cypress and palm (37).

After this last decoration, the magic picture disappeared, the sea resumed its
ordinary aspect, and the people who stood upon the strand, clapped their hands
in transport, a thousand times repeating with joyous shouts, the name of the
Fairy Morgana.

And so mamma, interrupted Pulcheria, we are at length come to our Fairy Tales
again?

Indeed we are not: this last Phenomenon, as well as all the other, is taken
from nature.

But there is a Fairy called Morgana, you know, mamma.

I have only told you what the people of Reggio say; who are generally ignorant
and credulous, are fond of fables, and easily adopt them.

But these magic pictures.

Are produced by natural causes.

I cannot conceive at present, why every body do not pass their lives in
traveling, reading, and acquiring knowledge, in order to understand and see
things so curious and interesting; but dear mamma, be pleased to continue your
recital.

Alphonso began to think like you; the astonishment which so many extraordinary
events continually raised, excited an ardent curiosity and strong defire of
obtaining knowledge; his trifling amusements no longer pleased; he became
thoughtful, spoke with reserve, and listened with attention; but in proportion
as his mind became enlightened, he discovered faults in his past conduct, every
recollection of which made him bitterly repent.

He could not now comprehend, how it was possible he should have forsaken his
father. The obstinate silence of Don Ramirex grievously afflicted him; he
ardently desired to arrive at Constantinople, where he expected to find letters
from Portugal: and though he had a passionate attachment to Thelismar, though
he had almost a certainty of obtaining the hand of Dalinda, he yet determined
to quit the former in Turkey, and return to Europe, there to sacrifice his
hopes and happiness to filial duty, if he received no intelligence from his
father.

This resolution plunged him into a state of melancholy, of which Thelismar
searched in vain the cause; which he even augmented, in wishing to dissipate,
by marks of the most tender affection. He often spoke to Frederic, in his
presence, of Dalinda, to drive away his dejection; while these conversations,
far from softening the secret pangs of Alphonso, but embittered them the more.
Thelismar at last took leave of Frederic, quitted Reggio, and returned to
Greece; and traveling through it, came to constantinople toward the end of
April.

Alphonso found a letter at Constantinople from Portugal, which he received
with inexpressible anxiety; it was not from Don Ramirez, but informed Alphonso
his father had returned to Portugal, had passed some time at Lisbon, and had
left that city, declaring he was going to undertake a voyage of eighteen
months. The letter added, that nobody doubted Don Ramirez had had several
private conversations with the King, and that the purpose of his voyage was
some secret negociations; that they were in great expectations of seeing him
once more in office, because his successor and enemy had been disgraced, eight
days after his departure.

The gentleman, who wrote an account of all this, ended his letter by saying,
he had not seen Don Ramirez, as Alphonso had desired him to do, because, being
on a tour to France, he had not returned to Lisbon till three weeks after his
departure.

From the date of this letter, Alphonso calculated, that his father could not
be in Portugal in less than fifteen or sixteen months, he therefore abandoned
his project of returning thither immediately: in fact, having no money, he had
no means of subsistence in the absence of Don Ramirez; and he was pretty
certain his travels would be ended, and he should return to Europe in less than
a year. The silence of his father deeply afflicted him; but the assurances of
his health and safety were great consolations, and he did not doubt but time
and his future conduct, might regain the affections of his father.

Alphonso, now less sorrowful, less absent, conversed with Thelismar as
formerly; who appeared so satisfied with the change he had remarked in him,
that Alphonso thought he might venture to speak of Dalinda. At first Thelismar
was satisfied with gently reminding him of his promise; and Alphonso,
emboldened by this indulgence, several times fell into the same error; till, at
last, Thelismar was displeased, and Alphonso was obliged to be silent, though
he still sought occasions to speak his sentiments indirectly, and to complain
of the restraint imposed upon him.

Frederic had given Thelismar letters of recommendation to one of his friends,
a Greek, who possessed a charming house on the canal of the Black Sea; this
Greek, whose name was Nicandor, was not then at Constantinople. Alphonso and
Thelismar, therefore, in about a fortnight went to Buyuk-Dairai, a village
eight miles from Constantinople The site of this village is very pleasant.
Ambassadors, and various others, have country-houses there. Voyage litteraire
de la Greece, by M. Guys, Tom. 1.
, where Nicandor and his family past a part of the summer.

It was the first of May, and ten in the morning, when our two travelers
arrived at Buyuk-Dairai. As they entered, they saw the streets full of young
people, elegantly clothed, and crowned with garlands, singing, and playing on
various instruments; every house was decorated with flowers, festoons, and
roses, and adorned by a multitude of young Grecian beauties, surrounded by
slaves magnificently clothed.

This spectable delighted Alphonso; and Thelifmar, acquainted with the customs
of Greece, informed him, that it was thus they celebrated every first of May;
that on this solemn day, young lovers fixed coronets of roses over the doors
where their mistresses dwelt, and sung their praises under their windows (38).

Alas! said Alphonso, they are happy, for they are heard. That favor, replied
Thelismar, is no proof of their happiness.

But what happens when two rivals meet under the same window, or at the same
door?

They fasten their coronets on each side, and sing alternately.

After our travelers had stopped some time in the first street, they continued
their way; and Alphonso, perceiving at a distance a house more ornamented with
flowers than the rest, said, certainly that is the habitation of some
celebrated beauty; he was confirmed in this opinion, when coming nearer, he
beheld two charming young virgins standing in a large balcony.

The guide informed them this was the house of Nicandor, and they entered; the
master came immediately to receive them, and after having read the letter of
Frederic, embraced them both affectionately, and testified the liveliest hopes
that they would remain with him some time. Nicandor and all his family spoke
French tolerably well: Thelismar understood that language perfectly, and
Alphonso knew something of it.

Nicandor called his slaves, who conducted the travelers into a spacious hall,
the walls of which were Parian marble, where a bath was prepared (39).

After bathing, Nicandor came and conducted them into the apartment of his wife
Glaphira; she was seated upon a sofa, with her two daughters, Glycera and Zoe,
and an old and venerable woman, the nurse of Nicandor, who, according to the
customs of the modern Greeks, the family called Paranama, a gentle epithet,
expressive of gratitude, and signifying second mother (40).

The daughters were superbly dressed, both had long floating robes, white
veils, decorated with gold fringe, and girdles richly embroidered, fastened
with buckles of emeralds (41).

Glaphira and Nicandor questioned Thelismar, concerning his travels, and
prevailed on him to recount some of his adventures. After which they sat down
to table, and their repast being ended, Zoe brought her lyre, and accompanied
several duets which she sang with her sister (42).

This agreeable music being over, Nicandor proposed a walk to his guests, which
they readily accepted.

He led them into the meadows, in one of which they beheld a multitude of
shepherd^ and shepherdesses clothed in white, and adorned with garlands of
flowers, almost all holding in their hands branches of the green palm, the
myrtle, and the orange tree; some danced to the found of the lyre, while others
gathered flowers, and sang the praises and the return of spring.

Look, said Nicandor, at that young virgin crowned with roses, and (...) her
companions; she is their Queen; she (...) the Goddess of flowers; and, while
called by the charming name of Flora, receives the ho^^ages of all the village
throng: but her reign is short; (...) the empire of youth and beauty, and ends
before the decline of day.

While Nicandor was speaking, the young Queen gave a signal, and all the
sheperds (...) round her; one of her virgin companions (...) sang a hymn in
honor of Flora and the spring; at the end of each couplet of which, the
shepherds repeated in chorus this burden:

"Welcome sweet Nymph! blessed Goddess of the May."

After which they continued their dances (43).

Having walked round the meadows several times, Nicandor re-conducted his
guests back to his house, where they found Glaphira and her daughters
surrounded by their slaves, employed at embriodering, each in turn relating
short stories and moral sables (44). Though Alphonso did not understand Greek,
he was charmed with the picture by beheld. The youthful Zoe was speaking, and
(...) ^^^jured her to continue her (...) the (...) began again, with a grace
which augmented the bloom of her cheeks, and her modest di^^^^ence.

Zoe related the history of a young virgin on the eye of her marriage, quitting
the paternal mansoon. She told her tale with equal truth and feeling, and
painted the interesting and deep grief of a tender and grateful daughter
tearing herself from the arms of her beloved family, Glycera listened to the
detail with extreme emotion; involuntary tearn then bathed her down^^ast eyes,
and watered the flowers she embriodered; her mother, who observed her, called
her with a broken vo^e^, and held out her arms. Glyeera rose, ran, and threw
herself at her mother's knees melted in tenderness.

The history is interrupted; Nicandor approaches Glycera, kisses her
affectionately, clasps her to his bosom: the lovely Zoe quits her work, and
flies to her sister's arms: the slaves testify their feelings at this touching
scene; and Nicandor, in a few moments, taking Alphonso and Thelismar into
another apartment, explained the cause of what they saw, by first telling them
the subject of Zoe's fable, and then informing them, that Glycera was herself
at the eye of marriage.

The very same evening, the young man, chosen to be the spouse of Glycera, sent
large baskets magnificently embellished, containing ornaments and nuptial
presents for Glycera and the family. The next day the young Greek came,
attended by his parents and friends, to the house of Nicandor; the beauteous
and affecting Glycera appeared; she had on a silver robe, embroidered with gold
and pearls, and fastened with a girdle of diamonds; her tresses floated upon
her shoulders, and a Hymen^al crown adorned her head while she wept, and hid
herself in her mother's arms.

Glycera received the parental benediction kneeling, which Nicandor pronounced
with great tenderness, but with a solemn and firm tone; while the feeling
mother, incapable of articulating a word, raised her swimming eyes to heaven,
and pressed between her trembling hands the hands of her daughter. After this
moving ceremony, the two families, united and followed by all their slaves,
walked to church; this superb train was preceded by a band of vocal and
instrumental music: after them came the young virgin, supported by her father
and mother; her pace was slow, timid, and trembling; her down-cast eyes were
evidently wet with tears she vainly endeavored to retain. According to the
ancient usage of Greece, the Torch of Hymen was carried before her, and her
slaves, husband, parents, and friends closed the procession, in which order
they arrived at church.

After the ceremony, the bride and bridegroom were re-conducted in pomp to
their house, the front of which was illuminated, and ornamented with flowers
and foliage; cups of wine were given to all the guests, and the young people
received nosegays bound with threads of gold, the person who presented them
saying, Go ye and marry also. These words roused the attention of Alphonso, who
looked at Thelismar. A banquet succeeded, and the dancing continued till
midnight (45).

Alphonso left this feast in a sorrowful mood; the remembrance of Dalinda, and
the fear of never, perhaps, tasting a happiness such as he had been a spectator
of, afflicted him deeply. This melancholy continued several days, but it was
insensibly dissipated by the new and agreeable objects which surrounded him,
and especially by the tenderness of Thelismar.

Thelismar and Alphonso every day after their walk, went regularly to the
embroidering room, whither Glycera, and the young friends of Zoe always came;
Nicandor explained, in a whisper, to the strangers, the subjects of the tales
related by these young Greeks; and when Zoe spoke, Alphonso became particularly
attentive; he often would change places with Nicandor or Thelismar, the better
to see them embroider, and he remained longest always at the frame of Zoe; he
praised all their performances, but he only looked at that of Zoe; he once more
undertook to design flowers, and offered every day a new pattern to Zoe for her
embroidery; at last he began continually to vaunt of the manners and customs of
Greece; and thought Buyuk-Dairai the most delightful place he had ever seen.

One morning when he was alone with Thelismar, the latter praised him highly
for his conduct. I am quite enchanted with you, continued he, dear Alphonso; I
see you begin to acquire a command over yourself.

Do I?

Yes; and I cannot conceal my satisfaction; for these three weeks past you have
learnt to hide and overcome that melancholy, at which I was so uneasy; you are
obliging, amiable, and attentive in company; and what must have cost you more
than all the rest, you speak no longer of Dalinda; be assured I feel the value
of this effort.

So saying, Thelismar embraced Alphonso, who suffered his embrance with a cold
and mournful air, without making any reply; a moment's silence succeeded.
Alphonso walked thoughtfully about his chamber, then suddenly turning, No,
Thelismar, said he, I must not deceive you; I should be unworthy of your
kindness, were I to leave you in an error -- he stopped and blushed.

What would you say? answered Thelismar.

Perhaps, exclaimed Alphonso, I am going to ruin myself.

Ruin yourself! what, by being sincere! and to me, Alphonso! Can you suppose it?

Know then, that though my heart is always the same, though Dalinda alone has
touched it, and though, were it not for the hope of becoming your son, life
would be a burden -- yet -- if I have ceased to speak of her, if I have seemed
cheerful, do not attibute this conduct to the efforts of reason, but on the
contrary to --

Come to my arms, interrupted Thelismar, come noble and dear Alphonso, this
proof of thy candor and confidence justifies my affection for thee.

Oh my father! Oh my indulgent friend! cried Alphonso. --

See, continued Thelismar, how fleeting a sensation love is, dear Alphonso,
when not confirmed by an affectionate and solid friendship: two large black
eyes, an ingenious countenance, a sweet smile, and five or six stories which
you did not understand, have made you, in three weeks, forget the object of
that passion which you presented was (...) violent.

It is true, that the young Zoe amused and interested are; it is true, (...) my
sorrows from my mind, and that Dalinda was less frequently present to my
imagination, but she was ever in my heart.

Do not deceive yourself, Alphonso, you have yet no real attachment to Dalinda,
because, at present, you know nothing of her but her form.

But that form proclaima a soul so pure, so superior! Besides, I know Dalinda
by her letters, her acquirements, her tenderness for you! In a word, Dalinda is
the daughter of Thelismar, and is not that enough to make her passionately
beloved?

All that is not a sufficient foundation for a deep and durable attachment,
which cannot exist without mutual considence and friendship. But let me ask you
a question concerning Zoe: how has it happened, that you have not perceived the
impression she has made upon you?

It must certainly be a want of reflection.

Imagine then, for a moment, the consequence of wanting such reflection. I have
more than once observed, that Nicandor and Glaphira do not approve your
excessive respect for Zoe; so many attentions, a preference so marked, must
soon injure the reputation of the young virgin to whom they are paid. You have
risqued troubling the repose of, and bringing sorrow into a house, where their
treatment demands all our gratitude.

Heavens! you make me shudder -- but henceforth I will think, I will each day
severely examine my actions, my sensations, and, what may be more effectual, I
will every day consult you, and never more will I conceal my thoughts from you.

And now, said Thelismar, I must quit myself of a promise which I have not
forgotten. So saying, he opened a casket, took out the fash of Dalinda, and
gave it Alphonso. It belongs to you, said he, you have a right to it, since I
promised it to you on the very first proof of your sincerity. --

Oh Thelismar, said Alphonso, greatly affected, what a moment have you chosen!
And am I permitted to receive a pledge so dear in this house!

Yes; if it still continues dear to you; if you have still the same sentiments.

Then I dare accept it -- Alphonso threw himself at Thelismar's feet, recceived
the sash of Dalinda kneeling, and kissed with transport the hand that gave it.

Remember, Alphonso, said Thelismar, this from a father, is no light, no
trifling gift; from this moment our engagement is mutually sacred. I have
adopted you as a son; I promise you an amiable and virtuous companion for life;
of whom you must become worthy, not by a romantic passion, but by a stable and
uniform virtue. Continue to inform your mind, and improve your temper and
understanding; it is thus you must prove your love for Dalinda, and show your
gratitude for my affection.

Nicandor came and interrupted their conversation, and Alphonso, too much moved
to support the presence of a third person, retired: he wished for solitude,
that he might indulge, without constraint, the transports of his heart. It is
needless to observe, that from that day forward he designed no more patterns
for Zoe, paid her no other attentions than such as good breeding demanded, and
avoided going into the embroidering room.

The family of Nicandor, however, met an unexpected affliction; one of their
friends, lately returned from the Isle of Calki It is the ninth of the
Propontis Islands, anciently called Daemoneri, or the Isles of the Genii. M.
d'Anville mistakenly calls them Les Isles du Prince, which name is given by the
inhabitants only to the fourth. This Note is by M. Guys.
, to which he had made a short voyage, fell ill and died in four days time.
Nicandor related many interesting particulars of the friend he had lost; and
told how he had renounced the riches and honors which he had a right to
expect, that he might yield himself, without control, to the delights of
friendship and study.

This sage, continued Nicandor, who had retired to a pleasant house (46) near
mine distributed the greater part of his income to the (...) he consecrated the
rest to the embellishment of his habitation: his heart was virtuous, and his
temper simple; he cultivated his garden himself, watered his flowers, and bred
birds, for which he made an extensive aviary. Such were his innocent
amusements. Beloved by his friends, adored by his slaves, he had a sister
worthy of himself, who lived with him, went with him every where, and who never
can forget his loss. Tomorrow, continued Nicandor, we shall perform the last
duties of friendship; his sister will conduct the funeral rites.

But how will she have the fortitude? said Thelismar.

You are a man, answered Nicandor, who wish to know our manners, to study
nature; come and see this sorrowful ceremony; you will there behold the
workings of despair. Grief among us is never repressed, it is seen in all its
energy. Among a people who are slaves to appearances and custom, sorrow is
mournful and mute, but here it is eloquent and sublime.

This conversation excited the curiosity of Thelismar, who did not fa^l, with
Alphonso, to follow Nicandor to the funeral of his friend. They went first to
the house of Euphro^ine, the name of the sister above mentioned, and entered a
chamber bung with black, where the corpse, magnificently cloth^^, and with the
face uncovered, was laid in his coffin; the slaves were kneeling round, and
venting their grief by tears and groans. Among them Thelismar distinguished an
old man, still more profoundly afflicted than the rest, to whom Nicandor went
and spoke.

Thelismar questioned Nicandor concerning this old man, who answered his name
was Zaphiri. He was present at the birth of him we lament, said Nicandor; he is
almost past the use of his limbs, and the impossibility of following the
burial, adds to his grief: he has just told me, there is but one remaining
pleasure for him on earth, the feeding of the birds, and the culture of the
flowers, which once were his dear master's delight.

Nicandor was speaking, when Alphenso and Theismar felt their blood run cold at
the broken accents and dolorous cries they heard: it is the wretched
Euphrosine, said Nicandor. Immediately a woman appeared, in long mourning
garments, with disordered hair, pale checks, and bathed in tears; she was
supported by two slaves, and seemed scarcely able to drag her ^low steps along;
the august and affecting picture of a grief so profound, made her natural
beauty more striking, more majestic; and her shrieks, her lamentable groans,
were uttered in an accent so penetrating and so real, that it was impossible to
hear them, and not at once feel astonishment, terror, and the most
heart-rending pity.

The Patrian^^ and his attendants soon after arrived. The corpse was taken up,
and a funeral dirge began. After passing through the village, and proceeding
less than a mile into the country, they came to a place overspread with
cypress-trees, tombs, and sepulchral-columns.

Euphrosine shrieked, and hid her face in her veil, as soon as she perceived at
a distance the sepulcher prepared for her brother. They came at last to the
grave, the procession stopped, the Patrierch pronounced the burial-service,
kissed the dead, and retired.

Euphrosins then raising up her veil came suddenly forward, and fell upon her
knees by the side of the (...).

Oh my brother! cried she, receive the l^st farewell of thy unhappy sister: Oh,
my dear, my affectionate friend! Do I then look upon then for the l^st time? --
My brother: -- i^ this my brother! -- Alas! yes, (...) are his features still;
but, oh, insupportable thought! While I bathe him with my tears, while I call
him, while my heart is torn with despair, his countenance still preserves the
same (...) gloom, the same mournful tranquillity -- Oh dreadful silence! -- it
is the silence of death -- my brother is but a shadow; it is his image only
Euphrosine kisses -- what then have I for ever lost thee! -- shall I never see
thee more! Never! -- never! No -- I cannot submit to this -- this eternal --
this horrible separation. No, I will not suffer the hand of cruelty to tear
thee from my arms, and plunge thee in the tomb -- stop, Bar, barian, stop,
forbear to dig his grave -- pity my grief, or dread my despair.

The Patriarch again advanced to take away the body. Euphrosine (...) a
dreadful shrick; her slaves flew to her assistance, and, in spite of her
struggles, held her at some instance from the grave, while she, quite beside
(...) ^ent her garments, and tore up her hair by the (...) to scatter on the
coffin.

Her tears then suddenly stopped: motionless and stupid her eyes were fixed upon
the coffin, as they were lowering it in the tomb* But when she saw them place
the marble over it, by which it was to be for ever hid, she shuddered
dreadfully, and shrunk back. Oh God! cried the -- Is it then done!

So s^^ing the color l^^t her lips, her eyes closed (...) into the arms of her
slaves They (...) the (...) as soon as she (...) to (...).

(...)she sshould cross the (...) soon (...) she (...) the old (...) in one
hand a (...) and in the other a watermg (...); she looked and and shuddered; it
was the occupation of the deceased; she ran toward the slave, what art thou
doing Zaphiri, cried she?

Alas! I am tending the flowers my master loved so much.

Miserable old man, said she, seizing the hoe, thy master is no more: this
place must be evermore the place of sorrow, of desolation; let all that
embellishes it die, be its pleasures annihilated; open the nets; give liberty
to those birds, whose warbling and mirth distract my heart; and these flowers,
nurtured by my brother's hand, let them perish with him.

So saying, Euphrosine wildly and rapidly ran, cutting down, and trampling on
all the flowers in her path (47).

This affecting scene made a strong impression on the heart of Alphonso; tell
me, said he to Thelismar, when they were got home, how does it happen that
ideas so opposite, may be the result of the same feelings? Why does this old
man delight to cultivate the flowers of his master, while Euphrosine, on the
contrary, finds a kind of consolation in their destruction?

Which of these two actions do you prefer? asked Thelismar in his turn.

That of the old man appeared most natural, and yet the other affected me more.

Common feelings produce only common effects, while a deep sensibility
naturally begets extraordinary ideas and actions: thus, for example, if the
woman, who has interested us so much, if Euphrosine had reason, taste, and
discernment, as well as such strong passions, and if she were then to write,
her works would certainly possess originality, energy, feeling, and truth.

And is it not the possession of these qualities which constitutes genius?

Undoubtedly! If genius did not originate in the soul, would it be a gift so
precious, so desirable, or could it so powerfully excite envy?

Thelismar and Alphonso passed some few more days at Buyuk-Dairai; after which
they took leave of Nicandor and his amiable family, quitted Greece, and entered
Asia by Natolia. They staid a little while at Bagdad Bagdad it a great city, on
the eastern borders of the Tigris; it was taken by the Turks somewhere about
16^^.
and Bassora Bassora is a fine city, below the confluence of the Tigris and the
Euphrates; the Turks have been (...) of (...) since 1664: it is 100 leagues
from Bagdad.
, and stopped at the island of Bahrein, in the Persian Gulf, where they saw the
famous pearl fishery (48). From thence they departed by sea for the kingdom of
Visapour.

During this voyage Thelismar and Alphonso were one evening walking the deck,
and conversing on the wonders of nature. I think at present, said Alphonso, I
know them all.

Dear Alphonso, since you are so learned, replied Thelismar, explain the
meaning of the phenomenon which at this moment appears; look this way on
yonder waves.

Alphonso went to Thelismar, and looking as directed, beheld the vessel
encircled by fire, to which the total darkness of the night gave an additional
brilliancy; the surface of the sea was entirely covered with small sparkling
stars, and every wave, as it broke, cast forth a shining light.

The wake of the vessel was of a luminous silver white, interspersed with
dazzling azure sparks (49).

In confess, said Alphonso, this is a glorious sight, and absolutely new to me.

Come let us go to bed, replied Thelismar; and should you happen to awake in
the night, I am persuaded you will make some solitary reflections on that
presumption which is but too natural to you, and which persuades you of the
extent of your knowledge, when every day proves the contrary.

Alphonso made no reply, but embraced Thelismar, and went to bed.

Scarcely had he been asleep half an hour, before there was a noise in his
cabin that awaked him: he had put out his light, and was frightened at opening
his eyes, by perceiving fire on the partition opposite his bed; he rose
hastily, and his surprise increased at beholding, in large legiable letters of
sire, these words written upon the boards:

Learned Alphonso, your terror is ill sounded, this fire burns not (50).

Ashamed and astonished, Alphonso put his hand upon these fiery characters, and
felt no heat: Oh Thelismar! cried he, what surprises me the most is, that you
have the art to render the lessons which wound self-love agreeable. Thelismar
immediately appeared, with a light in his hand, smiling; and after having
explained to him the nature of this seeming fire, retired, and Alphonso once
more went to sleep.

It is also time that we should go to sleep, interrupted the Barronness, for
the evening has been much longer than usual.

The next evening Madame de Clemire again continued her history of Alphonso.

Our travelers being arrived at Visapour, visited the diamond mines (51), and
afterward went to the Court of the great Mogul. Thelismar having obtained an
audience of the Emperor, was permitted with Alphonso to see the Palace. They
passed through many apartments, and found, in all of them, beautiful women, in
magnificent habits, armed with lances, who formed the interior guard of the
palace. They came to a vast and splendid hall, hung with gold brocade, where
the Monarch was sitting on a Throne of Mother of Pearl, entirely covered with
rubies and emeralds; four Columns, all bespread with diamonds, supported a
canopy of silver, embroidered with sapphires, and ornamented with festoons and
pearls; a superb trophy, composed of the Emperor's arms, his quiver, bow, and
sabre, garnished with jewels, and connected by a chain of topazes and diamonds,
were suspended to one of the columns; the Emperor himself was in cloth of gold,
and in the center of his turban was a diamond of prodigious brightness, and so
large, that it extended almost over his whole front: various rows of fine pearl
formed his bracelets and collar; and an infinity of precious stones, of various
colors, enriched his girdle and his buskins: before him was a table of massive
gold, and all the great lords of his court, in most sumptuous robes, were
standing ranged round his throne.

Thelismar presented to him several mathematical instruments, of which, by
means of an interpreter, he explained the use. The Emperor seemed pleased with
the presents and conversation of Thelismar; told him, it was his birthday;
that the whole empire celebrated the festival, and invited Alphonso and
Thelismar to spend the evening in his palace.

Evening came; wine was brought in vases of rock crystal; every body was
seated, fruits were served in plated of gold; the musicians entered, and the
hall soon resounded with cymbals and trumpets. The Emperor filled a goblet of
wine, and sent it to Thelismar; the goblet was of gold, enriched with the
turquoise, the emerald, and the ruby. When he had drank, the Emperor desired
him to keep the cup and mark of his friendship.

When the repast was almost ended, two large basins of rubies were brought the
Emperor, which he threw among the courtiers, who all scrambled for them. Soon
after two other basins were brought full of gold and silver almonds, which were
thrown, and snatched with the same avidity.

Thelismar and Alphonso, as you may well suppose, sat still, ashamed of, and
contemning the covetousness and meanness of the Mogul lords.

The Emperor also distributed pieces of gold-stuff and rich girdles to several
of the musicians, and some of the courtiers; after which the drinking began.
Thelismar and Alphonso were the only people who remained sober; the Emperor,
unable to sit upright, hung his head and fell asleep, and then every body
retired.

When Alphonso and Thelismar were alone, Thelismar said to the former, What do
you think of this Court?

I think, replied Alphonso, he is the richest and most magnificent Sovereign
upon earth.

And the happiest, and most respectable likewise?

I know not if he be happy, for I know not if he be loved, if his reign be
peaceable and glorious: but I confess there is nothing august in his person;
nothing which enforces reverence. There is not a single Prince in Europe, who
has so little the air of majesty.

And yet there is no European Sovereign, who may be any way compared to him for
pomp and show. Gold, pearls, diamonds, and all the Asiatic ostentation, do not
therefore of themselves impress any real respect. What must we think then of
those frivolous Europeans, who affix so great and imaginary a value on those
shining trifles? I wish the European women, who are richest in such
possessions, and who are sometimes properly enough, by way of derision, called
queens of diamonds, I wish they could be transported here for twenty-four
hours. What would one of them say, at seeing herself totally surpassed in such
bright ba^bles, by the very slaves of the Emperors ^ives.

For my part, answered Alphonso, blushing a little, I shall no more mention the
diamonds that my father lost during the earthquake at Lisbon. But pray tell me
how it happens, that the great Lords of this Court, who seem so rich, are yet
so covetous? How meanly did they hustle one another for the gold and jewels the
Emperor threw.

Their whole emulation is that of being more superbly dressed than others; they
only seek to distinguish themselves by silly outside show; and you see how much
this kind of vanity, carried to excess, can make men capable of the most
degrading acts. But to return to the Emperor: you say you are ignorant if he be
happy; can you suppose a monarch so ignorant, so debased, happy.

If he be good, he may be beloved.

We do not love whom we despise; ought he not, for the good of his people, to
be well informed, just, and estimable. Besides, this Monarch has no subjects,
they are only slaves, and he is a despot; he exercises a tyrannical power
outwardly, while he is inwardly tormented by all the fears and terrors, which
ever were the just punishment of tyrants. The homage paid him is forced; and
while adulation offers him incense, hatred is secretly conspiring his
destruction; his life is past in suspicion, or the punishment of traitors; he
is in continual fear of all that approach him; and to complete his misery, his
very children are suspected.

The next day, Thelismar and Alphonso went early to the palace; the Mogul was
then at war with the Sovereign of Decan, and was going to visit the camp where
his troops were assembled. His wives were mounted on elephants that waited at
their doors: Thelismar counted eighty of these animals all pompousty equipped;
the little towers they carried were plated with gold, and embellished with
mother-of-pearl; the same metal too formed the bars of their grated windows; a
canopy of cloth of silver, with tassels hung with rubies, covered each tower.

The Emperor was carried in a palanquin of gold and mother-of-pearl, set with
pearls and precious stones: many other palanquins followed that of the Emperor,
and a vast number of trumpets, drums, and other instruments, mixed among a
crowd of officers, richly clothed, who carried rich canopies, and umbrellas, of
brocaded gold, hung, with pearls, rubies, and diamonds, led the procession.

Our travelers, after having admired the splender of his camp, quitted the
court of the great Mogul (52), and went to the kingdom of Siam. Here they saw
the famous white elephant so much revered in India: his apartment is
magnificent, he is served kneeling, and in vessels of gold They have the same
respect for white elephants at Laos, Pegu, etc.
. "These attentions," says an illustrious philosopher M. de Buffon.
, these respects, these offerings, flatter him, but do not corrupt; he has not
then a human soul; and this should be sufficient to demonstrate it to the
Indians,

There was now but one part of the world unknown to our travelers, America,
for which they embarked, and came to California; from thence they went to
mexico; and as they were on their route to the town of Tlascala, Thelismar
looking at his watch, stopped his carriage, and alighted; telling his servants to
wait, and carefully look to the horses; for, added he, night will suddenly
overtake us.

How! said Alphonso, laughing, night! not so suddenly, for it is only noon.

Thelismar made no reply, but seeking the shade, turned toward some trees at a
little distance. Alphonso, as he followed, perceived an animal, the
extraordinary figure of which raised his attention; it was nineteen or twenty
inches long, without reckoning the tail, which was at least twelve, and scaly,
like a serpent; its ears were like those of the small owl, and its hair erect.

The animal stood still, and Alphonso wished to examine it; he observed it was
waiting for its young, which were running toward it; as they came up, it put
them one after another into a bag or pouch beneath its belly, then ran toward
the trees.

Desirous of observing so singular an animal nearer, and finding that it could
not run fast, Alphonso pursued it; he had just overtaken it when it came to the
foot of a tree, up which it ran with surprising agility, and seizing the end of
one of its highest branches with its tail, twised it round, and there remained
suspended, apparently motionless (53).

Alphonso was going to mount the tree, when he heard on every side of him a
loud crackling, which redoubling, seemed like the discharge of artillery; at
the same instant he was covered with an innumerable multitude of small black
grains, darted on him from all parts (54). He hastily drew back, and hid his
eyes with his hands, which were considerably hurt by the grains that had struck
them.

The pain was so great, that he was obliged to keep them shut for some minutes,
at last he opened them, but no sooner had he done so, than he cried out, Oh
heaven! I am blind! Oh Thelismar! Oh Dalinda! I shall never see you more. --
Thelismar, Thelismar, where are you? -- Do not abandon the unhappy Alphonso.

As he said this, he heard pretty near him a burst of laughter, and knew it was
the voice of Thelismar. What then, continued he, does Thelismar insult my
misery? No; it is not possible.

He then recollected that Thelismar, when he got out of his carriage, had told
his servants that night approached; he began therefore to take courage, and
doubt the truth of his blindness, nothwithstanding the midnight darkness that
surrounded him; he followed the sound of Thelismar's voice, till he found and
seized him in his arms.

I cannot at present, said Thelismar, serve you as a guide, Alphonso, for I am
as blind as you are.

Thanks be to heaven, replied Alphonso, that I am acquitted for the fright
only; I find now, that the cause of my fear is nothing but an eclipse of the
sun; but I did not think that eclipses ever produced such total darkness, nor
can I conceive by what art you could foretell, with so much precision, the
exact moment of this phenomenon.

While Alphonso was speaking, the sun, once more beginning to appear,
dissipated the fearful obscurity that had blackened every object; the profound
silence, the midnight calm, soon ceased, and nature seemed to revive; the
birds, with fresh animation, thinking they sang the return of Aurora, gave
notice by their loud and lively warblings, of the birth of day (55).

Thelismar and Alphonso now regained their carriage, and the eclipse, the
animal, and the strange artillery, furnished our travelers with subjects for
conversation, which were not exhausted when they arrived at Tlascala.

Quitting Mexico, Thelismar and Alphonso embarked for St. Domingo; here
Alphonso flattered himself he should find a letter from his father; he was
mistaken, but he received news from Portugal, though such as gave him great
affliction.

He learnt, that Don Ramirez had not returned to Portugal; that the public
opinion was totally changed concerning his being again taken into favor, and
sent on an embassy; most people even supposed him exiled, but were totally
ignorant to what part of the world he he was retired.

This intelligence overwhelmed Alphonso with grief; uncertain now of what might
be his father's fate, his remorse became more keen than ever.

Thelismar came to seek him, just as he was in the midst of these melancholy
thoughts. I come to tell you, said Thelismar, you will see Dalinda much sooner
than you hoped; she is at Paris with her mother; they will wait for us there;
tomorrow we will depart for Surinam, from thence we will embark for France,
whith^^ we shall go directly. But in the mean time, added Thelismar, before you
see Dalinda, I will show you a present I have just received from her. Here,
open this, do you recollect that form?

Heavens! cried Alphonso, it is the portrait of Dalinda! What a wonderful
picture! What a striking likeness! How perfect is the painter's art!

This picture will interest you still more, when you know it is the work of
Dalinda herself.

Dalinda! Has she then every talent as well as every charm? Oh permit me once
more to look on this precious painting. -- Yes; behold her angelic features;
look, there is her enchanting smile. How happy, Thelismar, are you in the
possession of such a treasure!

And yet I desire another picture of her; I would have her paint herself once
more, but with her husband by her side; and when, Alphonso, she shall give me
that, I promise you shall have this.

Alphonso only replied by tenderly pressing the hands of Thelismar, and
watering them with his tears.

Far from feeling a joy pure and unmixed, he looked upon it as his
indispensable duty to return to Portugal, hoping there to find some sort of
information concerning his father: he was unalterably determined to declare his
resolution of going thither to Thelismar; but this resolution was too painful,
not to cause the most violent agitations in his mind.

He had never had the courage to confess a fault, for which he justly and
bitterly reproached himself; he wanted the power to tell so dear a friend he
had left Spain clandestinely, without his father's consent; and this first
dissimulation, had obliged him to disguise the truth in a thousand other
instances: at last, however, he firmly purposed to expiate all his wrongs by
his sincerity, without reserve, and, if necessary, by the most painful
sacrifices; and in this disposition left Saint Domingo. They arrived at Surinam
Surinam is a Dutch colony, of about 30 leagues extent, along the river of
Surinam, in Guiana.
about dusk, and were struck by a most brilliant spectacle at their first
entering that country. The coast seemed covered with an infinity of
chandeliers, hung without order, at unequal distances. Thelismar and Alphonso
were admiring this agreeable illumination, when they perceived many of the
lights were in motion, and advancing toward them.

A moment after they plainly distinguished eight or ten men who walked nimbly,
though they seemed covered with small lighted candles; some on their bonnets,
some on their shoes, and some on their hands. This vision greatly surprised
Alphonso, who wanted to come near these men; but they passed hastily by, and,
as Alphonso did not understand the language of his guides, he could not satisfy
his curiosity.

When they came to the house where they were to lodge, they were shown into a
pretty chamber, as clear as day; but, as Alphonso remarked, that the lights
were placed in two small glass lanterns, he wished to see them nearer: he then
discovered, with astonishment, they were nothing but green flies, of a bright
emerald color, which gave all this light.

We have now an explanation of the thing we wanted, said Thelismar; the trees
being in a conic form, are covered with these flies, and resemble, at a
distance, girandoles and chandeliers hung in the air; the men we met, had
fastened these shining insects on their bonnets and feet, and carried them in
glass tubes in their hands.

The very same eveing, Alphonso learnt these beautiful flies were more than one
way useful. When he was in bed, they were taken from their little lanterns and
let fly about the room, in which he was informed, they would kill the knats,
which might otherwise disturb his rest (56).

Alphonso, however, a prey to inward grief and chagrin, could not close his
eyes the whole night; he rose before daybreak, determined no longer to defer
opening his heart to Thelismar, but to inform him of all his faults, and all
his sorrows.

He went to walk upon the seashore till Thelismar should rise, and after
straying a considerable time, sat down at the foot of a tree, where he fell
into a vague and painful reverie; presently his eyes became heavy, he began to
doze, and in a few moments was asleep. He was awaked by a piercing and
sorrowful cry, and opening his eyes, saw himself in the arms of Thelismar, who
was bearing him away.

Alphonso endeavored to speak, but could only utter some broken and plaintive
sounds; pale and faint, he could not support himself, he wanted even the power
of thought. Thelismar laid him down on the grass, ran toward the sea, filled
his hat with salt water, and made Alphonso drink it; after which, with the help
of some servants, he raised and took him home.

Alphonso came to himself by degrees. Where am I, said he, as he felt his
strength returning?

Oh my son, said Thelismar, have I not spoken to you of this fatal tree? Have I
not told you, that to sleep beneath its perfidious shade is to die (57)?

It is true, cried Alphonso, with a languishing voice, I recollect it now.

Providence be praised, you are out of danger; but had not my fears for you
brought me where you lay, the very instant they did, I should have lost you,
Alphonso.

And do you weep for me, my father? For me! Oh most affectionate of friends!
best of benefactors! wherefore have you snatched me from the arms of death? I
had then been regretted by you. Thelismar, while weeping for the miserable
Alphonso, would then have been ignorant of his worst errors.

What do you mean, Alphonso?

I am overpowered by your favors, penetrated by your bounties; my affection
for you is the reigning sentiment of my heart, and yet I am the most
unfortunate of men.

Heavens! Which way? how?

A single word, Thelismar, may make you judge of my situation; I cannot follow
you to France!

And why not?

Sacred duty dictates my return to Portugal: Oh! that by this painful sacrifice
I could expiate my fault!

What fearful remorse is it that overwhelms you? -- But -- no -- thou art
incapable of wickedness or meaness; speak, be confident, open thy heart to thy
friend.

Alphonso shed tears of gratitude and joy at hearing this, was silent a few
moments, then taking courage, owned, without reserve, how he had deceived
Thelismar, when he assured him that Don Ramirez approved his travels; related
the circumstance of his flight, and painted, in the most moving manner, his
remorse, and uninterrupted inquietude concerning the fate of his father.

When he had finished his recital, Thelismar, with a softened heart looked at
him, and said, No, I will not abandon thee; I myself will conduct thee to
Portugal.

These words inspired Alphonso with gratitude so strong, so passionate, he
could only express it by falling at the feet of his generous friend.

Yes, continued Thelismar, we will find this unhappy father; I will enjoy the
pleasure of giving thee again to his arms; for I dare assure him thou now wilt
make him happy. We shall arrive somewhat later in France, but Dalinda will see
thee reconciled to heaven and thyself, and honored with the paternal
benediction, Don Ramirez will certainly consent, without scruple, to your union
with Dalinda. My fortune is not immense, but it is more than sufficient; the
ties which attached Don Ramirez to Portugal, are all broken; it will be no
difficult thing to engage him to look on Sweden as his country, and my house as
his own.

This is too much, said Alphonso; Oh Thelismar! let me breathe; my heart cannot
express its feelings toward a benefactor such as you; gratitude becomes a
passion; words are weak; I cannot tell you what I think.

This conversation delivered Alphonso from one part of his troubles; the
indulgence and tenderness of Thelismar assuaged the bitterness of remorse, and
gave birth to the sweetest hopes.

Before they quitted Surinam, Thelismar and Alphonso were invited on a fishing
party, and rose on the day appointed early in the morning. In their way to the
seaside, they crossed a marsh full of extraordinary trees; from their flexible
branches, bundles of filaments hung down, lay upon the ground, took root, grew,
and formed other trees, as beautiful as those to which they were united, and of
which they were only shoots, which again multiplied after the same manner;
insomuch that a single tree might become the parent stock of a whole forest.

But what most surprised Alphonso was, that these trees were covered with
shellfish! A multitude of oysters were fixed to their branches (58)

Thelismar was explaining the cause of these singular things, when they arrived
on the strand; they went on board, the fishing began, the net was thrown, and
the haul was a good one.

Alphonso seeing an exceeding large fish, very like an eel, went and touched it
with a little switch that he had in his hand; no sooner had he done so, than he
felt so great a pain in his arm and hand, that he gave a loud cry before he
could recollect himself. The fishermen all began to laugh: and Alphonso, piqued
and astonished, remained motionless awhile.

Recovering himself, he went again to the fish, and said, I do not know how the
touching this fish can cause so violent a shock; but I will show you at least,
that though I may be surprised, I am not to be intimidated.

So saying, he stooped down and touched the fish with his hand. He did not cry
out this time; but he received so terrible a shock, that if Thelismar had not
stepped forward, and catched him in his arms, he would have fallen; and was so
stunned by the violence of the stroke, that he almost lost the use of his
senses.

As soon as he was perfectly recovered, I will show you, said Thelismar, a
still more astonishing effect produced by this fish. We are fourteen people in
all, let us form a circle, and each hold the other by the hand: I will stand
first, and you last; I will touch the fish with a stick, and, although
separated from me by twelve people, you shall yet feel the fame shock as I.

The experiment was made, and confirmed all that Thelismar had predicted (59).

The day after this adventure, our travelers quitted Surinam and America, and
embarked for Portugal. During the voyage, Thelismar, in return for the
confidence Alphonso had placed in him, satisfied a curiosity he had long
entertained. Alphonso could not conceive how Thelismar might resolve to quit
his country for four years, and tear himself from a family so dear to him, for
so long a time.

Thelismar informed him, that his Sovereign, being the protector of literature
and learned men, had engaged him to make this sacrifice: the favors of my
King, continued he, my love of science, and the particular delight I take in
natural history, have determined me to undertake an enterprise, the fatigues of
which my friendship for you has made me cheerfully support; the care of forming
your heart, and enlightening your mind, together with the affection you have
inspired me with, alone could soften the uneasiness and chagrin I have often
felt, and which are inseparable from the feeling mind absent from its native
home.

After a favorable voyage our travelers landed in Portugal, where all the
information that Alphonso could procure, relative to Don Ramirez, was very
feeble and insufficient. They assured him, that his father had not been seen
there during the last two years, and, after an infinity of researches, Alphonso
was persuaded Don Ramirez was either in England, or in Russia. The interests of
his family required Thelismar should go to England; this Alphonso knew:
therefore in quitting Portugal he had the consolation to think he should not
stay in France, but follow Thelismar and Dalinda to a land in which he hoped to
find his father.

Thelismar, as they drew near to France, thought proper to make his young pupil
promise carefully to conceal his love from Dalinda. You will travel with her,
said he; I have told you it is the wish of my heart to unite, by the most holy
ties, two objects who are now almost equally dear to me; but you cannot,
Alphonso, dispose of yourself without a father's consent: I have no doubt his
consent will be granted; yet there is a possibility it may be refused.

Oh heavens! refused!

Were I to present you to Dalinda, as her future husband, she would look upon
you, beyond dispute, with the eye of affection; and, uncertain as we are, would
it be right to hazard troubling the repose of her life?

I trouble her repose, or trouble yours! though but for a moment? No; let me
rather never behold her -- but we are so certain of my father's consent.

And yet, suppose, through some unaccountable caprice, he should refuse.

What, my father pronounce sentence of death upon me!

Either Alphonso, I have lost the fruits of all my cares, or you will support
this misfortune with fortitude. Is it in the power of fate to make us miserable
while we are virtuous, and while we possess a faithful friend?

Oh Thelismar! you shall for ever be the sovereign arbitrator of my destiny. Do
you not dispose of my actions, my opinions, my feelings, as you please? Oh yes;
and the ascendency you have acquired you can never lose; reason, virtue,
gratitude, and friendship confirm your power. I will faithfully follow the law
you impose -- I will see Dalinda, and be silent -- Yet what an effort! But
shall I doubt my power to perform what you prescribe?

Our travelers came to Bourdeaux, whence they immediately departed; and their
carriage breaking down at the distance of thirty leagues from Paris, they were
obliged to stop where the accident happened. Thelismar wrote from this place to
his wife, informing her he should certainly be with her the next day by five in
the afternoon at latest, and delivered the letter to a courier, who departed
immediately. Thelismar and his pupil rose before daybreak, got into their
carriage, and departed for Paris.

What a charming morning! said Alphonso, transported and embracing Thelismar,
as he beheld the rising sun; what a fine day! Before it is ended, I shall see
Dalinda.

Remember your promise, replied Thelismar; I dread lest you should betray your
feelings at this first interview.

Oh, I am certain of myself.

Do not be too sure: take my advice; from this moment moderate those
transports; those joys which in a few hours must be totally concealed; let us
speak of something else.

How is it possible?

If you wish to acquire a command over your passions, accustom yourself to
regulate your imagination at your pleasure, and to banish any certain train of
thoughts, when you wish so to do.

But provided my conduct be always rational, will it matter what my thoughts
are?

How is it possible to give any marking proofs of fortitude, if we are
habitually feeble? He who suffers his imagination to have dominion over him,
can neither drive from his memory what is dangerous to recollect, nor reject
thoughts he ought not to entertain; and can such a person always be supposed
rational? The facutly of thinking should be turned to the improvement of the
heart and mind; but we pervert this noble faculty, when we suffer our
imagination to dwell upon objects beneath, unworthy of, or derogatory to
ourselves; therefore there is no doubt but the most secret thoughts of a wise
man are far more pure and sublime than his words.

Alphonso sighed, and for a few moments remained silent; then, by an effort
over himself, entered again into conversation. Thelismar spoke of their
travels, and recapitulated whatever they had seen most remarkable; discoursed
on the arts, chemistry, botany, and various subjects of natural history, while
Alphonso was insensibly drawn to listen with pleasure.

How happy you are, said Alphonso to Thelismar; how extensive your knowledge,
nothing can astonish, nothing is new to you.

How mistaken you are, replied Thelismar. The heaven and earth, the universe,
all we see, all that environs us, is the work of an infinite Being; an eternal
book, in which man, till the end of time, shall find secrets that are
impenetrable, objects for ever new, and discover, through each succeeding age,
mysteries the most sublime, without ever knowing them all.

Thus conversing, they drew near to Paris, when our travelers, almost equally
moved, became thoughtful and silent; they remained so a considerable time. At
last Alphonso said to Thelismar, Will you not own that, at present, you do not
choose your thoughts, but that you are obliged to accept those which so
forcibly, so naturally present themselves?

As Alphonso was speaking, the postillion told Thelismar he saw something which
very much surprised him in the air. Thelismar looked out, and discovered, above
the clouds, toward Paris, a small round body, opaque and dark, which appeared
in motion, and slowly approaching as it were, to meet them.

Thelismar astonished, looked very attentively at this phenomenon, and his
astonishment increased at beholding the body become larger and luminous. He
determined to descend the better to examine it, and the terrified postillion
had already stopped his horses. They alighted in a charming meadow, adjoining to
Arpajon, six leagues from Paris; the luminons globe, however, seemed still to
increase in size.

It is a meteor, said Alphonso, and much such a one as I saw in Spain, when I
was traveling to Loxe.

It is no meteor, said Thelismar.

What is it then?

I cannot conceive: it approaches still, and still becomes brighter. Have you
your pocket telescope about you?

Yes.

Lend it me -- Thelismar took the telescope that Alphonso presented him, and
having adjusted it, looked and cried, it is incredible: I can perceive
underneath this globe a kind of vessel, a small ship fastened to it; this is
certainly an illusion -- Here, take your turn to look.

Alphonso took the telescope, and presently exclaimed, good God! I see a man!

Thelismar began to laugh; you have hit it, said he, it is Abaris the Scythian
Abaris was said to have received an arrow from Apollo, on which he flew through
the air.
.

I am not surprised at your incredulity, said Alphonso; for though I am certain
I see it, I do not believe it -- and yet -- why what enchantment is this? --
heavens! -- I now see two people distinctly!

Alphonso rubbed his eyes, and the telescope dropped from his hands; he looked at
Thelismar, who motionless and fixed in amazement, said not a word! The globe
still kept approaching, and at last appeared almost over their heads. I can
doubt no longer, cried Thelismar: this globe of purple and gold contains living
beings! -- I see them! -- Oh inconceivable prodigy! Oh happy triumph of
audacious genius!

While Thelismar was speaking, the globe hovered over his head, majestically
descended, and they saw in the vessel, suspended to the globe, two celestial
figures; they were females: the one had the dignity and beauty of Juno or
Minerva; the other clothed in white, and crowned with roses, resembled Aurora,
or the charming goddess of springtime and flowers.

Alphonso flew toward the globe; he was stopped by a violent palpitation of the
heart; no, cried he these ravishing creatures cannot ^e mortal -- they approach
-- they come hand in hand -- surely it is Innocence and Virtue, descending from
heaven to give back the golden age -- but -- good God -- is it a new delusion?
-- Oh, Dalinda, this young divinity, the more to charm us, has taken thy form
-- I dare not believe my eyes, and yet my heart cannot deceive me -- Yes, it is
she, it is Dalinda herself!

Alphonso wildly called Thelismar, just as the globe and its car touched the
earth; while the latter, pale, trembling, petrified with surprise and doubt,
looked on it, sent forth a piercing cry, and transported with joy, ran, or
rather flew toward them.

The two divinities were not less eager* they sprang, they wept, they sunk in
his arms.

Alphonso, quite beside himself, durst not follow the dictates of his heart; he
stopped, and the excess of his feelings obliged him to lean against a tree, for
his trembling legs were unable to support his body.

In the first moments of joy, the magic globe, the car, the miracle, were
totally forgotten. Thelismar behold nothing but his wife and daughter, and his
curiosity was suspended, superior to the power of all enchantment. Alphonso, a
witness of his happy meeting, did not taste a joy unmixed; he contemplated
Dalinda with ravishment; he enjoyed, with transport, the sweet pleasure of
understanding her in her native language, while she spoke every thing that
filial affection could inspire to a dear and tender father. But this
interesting scene brought to memory Don Ramirez, and all his wrongs; and thus
was one single subject of remorse sufficient to poison all his pleasure.

Reflection, after a while, having again given birth to surprise and curiosity,
Dalinda and her mother were questioned concerning the miracle they had seen.
They replied, they had not ventured themselves passengers in the Air Balloon,
had they not first seen experiments which had assured them of its safety; that
knowing the day and hour when Thelismar would arrive, and having a favorable
wind, they could not resist their desire of thus surprising him, especially
when it would bring them sooner to his arms; that living in the same house with
a philosopher, who had a globe ready prepared, they had seized so favorable an
opportunity of flying to meet a husband and father so dear; they added, as they
were hovering over the meadow of Arpajon, they had distinguished a carriage and
horses with their telescopes, and consequently had descended.

Thelismar after this went to examine the globe, and his wife gave a short
account of the experiments which had been made at the Muette, and the
Tuileries. Thelismar self himself greatly moved, while she described the
general enthusiasm which these sublime experiments had excited; and the
universal admiration with which the whole nation beheld the immortal author of
that discovery, and the two illustrious philosophers, whose heroic daring had
procured to France a spectacle s;o pompom, and so new.

Thelismar likewise heard with pleasure, that all the truly learned partook in
this well-founded national enthusiasm; and Alphonso was astonished to find,
that envy wanted power to poison the triumph of the author of this brilliant
discovery.

A little reflection, said Thelismar, will rob you of your surprise; such
lights as may serve to guide men to the things they wish, are always received
with transport. Suppose a chemist, by making a discovevery, should open a new
career to the learned, and furnish materials for an infinity interesting
speculations, and a multitude of new ideas: would he not thus afford them new
means of distinguishing themselves, and acquiring glory? From one discovery a
thousand others may arise, while each philosopher is only busied in bringing it
to perfection, and thence deducing new lights and further fame: thus, far from
endeavoring to diminish the merit of the first invention, each employs his
talents and his genius to make it more useful, consequently more glorious.

You give me infinite pleasure, said Alphonso; there exists then a way, in
which men may run toward the same goal, may overtake and outstrip, yet not
hate each other. Oh noble triumph, in which the victor is crowned by the
vanquished; where the' excellence of an individul is the delight of the whole
and becomes to them an inexhustible source of fame and fresh success. Oh that
men of wit would follow this sublime example!

You wish a thing impossible, answered Thelismar facts cannot be denied: a
discovery proved by experiment, is beyond criticism, above censure; but so are
not works of imagination. An author who writes to the fancy, may ardently
desire to prove his work is good, but cannot do it geometrically; it is in vain
that he may affirm it a hundred different ways in his preface, when whosoever
pleases can affirm the contrary: thus when he has composed a Chef-d' oeuvre,
ill taste and malignity may deny his merit, Hence arise disputes, unjust
criticisms, and enmities which dishonor literature. The philosopher can write
nothing which describes new facts that is not useful to all other philosophers;
while the wit and talents of the man of polite literature are subservient only
to his own individual fame.

After this conversation, they took a turn in the meadows, then entered their
carriages, and went for Paris, where they arrived in the evening.

Thelismar made no stay in this city, but departed with his family and Alphonso
for England. They passed some time at London; but not being able to learn any
tidings of Don Ramirez they left it, and went to Buxton in Derbyshire.

I will conduct you, said Thelismar, as they were walking out, to a fountain,
which, from the fabulous virtues attributed to it, would be much better placed
in Sicily or Greece than England. It is pretended, that the spring only flows
for constant hearts; and that any lover, capable of the least infidelity,
cannot drink of its waters, because they stop at his approach. It is long since
I heard this old tale, added Thelismar, the gallantry of which recals to memory
the fountain Acadine and the story of Argyra (60).

The guides now spoke to Thelismar in English, which language Alphonso did not
understand: they tell me, said Thelismar, we are not an hundred yards from the
fountain; but as the road is full of stones and brambles, they and our servants
will go before and clear the way. Let us sit down under these trees a moment
till they call. So saying, Thelismar seated himself between his wife and
daughter, where they had not sat long, before the guides returned, and
conducted them to the fountain.

I am going, said Thelismar, smiling, to his wife, to prove a fidelity, of
which I (...) you have never doubted; besides, this clear and abundant spring
invites me to drink; I therefore willingly consent to submit to this proof of
perfect constancy.

So saying, he approached the spring and drank two or three times. Who,
continued he, will, after this, pretend that men are inconstant! You see -- But
come, Alphonso, are not you thirsty?

No, replied Alphonso, laughing: however I will drink.

Alphonso drew near, but Thelismar stopped him, as he was going to stoop, and
whispered, What, have you the audacity to expose yourself to this proof; have
you forgot Greece, and the black-eyed youthful Zoe?

Nay, Thelismar, now you are cruel.

Well, well, since you have engaged with so much temerity, you must go through
with it now; you must drink.

While this dialogue was passing, Dalinda drew near, and Alphonso fearing she
might overhear Thelismar's jokes, stooped toward the fountain; but as his lips
drew near the stream, it instantly ceased to flow. Alphonso, abashed and
astonished, felt his heart violently beat, and stood like the statue of
surprise. Dalinda blushed and smiled, though with an air of some constraint,
while Thelismar silently, with mischievous pleasure, looked on; at last, A way
profane mortal, said he, in a tragic tone, depart from these sacred haunts.

Certainly, said Alphonso, this cannot be a real fountain.

I protest, said Thelismar, it is.

I own it has all the appearance of one. And can you, who possess so many other
wonderful secrets, forbid the fountain to flow?

That would indeed be a wonderful secret.

Yet I have seen you do things as surprising.

This, however, surpasses my power; I assure you I have no influence over this
fountain; the prodigy at which you seem so much astonished, is entirely the
work of nature. I will endeavor this evening to explain the phenomenon; in
the mean time, Alphonso, cede your place to me, for as I have a clear
conscience, I dare supply it, unterrified by your disgrace; look, and you shall
see the stream flow once more.

As Thelismar approached the spring, it began again impetuously to bubble forth
its waters; and when the had enjoyed his triumph for a moment, Thelismar took
Alphonso under the arm, and quitted this miraculous fountain.

Alphonso was not ignorant enough to believe the fountain was enchanted; and
after some reflection, he nearly divined the cause of an effect so
extraordinary; but Thelismar's pleasantry had so disconcerted him, that he
could not recover himself during the whole walk.

Thelismar departed from Buxton, and conducted his wife and daughter to the
frontiers of Scotland (61), where they left him to go to Edinburgh. The wife of
Thelismar had an ancient relation and benefactor who lived in that city, and
who was very desirous to see her once again; while, therefore, they went to
Scotland, it was determined that Alphonso and Thelismar should make a tour to
Iceland.

Alphonso at parting from Dalinda, acquitted himself with a fortitude that even
surpassed the hopes of Thelismar; fearing he should betray himself, he
determined scarcely to look at her, and pronounced no other kind of farewell
but such as mere politeness required.

As soon as he was alone with his friend, he uttered his tender plaints, but
the praises of Thelismar soon softened his chagrin. They embarked and arrived
in Iceland, at Skalhot, whence they went to Geizer. The first thing they
admired in this wild place, was a cascade of prodigious height; but another,
and a newer spectacle, soon drew all their attention: look this way, said
Thelismar, behold the supberb columns of ruby, ivory and crystal, which cover
that immense plain.

Alphonso turned, and over a vast extent of ground, among rocks and gulfs, he
saw thrown up into the air, at equal heights and distances, innumerable spouts
of water, as from prodigious fountains, and of various colors; some of a
bright red, some of a dazzling white, others of pure and limpid water, but
almost reaching to the very clouds (62).

Alphonso and Thelismar could not be tired with so beautiful, so brilliant a
sight. They admired many other phenomenon in the same island, equally curious;
and, after having seen every thing it contained, of interesting and uncommon,
they re-embarked, and again returned for England, where Alphonso once more saw
Dalinda, when the pains of absence were forgotten, though the necessity of
hiding it considerably abated his joy.

Thelismar left England with inexpressible satisfaction, and at last embarked
for Sweden. After so many travels, so many perilous voyages, to see himself in
his own country, in the midst of his family and friends, was a delight not
easily to be described.

Here he had the pleasure to find once more the virtuous Zulaski, with whom he
had lodged at the Azore Islands, and whose house was miraculously thrown into
the sea. Thelismar learnt with joy, that the filial piety of this young man had
made him the object of public admiration; that his sovereign had heaped
benefits upon him; that he had found his mistress faithful, and that he was
married, and the happiest of men.

Thelismar wished to contemplate him in the bosom of his family; he there saw
Zulaski, with his father on one side of him, his wife on the other, and his
child, a beautiful boy, not two years old, on his knees. Oh Zulaski! said
Thelismar, where is happiness that may be compared to yours? The wife you dote
on, the child you love, your wealth, your reputation, your pleasures, your
felicity, your glory, all, all the effects of your virtues. And your happiness
is still the more pure, since it is too interesting to incite envy. Those
qualities which are only brilliant, have ever more enemies than admirers; but
those which are the offspring of the heart, obtain the suffrages of all. You
cannot outshine other men, without wounding their pride; whilst you astonish
them, you often irritate: and whenever you are personal, you are assuming. Your
son too, that tender object of your dearest hopes, what may you not expect from
him: since, to make him worthy of yourself, to make him feel how extensive are
the sacred duties of nature, you have only to relate your own story.

Alphonso, more than ever a prey to disquietude, concerning the fate of his
father, and cherishing still the fond hope of finding him in Russia, told
Thelismar he was determined to go to Petersburgh. Easily imagining what
Alphonso's afflictions must be, should he not find Don Ramirez there, Thelismar
determined not to abandon, but go with him.

At Petersburgh they found Frederic, the old friend of Thelismar, whom they had
met in the island of Policandro: I am destined, said Frederic, to show you, and
see in your company, extraordinary things; follow me, and you shall behold a
palace of crystal.

We know, said Alphonso, that you call a cavern formed by nature a palace. For
this time, however, replied Frederic, it is no play of words, but a real
palace, built by men, according to the most regular rules of architecture.

This assurance scarcely could persuade Alphonso; therefore, to cure him of his
incredulity, Frederic immediately took him to the mavelous palace. As soon as
they came in sight of it, Alphonso uttered an exclamation of surprise! He saw a
real transparent palace, of beautiful architecture, apparently built of various
colored crystal.

Go on, said Frederic, and your amazement will be doubled: look at yonder
battery.

What do I behold, cried Alphonso: Cannon too of crystal.

The concert is going to begin in this enchanted castle, continued Frederic,
you may go in, if you dare enter a palace which must at least be the habition
of fairies.

I am too much accustomed to them now, said Alphonso, to stand in fear of
enchantments.

So saying, he passed beneath the brilliant porticoes of the palace; and, led
by celestial harmony, came to a magnificent hall, the walls and columns of
which, built of the same materials with the rest, were, likewise, ornamented
with garlands and festoons of roses; the girandoles of crystal, which were
placed in the angles of the hall, were filled with an infinite number of
wax-lights, which being reflected on every side, produced a most dazzling
brightness.

But what struck Alphonso most, was the beauty of the women, which he found
assembled in this magic palace. He was in no danger of taking them for fairies,
they were clothed nearly as Calypso, or the nymphs of Diana are painted;
something like Arethusa, or the beauteous Atalanta; their robes were the spoils
of animals, run down, or vanquished at the chase; their mantles, made of the
skins of the ermine and the fox, hung from their shoulders, fastened with
diamond clasps; and, in these supberb habits, their charms effaced the
brightness of the habitation.

Quitting this palace, Alphonso was informed of the nature of the materials
with which it was built; it was the ice taken from the river Neva (63).

What, mamma, cried Caesar, a palace of ice!

Nothing is more certain!

Filled with burning candles too, and yet not melt! How is it possible to find*
ice thick enough for such a building? Besides, you said the palace was of
various colors.

My notes will answer all these questions.

Oh dear, cried Pulcheria, how I long to read these notes!

You had reason, mamma, to tell us that Fairy Tales are not so miraculous as
yours! but pray, dear mamma, continue your story, we will not interrupt you
any more.

It is too late, said Madame de Clemire, you shall hear the rest tomorrow.

The following evening Madame de Clemire thus continued the History of Alphonso.

All the enquiries of Alphonso, relative to his father, were as fruitless in
Russia, as they had been in England: overwhelmed with grief, he found, in the
affections of a generous benefactor, the sole consolations he was capable of
receiving. Neither duty nor the laws, said Thelismar, permit you to marry,
without the consent of your father; you must, therefore, dear Alphonso, submit
to your fate; all that depended upon you, have you done to find him; now then
you must wait with resignation, till the age that you are allowed to dispose of
yourself; you must henceforth be separated from Dalinda, and see her no more
till you receive her hand. You shall pass this time in Sweden, in a house that
appertains to me, and in which I lived before my travels; I will conduct you
there, and leave you alone, while I go to Stockholm and join my family. We
shall be separated, but we shall inhabit the same* country, and with the
certitude of being for ever united in two years.

Alas! said Alphonso, how cruel an exile, how severe a separation will this be
to me! -- If Dalinda only knew my love -- might I but hope her pity -- but I
submit to my fate; and oh! may the pangs I shall suffer expiate my guilt; may
heaven, moved by my repentance, give me back a father who has caused me so many
tears!

Thelismar l^ft Petersburg, and brought Alphonso to his destined ^^treat. It
was an antique mansion, situated in a wild place, near S^lseberist.

Here th^n, said Alphonso, is the solitude in which I must pass two long years;
were it not for the cutting remembrance of my father and my faults, I might
support this rigorous exile with fortitude, but remorse now will be my only
companion.

Always preserve, said Thelismar, this just remorse; but be not vanquished by
it: industriously employ yourself in bringing that knowledge, the elements of
which I have given you, to perfection. I formerly promised you a treasure, the
value of which you are now capable of knowing; behold those shelves, those
books; behold there, my dear Alphonso, an immortal work, which will more
extensively instruct you in the secrets of nature. I will stay with you a few
days, and show you the neighborhood; in these savage environs you will find
objects worthy to excite your curiosity.

The next morning Thelismar and the melancholy Alphonso, were in their carriage
by daybreak. Thelismar promised to show him something curious, but Alphonso
was too deeply pensive to hope that any thing might divert his sadness. After
they had rode about three miles, they came to a wild desolate place, surrounded
on all sides by enormous mountains.

Here let us stop, said Thelismar. If I had not known your courage, Alphonso, I
would not have brought you to this desert, for our enterprise will be very
perilous. Look here -- do you perceive various gulphs on the other side of
those rocks? -- Into the abyss they lead to we must descend.

As Thelismar spoke, two men of a fearful aspect approached; they were wrapped
in long dismal garments, with naked arms, and lighted torches in their hands.

These are our guides, said Thelismar; here we must separate; we shall soon
meet again.

Accordingly he went with one of the men, and Alphonso followed the other, who
walked silently before. When they had gone a little way, Alphonso found himself
on the brink of a pit; he stopped, and saw in the mouth of this abyss, a kind of
small barrel or basket, suspended in the air; into this bark the guide leapt,
and Alphonso followed; after which the guide, still keeping the lighted torch
in his hand, made his deep hollow voice reverberate down the gulf; and while
its sides still shook with the sound, their vehicle began to descend, and an
invisible hand seemed to precipitate them into the deep bowels of the earth.
Alphonso looked upwards at the infinite firmament of heaven, which was an
imperceptible point; this point itself presently vanished, and he only saw his
strange attendant, who seemed the very counterpart of the ferocious ferryman of
hell.

After traveling thus about a quarter of an hour, Alphonso began to be
astonished at the length of the way, and the immense depth they had descended;
when suddenly he heard a noise, which he presently found to be impetuous
torrents, dashing and roaring round him, unseen, on all sides, and recalling to
his imagination the fearful and tumultuous streams of Tartarus.

At last the vehicle stopped, he jumped out; Thelismar came running again to
join him, and after walking a little way, Alphonso was surprised by the sudden
appearance of light. He advanced, but not far; he stood motionless with
amazement: he found himself in the midst of a vast and magnificent hall of
silver, sustained by pillars of the same metal, round which were four spacious
galleries: a brook of limpid water crossed this hall and these galleries, while
the sumptuous edifice was lighted by an infinity of lamps and flambeaux. All is
shining, all dazzles in these subterranean regions; the lights are reflected
and multiplied by the silver walls and vaults, and the crystal waters, which
wind along the hall.

Alphonso and Thelismar entered the galleries, where they found crowds of
people variously employed; farther on Alphonso discovered houses, saw horses
and carriages pass and repass; and, moreover, to his inconceivable
astonishment, perceived a windmill.

What! mamma, interrupted Caroline, a subterranean town of silver, and in that
town horses, carriages, and a windmill!

The town exists at this moment, exactly as I have described: but let me finish
my tale, my dear, without farther interruption.

While Thelismar and Alphonso were beholding these wonders, Thelismar
shuddered, on remarking the lights began to burn blue. He looked up, and saw
above his head a kind of whitish veil: he instantly took Alphonso by the arm,
dragged him down, and forced him to lie with his face upon the floor; at the
same moment, a terrible and universal shriek resounded through the vaults; the
lamps were all extinguish^^^ and to an illumination the most brilliant,
succeeded darkness the most horrid, which was yet augmented by a profound and
utter silence.

At last, in a few seconds, a noise was heard like the discharge of a cannon,
when instantly every body rose, and cried the danger is over; the lamps were
re-lighted, and Thelismar turning toward Alphonso, said, death has passed over
our heads. Such is the fearful peril to which men are often exposed, in these
profound deeps which avarice has dug. Alas! these unhappy people deprived of
the cheerful light of day, enjoy not the riches they wrest from the bosom of
the earth: misery buries them in these tombs of terror, and, instead of
enjoying the riches that pass through their hands, they have scarce enough to
buy them food; their days are consecrated to the most painful labors; their
health is destroyed, and their term of wretchedness is shortened (64).

How much, cried Alphonso, you interest me in favor of these unfortunate
victims! Poor unhappy creatures! But look, added Alphonso, what is the matter
yonder, where that crowd is assembled!

Alphonso ran toward the other end of the gallery, and Thelismar followed:
they were told, that one of the workmen, not having put out his light quick
enough when the mephitic vapor discharged itself, was wounded, and that they
were endeavoring to give him assistance.

Let us run, said Thelismar, I have a bottle in my pocket, which may be of
service to him perhaps.

They made their way through the crowd with all the haste they could; the
unfortunate man was laying senseless extended upon the ground; he is dead, said
one of his comrades, seeing Thelismar advance. Alphonso, with a compassionate
heart, drew near; his eyes, dim by tears, were cast toward the mournful object
-- He shuddered! started back! -- sprang again toward him! -- beheld him with
distraction in his countenance! his blood froze in his veins! his hair stood an
end; and, as if a thunderbolt had struck him, he fell speechless and lifeless
to the earth.

Thelismar flew to the succor of Alphonso; he gave orders to the people who
surrounded the supposed dead man, and then had Alphonso carried into another
gallery; in about half a quarter of an hour Alphonso gave some signs of life,
and some time after came more to himself.

Then it was, that the most horrible despair was seen in his looks, and
disfigured his features -- It is my father, cried he! it is he himself! it is my
father! -- Barbarians, give me my father! conduct me to him! let me see him!
let me die by his side! -- in what place! Oh God! in what dreadful state have I
found him! -- But he is dead! and do I exist! -- have I enjoyed the light of
heaven, while my father has uttered groans in this place of death and terrors!
-- Leave me, continued he, pushing Thelismar from him, with wild ferocity in
his eyes; fly a monster unworthy to revisit the day. I renounce happiness, the
world, and the blessed sun. This cave shall be my tomb, as it is, alas! that of
my most wretched father; in death at least we shall be united.

During this scene of distraction, Alphonso in vain endeavored to escape from
the arms of his friend: hold, cried Thelismar, hold Alphonso; know thou me
not? see thou me not? hear thou not my voice?

I see nobody but my father: I hear no voice but the voice of nature, whose
cries rend my very heart.

Yet be calm; yet hear me: if you are certain you are not deceived, if it be
your father, you yet may hope.

Almighty Providence! is he -- is he alive?

His hurt is not mortal?

Eternal Father of mercies, cried Alphonso, falling on his knees, and raising
his clasped hands to heaven, Oh God of boundless pity, hear me! have compassion
on my pangs, my remorse, my despair, and give me back my father.

Compose your spirits, Alphonso.

Oh let us run; deign Thelismar, to guide my steps; let us fly.

No; at present it is improper; such an interview might be fatal.

But is he alive? -- Do you assure me he lives?

I do -- I am certain, that though apparently, he is not really dead. I gave
orders they should carry him out of the pits into the air, and he is gone.

Has he revived? Has he spoken? Oh Thelismar, do not deceive me.

Alphonso! Is not my word sacred! -- I have sent him to my house, and must
follow to assist.

To your house! My father at the house of Thelismar, and alive!

I have ordered them to carry him in our carriage.

Oh! let us fly!

Thelismar and Alphonso immediately left the gallery, called their guides, and
were drawn out of the pit: they were obliged to return on foot, but they were
met half way by the horses and servants of Thelismar. Alphonso eagerly
questioned the domestics concerning his father, but received only vague and
unsatisfactory answers; his doubts and suspicions again revived, till his fears
became insupportable.

At last they got home, and Alphonso in vain endeavored to follow Thelismar
into the sick man's chamber. You are not sufficiently master of yourself, said
Thelismar; if the stranger is your father, you shall see him tomorrow; but
give me leave to inform him properly first, and prevent the consequences which
else might succeed.

Alphonso, obliged to submit, passed the day in anxiety and trouble too violent
to be described. Unable, however, any longer to support his incertitude, he
resolved to hide his intentions from Thelismar, and visit his father when every
body was gone to rest. Accordingly, about midnight, he went to the chamber*
door of the sick person, and knowing the bed was placed so that he might enter
the chamber without being seen, he softly opened the door. With trembling steps
he entered the room, and as he entered, heard the voice of Don Ramirez; his
sensations were so strong he could scarcely support himself: but, alas! what
were his feelings at hearing his father's discourse, who was raving in a fit of
delirium.

Alvarez! Alvarez! cried aloud the wretched Don Ramirez, come! -- come Alvarez,
and drag me from this abyss of terrors into which thou have plunged me; pity my
pangs; look, behold my misery. But how may thy eyes penetrate from the heights
of heaven to the bowels of the earth? How dreary is this gulf, it contains the
tomb of thy wife and son -- There! -- Ay, there they are* I see their p^le
shades! behold how they menace. See, see, how they pursue me! -- and must it be
for ever thus? -- But look; mercy, what do I see! thy son, Alvarez, arms
Alphonso with a poinard; behold! he is going to revenge thee; now he strikes,
now he pierces my heart -- Stop, my son, is it for thee to punish a father?
Will thou kill me first, and then abandon me? Ah, come at least and receive my
last sigh, take my blessing ere I go.

Alphonso, unable longer to contain, was going to cast himself in his father's
arms: but the watchful Thelismar appeared, caught hold of him, and in spite of
his cries and resistance, tore him from the chamber.

A physician, whom Thelismar had sent for, came; at first he was doubtful; but
in a few hours Don Ramirez became more calm, his delirium was gone, and the
physician pronounced him out of danger: the transports of Alphonso's joy could
now be only equalled by his late excess of grief; and as soon as his hopes for
his father were confirmed, his tenderness and obedience to Thelismar returned.
During the last few hours, Thelismar, for the first time, had found him unjust,
obstinate, and headstrong; but no sooner was he assured of his father's safety,
than he became more submissive, reasonable, and tender than ever, toward his
benefactor.

As soon as Don Ramirez heard he was at the house of Thelismar, he instantly
asked, with an exclamation of surprise, for Alphonso; and it was now impossible
any longer to defer the interview: Thelismar therefore sought for, and brought
him into the chamber of Don Ramirez. Alphonso agitated, hoping, fearing, bathed
in tears, ran and fell on his knees by his father's bedside, whose arms were
extended to receive him.

Oh my father! cried Alphonso, dear author of my being! Are you given back to
me at last? and will you receive your guilty son again? Ah! surely you read my
heart, or you could not: you there behold my repentance, my remorse, my love!
-- Yes, my father, my life hereafter shall be consecrated to you. I wish
existence only, to repair my faults, to obey, to make you happy. -- Oh speak to
me, my father, let me hear the sound of a voice so revered; confirm my pardon
with your lips; and oh! may it give me back the repose I had lost, and which I
never could have enjoyed without you.

Is it not an illusion? at last, said Don Ramirez, Is it Alphonso? is it my son
that I press to my bosom? -- I accuse thee not of thy errors and wretchedness,
both were equally mine: but heaven is appeased, and we are again united; again
I see thee, and all my sufferings are repaid.

The weakness of Don Ramirez would not suffer him to speak any more: he became
pale, and his head, heavy and helpless, dropped on the cheek of his son.
Alphonso, terrified, instantly ran for the physician, who brought Don Ramirez
to himself again; but forbade any more such conversations for the present.

This meeting did not forward the recovery of Don Ramirez. However, in a few
days he was capable of sitting up, and Alphonso then related to him all his
adventures. Don Ramirez gave a thousand testimonials of his gratitude to
Thelismar, and as soon as he was quite well, he also would relate his history.
He confessed all his faults without reservation, and the whole circumstance of
the history of Alvarez, the virtuous Portuguese hermit, whom he had met with on
Mont-Serrat.

When he came to the epoch of the flight of Alphonso, he thus continued his
tale:

The departure of my son grieved me so much the more, inasmuch as it was
impossible not to look upon it as a just punishment inflicted by heaven, and
the effect of the imprecations before pronounced against me by a wretched
father. Alas! said I, how equitable are the decrees of Providence! I made an
ill use of power and fortune, and heaven has deprived me of both. My detested
ambition robbed the unhappy Alvarez of a wife and son; and the wrath divine
has, at last, stripped me of the only comfort which could supply the want of
the rest; my son, my sole hope, Alphonso abandons me; and though thus arrived
at the height of my misery, I have not a right even to complain; Fate has done
me no wrong; it is all my own work.

Thus did I weep over my destiny, and thus was I obliged to admire Omnipotent
Justice by which I was pursued.

I learnt, after diligent enquiries, my son had taken the rout to Cadiz. I
could not, however, follow him immediately, as was my intention and desire;
detained at Grenada by a violent fever, I was obliged there to remain for six
weeks.

Though I could not hope to find my son at Cadiz, I still presisted in my
design of going there, from a supposition that I might get farther
intelligence. When I came to Loxe I put up at an inn, where, after the
description I gave of my son, and the answers of the innkeeper, I could not
doubt of his having passed some hours in the same place.

Fatherly fondness made me desirous of sleeping in his chamber; every part of
which I examined with great care and anxiety. I perceived some Portuguese
characters cut on the glass; I could not mistake the hand of Alphonso, and in a
single couplet, I saw the name of Dalinda three times repeated. The same name
was written too upon the walls; the circumstance struck (...) I entered it in
my tablets.

When I came to Cadiz, I enquired both for Alphonso and Dalinda; but they were
names totally unknown to every body that heard them. At last, however, I heard
a young Portuguese, who had carefully concealed his name and birth, had passed
ten days at Cadiz with a young lady, whom it was suspected he had run off with,
and that the two fugitives were gone to France, there, as it was supposed, to
reside.

I did not doubt but my son was the Portuguese in question, and that the young
lady was Dalinda, with whom I had discovered Alphonso was in love; I resolved,
therefore, to go to France; but it was first necessary that I should visit
Lisbon, to receive the money due upon my pension, and I then departed for Paris.

After much time and many pains spent in searching, I traced at last the
fugitives, concerning whom I had heard at Cadiz; and the result of all my cares
and discoveries was, I found two persons to whom I was absolutely unknown. I
had hitherto been supported by the hope of finding my son; and when I lost a
hope so dear to my heart, I drooped and fell into the most melancholy state of
despair. Totally detached from the world, I formed the project of quitting it,
never to return, and burying myself in the same solitude which the virtuous
Alvarez had chosen.

Arrived at Mont-Serrat, I went immediately to ^^^grotto of Alvarez, but alas!
the venerable (...) man approached the term of his existence; I round him on
the bri^k of the grave.

He received me, however, with that unalterable bounty by which his actions
were characterized; I told him my misfortunes, and he listened with tenderness
to the recital. May thou find, said he, in this peaceable asylum, comforts
that shall assuage thy griefs; if thou will remain in this grotto, thou will
soon enjoy it without a rival; and oh! in abandoning it to thee, would to
heaven I could leave thee also the tranquillity I enjoy.

Such was my reception with Alvarez. With new astonishment I viewed a virtue so
perfect; far from finding that his presence augmented my uneasiness and
remorse, I found myself less agitated in his company, received an inexpressible
delight in listening to, looking at, and assisting him, my affection for him
was every instant redoubled, and I would willingly have prolonged his life at
the expense of my own.

I had not at first related to him the particulars of my misfortunes; I had
only told him, that my son had run from me; that I knew not what was become of
him, and that, from some mistaken imformations, I had vainly sought for him in
France. Alvarez afterward begged me to be more precise; and I then mentioned,
among other things, the two Portuguese verses I had found on the window of the
inn, at Loxe.

Scarcely had I pronounced the name of Dalinda, before I was interrupted by
Alvarez^ (...) said he, and look in that chest of drawers (...) book, in which,
during these last ten years, I have written the names of such strangers as have
come to visit the hermitage. I flew as directed, brought the book, and Alvarez
found the following memorandum.

This twentieth of June, I have received a visit from a Swedish family; the
father speaks tolerable Portuguese, has charmed me by his knowledge and
simplicity of manners; he is going to Spain, embarks at Cadiz for Africa, and
his name is Thelismar: his daughter is remarkable for her beauty and modesty.
Her father desired her to show me some landscapes of her own drawing, and she
took a book from her pocket, in which were several, all designed after nature,
except one, which she had done from memory, and which was certainly the best
and prettiest among them: it was a representation of the Fountain of Love, in
the Province of Beira. The name of this young lady is Dalinda.

This note cleared up all my doubts, and gave me the first joyous sensation I
had felt since I re-returned from France; for though I had still cause enough
to be very uneasy, I now had discovered some certain intelligence, by the help
of which I might hope to find my son.

Alvarez farther informed me, Thelismar had said he intended to travel four
years, before he re-returned to Sweden; for which reason, said Alva^^^ if your
son is with him, it will be two years ^^^ger 'ere you see him again; nor can
you hope to hear any thing of Alphonso, except by going to Sweden.

No, Alvarez, said I, I will not now abandon you in helpless age; you offered
an asylum to your persecutor, advised him, consoled, and deigned to accept his
little services: such magnanimity, while it doubles my repentance, diminishes
the dreadful terrors of my guilt: when Alvarez is no longer angry with me, I
hope the avenging God, who pursues me, will be appeased -- And yet, alas! I am
indebted to religion only for this forgiveness: could your heart be reconciled,
and become a part of mine, I should then hope for heaven's protection.

My eyes were filled with tears as I spoke; and Alvarez, with a look of most
affectionate tenderness, answered, And is it possible that my friendship should
soften thy chagrin, and calm the cruel agitation of thy soul! -- W^ll -- be
satisfied -- I accept thy hand, thy friendly succors; yes, the hand of Don
Ramirez shall close the eyes of Alvarez.

The virtuous old man could no longer retain his tears, while I but too
forcibly felt what the cutting remembrance must be, which then offered itself
to his imagination: at the very moment he assured me of his friendship, the
unfortunate old man wept for his son.

The night after this conversation, Alvarez feeling himself more oppressed than
usual, wished to rise; he leaned on my arm, and went into his garden: he sat
down, the moon's rays shone upon his countenance; and while their silver light
increased his paleness, they gave him a mild, an affecting, an august serenity;
he raised his eyes and hands to heaven, and for a few moments, seemed absorbed
in a kind of trance; then afterward turning toward me --

Oh thou, said he, who for three months past have paid me every attention,
performed every office of filial piety, receive in these my last moments the
little I have to leave, receive the paternal benediction of a father.

Oh my father! cried I, bowing at his feet, my revered, my venerable father,
what is it you announce?

Yes, replied Alvarez, with a feeble voice, thou soon shall loose a father whom
religion has given thee; in an instant, my son, I shall appear in the presence
of that eternal Being, in whom clemency and benevolence are the sublimest
attributes -- Oh God! continued Alvarez, dropping on his feeble knees beside me
-- God, my Creator and my Judge! the awful moment approaches in which the most
virtuous of men ought to dread thy justice -- yet I dare rely upon thy mercy --
I have a heart to pardon -- behold in whose arms I expire -- behold for whom my
tears now flow, for whom I implore thy pity; hear, Oh God! the groans of Don
Ramirez; his soul is not hardened in sin, it feels, it repents, it is able to
elevate itself even to thee -- finish the purification of his heart, remove the
silm from his eyes, give back his son, restore him to happiness and peace. --
Oh deign to hear the last prayer of Alvarez!

As he ended, his head gently reclined upon my bosom, while my tears bathed his
placid face -- Alas! his parting breath was spent in prayer -- Alvarez was no
more.

All the grief which the loss of a (...) respectable parent could give, I (...)
losing Alvarez. I tasted, however, already (...) fruits of the solemn and (...)
had bestowed; for when I remembered (...) words, I no longer supposed myself a
devoted victim to the wrath divine, and the sweetest hopes succeeded to the
black forebodings of remorse.

Within the small circum^^^ance of the humble retreat of Alvarez, by the side
of a fountain, and beneath a shade of Olives, I raised, with my own hands, the
rustic tomb, in which are deposited the precious remains of the most virtuous
of men.

This duty fulfilled, my first wish was to depart for Sweden; but money was
necessary to undertake so long a voyage; and I wrote to Portugal to inform them
I was still in existence, and was obliged to travel to the north; begging they
would so far favor me, as to pay my pension two years in advance; my petition
was accordingly granted. I went for the last time to the shade of Olives, where
slept the peaceful bones of Alvarez, watered the grass with my tears, and wept
over the flowers that grew around his tomb. After which I quitted Mont-Serrat
and Spain, and took the route to Sweden.

As soon as I came to Stockholm, my first enquiry was to know if Thelismar had
returned: I learnt he was not expected in less than a year, that his wife and
daughter were not with him, and that they resided at a country house near
Salseberist. I was preparing to go thither, when I was informed a person named
Frederic, an intimate friend of Thelismar's, who had traveled with him, was
every day expected at Stockholm.

Determined, as soon as I heard this, to see the person thus described, I
continued some few months longer at Stockholm: at last he arrived, I saw him,
spoke to him without making myself known, questioned him concerning Thelismar,
and learnt, beyond a doubt, Alphonso still existed, and that Providence had
graciously placed him under the safeguard of Religion and Virtue.

Convinced my son was still alive, I felt more forcibly than ever the
unhappiness of having been thus abandoned: alas! I knew not his repentance, his
grief: I was ignorant of his having written to me. Having been only a moment as
it were at Lisbon, since his departure, and not having once returned to the
province of Beira, I had received none of his letters, which are now most
probably lost.

Frederic not being able to tell me where Thelismar then was, I determined to
go to Salseberist; but I found neither the charming Dalinda, whom I desired so
much to see, nor her mother there: I was informed they were gone abroad, and
were to return to Salseberist, with Thelismar. I went to the house, and
enquired of the servants, who assured me Thelismar had always inhabited that
solitary mansion; that they were in expectation of his arrival, which they
supposed would be some time within three months. I therefore determined to
remain at Salseberist.

I lived here entirely unknown, my project being to wait my son's arrival,
throw myself unexpectedly in his way, and see what effect this first interview
would produce. If his heart was not in sympathy with mine, it was my resolution
entirely to leave him, and end my sorrowful days at the tomb of Alvarez,

Thelismar, however, did not arrive; above a year had glided away in
expectations which every day became more and more insupportable. I intended to
write to Portugal, and make known the place to which I was retired, as well as
to ask payment of my pension, when I fell ill; a burning fever deprived me for
several days of the use of reason, during which time a dishonest servant robbed
me, and carried off all the money and clothes I possessed.

The man where I lodged, had the humanity to conceal this affair from me, till
such time as my health was entirely re-established, he (...) informed me of my
misfortune. I submitted without a murmur to my destiny, and considered this as
a means which heaven offered to complete the expiation of my crimes.

This idea called up all my fortitude, and I learnt that a peaceable and quiet
resignation could better sustain misfortune than even hope itself. I wrote to
Lisbon, and whilst I waited for an answer, which I have not yet received, I
determined to support myself, by asking employment in the silver r^ines, which
was granted, and in which aby^^ I have been buried three months.

Don Ramirez ended, and Alphonso, whose tears had more than once interrupted
the sorrowful tale, threw himself at his father's feet with every expression,
every mark of repentance, gratitude, and affection, which the best and noblest
mind could feel. Don Ramirez, at the height of happiness, clasped his son in
his arms, and bathed him with his tears, while Thelismar, in a rapture of
silence, beheld the moving scene.

At last Alphonso, Don Ramirez, and Thelismar, departed for Stockholm. Alphonso
now saw the lovely Dalinda, and made himself large amends, for the painful
silence to which he had been so long condemned: and Dalinda, in learning that
she had been five years beloved, learnt also the power which honor and
gratitude had over her lover. Then it was, that Alphonso applauded himself for
having so faithfully kept his word: by this virtuous effort he had entirely
gained the friendship and heart of Dalinda.

The happy Alphonso received the hand of Dalinda, and by his virtues and
conduct justified the choice and affection of the generous Thelismar; the
wrongs he had done his father he expiated by an unbounded attachment and*
submission, and the most tender attentions. They lived always in the same
house, and it became his glory and felicity to fulfill the extensive duties of
nature, gratitude, and friendship. Thus did he constitute the happiness of his
father, his benefactor, and his dear Dalinda.

What mamma, said Caroline, is the story of Alphonso finished?

And the conversation of this evening, as well as the story, answered Madame de
Clemire, as she rose from her seat.

Oh, what a pity! -- but the notes?

We will begin to read them tomorrow.

How I do long to see these notes!

Well you may, they are much more interesting than my tale; but at present bed
is the properest place.

The next day Madame de Clemire asked her children, whether they thought she
had fulfilled her promise, to write a story as miraculous as a Fairy Tale, the
mavelous of which should yet be true.

Oh yes, mamma, replied Caroline; and since there are so many extraordinary and
curious things in nature, you may be certain we shall not seek the miracles we
delight to hear of in Fairy Tales any more.

By reading books which shall instruct you, said Madame de Clemire, you will
learn many other things as surprising as those I have selected. Had I used all
the extracts I have made, the history of Alphonso would have been in two
volumes, and a better work; for, in order to abridge it, I was obliged to omit
incidents which would have better connected the different parts, as well as an
infinity of curious phenomenon. Yet my extracts contain nothing but well
avouched facts. I have rejected not only such as appeared fabulous, but even
doubtful. Had I been less scrupulous, I should have told you of a village where
all the inhabitants became idiots at eighteen; of a Virginian apple, which may
not be eaten without the loss of reason for a certain space of time; of a tree,
the boughs of which, though green, give as much light as flambeaux See
Geographie Physique, by M. l'Abbe Sauri, Tom. I.
; of an animal half a league long (65), etc. I might have described a thing
much better attested, and much less fabulous; such as Thelismar on the troubled
ocean, commanding the elements, and calming the tempest (66). But I had no need
to adopt any thing doubtful, since I have been obliged to leave out a multitude
of the miracles of nature, all incontestible: add to which, there is yet a
multitude of which I am ignorant. Judge, therefore, what pleasure a tale of
this kind would have given had it been written by a very learned person.

It seems, for example, said the Abbe to Madame de Clemire, you might have made
something more of the phenomenon electricity affords, either in the course of
the story, or in the notes.

I could do nothing better in that respect, I assure you, answered Madame de
Clemire; and that for a very good reason: I am ignorant of experimental
philosophy, a course of which I have gone through, like many others, and, like
many others, am not much the wifer.

But, replied the Abbe, had you judged me capable, I should have undertaken
this part of the notes with pleasure.

My dear Abbe, answered Madame de Clemire, a woman ought never to suffer a man
to add a single word to her writings; if she does, the man she consults, let
him be who he may, will always pass for the original inventor, and she will be
accused of putting her name to the works of others. One may be a very good
woman, yet a very bad writer, but not were one to take the credit of other
people's labors; one ought, therefore, carefully to avoid whatever might give
room to so injurious an accusation. Scarcely has there been one woman
successful in her writings, and not accused of this kind of baseness.
Mademoiselle de Lussan had three assisting friends. Lassere He has written
several operas.
the Abbe de Bois-Morand, and Baudot de Jully. It has been said, been written,
and is still believed, that Lassere wrote l'Histoire de la Comtesse de Gondez;
the Abbe de Bois-Morand, Les Anecdotes de la Cour, de Philippe Auguste, and
Baudot de Jully, Les Histoires de Charles VI. de Louis XI. and La Revolution de
Naples Mademoiselle Lussan has written many other works. This celebrated lady
is generally thought to be the natural daughter of Prince Thomas of Savoy,
Count de Soissons, and brother to the famous Prince Eugene. She died in 1758,
aged seventy-five years and six months.
. The works of Madame de la Fayette are given to Segrais; those of Madame de
Tencin Madame de Tencin, Canoness of Neuville, and sister to Cardinal Tencin,
was five years a nun, in the convent of Montfleuri, in Dauphiny; but she
recanted her vows, and left the convent. She died at Paris in 1749, aged 68.
to M. de Pont-de-Veyle her nephew. The tragedies of Mademoiselle Bernard,
which were played with success, are attributed to M. de Fontenelle, her friend;
and those of Mademoiselle Barbier, are supposed to be the productions of the
Abbe Pellegrin What is most remarkable, men of letters have, by the (...)
writings, given weight to these accusations. I find celebrated women, of all
ages, falsely accused, and no one ready to defend them. It is, nevertheless,
very, true, that many authors owe their success to ideas and subjects taken
from the works of women. Not to mention Louise l'Abbe, to whom La Fontaine is
indebted for one of his most beautiful fables ( La Folly and l'Amour) and which
this good man stole, without scruple, or without saying a word of the theft,
the works of Mademoiselle Scuderi, Mademoiselle de Lussan, M^dame de Gomez,
Mademoiselle de la Force, and many others, have given birth to a multitude of
operas, comedies, and even tragedies. Nay more, it is from the work of a
female, that M. de Voltaire has taken the subject of his tragedy of Tancrede; a
romance, entitled La Comt^sse de Savo^^, written by Madame la Comtesse de
Fontaine. At the time that this work appeared, M. de Voltaire addressed some
verses to Madame de Fontaine, among which are the following: Quel Dieu vous a
done ce langage enchanteur?
La force, and la delicate^^
La simplicite, la noblesse,
Que F^n^^on ^eul avoit joint, etc. What God has given such enchantment to your
words?
The delicate, the strong,
The simple, and sublime,
Which Fenclon alone could unite, etc.




He would have been more just not to have equalled Madame de Fontaine to
Fenclon, but have acknowledged in the preface to his tragedy, he had taken the
plot from La Comtesse de (...). Madame de Fontaine died in 1748.


.

These, and many other similar examples, ought, in my opinion, to prevent women
from consulting men concerning their works, and from forming any intimate
connections with men of letters.

This conclusion hurt the self-love of the Abbe. And so, madam, said he, with a
forced smile, if ever you should become an author, and print your works, you
would not consult any person.

Pardon me, replied Madame de Clemire, I should seek to know the truth, and not
vain compliments or flattery. I should read them, not to a company of wits or
strangers, but to my own family; and were they to give signs of sleepiness, or
being weary, I should wisely profit by this criticism, which, in my
apprehension, is more certain than any other.

The Abbe was piqued, and made no reply; Madame de Clemire, therefore, changed
the conversation, and the children returned to the tale they had just heard.

How happy was Alphonso, mamma, said Caesar, to have an opportunity of seeing
so many extraordinary things; when I am old enough, I shall travel too with my
father, and see strange trees and singular animals.

A-propos of singular animals, interrupted Madame de Clemire, I have a number
of them in my extracts, which are not mentioned in my tale; one of them I just
now recollect, do you wish to hear it described.

O dear, yes mamma, if you please.

Imagine then a hairy monster, of a yellow cast, with eight legs, each of which
is armed with two large claws, and each containing a moist sponge; besides
these eight legs, this monster has something like two hands, with which it
seizes its prey. Argus* like, its head is covered with eyes, for it has eight,
which are circularly ranged in front, while two pair of horrible pincers, armed
wtih sharp claws, seem to issue from its mouth.

Oh, what a hideous and extraordinary monster that is!

There are many others, still more singular; would you believe nature produces
creatures, which are increased by cutting them; that the same creature cut into
eight, ten, twenty, thirty, or forty parts, is so many times multiplied?

Mamma! Is that possible?

The name of that creature is not difficult to divine, said the Abbe.

But what is the other, added Pulcheria, can you tell that?

I confess, said the Abbe, that the description your mamma has given of it, is
absolutely enigmatical to me.

It is not the less exact, answered Madame de Clemine; I may have suppressed
some of its characteristics, equally necessary to be known, but those I have
given are sufficiently striking, to make such as have read its natural history
recollect what I mean.

I what country is this monster found, mamma?

It is very common in France; ay, and Burgundy. You have seen it here a
thousand times at Champcery.

Nay, mamma, I assure you I have never seen any such thing -- Pray tell us what
it is called.

A spider The domestic spider.
(67).

A spider! I should never have thought of a spider. How can a spider have eight
eyes, a moist sponge between its claws, and pincers at the side of its mouth?

Had you ever examined a spider with a microscope, you would have perfectly
distinguished all these particulars, and you may see them even with the naked
eye on a large spider.

I will ask Augustine to bring me large spiders, for I must see their sponges,
pincers, and eight eyes.

And I will read you the natural history of spiders, which I am sure will very
much amuse you, and in which you will find many extraordinary circumstances.

And what is the name of the other creature, mamma, which multiples by being
divided?

The fresh water polypus (68).

Oh! I do not know that; it is not to be found in this country; and I think it
is much more curious than the spider.

Since you are so desirous to see this prodigy, I will procure you that
pleasure.

What, mamma, will you send for them from abroad? I am sure you are very good.

You shall have them tomorrow -- the ponds of Champcery are full of them.

Why, is it possible? and we not know the name of so extraordinary a creature!

Nature every where abounds with most surprising phenomenon; ignorance is
deprived of the pleasure of knowing, of admiring them, while the philosopher
finds, at every step, objects worthy to excite, and to satisfy his curiosity.

Oh dear mamma! we will ask, we will read, we will buy microscopes, and examine
all the insects of Champcery, and at least become acquainted with the curious
things around us.

The Abbe who had been a little vexed with himself for not knowing the spider,
at last broke silence. As your mamma has judiciously observed, said he, the
tale of Alphonso contains but a small part of the phenomenon of nature: thus,
for example, she has neither mentioned beavers nor elephants.

Perhaps that is, because mamma knew we were acquainted with the history of
those animals, said Caesar,

But, continued Madame de Clemire, I have said nothing of numerous other
animals, as singular and much less known, such as the toucan (69) the kamichi
(70) bats (71), etc.

The Abbe, who was ransacking his memory to find something miraculous, which
Madame de Clemire had forgot in her tale, proceeded thus. It is certain, said
he, that besides animals, the vegetable and mineral regions present a crowd of
phenomenon, concerning which your mamma could not speak in so short a work. I
think, however, she might have found an advantageous opportunity of mentioning
the wax-tree (72), the sensitive-plant (73), fraxinella (74), and the amianthus
(75).

After having run over this catalogue with great gravity, the Abbe rose and
left the room, exceedingly well fatisfied with his memory. Pulcheria began to
laugh. It is my opinion, said she, mamma, M. Fremont is a little vexed with you.

And if he be, replied Madame de Clemire, why should you remind me of it?
Though he may be too susceptible, too liable to be out of humor, he is the
more excusable, because he has never lived among the great; where, while people
acquire a supple temper, and a refinement which teaches them to hide their own
pretensions, and the little ridiculous excesses of self-love, they often lose
sincerity, the first of virtues. I have more than once reminded you of what you
owe to the preceptor of your brother. I have often repeated too, that we are
not only forbidden to make (even confidentially) malignant observations on
those with whom we live in intimacy, but that we ought also to banish the
remembrance of their defects, and reject such thoughts as would make us
recollect their errors.

Pulcheria was greatly affected by this lesson; but as she had only said a rash
word for want of reflection, as she wept without sullenness, and as she truly
repented of her fault, she soon obtained her pardon, and resumed her gaiety.

Eight or ten evenings were spent in reading the notes to the history of
Alphonso. When they were ended, Caesar observed there was one of the prodigies
yet unexplained. In the Canary islands, continued he, after the adventure of
the cavern and the Guanches, Alphonso wandered to the borders of a lake, where
he saw the miraculous pillar, and the strange hail-storm: but what was more
strange, when he returned home, be found Thelismar knew every thing that had
happened to him at the lake; nay, that he saw him there, though he was on his
own terrace, at two leagues distance.

True, replied Madame de Clemire, I have not explained this latter miracle in
my notes; but come and breakfast tomorrow morning in the little belvidere at
the high end of the meadow, and I will show you Thelismar's secret.

This proposition was joyfully accepted by the young family, and the next
morning every body assembled at the place appointed before eight o'clock. Here
the children found a large machine, which greatly excited their curiosity: they
asked its name, and were told it was a telescope.

Sit down on that chair, Caroline, said Madame de Clemire, and look into this
end of the instrument through that glass.

Dear! dear! what do I see! cried Caroline; a large house not two steps off!

And yet it is a league distant, said Madame de Clemire; it is the chateau of
M. de Lusanne.

Well, that seems incredible! I can perfectly distinguish all the people who
pass and repass in the courtyard. There! now I see a servant feeding the fowls
-- and now a cow leading to grass -- and now a poor woman begging -- and now --

Nay, nay, interrupted Pulcheria, impatiently, you must let me see a little
too, my dear sister.

Scarcely had Pulcheria taken her seat, before a joyous exclamation broke
forth. O mamma, said she, I see Sidonia; I am sure it is her, she speaks to the
servants -- I will warrant she has the charge of the courtyard, for she seems
to give orders. Oh! that is charming at her age; I wish I was as old that I
might do the same! -- There, now she stoops -- now she rises -- now she stoops
again. -- Oh! she is surely collecting the eggs -- ay it is so, for somebody
gives her a basket -- and now she turns toward the poor beggar-woman. -- Pray
Caesar, continued Pulcheria, permit me to look a little longer -- Sidonia goes
to the old woman -- speaks to her -- makes her come into the courtyard, and
sit down on a bench -- Sidonia leaves her basket with her, and runs --

Every one in their turn sister, said Caesar.

Nay, one moment brother -- Sidonia comes back, but very gently -- she holds a
large bowl in her hands -- I fancy it is milk -- There! she gives it to the old
woman! -- Oh how I love that good Sidonia!

So saying, Pulcheria rose, and Caesar took her place. Sidonia had left the
courtyard, and nothing interesting was going forward; but he comprehended
which way Thelismar might distinctly see Alphonso from his terrace,
notwithstanding the distance by which they were separated.

They spoke of nothing all day, but the telescope and Sidonia. Pulcheria
admired the singular manner in which she had disovered the benevolent character
of that young lady. She did not suppose, continued Pulcheria, that we could see
all that was passing in the courtyard.

Chance, added Madame de Clemire, and an infinity of unforeseen circumstances,
every day discover actions much more secretly performed. The best way,
therefore, is to act as if all the world looked on; for not only does the
Almighty see and judge every incident of our lives, but accident, curiosity,
the indiscretion of servants, and the treachery of false friends, unceasingly
expose to open day our most hidden secrets.

NOTES, REFERRED TO BY THE FIGURES.
(1) A FAMOUS Florist in Holland, told me he had given 6800 livres (265l.) for
a root; adding, that he had seen others far dearer. Many Amateurs will not
allow there are more than six species of flowers worthy the care of
cultivation: these are the Hyacinth, the Tulip, the Auricula, the Carnation,
the Ranunculus, and the Anemony: the Hyacinth is one of the most beautiful, but
least various in its colors; it is less common too than the other. The
Ranunculus is said to have been brought from Syria, during the time of the
Crusades; the Anemony was transported from America in the last century, by M.
Bachelier; and they pretend, that the Hyacinth is a native of the Cape of Good
Hope; the most beautiful Hyacinth is the Ophyr; it is yellow, with purple spots
on the inside.

(2) The earthquake which happened is Sicily 1692-3; the history of which is
given by Mr. Hartop, Father Alessandro Burgos, and Vin Bonajutus, is one of the
most terrible ones in all history: it shook the whole island; and not only
that, but Naples and Malta shared in the shock. It was of the second kind
mentioned by Aristotle and Pliny, viz. a perpendicular pulsation or succession.
It was impossible, said the noble Bonajutus, for any body in this country to
keep on their legs on the dancing earth; nay, those that lay on the ground were
tossed from side to side, as on a rolling billow, and high walls leaped from
their foundations several; paces, etc. Phil. Trans. No. 207. The mischief it
did is amazing; almost all the buildings in the countries were thrown down;
fifty-four cities and towns, besides an incredible number of villages, were
either destroyed or greatly damaged. We shall only instance the fate of
Catania, one of the most famous, ancient, and flourishing cities in the
kingdom, the residence of several Monarchs, and a University. This once famous,
now unhappy Catania, to use the words of Fa. Burgos, had the greatest share in
the Tragedy. F. Anton. Serrovita, being on his way thither, and at the distance
of a few miles, observed a black cloud, like night, hovering over the city; and
there arose from the mouth of Montgibello, great spires of flame which spread
all around; the sea, all of a sudden, began to roar and rise in billows; and
there was a noise, as if all the artillery in the world had been at once
discharged; the birds flew about astonished; the cattle in the fields ran
crying, etc. His, (...) his companions horses stopped short, trembling, so that
they were forced to alight. They were no sooner off, but ^^ey were lifted from
the ground above two palms; when casting his eyes toward Catania, he, with
amazement, ^aw nothing but a thick cloud of dust in the air. This was the scene
of their calamity; for, of the magnificent Catania, there was not the least
footstep to be seen. S. Bonajutus assures us, that of 18,914 ihhabitants,
18,000 perished there. The same author, from a computation of the inhabitants
before and after the earthquake, in the several cities and towns, finds that
near 60,000 perished, out of 254,900.

(3) The greatest part of Lisbon was, in fact, destroyed by incendiaries; who,
during this dreadful disaster, set fire to the houses that they might pillage
them with more impunity. The unfortunate inhabitants, who were the victims of
this unheard of wickedness, found relief in the humanity of a generous nation.
No sooner were the English informed of this terrible event, than they hastened
to send them every succor of which they stood in need. This benevolent act
cost the English six millions, but it gave them new claims to the esteem of all
Europe.

(4) I find, in an English work, as instructive as entertaining, a singular
Anecdote, little known, relative to Catalonia.

From that period, the Emperors, Kings of France, governed Catalonia, by
appointing Counts, or Vicegerents, removeable at pleasure, till the government
was rendered hereditary in the family of Wilfred the Hairy: whether this
happened by a concession of Charles the Bald, or by usurpation, remains a doubt
among the ^earned. It continued in his posterity for many generations. This
Prince having been grievously wounded, in a battle against the Normans,
received a visit from the Emperor, who dipping his finger in the blood that
trickled from the wound, drew four lines down the gilt shield of Wilfred,
saving, Fa^l, be these thy armorial Ensign. Four Pallets, Gules, on a Field,
or, remained from that time the Coat of Arms of Catalonia, and afterward of
Arragon; when Raymund the fifth married Petronilla, only daughter and heiress
of Ramiro, the second King of Arragon. -- Travels through Spain, in the years
1775 and 1776, by Henry Swinburn, (...)*

(5) The following is what a Fren^^ (...) ^^veller says on the subject of the
Cascades I menti^^*

One is astonished, while trav^^ (...) ^^ese threatening rocks, to meet
delicious is valleys (...) verdure, and trees in the bosom of sterility; (...)
natural cascades precipitate themselves from their (...) pinnacles, and trouble
the silence which reigns in that asylum, only to render it more interesting.
Essais sur l'Espaigne, Tome I. Page 35.

And here follows what an English Traveller says on the same subject:

The greatest hardship here is a scarcity of good water. Except one spring at
the parish, and another at the convent, they have no other than (...) water,
and that bad enough. This, in summer, is a terrible inconvenience, and gives
the (...) to the florid descriptions I have read of the ^^^ing streams, and
beautiful cascades, tumbling down, on every (...), from the broken rocks. The
want of water is so great, that neither wolf, bear, or other wild beast is ever
seen on the mountain. -- Travels through Spain, by Henry S^winburn, Esquire London,
410 -- Page ^0.

This quotation is striking enough, and were pains taken to compare the
accounts of travelers, I believe many such like might be found. For my part, I
have taken a liberty which many Historians have likewise taken, that of
choosing the most agreeable; however, I do not dissemble my motives of
preference, and readily confess, that the name, reputation, and works of the
English Traveller, ought to inspire the greatest confidence.

(6) Among the combats between the Spaniards and the Moors, was one, in which
the women of Tortosa gained great renown. They exposed themselves on the
ramparts of the town, and performed such prodigious acts of valor, that
Raymond Berenger, the last Count of Barcelona, instituted, in 1170, the
Military Order of La Hacha, or the Torch. They obtained many other honorable
privileges, which now no longer exist, except that of taking the right hand of
the men, be their rank what it will, in their marriage ceremonies.

The history of Germany affords a similar anecdote. In the year 1015, the Poles
besieged the town of Meissin, which must have been taken, had it not been for
the heroism of the women, (...) ^^rtook all the labors of the siege. The
Emperor, He^^ (...) to perpetuate the memory of the women of Meissi^^ (...)
^^ad, on that occasion, shown greater courage than (...) ^^ands, ordained an
anniversary festival for the deli^^ (...) of the town, and that the women alone
should go (...) ^^cession to the church, as a testimony that Meissin owed its
safety to them. This procession was continued with great pomp till the
sixteenth century, when the Lutherans abolished the Romish religion. Hist.
Gener. d'Allemagne, by M. Montigny, Tome IV.

During the war between John I. King of Castile, and John I. King of Portugal,
the English having besieged Val^n^ia, in the kingdom of Leon, which was then
without men, the nobility having all followed the Prince to the field, the
ladies defended the town, repelled the assault of the enemy, harrassed them by
sall^es, and obliged them to retire. John, in recompense of their valor,
permitted them to wear a scarf of gold, and granted them all the privileges of
the Knights of the Scarf. The date of this order is uncertain, but is (...)
between 1383 and 139^. (...), at the word ECHARPE.

(7) The townhouse of Toledo, near the Archbishop's palace, is still admired;
the colonadeal architecture is very beautiful. On one of the walls of the
staircase are Spanish verses, of which the following is a translation:

Noble and judicious men of Toledo, leave your passions on this staircase;
here leave love, fear, and covetousness; forget private for public good; and
since God has made* you the pillars of this august palace, remain always firm,
upright, and unshaken. Essais sur l'Espagne, Tom. I.

(8) These mountains, absolutely desert, served many ages as an asylum to
robbers and wolves. In vain had some patriots proposed to grub and clear them.
M. Olavides, however, after having peopled the deserts of Andalusia, covered
the Sierra Morena with colonists and laborers. Government favored the
establishment, and it prospered; but, notwithstanding the attentions,
benefactions, and repeated exemptions of government, there are many
discontented spirits among these people; their complaints, generally
ill-founded, are the consequence of man's natural inquietude, who wishes for
ease and independence, without making use of the means by which the^ (...)
^rocured. Essais (...), Tom. I.

The chief place in the colony is (...) Carolina; both the French and English
traveller ha^^ (...) charming descriptions of this establishment. (...) the
latter are delightful.

(9) In the days of the Musselmen this Mosque was a square building, with a
flat roof, upon arches. It wanted proportion, for it was only thirty-five feet
high, while its breadth was four hundred and twenty, and its length five
hundred and ten. The roof was supported by near a thousand columns, and by
seven hundred and eighty, according to others. The Mosque had twenty-four
gates, and 4700 lamps were lighted in it every night, which annually consumed
near 26,000 pounds of oil.

At present a part of the Mosque only exists, which is turned into a church
that has seventeen gates, and is 5^0 (...) long, and 240 broad The French
Traveller says, 600 long, and 250 ^^^ad. Essais sur l'Espagne, Tom. I. page 285.
; and in one part of it stand a vast number of columns, marble, but of various
species, forming a vast quin^unx. -- Travels through Spain, by Henry Swinburne,
Esquire. page 297.

(10) Grenada is situated at the foot of Sierra Nevada, or Mountain of Snow,
and is built on each side of the Darro. The Xenil bathes its walls, and these
two rivers are formed from the melting of the snows, with which the Sierra is
always covered -- Essais sur l'Espagne, Tom. I.

(11) The most remarkable monument of Grenada is the Castle of the Alhambra, an
ancient Moorish palace, in the center of which is seen one more modern, built
by Charles V. which yet is in ruins, with only the walls remaining. Its extent
was not great, the better to preserve the Moorish palace, which was destined to
be a summer habitation. In the Alhambra are found the remains of predigious
magnificence, colonades of marble, fountains, (...) rel^^vos, a a prodigious
number of inscriptions, etc. Among others the supberb court, called the Court
of the Lions, is greatly admired: the Generalif is another Moorish palace,
which communicates with the Alhambra. It is built on a great elevation, and
watered from every part. The gardens are in the form of an Amphitheatre; the
situation is charming, and preferable that of the Alhambra. Essais sur
l'Estagne, Tom. I.

(12) In th^^ (...) Boabdil, or Abouabdo (...), the last King of Gre^^ (...)
^he Alabeces, Abencerages, Zegris, and Gomeles, (...) most powerful families in
that city; they filled most (...) great enployments about Court, and scarce a
brilliant achievement in war was heard of, that was not performed by the arm
of some knight of these four houses. High above the rest towered the
Abencerages, unequalled in gallantry, magnificence, and chivalry. None among
the Abencerages was more accomplished, more distinguished, than Albin Hamet,
who, for his great wisdom and valor, stood deservedly foremost in the list of
the King's favorites. His power rose to such a pitch, that it excited the most
violent envy in the breast of the Zegris and Gomeles, who determined to pull
him down from this post of superior eminence. After concerting many schemes for
his destruction, none appeared to them more effectual than one proposed by a
consummate villain of the Zegris family. He seized an opportunity of being
alone with the King, whose character was as yet frank and unsuspicious;
assuming an air of extreme anguish of mind, he observed to the Prince how very
weak his conduct appeared to all wise men, by (...) such un^ounded confidence
in, and tr^^^ing his person with such traitors as the Abencerages, who were
well known to be laying a scheme for a general revolt, thereby to deprive
Abouabdoulah of his life and crown. Nay more, he, and three men of honor, had
seen the Queen in wanton dalliance with Albin Hamet Abencerage, behind the
lofty cypresses in the gardens of the Generalif, from whence Hamet had returned
insolently crowned with a garland of roses. These calumnies rouzed all the
furies of jealousy in the breast of the credulous Monarch, and the destruction
of the whole lineage of Abencerage was planned by the bloody junto. The
principal men of the devoted family were, under some pretense or other,
summoned one one by one, to attend the King in the Court of Lions. No sooner
was each unhappy victim admitted within the walls, than he was seized by the
Zegris, led to a large alabaster basin in one of the adjoining halls, and there
beheaded. Thirty-six of the noblest of the race had already perished before the
treachery was discovered. A Page, belonging to one of those noblemen, having
found means to follow his master in, and 40 get out again uns^^^, divulged the
secret of this bloody transaction. The treason once known, all Grenada was in
an instant up in (...) and many desperate combats ensued, which, by the great
havoc made amongst the most valiant of its chieft^^^ brought the state to the
very brink of ruin. These tumults being appeased by the wisdom of Musa, a
bastard brother of the King, a grand council was held, in which Abouabdoulah
declared his reasons for the punishment inflicted on the Abencerages, viz.
their conspiracy, and the adultery of the Queen. He then solemnly pronounced
her sentence, which was, to be burnt alive, if within thirty days she did not
produce four knights to defend her cause against the four accusers. The Queen's
relations were upon the point of drawing their scimitars in the
audience-chamber, and rescuing her from the danger that threatened her; but
their fury was checked by the eloquence of Musa, who observed to them, they
might by violence save the life of the Sultana, but by no means clear her
reputation in the eyes of the world; which would certainly look upon that cause
as unjust, which refused to submit to the customary trial. The Queen was
immediately shut up in the tower of Comares. Many Grenadine warriors were
ambitious of having the honor of exposing their lives in her quarrel, but none
were so happy as to prove the object of her choice. She had conceived so high
an idea of the Christians, from the valor she had seen them display in a great
tournament lately held at Grenada, and the treachery of the Zegris filled her
with so despicable an opinion of Moorish honor, that she was determined to
rest her defense upon the gallantry of the Spanish Knights. In hopes of rouzing
their noble spirits to action, she dispatched a trusty messenger with a letter
to Don Juan de Chacon, Lord of Carthagena, entreating him to espouse her cause;
and like a true Knight, bring with him three brave warriors, to stand her
friends on the day appointed. Chacon returned for answer, that he set too high
a price upon that honor, not to be punctual to the hour of trial. The fatal
day arrived, and all Grenada was buried in the deepest affliction, to find that
their beloved Queen had been so remiss as not to have named one of her
defenders. Musa, Azarque, and Almoradi, the judges of the combat, pressed, her
in vain, to accept of their swords, or those of several other warriors willing
to assert the justness of her cause. The Sultana, relying on the Spanish faith,
persisted in her refusal; upon which the judges conducted her down from the
Alhamb^^to a scaffold in the great square, hung with black, wh^^ ^^ey seated
themselves on one side. At the sight of this beauty in distress, the whole
place resounded with loud cries and lamentations; and it was with difficulty
that the spectators could be restrained from attacking her enemies, and
rescuing her by main force. Scarce were the judges seated, when twenty trumpets
announced the approach of the four accusers, who advanced, armed cap-a-pie,
mounted on the finest coursers of Andalusia. Over their armor they wore loose
vests, with plumes and sashes of a tawny color. On their shields were painted
two bloody swords, and these words: For the truth we draw them. -- All their
kinsmen and adherents accompanied them to their posts within the lists. In vain
did the crowd cast a longing eye toward the gate, through which the champions
of injured innocence were to enter; none appeared from eight in the morning to
two in the afternoon. The Sul^ana, courage began to fa^l her; and when four
valiant Moors presented themselves to sue for the honor of drawing their
swords to vindicate her innocence, she promised to trust her life in their
hands, if, within two hours, the persons she expected should not appear. At
that instant a great noise was heard, and four Turkish horsemen came prancing
into the square. One of them addressed the judges, requesting the favor of
speaking to the Queen; which being granted, he knelt down, and told her aloud,
that he and his companions were Turks, come to Spain with the design of trying
their strength against the heroes of Ferdinand's army; but that hearing of this
solemn trial, they had changed their resolution, and were now arrived at
Grenada, to devote their first essay of arms in Spain to her service, and hoped
she would approve of them for her champions. As he spoke, he let drop into her
lap the letter she had written to Don Juan; by the sight of which, she
discovered this feigned Turk to be no other than the Lord of Carthagena, who
had brought with him, as companions in this dangerous conflict, the Duke of
Arcos, Don Alonzo de Aguilar, and Don Ferdinand De Cordova. The Queen accepted
of their proposal; and the Judges having solemnly declared her voice, gave
orders for the charge to sound. The onset was fierce, and the fight long
doubtful. At length Don Juan overthrew Mahandon Gamel, and the Duke flew
Alihamet Zegri; Mahandon Gamel fell by the sword of Aguilar; and the last of
all, the arch trai^or Mahomed Zegri, disabled by repeated wounds, and fainting
with loss of blood, sunk at the feet of Don Ferdinand; who, setting his knee on
the Infidel's breast, and holding his dagger to his throat, summoned him to
confess the truth, or die that instant. Thou need not add another wound,
said Mahomed, for the last will prove sufficient to rid the world of such a
monster. Know then, that to revenge myself of the Abencerages, I invented the
lie that caused their destruction, and the persecution of the Sultana; whom I
here declare free from all stain or reproach whatsoever, and with my dying
breath implore her forgiveness. The Judges came down to receive this deposition
of the expiring Zegri, and it was afterward announced to the people, who
expressed their joy by the loudest acclamations. The day ended in festivity and
rejoicing. The Queen was escorted back in triumph to the Palace, where the
penitent Abouabdoulah fell at her feet, and with floods of tears endeavored to
ar^ne for his crime, but to no purpose: for the Queen remained inflexible, and,
retiring to the house of her nearest of kin, refused to have any further
intercourse with him. The sour Knights left Grenada, without discovering
themselves to any other person; and soon after, the numerous friends and
adherents of the Abencerages abandoned the city, and, by their secession into
Castile or Africa, left Abouabdoulah destitute of able officers, and entirely
at the mercy of his enemies, who, in the course of a few months, deprived him
of his kingdom.

(13) This globe of fire was a meteor, and similar appearances have been
observed in the remotest ages. It was this kind of meteor which formerly spread
terror in Rome, which Aristotle, Seneca, and Pliny have described. It was
anciently called, and is so still by the vulgar, flaming sword, and fiery
dragon. I have not invented any circumstances relative to this phenomenon in
my tale, as may be seen by the following account:

The Globe of fire which was the subject of the Memoire of M. le Roy, was
observed the 17th of July, 1771, about half past ten in the evening. -- There
suddenly appeared in the north-west a fire like to a great falling star, which,
augmenting as it approached, soon took the form of a globe, that afterward had
a ^ail, which entrained all after it. This globe, having traversed a part of
the heavens, became ^lower in its motion, and took the form of Batayian Tears,
when it shed a most powerful light; its head appeared enveloped in sparks of
fire, and its tail edged with red, containing all the colors of the rainbow.
At length it burst, shedding a vast number of luminous particles like the
Brilliants in fireworks.

The 12th of November, 1761, M. le Baron des Adretz, one league from Ville
Franche, in Beaujolois, saw a bright globe of fire, which seemed swiftly
falling and increasing in size as it fell. A train of fire marked its route;
after it had traversed nearly an eighth of the horizen, it seemed as large as
an exceeding large tun, cut horizontally in half -- It turned upside down, and
out of it came a prodigious quantity of flaming sparks, like the largest of
those seen in fireworks.

In the town of Beaune, this meteor gave a light equal to that of noonday.

The 3d of November, 1777, at half past nine in the evening, a very
extraordinary meteor was seen at Sarle^ A small town of Perigord, 120 leagues
from Paris.
. The heavens became so light, that they thought day again was going to break.
A most luminous globe of fire appeared, from which came large sparks, like
artificial stars, and the circle by which it was surrounded, was formed of
different-coloured rays. -- When this enormous globe was about six fathoms
high, two species of volcano came from it, which took the form of two large
rainbows, one of which lost itself toward the North, and the other toward the
South. Dictionnaire des Merveilles de la Nature, Tome II.

(14) It must be remembered, that Alphonso's shoes were nailed, and that his
staff had an iron ferrule.

The Ancients, says M. de Bomare, knew the loadstone would attract iron; and if
Pliny may be believed, it was found out by a shepherd, who felt that the nails
of his shoes, and the ferrule of his staff, stuck to ae rock of lodestone over
which he passed; but they knew not its polar direction,

Alphonso, full of ignorance and remorse, and already terrified at the meteor
he had seen, feeling himself fixed to the rock, believed it proceeded from the
wrath of heaven, as a punishment for his flight. This idea redoubled his
terror, rendered him motionless, and aided the effects of nature.

The lodestone is ferruginous, and is found in iron-mines; its color varies
with the country where it is found; it has five remarkable properties: 1. That
of attracting iron, called Attraction. 2. That of transmitting its virtue --
Communication. 3. That of turning toward the poles of the earth -- Direction.
4. Its variation, called Declination. 5. Its dipping as it approaches either
pole -- Inclination. All these singular properties, the effects of the nature
of the lodestone, are produced by some general property hitherto unknown. It
is supposed there is a kind of atmosphere round the lodestone, which forms an
active vortex, and is sensibly discovered by its contrary effects, the one of
attracting, the other of repelling iron. The attractive force of the
lodestone, just taken from the mine, is not great, for which reason it is
obliged to be armed to augment its power. It may be remarked, that the rust of
iron has sometimes the effect of the lodestone.

Among the curiosities of the English Royal Society, is a lodestone, weighing
sixty pounds, which does not lift weight in proportion to its size, but which
attracts a needle at nine feet distance. L'Histoire de l' Academie des
Sciences, speaks of a lodestone, which weighed eleven oun^es, and raised
twenty-eight pounds of iron; that is to say, more than forty times its weight.
Dict d'Hist. Not. par M. de Bomare. Magnetism is the general name for the
different qualities of the lodestone. I have placed the adventure of the
Lodestone Rock in Spain, because it would have the most effect in the first
moments of Alphonso's flight; and there is sufficient probability for a tale
like this, in so doing, since, in fact, the environs of Loxe are full of rocks,
and Spain contains many mines.

(15) The pretended rain of blood happens only during a storm, and more
especially in summer. It is not astonishing, that the most part of insects
which feed on trees, are swept off by winds and torn in pieces, so that in
falling they seem bloody, and it rains the blood of insects. -- Dict. d'Hist.
Not, par M. de Bomare au mot Pluie.

I confess this explanation does not satisfy me; for were it only necessary to
produce this phenomenon, to have a high wind or rain in the months of July or
August, every person must have seen it rain blood more than once, which they
certainly have not seen.

The waters of the Lake of Zurich, in 1703, says M. de Bomare, suddenly became
red like blood; and on examination, it was found to proceed from currents of
bituminous waters, full of red ochre, which currents fell into the lake.

There is also what they call sulphur-rain, which is so named, from yellow
grains that seem to fall from the clouds, mingled with the water. This is
nothing but the yellow dust from various species of plants in bloom, and which
is the cause of this pretended sulphur-rain, that so frequently falls in the
neighborhood of mountains. This phenomenon often happens at Bourdeaux, in the
month of April, when the pine is in flower. -- Dict. d'Hist. N^^. par. M. de
Bomare.

(16) Quitting Loxe, travelers cross Mount Orespeda; and in the neighborhood
of Archidona, a city built in the very midst of rocks, on the frontiers of
Andalusia is seen la P^na de Los Enamaradoes; (the Lover's punishment) a rock
which this tragic adventure has rendered famous. A young French Knight was made
prisoner by the Moors, when they were in possession of Grenada. The Moorish
King gave him his liberty, heaped favors upon him, and retained him at his
Court. In return, the Frenchman seduced the King's daughter, and prevailed on
her to fly secretly from her father's palace. They made their escape in the
night; but heaven pursued an ungrateful and vile ravisher, and a criminal and
unnatural daughter. At daybreak, they saw a company of Moors chasing them, and
they clambered up a prodigiously high rock. They were soon surrounded, and,
torn by remorse, reduced to despair, they flung themselves from the summit of
the precipice, which still bears the name of the Lover's Rock. Essais sur
l'Espagne, Tome, I. page 225.

(17) Poison known to some hordes of savages, Mountaineers of Peru, was brought
to Europe in 1746, by M. de la Condamine, which was the most subtle and mortal.
Its effect is so prompt, that monkies or parrots pricked to the quick by small
arrows, which the Savages shoot from Sarba canes, immediately drop. M. de
Reamur had a bear of two years old, which, becoming mischievous, he determined
to kill. The effect of the poison was tried on this animal; the point of a
dart, proper to shoot from a Sarba cane, was steeped in it, and the bear
received the first dart above the shoulder, but without being apparently
wounded; a second was shot, and the animal made a bound, was convulsed,
trembled, foamed, and fell dead in about a minute and a half. It must be
remarked, that the monkies and parrots killed by this poison, which are eaten
in Peru, without any precaution, contract no pernicious quality. Sugar is the
most certain antidote to this powerful venom, and which, given to dogs and cats
a quarter of an hour before they have been wounded, has prevented all its
effects.

This note was given the Author, by a person who was a witness of the above
experiments.

(18) Every body knows this experiment on electricity was first made by Dr.
Franklin.

(19) The key was electrified.

(20) In the year 1755, when Lisbon suffered so much, the Azore Islands were
wonderfully agitated. In the island of St. George, twelve leagues from Angra,
the earth shook so violently, that most of the inhabitants were buried in the*
ruins of their houses. Their terror was next morning redoubled, when from the
same parts were seen eighteen islands newly risen from the sea. On the other
side a shock was felt, which threw portions of earth into the sea. On one of
these was a house, surrounded by trees, the inhabitants of which did not, till
the next morning, perceive the change of place. -- Dict. d' Hist. Not. par M.
de Bomare, au mot Tremblement de Terre.

(21) This is vulgarly called the dragon-tree, and by botanists is divided into
four species. That of the Canary islands resembles the pine, at a distance. Its
fruit is round, as large as fine peace, yellow, and a little acid. Its trunk,
which is rugged, opens in many places, and sheds, during the dog days, a liquor
like blood, which condenses to a red drop, soft at first, but afterward dry,
and capable of being reduced to powder. This is the dragon's-blood of the
shops. When an incision is made in the trunk of one those trees, the liquor
begins to run. -- M. de Bomare, au mot sang de Dragon.

(22) This pillar or water-spout, is only a thick cloud, compressed and reduced
to a small space, by contrary and opposing winds, which, meeting, give the
cloud the form of a cylindrical whirlwind, and thus occasions the water to fall
all at once under this cylindrical form. The quantity of water is so great, and
the fall so sudden, that if it happen on a ship at sea, it sinks it instantly.
In the month of July, 1775, a stroke of thunder beat down a cloud in Bavaria,
which directed itself perpendicularly, and formed a kind of a marine
water-spout. Passing over a pond, it drew up all the water, raised it to a
prodigious height, and afterward dispersed it with such force, that it
resembled a thick smoke. The cloud overturned in its passage several houses and
trees.

Another singular phenomenon happened near the Baltic, on the 17th of August,
1750. This was a (...) lumn of water, attached to a thick cloud, which the wind
carried along the earth. It attracted every thing it met with, corn, bushes,
and branches of trees, raised them about thirty feet high, intwined them, and
let them fall in small parcels. -- Some pretend, that firing (...) will break
and dissipate these water-spouts.

There is yet another species, called typhon, which does not descend from the
clouds, but raises water from the sea to the sky. These typhons are caused by
subterranean fires; for the sea is seen to boil on such occasions, and the air
is full of sulphurous exhalations. M. de Bomare, au mot Vents.

In the Memoires de l'Academie de Stockholm, we read, that on the 17th of
August, 1746. one of these columns was seen near Nystad, which attracted
stubble and wheatsheaves, and tore up small bushes by the roots.

There was another more singular in 1727, at Beziers, of something like a
violet color, which took up a quantity of young olive shoots, tore up trees,
transported a large walnut tree forty or fifty paces, and marked its route by a
well beaten track, on which three coaches might pass abreast; it was
accompanied by a thick smoke, and made a noise like the roaring of a troubled
sea.

Another appeared in the same year in la Brie, which passing over a ditch,
filled it with earth and stones, and marked its passage by such kind of furrows
as a harrow might make.

A column of a considerable height, was seen at Carcassona, in the year 1776.
It seemed to descend from a neighboring mountain, was of a deep marigold
color, from the bo^tom half way, wh^le the rest appeared inflamed. The noise
of this meteor resembled the bellowing of a herd of oxen. It threw itself into
the river Aude, which it dried up for a considerable space. Dict. des Merv. de
la Not. Tome II. mot Trombe.

(23) In 1740, hailstones fell at Rome as large as eggs. In Thuringia, a
province of Germany, there fell hailstones, in 1738, as large as geese eggs.

Vallade assures us, in his description of the Orcade islands, that in the
month of June, 1680, there fell pieces of ice a foot thick, during a storm.
Morton observed at Northampton, in 1693, blades of ice which fell in a storm,
that were two inches long, and one inch thick. Besides which, he observed
spherical grains an inch in diameter, in which were seen five different
colored rays, which formed a kind of star.

In 1720, hail fell at Crembs, some of the stones of which weighed six pounds.
Dict. des Merv. de la Not. Tome I. mot Gr^le.

Hail is a kind of rain condensed and crystalized by the cold, as it passes
through the middle region of the air, before it reaches the earth. --
Nicephorus-Calistus reports, after the taking of Rome by Alaric, hailstones
fell in many places of eight pounds weight. In 824, there fell near Autun, in
Burgundy, among the hail pieces of ice, sixteen feet long, seven wide, and two
feet thick. -- In 1723, there were hailstones fell at Leicester of five
inches. -- In the famous storm that happened in Picardy, August, 1722, the
least hail that fell, accompanied with thunder and lightning, weighed a pound,
and the largest eight. -- Many of the stones were forked, and pointed. etc. --
M. de Bomare, au mot Grele.

(24) Edens, an English traveller, relates, that having, as a physician,
rendered considerable services to the inhabitants of the Canary Islands, he
obtained of them the liberty to visit the Sepulchral Caverns; a favor they
grant to no one, and which cannot be obtained against their will, without life
being exposed to the greatest danger.

They have an extreme veneration for the bodies of their ancestors, and the
curiosity of strangers is to them profanation. -- These caves are places
anciently dug out of the rocks, or formed by nature. -- The corpse is sewed in
goat skins, with thongs of the same, and the seams are so equal and close, as
to become very admirable; but what astonishes most, is, that the bodies are
almost all entire; and in both sexes are equally found the eyes, (closed) the
hair, ears, nose, lips, teeth, and beard.

One day, when the author of this account was taking rabbits by a ferret, this
little animal, which had a bell round its neck, was lost in a burrow, and
disappeared, without their being able to know how. One of the hunters, to whom
he belonged, seeking for him in the midst of rocks and brambles, discovered the
entrance to a sepulchral cave of the Gaunches, he descended, etc.

If the account of the oldest of the Gaunches may be believed, there was a
particular tribe amongst their ancestors, who knew the art of embalming, and
preserved it as a sacred mystery. -- This tribe composed the priesthood, and
did not intermarry with the others; but after the conquest of the island, most
of them were destroyed, and their secret perished with them. Tradition has only
taught us a part of the ingredients necessary to that operation.

Abrege de l' Hist. Genesis des Voy. Tome I. Par M. de la Harp.

Among the ancients, the Egyptians, more than any others, practiced embalming;
and bodies have been preserved above two thousand years. In the breast of one
of these corpse, a branch of rosemary was found, scarcely dried. This art has
only been known in Europe during these latter ages; formerly they made deep
incisions in the corpse, salted it, and enclosed it in a tanned ox's hide. --
Encyclopedie.

(25) The French called this tree calebassier, and its fruit baboon's-bread. It
grows at Senegal, and the natives call it gooee, and its fruit booee; its real
name is boabab. Its first branches, which project almost horizontally, are
commonly sixty feet long, and its trunk about seventyeight feet round; though
many travelers have seen them larger. Ray says, that between the Niger and the
Gambia, some have been measured so monstrous, that seventeen men, with extended
arms, scarcely could embrace them. According to which, these trees must be
about eighty-five feet in circumference. The boabab, adds M. de Bomare, is
probably the largest of known vegetables; though there are accounts, in the
works of different naturalists, of well known trees so prodigious, as to be
reckoned vegetable monsters. Ray cites the account of travelers, who have seen
a tree in Brazil 120 feet round, and there are still trees more mavelous,
mentioned in late histories of China; one of which is in the province of Suchu,
near the town of Kian; it is called Sieunich, that is to say, the tree of a
thousand years: and is so vast, that one of its branches only will afford
shelter to 200 sheep. Another tree, in the province of Chekianga, is nearly
four hundred feet in circumference.

(26) There is a serpent called the Serpent of Damel, which is very common in
the westerly provinces of Africa. The Negroes, when bit, put powder on the
wound, and apply fire; and if this operation is but a little while deferred,
the poison gains ground, and death soon follows. -- The Sereres, a Negro
nation, catch and eat them. Some of them are fifteen, some twenty feet long,
and six inches in diameter. There are some green, others black spotted, and
striped with beauteous colors.

On the Slave coast, in the kingdoms of Juida and*Benin, all the Savages adore
a kind of serpent which they call the Fetiche. These serpents are very gentle,
not venomous, and extremely familiar. It is death to kill them. The Negroes
look upon them as benevolent deities, and have particular rites for them;
though they destroy, with great care, those serpents which are poisonous.

(27) The French of Fort St. Louis had a lioness, which they kept chained. The
animal had a disease in the jaw, that (...) it to extremity; and the people of
the for, (...) off the chains, threw the body into a neighbourin field. In this
state it was found by M. Compagnon. A^^er of the Voyage of Bambuck, as he
returned (...) the ch^^e. The eyes were closed, the jaw open, and already
swarming with ants. Compagnon ^^ok pity on the poor animal, washed the gullet
with water, and poured some milk down the throat. The effects of this sample
(...) were wonderful. The lioness was brought back to the (...), recovered by
degrees, but, far from forgetting the service done her, took such an affection
for her benefactor, that she would receive food only from him; and, when cured,
followed him about the island, with a cord about her neck, like the most
familiar dog.

A lion having escaped from the menagerie of the Great Duke of Tuscany, entered
the city of Florence, every where spreading terror. Among the fugitives was a
woman with a child in her arms, whom she let fall. The lion seized, and seemed
ready to devour it, when the mother, transported by the tender affections of
nature, ran back, threw herself before the lion, and by her gestures demanded
her child. The lion looked at her steadfastly; her cries and tears seemed to
affect him, till at last he laid the child down without doing it the least
in^ury. -- Misery and despair then, have expressions intelligible to the most
savage monsters; but what is yet more to be admired, is the resistless and
sublime emotion, which can make a mother offer herself a prey to a fer^cious
animal, before which all fly: that loss of reason, so superior to reason's
self, which can impel a despairing woman to recur to the pity of a beast
breathing only death and carnage. This is the instinct of supreme grief, which
always would persuade itself it is not possible to remain inflexible to its
feelings. Abrege, etc. par M. de la Harp, Tom. II.

It is very certain, says M. de Buffon, that the lion, when taken young, and
brought up among domestic animals, may easily be brought to live, and even play
harmless among them; that he is gentle to his masters, caresses them,
especially in the former part of life, and that, though his natural ferocity
may sometimes break forth, it seldom is turned against those who do him good.

I might cite a number of particular facts, in which I own I have found some
exaggeration; but which are sufficiently established to prove, at least by
their union, that his anger is noble, his courage magnanimous, and his heart
feeling. Often has he been seen to disdain weak enemies, despise their insults,
and pardon their offensive liberties. When reduced to captivity, though weary,
he is not peevish; but, on the contrary, becomes habitually gentle, obeys his
master, flatters the hand that feeds him; sometimes grants life to animals
given him as a prey, and, as if attached to them by this generous act,
continues afterward the same protection; lives peaceably with them, gives them
part of his subsistence, lets them sometimes take it all, and would rather
suffer hunger, than lose the fruit of his first benefit.

The circumstances relative to the chase of the lion, are taken from l'
Histoire des Voyages.

(28) There is a remarkable echo near Rosneath, a fine country-seat in
Scotland, situated to the west of a salt water lake that runs into the Clyde,
17 miles below Glasgow. The lake is surrounded by hills, some of which are
barren rocks, others are covered with trees. A good trumpeter, standing on a
point of land that gives an opening to the water toward the north, has played
an air and stopped: the echo repeated the air faithfully and distinctly, but
not so loud: this echo having ceased, another has done the same, and a third,
as exactly as the two former, with no difference but that of becoming more
feeble. The same experiment, several times repeated, had still the same success,

There was formerly in the Chateau de Simonette, a windowed wall, whence what
was said was forty times repeated. Addison and others, who have traveled in
Italy, mention as echo which would repeat the report of a pistol fifty-six
times, even when the air was ^oggy.

In the Memoires of the Academy of Sciences at Paris, for the year 1692,
mention is made of the echo at Genetay, two leagues from Ro^^en, which has this
peculiarity, that the person who sings does not hear the echo, but his voice
only; and, on the contrary, those who listen do not hear the voice, but the
echo, but with surprising variatious; for the echo seems sometimes to approach,
and sometimes to retire: sometimes the voice is heard distinctly, at others not
at all; some hear only a single voice, others several; one hears to the right,
another to the left, etc. -- This echo still exists, but is not what it was,
because the environs have been planted with trees, which have greatly hurt the
effect.

(29) This bird is called flamingo, or phenicopetra, or becharu; which second
name among the Greeks, signified the bird of flaming wing, because when it
flies against the sun, it appears like a firebrand. The plumage, when young, is
rose colored, and at ten months old, the color of fire. Its beak, says M. de
Buffon, is of a very extraordinary form, its legs excessively high, its neck
long and dented; its body stands higher, though it is less than the stork's;
and its form, somewhat odd, makes it distinguishable from that of every other
fishing bird.

This bird is found on the old Continent, from the coasts of the Mediterranean,
to the southern part of Africa; flamingos are plentiful to the west of Africa,
at Angola and Congo; where, out of superstitious respect, the Negroes will not
suffer one of them to be killed.

The flamingo is certainly a bird of passage, and are numerous at St. Domingo
and the Antilles; they fly in society, and naturally form themselves into a
line, so that at a certain distance they resemble a brick wall, and, somewhat
nearer, soldiers arranged in rank and file. They place sentinels, which give
the alarm by a very shrill cry, like the sound of a trumpet, at which they all
take flight. Their flesh is much admired as food, and ancient Epicures were
very fond of their tongues.

(30) This bird, called Cucullus Indicator; says M. de Buffon, is found in the
interior parts of Africa, at some distance from the Cape of Good Hope, and is
famous for indicating where wild bee-hives may be found; twice a day its shrill
cry is heard sounding cherr, cherr; which seems to call the honey-hunters, who
answer by a soft whistle, still approaching. When it is seen, it flies and
hovers over a hollow-tree, that contains a hive; and if the hunters do not
come, it redoubles its cries, flies back, returns to the tree, and points out
the prey in the most marking manner; forgetting nothing to excite them to
profit by the treasure it has discovered, and which probably it could not enjoy
without the aid of man; either because the entrance to the hive is too small,
or from other circumstances which the relater has not told us. While the honey
is procuring, it flies to some distance, interestingly observing all that
passes, and waiting sor its part of the spoil; which the hunters never forget
to leave, though not enough to satiate the bird, consequently not to destroy
his ardour for this kind of chase.

This is not the tale of a traveller, but the observations of an enlightened
man, who himself assisted at the destruction of many bee-hives, betrayed by
this little spy, to the Royal Society of London. He procured two of these birds
that had been killed, to the great scandal of the Hottentots, for in all
countries the existence of a useful being is precious.

M. de Buffon adds, in a note, that the honey-hunter is sometimes devoured by
wild beasts; whence it has been said, that they and the bird understand each
other, and that it allures their prey Hist. Not. des Oiseaux, Tome XII. Edit.
in 12 mo.

(31) Mecca is a town of Arabia Felix, about as large as Marseilles. The
magnificence of its mosque, draws a prodigious concourse of all the Mahometon
sects, who go thither on pilgrimages. It is the birthplace of Mahomet.

(32) Medina is a city of Arabia Felix, the name of which signifies, in Arabic,
a city in general; and here the city, by way of excellence; for here it was
that Mahomet fixed the feat of the empire of the mussulman's, and here he died.
It was (...) time called Lotreb. In the midst of Medina is the famous mosque,
to which the Mahometans go in pilgrimage; and in this mosque are the tombs of
Mahomet, Abubecker, and Omer. Medina is governed by a Sheriff, who says he is
of the race of Mahomet, and who is an independent sovereign. -- Encyclopedie.

(33) Cairo is the capital of Egypt; the Sultan Sel^m took it from the
Mamaluks, in 1517; since which time it has been subject to the Turks. Old Cairo
is three quarters of a league distant from it, on the borders of the Nile; the
Cophtes have a magnificent church there A Christian set of Jacobites, or
Monophysites
.

(34) The pyramids of Egypt were built to serve as tombs for their
constructors. The Egyptians of lower rank, instead of building pyramids, dug
caves, in which every day mummies are discovered. Each pyramid has an opening
into a long low alley, which led to a chamber, where the ancient Egyptians
deposited the bodies for which the pyramids were built. Their construction is
very regular: each of the three remaining large ones is placed at the head of
others, smaller and difficult to distinguish, they are so much covered with
sand. All are built on one sole rock, hid under white^and.

In all the pyramids there are deep pits, cut square in the rock; on the walls
of some are hyroglyphics, cut also in the rock. The three principal pyramids
known to travelers, are about nine miles from Cairo; and the most superb of
them is upon a rock, in a sandy desert of Africa; a quarter of a league
distant, toward the west, from the plains of Egypt. This rock rises about 100
feet above the level of the plains, but with an easy ascent, contributes much
^o the majesty of the building.

The pyramid contains chambers, galleries, etc. and those who ascend on the
outside, rest occasionally to take breath. There is a square chamber, about
half way up, which serves only for a resting place. When arrived at the top, a
platform is found, whence a most agreeable landscape is seen. This platform is
sixteen or seventeen seet square, ^et the pyramid seems to end in a point; the
descent, which is on the outside, must be very dangerous.

(35) The island of Thera, in ^he Archipelage, which is twelve great French
leagues in circumference, was thrown from the bottom of the sea by the violence
of a volcano, which has since produced six other islands. This volcano is not
yet extinguished, for in 1707 it (...) out with redoubled fury, and sent forth
a new island, six miles in circumference. The sea, at that time, appeared
greatly agitated, and covered with flames, and from it rose, with dreadful
noise, several burning rocks. The earth has been so rent and torn in these
latitudes, that vessels can no longer find anchorage there.

One of the most violent eruptions of Vesuvius, (the twenty-second) happened on
the 20th of May, 1737; the mountain vomited, from several mouths, huge torrents
of burning, melted, metallic matter, which overspread the country, and took its
course toward the sea. M. de Montealegre, who communicated the account to the
Academy at Paris, observed with horror, one of these rivers of fire. Its course
was six or seven miles before it reached the sea; its breadth was fifty or
sixty paces; its depth twenty-five or thirty French palms; and in certain
bottoms or valleys, 120, etc. -- M. de Bomare.

The eruptions of volcanos are usually announced by subterranean noises like
thunder; by dreadful hissings, and interior strife. History inform us, that
during two eruptions of Vesuvius, the volcano cast up so great a quantity of
ashes that they flew as far as Egypt, Lybia, and Syria. In 1600, at Arequina,
in Peru, was an eruption of a volcano, which covered all the neighboring
lands, for thirty or forty leagues round, with calcined sand and ashes, which
lay in some places two yards deep. The lava vomited by Mount AEtna, has
sometimes formed streams that ran 18,000 paces.

Volcanos often have been known to cast from their entrails boiling water,
fish, shells, and other marine bodies. In 1631, during an eruption of Vesuvius,
the sea, in part, became dry; it seemed absorbed by the volcano, which soon
after overflowed the country with salt water. -- Volcanos are found in hot as
well as cold countries. -- Encyclopedie.

(36) The entrance to the Cavern of Policandro (or Policando) is grand, the
bottom is covered with congelations, formed from drops of water, which distill
from the summit, but of a ferruginous nature, pointed and hard enough to wound
the feet. The ceiling affords various and great beauties. These congelations,
though exceedingly elegant, are not the only ornaments the grotto has received
from nature, for here is plentifully found a species of iron ore, in the form
of stars, and shining like polished steel. The pieces in some places have a red
cast, and as brilliant as diamonds.

In another part of the vault are seen large masses of round bodies, pendent
like grapes, some red, others of a deep black, but perfectly bright and
shining. The greatest ornament of the ceiling consists in the same species of
congelation in the form of chrystals; several are brought to a point, as if
purposely so labored; and what is more remarkable, some of them are naturally
gilded, in as regular a manner as if they had just come from the hands of an
able artist. -- Merv. de la Not. Tome I.

(37) Mr. Swinburne, an excellent another already cited, has written another
very interesting work, entitled Travels through the two Sicilies, where I have
found a description of the phenomenon, called by the country people La Fata
Morgana; which name, Mr. Swinburne says, is derived from an opinion established
among the vulgar, that this spectacle is produced by a fairy, or a magician.
The populace are enchanted at the sight of the phenomenon, and run through the
streets to behold and invite others to behold it, with shouts and acclamations
of joy. It seldom appears at Reggio; Mr. Swinburne did not see it, but says,
its causes are learnedly explained by Kirchir, Minazi, and other authors. Mr.
Swinburne gives an exact description of it, taken from the account of Father
Angelucci, who was an eyewitness of the phenomenon; and it is from this same
description, by Father Angelucci, cited by Mr. Swinburne, that I have made a
literal translation, without imbellishment, for my tale.

This phenomenon is mentioned, but very superficially, in a French work,
entitled Tableau de l' Univers.

(38) Lovers, says Athenaeus, an ancient Greek author, decorate with flowers
the door of their mistresses, like as they ornament the gates of the temple;
whence, no doubt, the present custom of the Greeks to adorn their doors, and
those of the persons they love, on the first of May, is derived. They sing and
walk before the houses of their fair mistresses, to draw them to their windows;
and such were the gallantries they practiced in the days of Horace. -- The
young maidens dressed their heads with natural flowers, with which they made
themselves garlands; and the young men who wished to be thought gallant, did
the same. Voy de la Greece, 3d Edit. Tome I. par M. Guys.

(39) There was anciently a feast instituted in honor of Hecate, who had
hospitably entertained Theseus, and who had likewise offered up victims and
vows for his victory and safe return; hence she obtained her rank among the
Goddesses.

In ancient Greece, when a stranger arrived, the master of the house took him
by the hand, in token of confidence, and his first duty was to lead him to the
bath, and present a change of raiment. -- Among the moderns, when a stranger
arrives, the master of the house meets and embraces him, then conducts him to
his most commodious apartment, and interrogates him concerning his travels,
while the slaves prepare the bath; where he finds linen and clothes to change,
and those he has left off are taken by the slaves, washed and repaired while he
stays. -- M. Guys. Tome I.

(40) Now, as anciently, the nurse of the master or mistress, in all
respectable Grecian houses, is considered as one of the family. Of old, a woman
who had nursed a child, never quitted it, not even after marriage: and among
the moderns, as well as the ancients, the nurse is generally a slave, purchased
when the time of delivery draws near.

The attachment of nurses to the children they have suckled, is so strongly
interwoven with their manners, that the modern name for nurse is Paramana, a
most kind word, and even more expressive than the ancient appellation, since it
signifies second mother. The nurse is always lodged in the house, when she has
suckled a child, and from that moment is in a manner incorporated in the family.

Female slaves, now, as well as anciently, are treated with much kindness and
humanity by the Greeks, and, after a certain time, are freed; some are adopted
while young, and these are called Daughters of their souls.

The maids and slaves work as formerly, at embroidering with their mistresses,
and do all household duties. When their mistresses go abroad, they follow as
they did of old. -- The Legislator, Zaleucus, to repress the vanity and luxury
of his time, ordained that no free woman should go abroad attended by more than
one maid, at least unless she was drunk. -- M. Guys, Tome I.

(41) The Grecian ladies have always delighted to adorn themselves with jewels;
they enrich their girdles, neck-laces, and bracelets, with them; and while
their heads are decked with the most beautiful flowers of the spring, the
diamond is seen sparkling beside the jessamine and rose; they dress themselves
thus when going abroad, or without an intention of being seen.

These ornaments are only sacrificed to some strong cause for grief. -- Almost
all the Grecian women forbear to wear them in the absence of their husbands. --
At present when they go any distance, unwilling to walk through the streets
with their jewels, they have them carried, put them on before they enter the
house they are going to, and take them off when they return: this likewise is a
very ancient custom.

The use of the veil is very old; and now, as formerly, is an essential part of
dress, by which rank is distinguished, The veil of the mistress and the maid,
the free woman and the slave, all are different. -- The origin of the veil is
attributed by the Greeks to modesty and bashfulness, equally timid.

The veil of the Grecian ladies of modern times is muslin, fringed with gold.
-- M. Guys, Tome I.

(42) The repast of the Greeks, however little animated, finished always by
songs. The modern lyre of the Greeks resembles that of Orpheus, according to
the description of Virgil, and is sometimes nipped with fingers, and sometimes
touched with a bow I cannot conceive how they can play the lyre with a how.
. -- The guittar and the lyre are the principal instruments in use among the
modern Greeks. The shepherd plays indifferently the musette, the flute, or the
lyre. M. Guys, Tome I.

(43) The modern Greeks have preserved dances in honor of Flora; the wives and
maidens of the village gather and scatter flowers, and bedeck themselves from
head to foot. She who leads the dance more ornamented than the others,
represents Flora and the spring, which the hymn they sing announces the return
of; and one of them sings,

"Welcome sweet nymph, Goddess, of the month of May."

In the Grecian villages, and among the Bulgarians, they still observe the
feast of Ceres. When harvest is almost ripe, they go dancing to the sound of
the lyre, and visit the fields, whence they return with their heads ornamented
with wheat ears interwoven with the hair.

(44) Embroidering is the occupation of the Grecian women; to the Greeks we owe
the art, which is exceedingly ancient among them, and has been carried to the
highest degree of perfection -- Enter the chamber of a Grecian girl, and you
will see blinds at the windows, and no other furniture than a sofa and a chest
inlaid with ivory, in which are kept silks, needles, and their embroidery.

Apologues, Tales, Romances, owe their origin to Greece. The modern Greeks love
tales and fables, and have received them from the Orientals and Arabs, with as
much eagerness as they formerly adopted them from the Egyptians. -- The old
women love always to relate, and the young pique themselves on repeating those
they have learnt, or can make, from such incidents as happen within their
knowledge. -- M. Guys, Tome I.

(45) The Greeks at present have not a fixed time for the celebration of
marriages, like the ancients, among whom the ceremony was performed in the
month of January. Formerly the bride was bought by real services done the
father. This was afterward reduced to presents, and, to this time, that custom
is continued, though the presents are arbitrary. The man is not obliged to
purchase the woman he marries, but, on the contrary, receives a portion with
her equal to her condition.

It was on the famous shield of Achilles, that Homer has described a marriage
procession; Here sacred pomp, and genial feast, delight,
And solemn dance, and hymeneal right.
Along the streets the new-made brides are led,
With torches flaming to the nuptial bed:
The youthful dancers in a circle bound,
To the soft flute and cittern's silver sound.
Through the fair streets the matrons in a row,
Stand in their porches and enjoy the show."
POPE

The same pomp, procession, and music, are still in use. Dancers, musicians,
and singers, who chant the Epithalamium go before; the bride, loaded with
ornaments, her eyes down-cast, and herself sustained by women, or two near
relations, walks extremely slow, etc. -- Formerly the bride wore a red or
yellow veil; the Armenians do so still. This was to hide the blush of modesty,
the embarrassment and tears of the young virgin.

The bright torch of Hymen is not forgotten among the modern Greeks; it is
carried before the new married couple into the nuptial chamber where it burns
till it is consumed; and it would be an ill omen, were it by any accident
extinguished; wherefore it is watched with as much care, as was of old the
sacred fire of the vestals.

Arrived at the church, the bride and bridegroom each wear a crown, which,
during the ceremony, the priest changes, by giving the crown of the bridegroom
to the bride, and that of the bride to the bridegroom; which custom also is
derived from the ancients. -- I must not forget an essential ceremony which the
Greeks have preserved, which is the cup of wine given to the bridegroom, in
token of adoption; it was the symbol of contract and alliance; the bride drank
from the same cup, which afterward passed round to the relations and guests.

They dance and sing still all night, but the companions of the bride are
excluded; they feast among themselves, in separate apartments, far from the
tumult of the nuptials. The modern Greeks, like the ancient, on the nuptial
day, decorate their doors with green branches and garlands of flowers. -- M.
Guys, Tome I.

M. Guys, the eldest son of him already cited, gives an interesting account of
a Grecian marriage, at whcih he was present.

The young bride, richly dressed, wearing long tresses of threads of gold,
interwoven with her beautiful hair, after the manner of the Greeks, descended
from her apartment; she eagerly advanced to kiss her father and mother, who
waited to receive her, at the head of ten children. -- Who, among us, could
behold with dry eyes, a tender and respectable mother, unable to detach herself
from a daughter, whom she pressed in her arms, and whom she bedewed with tears,
which an excess of joy and affection caused abundantly to flow on her maternal
bosom? -- The father wept also, but, with eyes raised to heaven, pronounced,
with a firm tone, a paternal benediction on his daughter, and vows for the
happiness of her and her husband. -- At their return, nosegays woven with
threads of gold, were given to the young men, saying, Go you and marry also.

M. Guys terminates the recital by saying, the bride's mother conducted her
daughter into an apartment superbly furnished; the tapestry and bed of which,
embroidered on a ground of white, adorned with beautiful flowers, were the work
of this good mother. She had labored at them, privately, adds M. Guys, for ten
years, without the knowledge of any one. -- M. Guys, Tome II.

(46) The Grecian houses are divided into two parts, by a great hall, which
takes up the center and whole width. In this hall they give feasts, and perform
all ceremonies that require room, etc. M. Guys, Tome I.

(47) A Grecian woman weeps for the death of her husband, her son, etc. with
her female friends, for several days, who sing their praises and regrets. --
Their manner of showing grief is now as formerly, by plucking up their hair,
and tearing their garments. Fathers and mothers follow their children, when
carried to the grave; and the body is now, as of old, washed before it is
buried. If it is the corpse of a young virgin, they clothe it in its finest
robes, crown it with flowers, and the women throw roses and scented water from
their windows upon the coffin as it passes. The ancients aadorned the dead with
crowns of flowers, to indicate they had at length overcome the miseries and
vexations of life. -- The funeral repast is not neglected by the modern Greeks;
the nearest relation undertakes the charge, and with this the ceremony ends. --
Fathers and mothers in Greece, wear mourning for their children They do the
sa^e in Italy.
, and this mourning is very long; which is also an ancient Grecian custom. --
The Greeks have preserved the usage of dressing the dead in their best habits
and of carrying them to the grave with their faces uncovered The same custom is
observed in Italy.
.

In this same work, by M. Guys, is a letter from Madame Chenier to the author
Tome I. Page 233.
, which first gave me the idea of the Episode of Euphrosyne. I shall only cite
such passages from this letter as I have profited by, the rest having no
relation to my Episode.

A Grecian lady, equally distinguished by her rank and the beauties of her
mind, and who to the charms of her sex added those of a good education, lived
with a younger brother, who, from excess of virtue, had renounced (...) and
emoluments, to whcih his alliances and rank might naturally have taught him to
aspire. For his sister he had all the affection of a brother, and all the
friendship of a congenial mind. This dear brother was attached by a malignant
fever, and died. -- His sister, according to the custom of the country,
accompanied the procession, preceded and followed by part of the Grecian
nobility. Every thing announced the dejection of an affectionate heart; the
discorder of her veil and dress, the negligence of her hair, added new traits
to the grief visible in her countenance. -- After the customary prayers, they
performed the ceremony which the Greeks have preserved, which they call the
last farewell. When the Patriarch has embraced the corpse, the relations, and
those who walk in the procession, do the same. This scene, which the idea of an
enternal adieu rendered but too affecting, became more so, when the sister,
with streaming eyes, attending only to her cause of grief, rent her garments,
and tore her hair up by the root, to strew over the coffin of a brother, whom
she was soon no more to see. Efforts were used to shorten this gloomy scene,
and bring back the afflicted sister to her house; she then became less
agitated, and her grief more calm.

After this detail, Madame Chenier suspends her narration, in order to describe
the garden of the deceased.

The sea was seen from this garden, which was ornamented by beautiful flowers,
fruit trees, and an area full of birds; there was likewise a reservoir of
water, recruited by the sea, in which all forts of fish were kept. This garden,
these birds and fish, were the amusement of the sage, who just had been torn
from his sister and friends. -- Where is my brother? said this despairing
sister, as her eyes wandered over the garden. -- He is gone. -- has passed away
like a shadow -- Ye flowers which he cultivated with so much pleasure! ye have
already lost the freshness his hand bestowed! -- Perish with him! -- Droop and
wither, even to the root! -- Ye fish, since ye have no longer a master nor a
friend, to watch over your preservation -- return ye to the great waters! --
Return and seek uncertain life! -- And ye little birds! if ye may survive your
grief! accompany my sighs with your plaintive songs! -- Thou peaceful ocean,
whose surface begins to be disturbed, art thou also sensible to my sorrows The
sea in the channel is smooth, evening and morning, and only begins to be
agitated about ten o'clock and till sunset. The time of the day must justify
the allegory. -- M. Guys.


? -- Then turning toward her slaves she said, Weep my children, weep! Ye have
lost one who was kinder than a father to you! -- My brother is no more! --
Cruel death has dragged him from us! -- He has disappeared like a shadow, and
we shall see him no more! These haunts, which his presence rendered so
delightful, must now become the residence of gloom and affliction.

The tombs of the Greeks, like those of the Turks, and other eastern people,
are situated near the highway; and though without enclosure, are not the less
sacred. The Greeks and Armenians plant elm trees round them; which tree the
ancients chose, because it bears no fruit, and therefore is a proper
representative of the dead. They likewise use the cypress. -- Besides the
stones which cover the tomb, there are little sepulchral columns, which, as
formerly, bear the name of the intered; and this custom is adopted by the
Turks.

The Grecians come occasionally and weep over the tombs. -- At Easter, which
the Greeks celebrate with great rejoicings, feasts, and public dances, there is
one day on which they go in multitudes to visit the tombs, where they weep for
their relations, their friends, and perhaps the loss of their liberty. -- At
present, the Grecian women are satisfied with tearing up their hair, though
they formerly cut off their long tresses, and strewed them over the tombs of
those they lamented. M. Guys, Tome I.

Of all the people on earth, none are more magnificent in their funerals than
the Chinese.

The idea of death ceases not to torment them; it appears, however, less cruel,
if they can purchase a coffin, and erect a tomb on the side of a hill, in an
agreeable situation. They expend excessive sums on their funerals, which are
sometimes performed six years after death, with unexampled magnificence. They
hire men, and dress them in white, for mourning, to weep in the procession for
several successive days; they carry the deceased by water to the sound of
instruments, while the boat which bears the body, and those which accompany it,
are so illuminated, that the different colored lights form designs even to the
mast head. -- Voyages aux Indes Orientales and a la Chin^ fait par order du
Roi, par M. Sonnerat, Tome II.

(48) There are two seasons of pearl fishing in the year; the first in March
and April, the second in August and September; the more rain there falls in the
year, the more plentiful are the fisheries. In the opening of the season, there
appear sometimes 250 barks on the banks. In the larger barks are two diverse, in
the smaller one. Each bark puts off from shore before sunrise, by a land
breeze, which never fails, and returns again by a sea-breeze, that succeeds it
at noon.

As soon as the barks are arrived where the fish lie, and have cast anchor,
each diver binds a stone, six inches thick, and a foot long, under his body,
which is to serve him as ballast, prevent his being driven away by the motion
of the water, and enable him to walk more steadily among the waves.

Besides this, they tie another very heavy stoneto one foot, whereby they are
soon sunk to the bottom of the sea; and as the oysters are usually strongly
fastened to the rocks, they arm their fingers with leathern mittens, to prevent
them from being wounded, on scraping them violently off; and some even carry an
iron rake for the purpose.

Lastly, Each diver carries down with him a large net, in manner of a sack,
tied to his neck by a long cold, the end whereof is fastened to the side of the
bark. The sack is intended for the reception of the oysters gathered from the
rock, and the cord is to pull up the diver when his bag is full, or when he
wants air. In this equipage he precipitates himself above 60 feet under water.
As he has no time to lose there, he is no sooner arrived at the bottom, than he
begins to run from side to side, sometimes on sand, sometimes on a clay earth,
and sometimes among the points of rocks, tearing off the oysters he meets with,
and cramming them into his budget.

At whatever depth the diverse be, the light is so great, that they easily
behold what passes in the sea, with the same clearness as on land; and, to
their consternation, they sometimes see monstrous fishes, from which all their
address in mudding the water, etc. will not always save them, but they become
their prey; and of all* the perils of fishery, this is one of the greatest and
most usual.

The best diverse will keep under water half an hour, the rest do not stay less
than a quarter; during which time they hold their breath, without the use of
oils, or any other liquors, only acquiring the habit by long practice. When
they find themselves straightened, they pull the rope by which the bag is
fastened, and hold fast by it with both hands; the people in the bark take the
signal, and heave them up into the air, and unload them of their fish, which is
sometimes 500 oysters, and sometimes not above 50.

Some of the diverse need a moment's res^ite to recover their breath, others
jump in again instantly, continuing this violent exercise, without
intermission, for many hours. They unload their barks on shore, and lay their
oysters in an infinite number of little pits, dug four or five feet square;
then raise heaps of sand over them to the height of a man, which, at a
distance, looks like an army ranged in battle. In this condition they are left,
till the rain, wind and sun obliges them to open, which soon kills them; upon
this the flesh rots and dries, and the pearls, thus disengaged, tumble into the
pit, upon taking the oysters out.

After clearing the pits of the grosser filth, they sift the sand several times
to separate the pearls; but what care soever they take herein, they always
loose a great many. When the pearls are cleaned and dried, the smallest are
sold as seed pearls, the rest by auction to the highest bidder.

Pearls of unusual figures, that is neither round nor in the form of a pear,
are called Baroguas, and ours Scotch Pearls; those of unusual sizes are called
Parangons. Such was that of Cleopatra, valued by pliny at centies H. S. or
80,000l. sterling; that brought in 1574, to Philip II. of the size of a
pigeon's egg, valued at 14,400 ducats; that of the Emperor Rudolph, mentioned
by Boctius, called la Pereguina, or the Incomparable of the shape of a muscade
pear, and weighing 30 carats; and that mentioned by Tavernier, in the hands of
the Emperor of Persia, in 1633, bought of an Arab for 32000 tomans, which at
30l. 9s. the toman, amounts to 110,400l. sterling -- Cyclopoedia.

(49) The shining of the seawater is a common phenomenon in some seas. The
prow of the vessel plowing the waves, (...), during the darkness of the night,
to set them on fire; the ship rides in a circle of light, and the wake leaves a
long luminous track. This happens often on the roast of Malabar, and the
Maldivia islands, where Mr. Godehu observed the following appearances:

The sea seemed covered with small stars, the wake of the vessel was a lively
bright white, strewed with brilliant and azure points. He learned that the sea,
where most luminous, was full of small living animalcula, which not only shone,
but gave an oily liquor, which swam on the surface, and afforded that lively
auzure light. The animalcula could not be seen without a good microscope, and
the liquor they shed, remained on the strainer through which the seawater
passed, which, by this filtration, was deprived of its luminous quality. -- M.
de Bomare.

(50) Natural Phosphori, are matters which become luminous at certain times,
without the assistance of art or preparation. Such are the glowworms, in our
cold countries; and, in hot, lantem-flies, and other thining insects; (...),
the eyes, blood, scales, flesh, sweat, feathers, etc. of several at mals;
diamonds, when rubbed after a certain manner, or after having been exposed to
the sun or light; sugar and sulphur, when pounded in a dark place; seawater,
and some mineral waters, when briskly agitated; a cat's or horses bark, duly
rubbed with the hand, etc. in the dark; ray, Dr. Croon ^ells, that, upon
rubbing his own body bris^^y with a well warmed shirt, he has frequently made
(...) and Dr. Sloane adds, that he knew a gentleman of Bristol, and his son,
both whose stockings would shine much after walking. -- All natural phosphori
have this in common, that they do not shine always, and that they never give
any heat. -- Cyclopoedia.

(51) Diamond, in Natural History, by the ancients called Adamant, a precious
stone, the first in rank, value, hardness, and luster, of all gems.

Diamonds are found in the East Indies, principally in the kingdoms of
Golconda, Visapour, Bengal, and the island of Borneo. There are four mines, or
rather two mines and two rivers, whence diamonds are drawn. The mines are, 1.
That of Raolconda, in the province of Carnatica, five leagues from Golconda,
and eight or nine from Visapour. It has been discovered about 250 years. 2.
That of Gani, or Color, seven days journey from Golconda, eastwardly. It was
discovered about 170 years ago by a peasant; who, digging in the ground, found
a natural fragment of twenty-five carats. 3. That of Soumelpour, a large town
in the kingdom of Bengal, (...) the diamond-mine: this is the most ancient of
them (...). It should rather be called that of Goual, which is the name of the
river, in the sand whereof these stones are found. Lastly, The fourth mine, or
rather the second river, is that of Succudan, in the island of Borneo.

The most remarkable diamonds for (...) now known, are, that known in France
under the name of Grand Sancy, by corruption of cent six, which is one of the
crown jewels, weighing 106 carats; Governor Pitt's diamond, purchased by the
late Duke of Orleans for Louis XV. King of France, weighing 136 carats, and
said to be bought for 125,000l. the diamond of the Great Duke of Tuscany, which
weighs 139 carats; that of the Great Mogul, weighing 279 9-16ths carats; and
one mentioned by Mr. Jeffries, in ^^erchant's hands, weighing 242 1-16th carats.

According to Mr. Jeffries's rule, that the value of diamonds is in duplicate
ratio of their weights, and that a manufactured diamond of one carat is worth
at a medium 8l. the Great Mogul's diamond must be valued at above 624,962l.
this being the value of a diamond of 279 carats.

(52) This account of the magnificence of the Great Mogul, is found in many
travelers.

(53) Opossum, or Possum, the name of a very remarkable American animal, the
DIDELPAIS marsupialis of Linnaeus. Its tail is round, and a foot long, and is
of great service to it, as it uses (...) to twist round the branches of (...),
hanging itself (...) them by that means; the tail is (...) near the insertion,
but naked all the other part, co^^^^ with small scales, and is partly black,
partly of a brownish white; its hinder feet are considerably longer than the
fore ones, and each have five toes; they much resemble hands, and the nails are
white and crooked, the hinder one being, as in the monkey kind, the longest.

What distinguishes this creature from all the other animals of the world is,
that it has a bag or pouch into which it receives its young as soon as
delivered; this is a sort of open uterus, and is placed under the belly, near
the hinder legs; in this the young are sheltered till they are able to shift
for themselves; and when they begin to be strong enough, they frequently run
out and return in again. The creature is of a stinking smell, like our fox or
martin. It feeds on sugar canes, and some other vegetables; but not wholly on
the^^ (...) it frequently preys on birds which it catches on the (...), and
often plays the fox's trick of stealing poultry.

The male opssu^^ as well as the female, has this kind of pouch under its
^^elly, and takes upon himself, at times, the care of carry^^^ and preserving
the young, in case of any impending danger.

The flesh of the old animals is very good, like that of ae sucking pig; the
hair is dried by the Indian women, and wove into garters and girdles, and the
skin is very foetid. Cyclopoedia.

(54) There is a tree* called the Devil Tree, which grows in America; its
fruit, in a state of maturity, is elastic (...) and when dried by the heat of
the sun, noisily splits and bursts, and darts forth its grains. To this sport
of nature the tree owes its name, for at the moment of pursting, the effect of
small artillery is produced, the noise of which succeeds rapidly, and is heard
tolerably far off. If this fruit be transported before it be ripe to a dry
place, or exposed on a chimney-piece, to a gentle heat, it will have the same
effect, and produce the same phenomenon. -- M. de Bomare.

(55) Livy relates, how Sulpicius Gallus, lieutenant of Paulus AEmilius, in the
war against Persia, predicted an eclipse of the moon to the soldiers, which
should happen the next evening; and thus prevented the terror it would
otherwise have caused.

A total eclipse of the sun is a singular spectacle. Clavius, who saw that
which happened on the 21st of August, 1560, at Coimbre, tells us, that the
obscurity was, as he might say, greater, or at least more striking, than the
darkness of night; people could not see where to set a foot, and the birds fell
with terror to the earth. -- Encyclopoedia.

The Acudia is a flying and huminous insect, found in America, and suspected to
be the same with the cucuju or cocojus.

It is of the class of Scarabeus, of the bigness of the little finger, two
inches long, and so luminous, that when it flies by night, it spreads great
light. Some say, that if you rub the face with the humidity which issues, in
shining spots or stars, from this little living phosphorus, it will appear
resplendent. Before the arrival of the Spaniards, the Indians made no use of
candles, but of these insects to light their houses; by one of which of a
person may read or write as easily as by a lighted candle.

When the Indians walked in the ^^ght, they fixed one of them to each toe of
the foot, (...) ^^^ers to the hand. When taken, these insects do not (...)
^^bove three weeks at most; while they are in good health they are very
luminous, but their light decreases with their powers, and after they are dead
they shine no more. They are doubly useful, for they fly about the houses and
devour the g^ats.

It is uncertain whether the ac^di^^ i^ not the same insect as the
lantern-(...); so called, because the forepart of the head, whence the light
issues, has been called a lantern. -- Mademoiselle Merian Maria Sybilla Merian,
daughter of Matthew Merian, a famous engraver and geographer, was born in
Germany in 1647; and learnt from Abraham Minion, to paint flowers, fruits,
plants, and insects, in which she excelled. She understood Latin perfectly, and
made natural history her partilar study. She passed two years at Surinam,
fainting the insects of the country; and composed a work in German, called, A
History of the Insects of Europe, with Designs after nature; and an Account of
the different Metamorphosis of Insects, and of the Plants on which they feed.
She died at Amsterdam, aged 70, leaving two daughters, whom she had taught to
paint. One of them, especially, named Dorotha, was eminent for her knowledge
and abilities. -- Vie de Peintres, Tome. II.
who observed this sort of insect at Surinam, says, their light is so strong,
that one alone was sufficient, at each sitting, to paint the figure of the
insects of the country, which are engraved in her work.

There are shining flies found in Italy, or rather a species of Scarabeus,
about the size of a be, the belly of which is so luminous, that three of them,
enclosed in a tube of white glass, will light a chamber. M. l'Abbe Nollet has
proved, that the light of the insect extends over the place where it has been
crushed The ditches of Mantua are full of these insects, and the grass and
trees are covered with them, which, by night, produces a most agreeable effect.
. M. de Bomare.

The most singular Scarabeus is that described by M. Rolander. The first time
M. Rolander picked up this insect, which is phosphoric, there came a noise from
its body like that of fire arms, and a clear blue smoke. Another time he
pricked the insect with a pin, and it went off as many as twenty times
successively. -- M. Rolander opened the insect, and found a vacant bladder in
its body, but could not discover whether this was its reservoir for air, or
some intestine. This insect may be called the Bombardier. -- Dict. de Merv. de
la Not. Tome II.

(56) Manchineel Hypemanc, in botany, a genus of the Monoecia Adelphia class.

The wood of this tree is much esteemed for cabinet-work, being very durable,
taking a fine polish, and, as is said, not being eaten by worms; but the tree
abounding with a milky caustic juice, before if it felled, they make fires
round the trunk to burn out the juice, otherwise those who fell it would be in
danger of losing their sight by the juice flying into their eyes. Wherever the
juice touches the skin it raises blisters; and if it falls on linen, it turns
it black, and it washes into holes. The like danger to the eyes is to be
apprehended from the saw-dust: the workmen, therefore, generally cover their
faces with fine lawn.

The tree produces fruit, somewhat like a golden pippin, which, if ignorantly
eaten, inflames the mouth and throat to a great degree, and is very dangerous
to the stomach, unless timely medicines are applied. Dr. Peyssonel, in his
observations on this fruit, informs us, that the savages use the juice of it to
poison their arms, the wounds of which are thereby rendered mortal: that the
rain which washes off the leaves, causes bli^^ters to rise like boiling oil:
and that even the shade (...) the tree is fatal to those who sit under it.
Timely (...) vacuations, however, by purges and emetics, have prevented their
ill effects. -- Cyclopoedia.

The Cassada, or Cassava, is also a remarkable American shrub, from the ^oot of
which bread is made, though the juice expressed from the root to prepare it for
bread, will kill any animal that drinks it crude; as will the root eaten with
its juice. Yet this juice may be boiled over the fire till a great part is
evaporated; and the remainder, if it be far evaporated, will be sweet, and
serve in the place of honey. If less evaporated, and set by to ferment, it will
make a very good and wholesome vinegar. -- Cyclopoedia.

(57) The Mangle, or Manglier, is a true that grows in the West Indies, and
chiefly in the Antilles, toward the mouths of rivers.

Bunches of filaments part from its flexible branches, and hang to the earth,
where they take root, and grow into new trees, as large as those to which they
originally belonged, which again multiply in the same manner; so that a single
tree may become a forest. In the isle of Cayenne, the marshes are covered with
them; and oysters attach themselves to the foot and pendant branches, by
depositing their spawn on them, which adheres, grows, and as the tide ebbs and
flows, is sometimes in water, and sometimes in air.

There is another very singular tree, called the Fromager, or Saamona, which
grows in the Antilles as high as the pine. The top and bottom of the trunk are
of the thickness of common trees, while the middle is more than twice as thick.
The roots, which are very thick, shoot out of the earth seven or eight feet
high, and form a kind of buttresles around the trunk. It is called Fromager,
because its wood greatly resembles cheese: its fruit, when ripe, contains seed
of a dark red color, as large as small peace, and garnished with a kind of
pearl-grey cotton, extremely fine, shining, and silky to the touch; but the
filaments are so short it is very difficult to spin. The Indians use it as we
do down, for their ears and feet. -- M. de Bomare.

(58) The Gymnotus, or Electrical Eel, a kind of Tor^^do, is a fish well known
at Surinam. The common size ^^^rom three to four feet in length, and from ten
to fourteen feet in circumference. Some, however, it is said, have been seen in
the river Surinam, upwards of twenty feet long; and the stroke, or shock, of
which, was instant death.

(59) The Fountain Acadine is in Sicily, and is consecrated to the Palicii. A
miraculous property is attributed to this fountain. To know the sincerity of
oaths, they are written on tablets; if the tablets do not swim, the inference
is, the oaths are all false.

Argyra was a nymph of Thessaly. Celenus, her husband, seeing her ready to die,
fell himself into a kind of mortal languor. Venus, affected by their
tenderness, metamorphosed the one to a river, and the other to a fountain;
which, like Alpheus and Arethusa, were reunited by mingling their waters.
Celenus, at length, however, forgot Argyra; since when, if lovers drink of, and
bathe in his streams, they forget their love. -- Dict. de la Fable.

Baxion Spring, in the county of Derby, is intermittent, as Childrey says, in
his Curiosities of England, running only every quarter of an hour. Dict. des
Merv. de la Not. Tome I. page 339.

It must be supposed, Thelismar knew the phenomenon, and attentively counted
the minutes on his watch, without being perceived by Alphonso.

There are many other intermittent springs.

In Provence is a spring, which runs and stops eight times in an hour. -- The
spring of Frouganches, in the diocese of Nimes, runs and stops regularly twice
in twenty-four hours. -- The springs near Paderborn, called Buller-bares, are
said to run twelve hours, and stop twelve. -- That of Hautecombe, in Savoy,
runs and stops twice in the hour. -- Dict. des Merv. de la Not. Tome I.

At Bosely, near Wenlock, in Shropshire, there is a famous boiling Well, which
was discovered in June, 1711, by an uncommon noise in the night; so great, that
it awakened several people, who, being desirous to find what it was owing to,
at length found a boggy place under a little hill, not far from the Severn; and
perceiving a great shaking of the earth, and a little boiling up of water
through the grass, they took a spade, and digging up some part of the earth,
the water flew to a great height, and was set on fire by (...) candle. This
water was, for some time afterward constantly found to take fire, and burn
like spirit (...) wine; and after it was set on fire, it would boil the water
in a vessel sooner than any artificial fire, and yet the Spring itself was as
cold as any whatever. -- Cyclopoedia.

(61) There is a Mountain in Scotland, called Cork-head, which has the singular
property of being the highest Meridian in the Universe: its perpendicular
height is said to be above 400 fathoms. This mountain is split open to the very
top, by a crevice which faces the Sun at noon; and the two summits form a kind
of Dial, which indicates the hour, by shadow, on the opposite rocks. Precis
d'Hist. Not. par M. L'Abbe Saury, Tome I.

(62) Tho following is an extract of a letter, in which Dr. Troil gives an
account of his voyage to Iceland, to examine Mount Hecla:

The sky was clear, the water of the Lake resembled a looking-glass, and was
thrown up in eight different parts of the Lake, as from waterworks. I
particularly remarked one of these columns of water, which was from six to
eight feet in diameter, and thrown from eighteen to twenty-four feet high. The
water was extremely hot, and in six minutes, boiled us a bit of mutton and some
trout.

Reckum afforded us a similar spectacle. Some years since, the water was thrown
from sixty to seventy feet high; but the falling in of the earth, has stopped up
a part of the o^fice; and the water does not now rise higher than from
fifty-four to sixty feet.

When we came to Geiser, near Skalhot, we saw the water thrown, with
impetuosity, from a large mouth, and forming a Cascade, to which those of
Marly, S. Cloud, Cassell, or Herrenhaussen, cannot be compared. Here we
observed, in the circumference of a good league, forty or fifty Jets d' Eau,
boiling up, which, no doubt, came all from the same reservoir. The water of
some was very limpid, of others muddy: here it was a very fine red ochre, there
as white as milk. Some of the spouts were continual, others intermittent, etc.
We felt the earth tremble in many places. -- There was a column of water raised
ninety-two feet, etc. etc. Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres and des Arts,
Aure 1783, No. ^, Mercredi, 26 F^vrier.

(63) During the severe winter of 17^9, there was a Palace of Ice of fifty-two
feet and a half long, sixteen and a half wide, and twenty high, built at (...),
according to the most elegant rules of art. The (...), a neighboring (...),
afforded the ice, which was from two to three feet (...), and blocks of which
^hey cut out, and embellished with various ornaments. When built up, they
sprinkled them over with wa^er of various tints.

Before the Palace they placed six cannon, made of, and mounted with Ice, with
wheels of the same materials, and two bomb mortars. The caliber of the cannon
was equal to that in which they usually put three pounds of powder: they only
put a quar^er of a pound in these, after which they made a hempen bullet,
which, in the presence of the whole Court, pierced a board of two inches thick,
at the distance of 60 paces.

This renders credible what is reported by Olaus Magnus, a Northern Historian,
concerning fortifications of Ice, which, he assures us, certain nations made
use of, in cases of necessity.

An English philosopher made a curious experiment in 1763. He took a circular
piece of Ice, two feet nine inches in diameter, and six inches thick, of which
he formed a lens, exposed it to the sun beams, and set fire to gunpowder,
linen, paper, etc. -- M. de Bomare.

(64) The Silver Mine of Salseberist, in Sweden, is a most beautiful spectacle.
It has three large mouths like wells, (...) deep to see to the bottom. The half
of a barrel, (...) by a rope, serve^ for a staircase ^o descend these gulphs,
which is worked by a water machine; only one leg, and not (...) the body, is in
the barrel. The person who descends, has a companion as black as Vulcan, who
mournfully sings a gloomy song, holding a ^orch in his hand. About half way
down cold is severely felt, and torrents are heard tumbling on all sides. In
about half an hour they land, terror is dissipated, nothing fearful remains;
but, on the contrary, all is shining in these subterranean regions. They then
enter a kind of Grand Saloon, sustained by two columns of mine-silver. Four
spacious galleries surround it. The fires by which the people work are
reflected on the silver vaults, and in a brook which runs through the middle of
the mine. Here are seen people of all nations; some drawing carts, others
rolling stones, every body employed. It is a subterranean City; there are
houses, inns, stables, horses; and, what is more singular, a Windmill, worked
by a current of air, that raises the waters which might otherwise incommode the
miners.

There are various exhalations which produce various effects, to which the
miners give different names: that which they call wildfire, is seen much like
the spider's webs, or white threads, that are observed, riding in the air,
toward the end of summer. When this vapor is not sufficiently thin, it takes
fire at the lamps of the workmen, and produces effects similar to those of
lightning, or gunpowder. To prevent this, the workmen watch these white
threads, which they hear and see issuing from the crevices, seize them before
they reach their lamps, and crush them between their hands. When the quantity
is too great, they put out their lights, fall with their bellies to the ground,
and, by their cries, advertize their comrades to do the same; by which means
the inflamed matter passes over them, and hurts only those who have no^ taken
the same precautions, and who are therefore liable to be killed or wounded.

The most singular phenomenon these mineral exhalations present, is, that
which the miners name Balloon. This appears floating near the roof of the
mines, in the form of a round pocket, made of a spider's web. If the bag burst,
its contents expand through the mines, and kill all those that breathe it. --
M. de Bomare.

(65) Kraken, a most amazing large sea animal, seemingly of a crab-like form;
the credit of whose existence rests upon the evidence produced by Bishop
Pontopiddan, in his Natural History of Norway, published some few years since,
and though the reality of it cannot be denid, the relation will be thought to
require good authentication.

As a full-grown Kraken has never been seen in all its parts and dimensions, an
accurate survey of which must employ some time, and not a little motion, it is
impossible to give a complete description of one. Nevertheless, we shall submit
the probability of its existence, on the best information our author could
collect, which seems to have fixed his own belief of it; though, at the same
time, he acknowledges the account is very defective, and supposes a farther
information concerning the creature may be reserved for posterity.

Our Fishermen, says the author, unanimously and invariably affirm, that, when
they are several miles from the land, particularly in the hot summer days, and
by their distance, and the bearings of some points of land, expect from eighty
to a hundred fathoms deep, and do not find but from twenty to thirty, and more
especially if they find a more than usual quantity of cod and ling, they judge
that the Kraken is at the bottom; but if they find, by their lines, that the
water in the same place still shallows on them, they know he is rising to the
surface, and row off with the greatest expedition, till they come into the
usual soundings of the place; when, lying on their oars, in a few minutes the
monster emerges, and shows himself sufficiently, though his whole body does not
appear. Its back, or upper part, which seems an English mile and an half in
circumference, (some have affirmed more) looks at first like a number of small
islands, surrounded with something that floats like sea-weeds. At last, several
bright points, or horns, appear, which grow thicker, the higher they emerge,
and sometimes stand up as high and large as the masts of middle-sized vessels.
In a short time it slowly sinks, which is thought as dangerous as its rising;
as it causes such a swell and whirlpool, as draws every thing down with it,
like that of Male-strom. The Bishop justly regrets the omission of, probably,
the only opportunity that ever has, or may be presented, of surveying it alive,
or seeing it entire when dead. This, he informs us, once did occur, on the
credit of the Reverend Mr. Friis, Minister at Nordland, and Vicar of the
College for promoting Christian Kowledge; who informed him, that in 1680, a
Kraken, (perhaps a young and careless one, as they generally keep several
leagues from land) came into the waters that run between the rocks and cliffs
near Alstahong; where, in turning about, some of its long horns caught hold of
some adjoining trees, which it might easily have torn up, but that it was also
entangled in some clifts of the rocks, whence it could not extricate itself,
but putrefied on the spot. Our author has heard of no person destroyed by the
Monster, but relates a report of the danger of two fishermen, who came upon a
part of the water, full of the creature's thick slimy excrements (which he
voids for some months, as he feeds for some others); they immediately rowed
off, but were not quick enough, in turning, to save the boat from one of the
Kraken's horns, which so crushed the head of it, that it was with difficulty
they saved their lives on the wreck, though the weather was perfectly calm; the
Monster never appearing at other times. His excrement is said to be attractive
of other fish, on which he feeds; which expedient was probably necessary, on
account of his slow unwieldy motion, to his subsistence; as this slow motion
again may be necessary to the security of ships of the greatest force and
burden, which must be overwhelmed on encountering such an immense animal, if
his velocity was equal to his weight; the Norwegians supposing, that if his
arms, on which he moves, and with which he take his food, were to lay hold of
the largest man of war, they would pull it down to the bottom.

In confirmation of the reality of this animal, our learned author cites Debe's
description of Faroe, for the existence of certain islands, which suddenly
appear, and as suddenly vanish. Many seafaring men, he adds, give accounts of
such, particularly the North-Sea; which their superstition has either
attributed to the delusion of the Devil, or considered as inhabited by evil
spirits. But our honest historian, who is not for wronging the devil himself,
supposes such mistaken islands to be nothing but the Kraken, called by some,
the Sea Trolden or Sea Mischief; in which opinion he was greatly confirmed, by
the following quotation of Dr. Hierne, a learned Swede, from Baron
Grippenhielm; and which is certainly a very remarkable passage, viz. Among the
rocks about Stockholm, there is sometimes seen a tract of land, which, at other
times, disappears, and is seen again in another place. Buraeus has placed it as
an Island in his Map. The peasants, who call it Gummars Ore, say that it is not
always seen, and that it lies out in the open sea, but I could never find it.
One Sunday, when I was out amongst the rocks, sounding the coasts, it happened,
that in one place, I saw something like three points of land in the sea, which
surprised me a little, and I thought I had inadvertently passed them over
before. Upon this I called to a peasant, to enquire for Gummars Ore; but when
he came we could see nothing of it: upon which the peasant said, all was well,
and that this prognosticated a storm, or a great quantity of fish. To which our
author subjoins, Who cannot discover that this Gummars Ore, with its points,
and prognostications of fish, was the Kraken, mistaken by Buraeus for an
island, who may keep himself about that spot where he rises. He takes the
Kraken, doubtless, from his numerous tentaculi, which serve him as feet, to be
of the polype kind; and the contemplation of its enormous bulk, led him to
adopt a passage from Eccles. xliii. 31, 32, to it. Whether it may be intended
the Dragon that is in the sea, mentioned Isaiah xxvii. 1. we refer to the
conjecture of the reader. After paying but a just respect to the moral
character, the reverend function, and deligent investigations of our author, we
must admit the possibility of its existence, as it Implies no contradiction;
though it seems to encounter a general prepossession of the Whale's being the
largest animal on, or in, our globe; and the eradication of any long
prepossession is attended with something irksome to us. But were we to suppose
a Salmon or a Sturgeon, the largest fish any number of persons had seen or
heard of, and the Whale had discovered himself as seldom, and but in part, as
the Kraken, it is easy to conceive that the existence of the Whale had been as
indigestible to such persons then, as that of the Kraken may be to others now.
Some may incline to think, such an extensive Monster world encroach on the
symmetry of nature, and be over proportionate to the size of the globe itself;
as a little retrospection will inform us, that the breadth of what is seen of
(...), supposing him nearly round, must be ^^ll 2600 feet (if more oval, or
crab like, full 2000); and his thickness, (...) ^ay rather be called altitude,
at least 300; out author declaring, he has chosen the least circumference
mentioned of this animal for the greater certainty. These immense (...),
nevertheless we apprehend, will no^ argue conclusively ag^^ng the existence of
the animal, though considerably against a numerous increase o^ propagation of
it. In fact, the great scarcity of the Kraken, his confinement to the
North-Sea, and perhaps to equal latitudes in the South; the small number
propagated by the Whale, who is viviparous; and by the largest land animals, of
whom the Elephant is said to go near two years with young; all induce us to
conclude, from analogy, that this creature is not numerous; which coincides
with a passage in a manuscript, ascribed to Svere, King of Norway, as it is
cited by Ol^ Wormius, in his Museum, p. 280, in Latin, which we shall exactly
translate, There remains one kind, which they call Hafguse, whose magnitude is
unknown, as it is seldom seen. Those who affirm they have seen its body,
declare, it is more like an Island than a Beast, and that its carcass was never
found; whence some imagine, there are but two of the kind in nature, Whether
the vanishing island, Lemair, of which Captain Rodney went in search, was a
Kraken, we submit to the fancy of our readers. In fine, if the existence of the
creature is admitted, it will seem a fair inference, that he is the scarcest as
well as largest in our world; and that if there are larger in the universe,
they probably inhabit some sphere or planet, more extended than our own. Such
we have no pretense to limit; and that fiction can devise a much greater than
this, is evident, from the Cock of Mahomet, and the Whale in the Bava Bathra of
the Talmud, which were intended to be credited; and to either of which our
Kraken is a very shrimp in dimensions. -- Cyclopoedia.

(66) Pliny has mentioned an extraordinary effect of oil, in stilling the
surface of the water, when it is agitated with waves; and the use made of it,
by the Diverse, for that purpose.

Dr. Franklin was led, by an accidental observation made at sea, in 1757, to
attend particularly to Pliny's account; and the various information which he
afterward received relating to it, induced him to try some experiments on the
subject. Standing on the windward side of a large pond, the surface of which
was rendered very rough with the wind, he poured a tea-spoonful of oil on the
water. This small quantity produced an instant calm over a space of several
yards square, which spread amazingly, and extended itself gradually, till it
reached the Ice-side, making all that quarter of the pond, perhaps half an
acre, as smooth (...) looking-glass, On rep^^^ing this experiment, which
constantly succeeded, one circumstance struck him with particular surprise;
this was the sudden, wide, and forcibly spreading of a drop of oil on the face
of the water, which, he adds, "I do not know that any body has considered."

When a drop of oil is put on a looking-glass, or polished marble, it spreads
very little; but on water it instantly expands into a circle, extending several
feet in diameter, becoming so thin as to produce the prismatic colors, for a
considerable space, and beyond them so much thinner as to be invisible, except
in its effects of smoothing the waves at a much greater distance. It seems says
Dr. Frahklin, as if a mutual repulsion between its particles took place as soon
as it touched the water, and a repulsion so strong as to act on other bodies,
swimming on the surface, as straws, leaves, etc. forcing them to recede every
way from the drop, as from a center, leaving a large clear space. The quantity
of this force, and the distance to which it will operate, the author says, he
has not yet ascertained; but he thinks it a curious enquiry, and wishes to
understand whence it arises.

Upon the whole, there is great room to suppose, (notwithstanding the partial
failure of an experiment made at Portsmouth, by Dr. Franklin, and others) that
seafaring people may derive advantages from using oil, on particular occasions,
in order to moderate the violence of the waves, or to lessen the surf, which
sometimes renders the landing on a lee-shore dangerous or impracticable.

To this purpose we are informed, that the captain of a Dutch East India ship,
being overtaken by a storm, found himself obliged, for greater safety in
wearing the ship, to pour oil into the sea, to prevent the waves breaking over
her, which had an excellent effect, and succeeded in preserving her. --
Cyclopoedia.

(67) Spider, a genus of the optera order of insects. The characters of which
are, that they have eight feet and eight eyes; ^he mouth is furnished with two
claws; the two palpi are articulated; and the anus is provided with papillae,
or nipples, for weaving. Linnaeus enumerates 47 species.

Of the Spider, we have a great number of species common among us, which all
agree in the general marks and characters.

They all have weapons issuing out of the mouth; but these are of two kinds,
according to the two principal distinctions of the Spiders. They consist, in
some, of two spicula, in the manner of a forked hook; this is their structure
in all the kinds which have eight eyes. In others they are composed of two
forcipated arms, or are divided into two claws, in the manner of the legs of a
crab; these are the weapons of all those Spiders which have only two eyes.

The belly of the Spider is remarkably divided from the head and shoulders, so
as to adhere only by a thread: this is the case in all except the two-eyed
kinds; and in the different species the body is variously painted.

Spiders frequently cast their skins, which may be found in the webs, perfectly
dry and transparent; and from such skins the forceps, or claws, for they are
always shed with the skins, may easier be separated, and examined with much
greater exactness, than in the common Spider, while living.

The Spider's manner of weaving its web is very wonderful. The creature has
five little teats, or nipples, near the extremity of the tail: from these there
proceeds a gummy liquor, which adheres to every thing it is pressed against;
and being drawn out, hardens instantly in the air, and becomes a string or
thread strong enough to bear five or six times the weight of the Spider's body.
This thread is composed of several finer ones, which are drawn out separately,
but unite together at two or three hair-breadths distance from the creature's
body. These threads are finer or coarser, according to the bigness of the
Spider that spins them. Mr. Leuwenhoeck has computed, that a hundred of the
single threads of a full-grown Spider, are not equal to the diameter of the
hair of his beard; and, consequently, if the threads and hair be both round,
ten thousand such threads are not bigger than such a hair. He calculates
farther, that when young Spiders first begin to spin, four hundred of them are
not larger than one which is of a full growth; allowing which, four millions of
a young Spider's threads are not so big as the single hair of a man's beard. --
Cyclopaedia.

(68) Polype, or Polypus, a fresh water insect, belonging to the genus of
HYDRA, in the class of worms, and order of Zoophytes, in the Linnaean System;
which, when cut into a number of separate pieces, becomes, in a day or two, so
many distinct and separate animals; each piece having the surprising property
of producing a head and tail, and the other organs necessary for life, and all
the animal functions.

The production of its young is, indeed, different from ^he common course of
nature in other animals: for the young one issues from the side of its parent,
in form of a small pimple or protuberance, which lengthening and enlarging
every hour, becomes, in about two days, a perfect animal, and drops from off
its parent to shift for itself: but before it does this, it has often another
growing from its side; and sometimes a third from it, even before the first is
sepaparated from its parent.

If the method of this little animal's producing its young be very amazing, its
reproduction of the several parts, when cut off, is much more so. The discovery
of this was perfectly accidental; for M. Trembley, who had often met with the
creature in the water, and from its fixed residence in one place, and some
other observations, not being able to determine whether it were an animal or a
vegetable, made the trial by cutting it asunder, when, to his amazement, he
found, that in a few days each of those pieces was become a perfect animal, the
head part having shot forth a tail, and the tail a head.

A thousand other trials, by cutting the animal in different manners, first by
M. Trembley, and afterward, at his request, by M. Reaumur, and Bernard de
Jussie^, at Paris, and Mr. Folks, Mr. Baker, and the other Naturalists in
England, were the result of this; and all succeeded in the same manner by those
who repeated them.

The several strange properties rocorded of this animal, though very
surprising, are, however, none of them peculiar to it alone. The Surinam Toad
is well known to produce its young, not in the ordinary way, but in cells upon
its back. Mr. Sherwood has, very lately, discovered the small eels in sour
paste, to be each, without exception, full of living young ones. And as to the
most amazing of all its properties, the reproduction of its parts, we know the
crab and lobster, if a leg be broken off, always produce a new one: and M.
Bonet, M. L^onet, M. de Reaumur, and Mr. Folks, have all found on experiment,
that several earth and water worms have the same property, some of them even
when cut into thirty pieces. The urtica marina, or sea-nettle, has been also
found to have the same: and the sea star-fish, of which the Polype is truly a
species, though it had long escaped the searches of the Naturalists, was always
well known by the fishermen to have it also. -- Cyclopoedia.

(69) The Toucan is a very singular bird, particularly for the largeness and
disproportionate length of its beak, which, far from being a useful instrument,
is only, says M. de Buffon, a mass to lift which hinders the flight of the
bird. This excessive and useless beak enclo^es a tongue more useless, nor
fleshy or cartilaginous, but a real feather, and certainly very ill placed. Its
name, Toucan, signifies feather in the Brasilian tongue.

The To^cans are spread through all the hot climates of Southern America: its
plumage is very beautiful.

(70) The Kamichi is a large black bird of America, "very remarkable," says M.
de Buffon, for the strength of its cry, and of its arms. It carries, on each
wing, two powerful spurs, and on its head a pointed crown, of three or four
inches long, and two or three lines in diameter at its base, etc. -- M. Buffon.

(71) Travelers speak of a sort of Bats, in Golconda, bigger than hens. -- In
Brasil there is a large species of this animal, which if men lie asleep with
their legs naked, will; it is said, make a wound in them so gently as not to
wake them, but so deep, that they will suck the blood at it, and leave the
person in some danger of bleeding to death. -- Cyclopoedia.

(72) The Wax-tree is a shrub of which there are two species; the one grows in
Louisiana, the other in Carolina. This shrub has the appearance of myrtle, and
its leaves are nearly of the same color. Its berries about the bigness of
coriander-seed, contain kernels covered with a kind of raisin: this has some
resemblance to wax, and the inhabitants make it into candles. -- M. de Bomare.

(73) Sensitive Plant, in Botany. The structure of which is this: from the
large stems, or main branches of the whole, there part off several other lesser
ones, and from these there grow off others still less, which, by way of
distinction, may be called the ribs of the leaves, as they serve to support a
number of leaves arranged on each side, and standing on short pedicles in pairs
over against one another. Several other plants have this sort of compound
leaves, as the cassia, colutea, and the like; and all these shut their leaves
together at night, and open them again in the morning, in the same manner as
the Sensitive Plant does. The periodical opening and shutting of the leaves are
therefore common to many plants, not peculiar to the Sensitive Plant; but the
marvel in this is, that beside having this ^^tion periodical and regular, it is
to be brought on at other times, and by accidents, there requiring no more than
the touching the plant, to make it close its leaves at any time of the day,
which it soon afterward naturally opens again. This is peculiar to this plant,
and resembles the action of an animal, which had been injured or frighted.

Mr. Ellis has lately described a Sensitive Plant, which is a native of the
Swamps, in North Carolina, called Dionea Muscipula, or Venus's Fly^trap; and
which, from his account of it, appears to be the most animated of the whole
sensitive tribe of vegetables. Its sensibility exists in its leaves, each of
which exhibits, in miniature, the figure of a rat-trap, with teeth closing on
every fly, or other insect, that is tempted to taste the sweet liquor, which is
supposed to be secreted in certain minute red glands, that cover its inner
surface; but before it has had time to taste it, the lobes of the leaves rise
up, and enclose and grasp the invader; and he is soon deprived of his life, by
the action of three small erect spines, fixed near the middle of each lobe; nor
do the leaves open again, while the dead animal continues there. The same
effect is produced by a straw, or pin.

(74) Fraxinella, or white Dittany, is a plant which grows sporaneously in the
woods of Languedoc, Province Italy, and Germany. The extremities of the stalks,
(...) ^^etals of the flowers, produce a quantity of essential oil, (...) may
easily be shown by the microscope. Morning and evening, during the summer, it
sends forth (...) inflammable vapors in such abundance, that were a lighted
candle put at the foot of the plant, it would suddenly be all in a flame, and
form a very curious kind of burning b^sh. -- M. de bomare.

(75) The Amianthus, is a fostile substance, composed of very fine threads, and
is found of various colors. From these threads a cloth is made, which fire
wall not consume: on the contrary it is thrown into the fire to be purified
from any dirty or extraneous matter, though it loses a little of its weight
each time it is thus washed. Among the ancient Greeks and Romans, they bound
the bodies of their Kings in cloth, made of the Amianthus, to prevent the ahtes
mingling with the materials of the funeral fire. It is very proper for wicks to
burn in oil, because it is not liable to any change which might impede the
light. The Pagans used it in their sepulchral lamps. -- M. de Bomare.

FINIS

