ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET, CONTAINING THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN The Honorable JOHN
JAY, Secretary for Foreign Affairs; AND LEWIS LITTLEPAGE, Esquire, OF VIRGINIA;
AT PRESENT Chamberlain and Secretary of the Cabinet of his Majesty the King of
Poland.

BONIS NOCET QUI MALIS PARCIT. NEW YORK: PRINTED and SOLD by FRANCIS CHILD'S, at
the Corner of WALL and WATER-STREETS.

INTRODUCTION.
AS it seem, it has not been thought either indecent or unfair to renew the
attacks upon Mr. Littlepage's character, in his absence, it is become
necessary, to make a general collection of the successive publication of that
gentleman. Answers will be found in them to every thing which has been
advanced, or can be further said upon the subject of his contest with Mr. Jay,
as far as relates to the original letters, on either part. As these letters
have been lately published, and may now be had of the Printer, a re-publication
of them is judged unnecessary.
At the same time a short preliminary recapitulation of the circumstances which
preceded and led to the discussion, will serve to place, in the clearest point
of view, not only the propriety and consistency, but even necessity of his
conduct, in the appeal which he first made to the Public.

On the 18th of November, 1785, Mr. Littlepage arrived in New York, and the
same day wrote the following letter to Mr. Jay.

Maiden-Lane, 18th Nov. 1785. SIR,
I Had the honor to call at your Excellency's house this evening, to pay you my
respects, and at the same time to inform you that every exertion has been made,
on my part, to acquit myself of my pecuniary obligations toward you. I am
sorry to add, that accumulated embarassments prevented me from accomplishing it
before my departure from Virginia, where I arrived only in July last, and am at
present on my return to Europe.

I have, however, taken explicit arrangements with my uncle on that head, and
am AUTHORIZED to make you the most possitive assurances on his part, that your
re-imbursement shall not be delayed longer than circumstances render
unavoidable. I have the honor to be, etc. etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

The Hon. John Jay.

To that letter Mr. Littlepage received no answer, and although he afterward
repeatedly saw Mr. Jay, nothing further passed upon the subject; the only
conclusion which he could draw from that conduct, was, that Mr. Jay was
satisfied with the assurances he had received, or did not think personal
engagements from Mr. Littlepage necessary; such, if requested, he was ready and
willing to take, as both his time and circumstances then permitted.

On the 25th November, Mr. Littlepage sent to Mr. Jay, in quality of Secretary
for foreign affairs, a letter of recommendation in his favor from his CATHOLIC
MAJESTY, addressed to his Excellency the President of Congress; accompanied by
several other letters from different Generals in the service of Spain and
France. Mr. Jay having in consequence intimated to Mr. Littlepage, that it
would be proper for him, at the same time, to communicate his views and desires
from Congress, he replied by the following letter.

SIR,
THE Minister of his Catholic Majesty will deliver to you different letters of
recommendation in my favor, which I request may be laid before Congress, and
the originals, or attested copies of them, returned to me. Encouraged by the
condescension of a great and benevolent King, who has deigned to recommend me
to Congress, the request which I take the liberty of making to them, will not,
I hope, be deemed importunate or presumptuous.

The character of a CITIZEN of AMERICA, I consider as the first of titles; to
serve my country is my highest ambition, to merit her esteem would be my
noblest recompense; but as America has happily no farther occasion for the
exertions of military zeal, Congress, I hope, will not think my conduct
inconsistent with the duty of a citizen of the United States, when I inform
them that my intention is to return to Europe, where some years of my future
life will be devoted to the service of a monarch. The name of the KING of
POLAND reflects sufficient honor upon all who boast his patronage: Of his
esteem, at least, I should think myself assured, under the sanction of a
recommendation from Congress.

Permit me then, Sir, to request, that you will officially notify to Congress
that, if not incompatible with the principles of the constitution, or their
resolutions, I humbly petition them to honor me with a letter of
recommendation, addressed to his POLISH MAJESTY. I have the honor to be, etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

The Hon. John Jay, Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

Congress having referred the abovementioned letters to the Secretary for
foreign affairs to report, Mr. Littlepage earnestly pressed him to terminate
the affair, as he could, for no consideration, (...) his return to Europe by
the (...) packet, which would sail on the 6th December. After waiting in
anxious expectation (...) the ^st December, he was surprised at receiving the
following note from Mr. Jay.

Mr. Jay presents his compliments to Mr. Littlepage, and requests to be
informed whether his Catholic Majesty conferred upon him any commission or
other reward for his services; and also, whether Mr. Littlepage holds any, and
what military commission. -- As Mr. Littlepage's letter and those which
accompanied it are referred to Mr. Jay to report, he wishes to have accurate
information upon these points.

Office for Foreign Affairs, 1st Dec. 1785.

Only the demand respecting any reward from the Catholic King, could be either
proper or necessary; -- and upon that point Mr. Jay stood in need of no
information; -- Mr. Littlepage, however, returned an explicit and satisfactory
answer to the whole: His uneasiness having been increased at being informed
that an adjournment of Congress would take place in two days time, from that
absence of some of the members, he wrote to Mr. Jay, informing him of that
circumstance, entreating him to consider the emergency of his affairs and
re-iterating his solicitations for him to send in his report to Congress
immediately.

In the evening of the 2d December Mr. Littlepage was informed that the
adjournment of Congress had that day taken place, and nothing had been done in
his business!!!

He then began to penetrate into the mystery of Mr. Jay's conduct; but, however
shocked at a similar prostitution of public duty to private animosity, he
confined his expostulations to a letter, requesting Mr. Jay "to return him, if
possible, the papers in question, as he was still under the necessity of not
postponing his voyage to Europe, where the loss of them might be infinitely
prejudicial to him." He concluded by entreating Mr. Jay to remember, "that
those honorable attestations of his conduct were his only reward for some
severe service, and, at least, a disinterested zeal in the cause of his
country: -- It could not surely be consistent with the INTENTIONS OF CONGRESS,
or, he hoped, with Mr. Jay's feelings, that he should be DEPRIVED OF EVEN THEM."

The day following he received an answer, informing him that the letters had
been sent to Congress, and could not be returned without their order. -- The
answer was on Saturday; -- the packet was to sail on Monday; -- Congress no
longer existed as a body; -- the cruel alternative to which Mr. Littlepage was
then reduced is too obvious to need farther explanation.

The state of his affairs in Europe would not, however, as yet permit him to
hesitate upon the choice he had to make; but immediately after a new mine was
sprung against him: the same day, without the least previous notice, or even a
demand having ever been made upon him, Mr. Littlepage was arrested in his
lodging, at the suit of Mr. Jay, for the sum due to him by Bon. Lewis, Esquire late
guardian to Mr. Littlepage.

Such an insult to any gentleman would have loudly called for vengeance and
reparation; but in that instance it was attended with many aggravating
circumstances: -- Mr. Littlepage was informed that the most malicious
insinuations against him had been infused into the minds of all disposed to
listen to them: in a word, that the whole of Mr. Jay's proceedings was the
result of a deelared enmity and premeditated design to injure, and, if
possible, disgrace him in the eyes of the public.

Thus persecuted, insulted, and justly exasperated, Mr. Littlepage at last
resolved, notwithstanding the public character of his enemy, to call him to a
severe account; in consequence he sent him a challenge, which was refused: he
then resolved to appeal to the public, but by the mediation of a worthy friend
to both parties, he was induced to demand once more an explanation: in
consequence he wrote the following letter to Mr. Jay:

Maiden-Lane, 4th Dec. 1785. SIR,
BEFORE I proceed to the last extremity, that is, an appeal to the public, be
pleased to inform me whether you choose to enter into a discussion more
consistent with the character and ideas of a gentleman. You must be convinced
from every preceding circumstance, that I can put but one construction upon
your late extraordinary conduct, which is, a premeditated design to injure and
disgrace me. If such was your intention, I certainly am at liberty to justify
myself, and perhaps to retort upon you.

I shall be happy to find myself mistaken, and if you will condescend to
explain your conduct, many disagreeable things may be yet avoided. Your answer
will be definitive. In the mean time, etc. etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

John Jay, Esquire.

To this letter Mr. Jay, probably mistaking the motives which had dictated it,
returned the insolent answer which he has caused to be printed. Yet still,
prevailed upon by the entreaties of the same friend, Mr. Littlepage once more
had the moderation (perhaps weakness) to write to him again as follows:

SIR,
I Have received your answer to my note, and before the irrevocable step of a
publication is yet taken, be pleased to answer me one question: "Why did you
not answer my letter to you upon my arrival here, in which I repeated the
assurances of my guardian to discharge his debt to you? -- Mine it is not; and
you are too well acquainted with the laws of your country not to know that I
cannot personally be accountable for sums advanced for me while under age, upon
the credit of my guardian. But that apart; -- Why was your suit delayed during
my past residence in this city, and only brought the day before I intended to
embark for Europe, upon affairs of the greatest emergency?

As to your declining a correspondence with me from motives which have
reference to former affairs, there is little confidence to be placed in your
professions, or they ought to have been long since buried in oblivion.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.
5th Dec. 1785.
John Jay, Esquire.

As much a stranger to moderation as modesty, Mr. Jay again mistook the
principle of that letter, and had the impertinence to return it unanswered. The
same day Mr. Littlepage met him in the public street -- they were both unarmed
-- Mr. Littlepage branded him with the name of COWARD -- he saved himself by
flight.

ANSWER TO A PAMPHLET, Containing the CORRESPONDENCE between the Hon. Mr. JAY,
and LEWIS LITTLEPAGE, Esquire.
QUOUSQUE TANDEM ABUTERE PATIENTIA NOSTRA?
Warsaw, 1st June, 1786.
A PAMPHLET, containing my private correspondence with John Jay, Esquire, and
published since my departure from America, has been transmitted to me.

Confidence in the justice and impartiality of my country first induced me to
appeal to her solemn tribunal; malice, persecution and insult, united in
rendering recrimination on my part but a just defense, and I have still more,
the satisfaction to think that I have given an useful lesson to the world, by
unmasking a character, which hypocrisy and dissimulation had so long concealed.
The shafts of calumny, I dare hope, have been long blunted against my fame; and
I should think myself degraded by entering into a further juftification, was it
not to convince my fellow-citizens, that no situation in the European world can
diminish the submission and respect which I shall ever pay to their judgment:
To merit their esteem will ever be my highest ambition; my first duty is, to
leave on unspotted name amongst them.

Had the publication of my correspondence with Mr. Jay been unsoiled by his
observations, I should have thought it needed on my part neither comment nor
defense. It commences at an age, when few inferences are to be drawn from
either opinion or conduct, which can justly affect the heart or morals. If,
instead of the effusions of a warm and grateful mind, that zeal for my country,
that ardour for military fame, and enthusiastic sense of honor, which even my
connection with Mr. Jay could not extinguish, mine had been replete with the
imprudent sallies and inconsequential errors so common to my age; surely the
voice of candor would still hesitate to decide, until maturity should either
fix or obliterate the stain, which only at a certain period becomes indelible.
If it was intended to prove that I once thought differently of Mr. Jay, I
entreat the Public to observe that I have never ceased to avow it; at an age of
error I certainly esteemed him.

The second part approaches nearer to manhood. It contains some ripened ideas
upon Mr. Jay, joined to some warm expostulations with him for his conduct
toward me, dictated by sentiments as void of art as the expressions which
convey them. But there, too, his malignity has been baffled to point out one
line which can be justly construed into a breach of honor, and still less of
probity, Even the pitiful subterfuge which he at last found, may be considered
as no light encomium upon my character. I am accused, it seems, of having dared
to reproach him with injustice and cruelty, during a scene of distress,
Alluding to my situation in Minorca, and my letters to him in consequence.
which will for ever remain engraved in my memory. Does he from thence, too,
pretend a fresh claim to my gratitude? Would not his conduct, on the contrary,
have even justified me, in considering every past obligation as cancelled, and
might I not here appeal to the sympathy and indignation of the world?

Upon another occasion, I recollect, he has insinuated that I acted the part of
an incendiary, to pay court to him, and render his advances more liberal. He
will hardly deny, that at the period alluded to, I stood in infinitely more
need of his liberality, and still the public has seen that I proved, at best,
but a snarling courtier. I confess I am even at a loss to conceive his motives
for laying that part of our correspondence before the public; was it to prove
his generosity, or PATRIOTISM? In the first instance, a youth of no unpromising
dispositions, confided to his care and friendship, who had been guilty of no
dishonorable, or even imprudent act, -- at whose reputation, on the contrary,
he himself rejoiced; Vide his first letter to me at Mahon, No. 27 of his
pamphlet. "You are well spoken of, and I rejoice to hear it." That letter was
written after he had protested my bill in favor of Mr. Harrison; although
without even acquainting me with that circumstance.
-- ought surely to have had some claim to the common rights of humanity, if
not to friendship and indulgence.

The conclusion resulting from the second state of the question is infinitely
more serious: in that I am to be considered only in the character of a citizen
of America; -- the first ever recognized as such by the court of Spain, at a
most critical era in politics; -- the first Protestant who was ever publicly
authorized to serve in the army of the Catholic King: -- In a word, placed in a
situation which, insignificant as I was, had attracted the attention of part of
Europe upon me: -- at a juncture like that, did it become A MINISTER OF THE
UNITED STATES, after having himself solicited my admission into the family of
the commander in chief, both from the minister of state, Vide his letter to the
court of Florida-Blanca, of the 17th, and to the Count de Montmorin, of the
24th of June, 1781, contained in No. 14.
and the ambassador of France; after acknowledging the service, Vide his letter
to Benjamin Lewis, Esquire No, 14, "Gentlemen of weight and distinction advised me
to consent to his going," and adding "that it would serve the American cause,"
and just before, "so popular did his application soon promise, and indeed begin
to be, that some, on whose attachment he had no great reason to rely, etc. etc."
alluding, I suppose to Mr. Carmichael.
which I rendered to my country; did it become him, I again repeat, to abandon
me, deprive me of all credit and resources, and reduce me to the hard necessity
of rearing, in the midst of the campaign, or derogating from my own honor and
the dignity of my country, by imploring the charity of strangers? -- These
considerations were so obvious that the only citizen of America at hand,
although personally almost a stranger to me, nobly exerted himself in what had
then become a public cause; whilst the representative of Congress, with the
trifling salary of 2,500 l. sterling per annum, held back, and affected to
cavil at expressions, until finding the campaign drawing toward a conclusion,
and himself in want of a private secretary, he condescended to forgive my
complaints, and, by an unheard of effort of generosity, made me a remittance of
20 guineas.

For my own part, although I regard the campaign in Minorca as the severest
trial of my youth, I shall ever look back to it with the pleasing sensations of
a mind unconscious of reproach, and even elate with triumph. At that crisis, I
confess, I considered myself as much a representative of my country as her
well-paid minister; -- That idea alone added enthusiasm to ambition; -- the
latter may lead to glory, but the first urges to martyrdom. Perhaps, I may add,
considering my situation, the motives which animated me, and the difficulties I
had to encounter, my countrymen may conceive ideas of my principles and
character very different from those which my adversary has long labored to
infuse. In justice, however, to the many elevated characters who honored-me
with their friendship in the army of Spain, I must declare, that, could I have
submitted even to accept their pressing and reiterated offers, that part of my
discussion with Mr. Jay would have been abridged, and the public not exposed to
the indecency of seeing even my servant's accounts laid before them. Vide No.
^5, and some others of his pamphlet, in which he has inserted (...) of my
mental expenses, which I had transmitted to him, in (...) satire upon his own
economical littleness.


As to the general sentiments expressed in my letters to him, our relative
situations will sufficiently explain them. I shall confine my observations to
such parts as have reference to the dispute, which has too long engaged the
public attention.

With respect to my letter of the 15th June, 1781, I can only repeat what I
have advanced in my publication of the 7th Dec. last, in which the secret
springs of Mr. Jay's political machine are displayed to view. That I was most
egregiously duped in the whole of that transaction I have never scrupled to
confess: -- without (unfortunately) entertaining at that time the smallest
doubt upon Mr. Jay's veracity. I certainly expected a more explicit answer from
him to accusations which I had produced upon his own authority: That letter, he
does not deny, was written at his own request, to serve as a proof of the
charges contained in it, in defense of BOTH OUR CHARACTERS: Vid. No. 35, of my
letters to him from Mahon, p. 35.36, "Was not (...) of the ^5th June written at
your own request, to serve as a proof of the (...) to, in defense of both our
characters? -- (...) so (...) forgotten."
consequently the same motives, which rendered such testimony of importance to
him, gave me a right to expect that his reply would be so far consonant to it
as to afford me the same advantage. His manner of evading it is equally
singular and characterisic: "As to the minute particulars you mention, MY
FEELINGS ARE TOO MUCH AWAKENED TO HAZARD any other reflection on them at
present, etc." Vid. No. 13, p. 13, it his answer to my letter of the 15th June.
Does this convey the most distant hint of his requiring further proof of those
facts, or doubting of their authenticity? Does not, on the contrary, his
expression of fearing to hazard a reply upon a subject, which had too much
awakened his feelings, imply that he avoided entering into it, lest,
notwithstanding his natural apathy, he should be transported beyond the bounds
of decorum? This artful display of warmth and sympathetic indignation, it is
evident was calculated to play upon my passions, to sooth and blind me to his
purpose.

That he may not, however, be again led into an error, which has already proved
fatal to him, of relying too much upon his supposed invisibility in similar
transactions, I shall once more condescend to answer his arguments upon that
letter.

The paragraph which he has selected from the rest to display his logic, is
that in which I mention that "attempts were made to render me discontented with
him, and at the same time to seduce me into pursuits which would tend to
prejudice me in his opinion." The latter part I explained in a short note upon
my publication of the 7th December, to which I must refer. "Gallantry:" -- The
recording angel, I hope, has dropped a tear and blotted it out forever.
As to the attempts alluded to in another sense, since it seems the most
trifling of my juvenile adventures are of importance to the public, they were
briefly these. In the course of my correspondence with Mr. Jay, it has been
that I frequently instance, as one of the motives which first induced me to
leave his family, the painful obscurity in which I was secluded, and which I
even regarded as an obstacle to my political hopes. Vide No. 35. my letter to
Benjamin Lewis, Esquire
In one of my letters, I expressly declare that all intercourse with Spaniards
was at that time difficult, and, to me, really IMPOSSIBLE. Vide the same letter.
Consequently the information which I then gave Mr. Jay of Mr. Carmichael's
machinations against him in Madrid, must have amounted to very little. In the
mean time I was not absolutely upon such terms with Mr. Carmichael as to
exclude common civility between us; and he even more than once, apologized for
not introducing me into the circle of his acquaintances, under pretext that it
would give umbrage to Mr. Jay. The latter, I must add, he frequently
insinuated, had his reasons for not procuring me more extensive connexions. But
whether he believed these motives to proceed from a system of economy or
politics, for every thing had a tincture of the latter, I really cannot
determine. For my own part, I should never have construed those inuendos into
attempts to render me discontented with Mr. Jay, had he not at the same time
informed me that Mr. Carmichael labored to prepossess even him against me, by
false and insidious reports. Vide my letter of the 15th June -- "The most
infamous falsehoods have been reported even to, YOURSELF by the same cruel and
perfidious author," etc.
Such is the duplicity, such the want of honor and probity, for which a
PRESIDENT of CONGRESS, a MINISTER PLENIPOTENTIARY and SECRETARY of STATE, has
arraigned a boy of seventeen before the tribunal of the American public!

But to return once more to the point in question: Whatever might have been Mr.
Carmichael's views in his insinuations to me, I confess I never thought I had
reason to complain of Mr. Jay in that particular. The universal disgust which
that able negociator had sound means to inspire into all ranks of Spaniards,
had reduced him to almost a state of solitude in the midst of the most
hospitable capital of Europe. Even that circumstance contributed to inslame his
jealousy and resentment against Mr. Carmichael, to whose intrigues he imputed
it; and it must be confessed the personal address, and insinuating talents of
the latter, formed a most striking contrast with his own awkward dignity and
natural phlegm. Never, I cannot forbear observing, was a negotiation conducted
with such frivolous, and sometimes ridiculous circumstances, as that which Mr.
Jay at last terminated, like the defense of his character, in, literally,
NOTHING. Systems adopted and changed -- plots, counter-plots, and machinations
of every kind employed; -- in short, every wheel of political machinery put in
motion -- not to penetrate the Spanish ministry, but his own secretary!!! The
object, after all, seldom extended beyond conjectures upon a conversation, or
conclusions from a visit. The latter, particularly, were deemed of such
importance, that one would have thought the treaty between America and Spain
depended more upon visiting-cards In one of Mr. Jay's shortest letters to
Congress, of 80 pages in folio, I remember he dwells particularly upon the
important circumstance of his having "drank a dish of chocolate" with D.
Bernardo del Campo, first under secretary.
than minisierial propositions. The public will easily conceive this in a
genius so universal and comprehensive, who could at once attend to the great
interests of the country he represented, and to my servants accounts; who could
at the same time discuss the articles of a treaty, and write me a letter in
forty pages, to prove what he ought to have said six months before.

But, after having so greatly contributed to the amusement and edification of
the public by this display of his character and eloquence, in his dissertation
upon one part of my letter, why has he passed over the remainder in silence?
The paragraph which follows is no less worthy of attention: " The most infamous
falsehoods have been reported even to yourself by the SAME PERFIDIOUS AND CRUEL
AUTHOR." How did I come to the knowledge of these falsehoods reported to
himself? He has quoted an anecdote, related in terms as ambiguous and obscure
as the recesses of his soul: For my part, I recollect nothing of it; but even
admitting the fact to have been such as he has stated, it is one instance; I
speak in the plural number: Did he ever object to this severe and direct
accusation, for which, at least, I could have no other authority than his
information? Did he ever blame, or request me to mitigate the harsh terms of
INFAMOUS FALSEHOODS, reported to HIMSELF, by a CRUEL and PERFIDIOUS AUTHOR, if
all that had only reference to one charge, which he himself had occasioned, and
of which, to use his own words, "he did not believe Mr. Carmichael capable,"
and still more, " in which that gentleman had acted a part both HONORABLE and
FRIENDLY to me?" To extinguish animosities, and, above all, to rectify the
mistakes which occasion them, is a duty to heaven and to mankind: But to kindle
the flame of discord, to urge one man on to mortal enmity against another by
false accusations, afterward to deny the fact, affect to misunderstand words,
torture the sense, and consign the whole to the public under a false coloring
-- merits an epithet which, fortunately for society, is only to be found in the
name of JAY.

Frown, frown! -- for blush thou can not!

After all, I must confess, I might have found some difficulty in extricating
myself from this snare without the authority of his letter of the 29th Dec.
1781, * part of which I have quoted in my former publication. His defense of
that letter, it seams, is confined to one short negative assertion, viz. That
the facts alleged in it can only be considered as resulting Vid. p. 76, "They
say nothing of Mr. Carmichael, but what sprung from the letter in question.
from my letter of the 15th June.

I have been so long accustomed to the miraculous in Mr. Jay's character, that
nothing on his part can appear to me either novel or astonishing. The public,
perhaps, may be differently affected: What then, this man, acknowledged to be
great in all little things; this statesman formed from the chaos of law and
politics, this poisonous worm of Machiavellian excrement; entangled in the
snares of his own duplicity, is at length obliged to sacrifice his vanity to
the opinion of the world, and would willingly confess himself to have been the
dupe of a boy, a beardless boy!! Risum teneatis, amici?

Once more I must entreat the public to attend to the words of that letter of
the 29th Dec. 1781. It will be easy to distinguish between what had reference
to mine, and what was foreign, and even antecedent to it: For example, in the
very first line of my quotation he says, The second instance you adduce is,
that I EXPRESSED MY APPREHENSIONS TO YOU ONE DAY, that a CERTAIN GENTLEMAN
would be glad to have a handle against me, Vide No. 26 of his pamphlet.
etc. He adds, "I remember this circumstance, and you have stated it right."
Has this referrence to my letter, or to any thing from me? -- does not he
confess the conversation to have been spontaneous on his part, and the
communications made directly to me. Again, "AS EXPERIENCE had taught me to
expect little FAIR or FRIENDLY from the gentleman in question I DID
APPRREHEND," etc. a little further he expressly says, " though I DO NOT
REMEMBER TO HAVE EXPLAINED THIS TO YOU, yet I was not without suspicions," etc.
Surely my information could not have extended to facts or suspicions which he
had not even explained to me.

Throughout the whole of his letter he never once appeals either to mine of the
15th June, or to my knowledge of the facts alleged. On the contrary, he even
communicates to me a circumstance which personally affects me, and could only
tend to inslame my resentment against Mr. Carmichael: " that SAME GENTLEMAN
perceiving that the SPANIARDS ( among whom he had AGAINST HIS BETTER KNOWLEDGE,
AND NOT FOR THE BEST PURPOSES, represented you,") etc. etc. In short, the
misfortune of my adversary, upon this, as well as similar points, seem to be
his confounding his principle in common life, with the habitual practice of his
profession -- he defends himself upon the point of honor, as he would at the
bar, and thinks reputation, like a bad cause, may be saved by a quibble.

Even supposing for a moment no proof to have existed on either part, but
assertions and negatives, notwithstanding his modest exordium in the
introduction to his pamphlet, the American public, I presume, would hardly
suspend their judgment upon a question of duplicity between a young soldier and
a veteran lawyer.

As another proof of his principles in argument as well as politics, I beg
leave to instance one of his late quotations, intended to prove that I
advanced, upon my own knowledge, facts to the prejudice of Mr. Carmichael: --
the paragraph is taken from my letter to him of the 1st February, 1782, from
Mahon. In his quotations, page 67.69, of his pamphlet, it runs thus, "On the
contrary, political reasons seemed to point out another line of conduct; had I
desisted, Carmichael would have had a handle against one of us," etc. etc. Here
is no less than an entire paragraph omitted and which, it will be seen, changes
the sense of the whole: it is as fallows: On the contrary, The first coolness
between Mr. Jay and Carmichael, arose, as the first informed me, on board of
the frigate in which they sailed from America; twelve months before I ever had
the honor of an acquaintance with either of those gentlemen: As this affair
alluded to is in some degree of a public nature, I have never thought myself
authorized to enter into a detail of it.
political reasons (...) to point out another line of conduct. YOUR
OBSERVATIONS upon these reasons, I undestood in a different sense:" then
follows, "had I desisted," etc. which is no more than a conclusion from my
sense of his own observations. But "Qui vult decipi, decipiatur" is Mr. Jay's
motto.

With respect to his system of detaining me in Madrid, after the siege of
Mahon, and upon which he is also negative, the public will reflect, that
certain combinations of circumstances sometimes render conclusions inevitable,
and literal proofs unnecessary.

He himself, upon that point, has quitted his common methodical road, and
recurs to preceding and subsequent facts, from which he only draws an inference
of probability: upon this ground I meet him: he begins, rather unfortunate, by
denying the term of my residence with him at the period alluded to: -- he
affirms that I could not have arrived in Madrid "early in April" Vide page 73.
"His last letter before his return to Madrid is dated 25th March at Mahon;
consequently his return to Madrid could not have been early in that month."
because my last letter to him from Minorca is dated on the 25th March. His
ignorance of geography seems to have led him into this mistake, as, I presume,
he calculated upon the month which the fleet had employed in their passage from
Cadiz to Minorca: that Island, any map will inform him, is only sixty leagues
distant from the coast of Catalonia, where I landed on my return. My journal
for 1782 says, "On the 27th March failed, with the Duke de Crillon, from Mahon,
landed at Barcelona on the 29th, and reached Madrid on the 9th April."

The interim from thence to the time of his departure for Paris, I think, can
be little short of six weeks.

I never saw Dr. Franklin's letter, summoning him to France, nor do I know the
precise time of its reception; but I again affirm, that previous to that event,
he had prevailed upon me to renounce my military views and direct my hopes to
the diplomatic line. I desire it may be understood, that I never considered, or
represented myself as serving in quality of Mr. Jay's private secretary -- I
never solicited either salary or reward for my services, and even should have
thought myself off ended by a proposal of the kind from him. Thus far he may be
justifiable in declaring that he never considered me as properly in the
diplomatic line.


In answer to his second argument, I beg leave to insert at length my last
letter to him from Mahon.

March 25th 1782. SIR
I Have this moment received your letter in answer to mine of the 1st ult. and
am really (...) for Col. Livingston's departure, as I fear it has proceeded
from reasons similar to those which first suggested to him the idea. Vide my
publication of the 7th Dec. 1785.


I must own my military Quixotism is not yet abated, and I could wish to assist
at the Gibraltar business; however, as the general has ordered me a passage in
his ship to Barcelona, I shall from thence proceed to Madrid, In consequence of
Mr. Jay's instructions. Vid. his letter to me, No. 31, I advise you to take the
first good and least expensive opportunity of returning to Madrid."
(with him, if possible) instead of a voyage by sea to Cadiz, agreeable to my
first intention.

Your partiality to my abilities, I know, induces you to suppose politics my
proper sphere; -- inclination, and indeed necessity, points out a military line
as far more eligible. I WISH TO RETURN TO AMERICA: the eclat of having served a
campaign in Europe in a distinguished military post, will, I doubt not, procure
me at least a decent commission. I have already been sufficiently burdensome
to my friends; my early age has hitherto obliged me to submit to it: I now
think myself qualified to live independently in the character of a soldier, and
in that only. My situation is seriously alarming; totally neglected by my
guardian in America; for more than two years I have subsisted upon money
borrowed upon his credit, without even knowing how far it may distress him to
repay it. Virginia has been the theater of war ever since my departure, and my
friends must have shared in the general calamity; in how great a degree, God
knows. I hope soon to see you, and in the mean time,"etc. etc.


Mr. Jay continues to animadvert upon that letter, and very judiciously calls
the attention of the reader to the necessity of his taking explicit
arrangements with me: He adds, that he pressed me to go to America; that he
represented the inconveniences to which I exposed him upon the point of
supplies; that I warmly entreated him to permit me to continue until I could
again write to America, and receive answers; in short, that it was, after great
importunity on my part, and much altercation between us, that he at length
reluctantly consented.

How far all this is consistent with the sense of my letter, the public will
judge: From that it appears that I was perfectly sensible of the embarrassments
of my situation, and earnestly wished to put an end to them by returning to
America. I even hint that I had penetrated into Mr. Jay's design upon me, from
that part of his letter which mentions colonel Livingston's return; in
consequence I already prepare him for a polite refusal to supply the place of
that gentleman, by expressly declaring that, "although I know he thinks
politics my proper sphere, both inclination and necessity determine me to
adhere to my military plans."

From whence then proceeded my sudden change in system and opinion? Was it to
confirm me by his personal remonstrances, in a resolution which I had already
taken of returning to America, that, instead of letting me embark at once from
Minorca for Cadiz, and from thence to America, Mr. Jay advised me to pass by
Madrid, which necessarily obliged me to undertake a journey by land through the
whole kingdom of Spain in its greatest extent? and yet secure under his
Vulcanian shield of impudence, without alleging one oftensible motive for
either his conduct or my own, he asserts that, contrary to his most strenuous
remonstrances, I urged him to consent to my remaining at Madrid! This enigma
has been amply explained in my publication of the 7th December last.

As a corroborating proof of what I have there advanced, with respect to the
arrangements which took place between Mr Jay and myself, in the interim from my
arrival, until the time of his being summoned to Paris, I shall insert the
following extract from a letter which I wrote to Ben. Lewis, Esquire in date of the
25th April, 1782; that is near three weeks antecedent to the one which Mr. Jay
has caused to be published. The words are as follow:

"After the campaign in Minorca, I had formed the design of returning to
America, in the hopes of obtaining a genteel employment in the army, but the
present pacific appearance of affairs points out a political line as far more
eligible for me. The reputation of having resided some time at a foreign court,
in the family of a minister, may probably recommend me to Congress as an object
worthy their attention; for this end the efforts of my friends will not, I
hope, be wanting; on Mr. Jay, at least, I can rely; he ADVISES me to remain at
Madrid UNTIL SOMETHING OF THE KIND MAY HAPPEN, and will continue to supply me,"
etc. etc.

With respect to my second letter to Mr. Lewis, of the 15th May following, it
will be found upon examination to contain nothing contradictory to my former or
present assertions: It was intended to stimulate him to make every effort in
his power to relieve me from the pain of my situation with respect to Mr. Jay;
recent experience had taught me what I had to apprehend from him in pecuniary
affairs; consequently my design was to paint, in the most brilliant colors,
the objects which induced me to prolong my residence in Europe, and the
inconveniences to which I should be exposed if I did not receive supplies by a
given time. The delicacy and caution which I observe upon every point
respecting Mr. Jay, would be sufficiently accounted for from the circumstance
alone of his being entrusted with the letter; how far my suspicions were just
is proved by the event: he examined the letter, found the contents might be of
use, kept it in his own possession, and has since caused it to be printed. I am
really curious to know upon what principle he pretends to justify that act of
treachery. He has said in one of his publications, that I gave him a number of
copies to be forwarded to America: Admitting the fact, it by no means
authorized him to keep one of them, and still less to publish it; but even the
excuse is a falsehood: I mention indeed in the letter, that I shall send twelve
copies of it to America; but I perfectly recollect that I never made more than
three, two of which Mr. Jay took charge of, the other I enclosed to Mr.
Harrison at Cadiz. The public may not find that anecdote unworthy of attention.

I confess I am at a loss to discover what imputation he aims to fix upon me by
the publication of my letters to him, after his departure from Spain? His
answer to my letter of 23d May, 1782, as printed in No. 37 of his pamphlet, I
never received, and have some reason to believe it is of a much later date.
He affects surprise, it is true, in his note upon that of the 10th June, 1782,
Vide his note upon No. 38, page 57.
that if I considered myself as left by him in the character of a spy upon Mr.
Carmichael, I did not allude to it, by way of obviating that objection to my
leaving Madrid. Has the weakness of his nerves affected his intellects? is it
the impotence of despairing guilt, or in derision of the public, that he has
ventured that observation? I can hardly suppose he has forgotten the contents
of my last publication any more than those of my letter to him at Passy, which
he so well recapitulates in his pamphlet, although it was burnt the same day he
received it. By all these it will appear, that his designs upon me at that
juncture, although sufficiently proved by his conduct, were only communicated
by inuendo: a similar proposition from him in direct terms, would have hastened
the catastrophe with which he has been since repeatedly menaced. Upon another
occasion he is astonished that in my letters to him from Mahon, I did not
retract my charges against Mr. Carmichael of the 15th June, 1781; since that
letter was written at his instigation. Vide page 75.


I have repeatedly observed, that my explanation with that gentleman did not
take place until the year following, after Mr. Jay's departure from Madrid: how
then was I to retract what I still believed? -- Was Mr. Carmichael to appear
more estimable, because I began to discover the bad qualities of Mr. Jay? -- or
does he so far wrong himself as to suppose that the first ray of suspicion
could penetrate into the dark abyss of his character; -- could discern at once
a complication of vices, which even perplexes the understanding, when guided by
experience and demonstration?

In short, this continued strain of low artifice and evasion -- misinterpreting
some parts of my letters and affecting not to understand others, can only be
compared to the proverbial stupidity of a certain animal, who, when in danger,
shuts his own eyes, and thinks himself concealed from view.

In several of his notes and observations, he endeavors to prove an
inconsistency in my conduct for continuing to write to him, after, I confess, I
had ceased to esteem him. But politeness is as different from esteem as respect
from servility. Besides, my situation with respect to him was still delicate:
having been placed in a manner under his direction, I thought it incumbent upon
me to preserve an appearance of regard and deference toward him, both for my
own justification to my friends and to avoid giving him a handle of
misrepresentation against me.

Further observations upon that point would be superfluous, as few persons can
be at a loss to conceive my motives and situation.

His last charge against me, that I repeatedly made efforts to discharge I
entreat the public to observe that these efforts were made in Europe. I had not
for a series of time even heard from my friends in America, but having by some
favorable circumstances acquired an extensive credit upon my own account, I
endeavored from motives of delicacy to acquit both my friends and myself
toward Mr Jay, to whom, of all mankind, I did not wish to have obligations of
any nature.
a debt contracted under such circumstances, and for which I did not consider
myself as personally responsible, I should think might rather afford matter for
eulogy than reproach: May greater crimes never be imputed to me, nor supported
by more respectable accusers!

I come at last to his narrative of the affair of Passy, and which I always
expected he would reserve for a trans-atlantic discussion. He begins by
insinuating that "I solicited his favor and interest, in Paris, by my letter of
the 16th July, 1783, and when he afterward acted contrary to my wishes and
request, that I asked his pardon in presence of Mr. Adams for the expressions I
had used." The public will observe that this circumstance never once occurred
to his memory until after my departure from America; but without further
animadverting upon his motives or conduct, the following candid state of facts
will sufficiently explain my own.

At the conclusion of peace, the honorable Major General Marquis De la Fayette,
with whom I then served in the combined armies assembled at Cadiz, requested me
to accompany him upon public business to Madrid. The letter which I had the
honor to deliver from that distinguished character to Congress, in December
last, will prove how far he expressed himself satisfied with my services upon
that occasion. He afterward prevailed upon me to pursue my journey with him to
Paris, where he seemed confident by his interest with the commissioners of the
United States to have me nominated to carry the definitive treaty to Congress.
Although Mr. Jay was personally under a previous engagement to me, After my
letters of the 29th Oct. and 29th Dec. 1782, it will be seen that I considered
myself as no longer connected with Mr. Jay; consequently my delicacy in not
insisting upon his compliance with an engagement contracted under circumstances
relative to my former situation; and indeed under certain conditions, on my
part, which I certainly had not fulfilled; viz. of remaining at Madrid in
1782," cannot appear extraordinary.
I was so far from reclaiming it, that I strenuously refused to speak to him
upon the subject, until the absence of the Marquis De la Fayette, and the
necessity of bringing matters to a decision obliged me to address him
personally; in consequence I wrote him the following note:

Paris, 16th July, 1783. SIR,
INTENDING to leave Paris tomorrow morning, no an excursion to Fontainbleau to
meet the Marquis de la Fayette, I take the liberty to address your excellency
upon the subject of his request of my being permitted to carry the definitive
treaty to Congress.

I neither wish nor expect you to sacrifice any private view of your own to
oblige me; but should you be personally uninterested, I flatter myself you will
not refuse your influence in my favor. As the marquis will probably be absent
some weeks, I wish to inform him positively of at least your sentiments on this
occasion, as they will greatly tend to influence my future arrangements.


To this note he gave an evasive and equivocal answer. The public, however,
will perceive with how much justice I can be accused of "soliciting his favor."
I expressly mention the demand as proceeding from the Marquis de la Fayette:
Common politeness obliged me to add, that I should thank him for his influence
in my favor; but I, at the same time, give him to understand, that I neither
wish nor expect any thing from him. The "private views of his own" he could not
be at a loss to comprehend.

The subsequent circumstances will be best explained by the following letter
from me to the Marquis de la Fayette, in which I inform him of the steps I had
taken, and their result.

Paris, 5th Sept. 1783. My dear General,
THE affair of the treaty is at length decided in favor of Mr. Adams's
secretary, and, what will doubtless surprise you, Mr. Jay gave the casting vote
against me. As his conduct upon this occasion has produced some severe
crimination between us, I think it proper to give you a recital of it in the
most minute and circumstantial manner.

The day after your departure, I waited upon him at Passy, in company with Col.
Ogden. He immediately informed me that my pretensions to being sent with the
definitive treaty to Congress, were inadmissible, as Dr. Franklin had
acquiesced in Mr. Adams's application in behalf of his secretary. I was
mortified, but had in fact no reason to complain of the Doctor's decision, as
he was under no positive engagement to me.

I appeal to your own feelings, my dear general, to judge what must have been
my surprise and resentment, when in a conversation with Dr. Franklin, a moment
after, he absolutely denied having any predilection in favor of Mr. Adams's
clerk, and in the most friendly manner assured me that he was happy in an
occasion of showing his deference to your request and his personal regard for
me.

I immediately reported his answer to Mr. Jay, who then in some confusion,
confessed "that he had engaged to give his vote for Mr. Adams's secretary." I
then took leave of him, and the next morning wrote him a letter, exposing his
ungenerous and unmanly conduct toward me for a long time past; reproaching him
for his want of candor in having always given both you In a letter to me some
time before the Marquis mentions, as to your carrying the treaty, I have had
those gentlemen sounded, and it appears Mr. Adams is the ONLY ONE who has a
friend to send.
and me to understand that he would be far from opposing any obstacle to my
election; and, lastly, his infamous duplicity with respect to Dr. Franklin: I
concluded with requesting him to appoint an hour when we might adjust all
differences and animosities, by an ultimate appeal to arms. As he did not think
proper to honor me with an answer, I took the liberty to call upon him in the
evening, and found him with Mr. Adams in consultation upon my letter. After
several repeated and vain solicitations for him to favor me with a conference
in my way, Mr. Adams declared that he had informed Mr. Jay of Dr. Franklin's
having acquiesced in his application, consequently Mr. Jay had been guilty of
no deception in what he had said to me.

Although I strongly suspected the veracity This is by no means intended as an
affront to Mr. Adams. I ever considered his conduct upon that occasion as only
calculated to extricate Mr. Jay from the disagreeable dilemma to which he had
reduced himself.
of this declaration, it deprived me all pretext for insisting upon Mr Jay's
compliance with my demand; and after a superfluous discussion of his former
conduct, by Mr. Adams's mediation, I consented that the affair should be buried
in oblivion.


If the public will compare this recital, written only the third day after the
transaction, with that composed by Mr. Jay the third year after, it will most
certainly appear that they do not "run parallel." In support of the facts
preceding our last interview, I appeal to the testimony of Col. Ogden. For what
passed afterward, if Mr. Adams recollects it, I rely too much upon his candor
to fear his attestation. That an accommodation took place between Mr. Jay and
myself, as far as related to the affair in question, is an undoubted fact; as
also that I apologized for having in direct terms taxed him with falsehood,
after Mr. Adams had stepped forward to exculpate from that charge, by
attributing the misunderstanding to himself. To have pressed the matter
further, would have been an implied doubt of the veracity of that gentleman,
which, not only decency, but infinite considerations, opposed. My motives for
ceasing the enquiry are as obvious as those which induced me to begin it. I
must take the liberty to observe, that if in my former publications I have
avoided entering into any details upon this affair, it was only from a
principle of delicacy; as I did not choose to call upon the testimony of
gentlemen by no means interested, and who might not wish to be meddled in a
contest of this nature. But this is not the first time that Mr. Jay, by
mistaking my motives, has provoked me to his own loss.


As to Mr. Jay's observation that I did not express resentment at his
persevering in his opposition against me, I only reply that I should never
consider myself as justisiable in cutting any man's throat for voting against
me. My challenge to him was founded upon a charge of falsehood; that ground
removed, every thing returned of course to its primitive state. But as his
courage, like his reasoning, is always posterior to the point in question; he
was offended, it seems, at being told that I had spoken of the affair, and had
even hinted that he had made certain admissions; but, instead of rising into
anger, he says he most heroically "avoided all intercourse with me afterward.
Vide p. 62.


After this candid exposition of the principles which have actuated my conduct,
and the consequences which have resulted from it, from the earliest to the
present period of my life, the public will pronounce, for the last time, I
hope, upon both. It is certain I have been too nearly connected with dark
characters; but instead of casting a shade upon mine, I flatter myself they
have served but to illustrate it; at least I shall ever enjoy a conscious
satisfaction in reflecting that the most minute words and actions of my life,
chosen at an age of error, imprudence and passion, although scrutinized and
tortured by the malice of a JAY, have afforded nothing which can be construed
into a stain upon honor, or a breach of the most rigid principles of probity.

I must now recur once more to the most painful part of my defense, that which
respects Mr. Carmichael. A remark contained in one of Mr. Jay's notes, I
confess, occasions me some uneasy sensations. He desires the public to observe
that not one of the letter which I have quoted from Mr. Carmichael, is of a
date posterior to the time of my departure from Paris in 1784. The fact is most
certainly true, and his allusion to it, I confess has excited a doubt in my
breast, which, for the honor of friendship and philanthropy, I could wish had
been forever a stranger to it! It is true, I repeat, from the time of my
departure from Paris at the time alluded to, I have never received one line
from Mr. Carmichael! I was so far, however, from imputing the cause of his
silence to any other motive than the consequences resulting from my own
situation, I was then upon a tour through most of the eastern, and great part
of the northern states of Europe; from which I never returned nearer to France
than Hambourg, where I embarked for America. Mr. Carmichael was in Spain.
that I continued to write to him in the same friendly and affectionate manner.
The suspicion is, however, at present, but too well founded, of his having
acted in collusion with Mr. Jay; in consequence I think it prudent to make such
a preparatory defense as is become necessary for my own justification, and at
the same time cannot be injurious to Mr. Carmichael, unless he should indeed
prove an apostate from honor.

In Mr. Jay's publication of the 7th December, 1785, are these words, to which
he has also adhered in his late pamphlet: "I neither showed not mentioned to
him (Mr. Carmichael) Mr. Littlepage's letter, nor any of its contents. In the
course of conversation HE mentioned him, and intimated HE had good reason to
believe that Mr. Littlepage had played a DOUBLE GAME between us." Here Mr. Jay
is entirely passive; -- Mr. Carmichael, without object or stimulative,
introduces my name, stained by the most poisonous breath of calumny: -- Without
further calling in question the verity of Mr. Jay's allegation, I shall proceed
to answer directly to the charge:

The words attributed to Mr. Carmichael fix the date of his accusation against
me at the express period of Mr. Jay's departure from Madrid in 1782: he "then
received me into his house, advanced me money, and in return I revealed Mr.
Jay's secrets." Such is the substance of the 'charge; for a moment admitting
it, what follows? -- If Mr. Carmichael does not confess himself lost to every
manly virtue, and even deaf to the voice of prudence, he ought at least to have
regarded me as a dangerous confident, and in future to have avoided any
connection or intimacy between us. Even admiting that policy would have
justified him in temporising some time longer with me, views of that nature
could not surely have extended his sentiments to "the prudence of a guardian
and the warmth of a brother." His own words, which I have quoted on a former
occasion.
POLICY might have induced him to advance me money to serve a campaign, where
he thought the honor of the American name interested: but will that account for
the expressions of friendship and affection, with which his letters continually
abound? -- One moment he pours forth the most virulent complaints against Mr.
Jay, congratulates me upon my being no longer connected with him, as I should
certainly, at last, have experienced the fate of Livingston and himself: Vide
my publication of the 7th December.
and, without the most distant allusion to the point in question, often conjure
me, "to defend him if ever he is attacked." In another instance he becomes the
champion of my own honor, and on the 21st of Jan. 1783, writes to me, "
Persevere in the same line of conduct which has acquired you the esteem of the
most distinguished characters, and make yourself easy on account of any
insinuations which may be infused into your friends to your prejudice. Mr.
Adams knows me too well not to be persuaded, that I would never advise you to
pursuits which are either imprudent or dishonorable."

The last word might have been spared, according to the opinion which, he tells
Mr. Jay, he had long before conceived of me. But admitting him to have been
influenced by POLICY alone during the whole time of my residence in Spain; --
he continues the same style for more than a year after my arrival in Paris. In
the first letter which I received from him in that capital, he says, "I hope
the pleasures of Paris will not absorb you so entirely as to make you forget
your friends here, and particularly one who loves you as much as I do." In the
same letter he observes, "I am curious to know how you have been received by
your quondam friends. Continue to conduct yourself with the same discretion,
that you have hitherto done, and you will avoid any handle of misrepresentation
to your disadvantage." In another letter to me of the 30th March, 1783, are
these words: "I hope your friendship will induce you to communicate to me
whatever you may learn which interests me personally. It is unnecessary to
observe, that not even your friendship for another can justify the smallest
breach of confidence." That, it must be confessed, would have been a severe
piece of satire upon a person whose first connection with him had been founded
upon a similar act of treachery. In a letter of the 18th August, 1783, he
mentions to me a design of coming to Paris: "I had some thoughts of coming to
Paris, if reflections upon the nature of my situation, and the advice and
represeatations of *** had not decided me to remain here. This voyage would
have been useful to my health, and highly agreeable to me on many accounts,
particularly in affording me the occasion of removing any prejudices which may
have been conceived against me by persons whom I esteem."

Far was I from foreseeing that the object of his journey would at last be to
purchase an accommodation with our common enemy at the price of my honor.

Further remarks upon our correspondence would at present be unnecessary; the
whole of it will probably be laid before the public; at least, if Mr.
Carmichael thinks it proper, I shall be far from objecting to the measure.

Although I ardently wish that he may still appear worthy of the public and my
own esteem, I must, at the same time declare, that I have nothing to apprehend
from his enmity. Whether he may be induced by policy to avow, or by a sense of
shame to deny, the accusation against me, which Mr. Jay attributes to him, his
situation will be embarrassing. All that I have to ask of him, is to take at
once a decided part; -- I have fought too long in the dark; let me see my enemy
and I can never fear him in a cause like this.

At present I shall not trouble the public further upon his account, than by
inserting the following letter, which I wrote to him immediately after my late
arrival in Europe, and upon which his silence, more than all the rest, appears
problematical.

Paris, 20th January, 1786.
This letter, it will be easily seen, was never intended for the public: it was
written at a time when I would have pledged my honor and life upon Mr.
Carmichael's friendship for me; his indignation at what Mr. Jay has thrown upon
him, I was confident, would have equalled my own; but a silence of more than
four months has given rise to conjectures of a different nature.
I HAVE now to communicate an affair of a different nature to you: -- lately
took place between Jay and myself, and in which you are equally interested.

For my own part, there is nothing in that business of which I either repent or
have need to be ashamed: insulted, almost dishonored in the eyes of the world,
exposed to the malicious insinuations of a wretch, whose every wish and effort
has for a series of time been to injure and distress me in every noble pursuit;
denied the satisfaction of a man of honor, an appeal to the public was the only
resource which remained to me, to vindicate my own character, and was perhaps
at the same time no slight revenge upon a man whose existence depends upon his
popularity, and whose malice had furnished me with such ample materials against
him.

How far the origin of our contest had reference to yourself, you will easily
perceive, as well, I presume, as Jay's motives in turning the dispute upon you.

As to the letter which he had quoted from me to your disadvantage, you can be
little surprised at it; both my situation and your own, at that time, rendered
it impossible for any explanation to take place between us, and as I only knew
you from Jay's report and representation, I certainly beheld you in a most
unfavourable point of view. That, however, I have answered to the public, and
had previously explained, to your entire justification, to my friends in
Virginia; to yourself I never could have mentioned it, under any other
circumstances than the present, After my rupture with Mr. Jay at Passy, I more
than once had it in (...) to demand that letter of the 15th June, from him, or
insist upon the liberty of communicating its contents to Mr. Carmichael: but
the apparent improbability of his ever attempting to make use of it to the
disadvantage of that gentleman, after my known connection with him, prevented me
from executing that design. As to that letter's being turned against me, I
confess it was a stroke of Jayitical artifice and impudence, which I never
expected.
without a breach of confidence, from whence I should justly have incurred a
dishonor which my enemy has generously taken upon himself.

From you I have now to demand a more serious eclaircissement: YOUR NAME has
been used to traduce and vilify my character, at the very moment in which every
effort was made on my part that could in the least contribute to your service;
-- while, glowing with the warmth of friendship, my heart and confidence were
open to you; -- is it possible that you could have sacrificed my fame for the
contemptible object of PAYING COURT to a man whom you knew to be your MORTAL
ENEMY, and whose implacable enmity I had incurred ONLY upon YOUR ACCOUNT? --
The accusation against me YOU BEST KNOW to be a most ATROCIOUS and INFAMOUS
FALSEHOOD. During the whole time of my residence in Spain, after Jay's
departure, I never gave you the most DISTANT HINT OF HIS DESIGN IN LEAVING ME
AT MADRID, nor did you ever see his cipher or one line of the correspondence
between him and me during or previous to the siege of Mahon. I well remember,
that after the open rupture which took place between us in Paris in 1783, I no
longer made a secret of that, or any other circumstance relative to either
himself or me. One of my charges against him in the challenge which I sent to
him at Passy, was "his infamous intention of employing me as a spy upon you."
That letter had been seen by several persons; -- was discussed by Jay and
myself, in presence of Mr. Adams, and, in short, the whole contents of it no
longer a secret. Of all this I have, at different periods since, most certainly
informed both you and others; but your situation and my own was then entirely
changed, and the communications which I afterward made to you, very different
from the charge brought against me, upon your authority, viz. "that after Jay's
departure from Madrid, you had received me into your house and lent me money,
and that in consequence I had betrayed his confidence."

This, sir, you must answer to me, to the world, and to your own conscience.

I esteem you too much to suppose that your justification will not be
satisfactory, but, until that takes place, you will excuse me for observing,
that all correspondence must cease between us. Meaning the friendly
correspondence which formerly subsisted between us, and which could not be
resumed until Mr. Carmichael had justified me to the public. I was so far from
not expecting an answer to this letter, that I, at the same time, gave him my
address in Poland. I must again repeat, more than four months have since
elapsed!
I have rendered you justice to the public; a reciprocal obligation rests upon
you as a reparation due to my honor, and perhaps, sir, your own.

Perfectly convinced that your conduct upon this occasion will even add to the
esteem which my connection with you has impressed upon my mind, I have the honor
to be, sir, your most humble servant, and, I hope, still your friend.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

The Hon. Wm. Carmichael, etc.

I must now add, that I expect his answer from the press: To the awful tribunal
of the public I refer him; there let him answer to his charges. I shall
conclude by one LAST APPEAL to his honor and veracity; nay more, by warning him
to remember, that although I may have been THE DUPE OF ARTIFICE, I trust I
shall never become THE VICTIM OF TREACHERY.

As I have the vanity to think that I shall live for some time in Mr. Jay's
memory, I shall once more descend to address a short apostrophe to him, which I
hope will close our correspondence for ever.

TO YOU, SIR, However degraded in the public and your own opinion; although
reduced so low, that even revenge has lost its edge, and punishment becomes a
cruelty; -- TO YOU I once more address myself. A distance of near two thousand
leagues now separates us; -- read then with as little emotion as the stings of
conscience will permit you.

After having exhausted every shaft of calumny and malice; after having
sacrificed your reputation in one instance, your probity in another, and your
vanity in all; in what light do you now appear before the tribunal of your
country? You have been proved to have denied facts, and asserted falsehoods;
your name is become a satire upon honor, and would discredit even truth: What,
after all, was your object? To crush an enemy, whose tender age, even supposing
it had afforded you the advantage over him, which you expected, would have
rendered your conduct odious, and your victory unmanly: But to have failed in
the attempt, has subjected you at once to contempt and ridicule! You have
suffered yourself to be guided by a principle of malice, unsupported by courage
sufficient to save you from disgrace: I am even willing to believe that some of
your ill qualities proceed from this inherent weakness of mind; and it may not
appear the only paradox in your character to observe, that if nature had endued
you with a greater portion of courage, she would have rendered you a more
noble, and perhaps, less formidable enemy. In a word, you possess all the
qualities of a bad man without firmness enough to dignify guilt: One ingredient
more in your mental composition would have qualified you to act the part of a
Cataline; the want of it has left you a JAY. Vindictive from principle, an
hypocrite from system, and a coward from constitution, you lead the life of a
Bevot, with the principles of an Atheist, and perhaps may be at last compelled
to die the death of a Martyr, without the reputation of sanctity or courage.

As to what has happened, without affecting moderation, or betraying (...),
believe me, I never wished to bring it forward: A state of war could never be
desirable with you, where revenge is almost dishonor, and triumph becomes
humiliation.

Profit at least from the bitter consequences of your own imprudence, nor, like
an obstinate slave, become hardened by the scourge.

Be satisfied with the contempt, and do not provoke the execration of the
public; to avoid it, sink to your primitive obscurity; render, at last, one
real service to your country, by retiring from a post, which, eminent as it is,
can never be honorable while filled by you; you may then deserve to be
forgotten.

Scorched by the rays of truth, fly for shelter to the shade of oblivion; and
beware how in future you excite the breath of rumor upon a character which
only rots when undisturbed, but falls to pieces if agitated.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.


