

THE page of History will record the actions of the WISE and GOOD; and marble
Monuments will inform future Generations of their Virtues: The actions of the
wicked will be told, only as a warning to others, to avoid the shame and infamy
attending them.

THE JUVENILE BIOGRAPHER; CONTAINING THE LIVES OF LITTLE MASTERS and MISSES;
INCLUDING A VARIETY OF GOOD AND BAD CHARACTERS.

By a LITTLE BIOGRAPHER.

THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

WORCESTER, (MASSACHUSETTS) PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, AND SOLD AT HIS BOOK
STORE.

SOLD ALSO BY E. BATTELLE, BOSTON. MDCCLXXXVII.

INTRODUCTION.
THE greatest Writers of the present Age having thought proper to write the
Lives and Characters of great and famous People, I see no Reason why I may not
employ myself in writing the Lives and Character, of little Masters and Misses;
and I will be bold enough to say, that I make not the least Doubt of my little
Readers finding more Improvement and Amusement from this Volume, than they
would from the Perusal of one of those huge Works, which would take them a
great Part of their Lives to read through, and cost them five hundred Times as
much as this.

In this little Work I shall notice the Conduct and Behavior of such young
Gentlemen and Ladies, whose good Sense and Prudence render them highly worthy
of Imitation; nor shall I spare to censure those, whose Stubbornness,
Obstinacy, or Naughtiness, render them necessary to be held forth to public
Notice as a Caution to all good Children, and to remind them, that, if they
behave amiss, I shall lay their Faults be^^^^ (...) World, by publishing (...)
the next Edition of my Biography.

THE JUVENILE BIOGRAPHER.
Miss BETSEY ALLGOOD.
THIS pretty little Miss, though now but in the seventh Year of her Age, has
more Thought and Prudence than many at seventeen. She works at her Needle to
Admiration, reads like a little Queen, and writes a very pretty Hand. How far
she has improved in the Art of Drawing, the Specimen in the next Page will show.



However pretty these Accomplishments may be considered, yet they are but
trifling when compared with the Graces of her Mind; I mean, her good and pretty
Behavior. She never laughs at those who may not happen to know so much as
herself, but she endeavors to instruct them; she is not satisfied with telling
them that such a Thing was done wrong, but she endeavors to tell them how to
do it right.

So great is her Reputation among all her little Friends and Neighbors, that
whenever any Dispute happens among them which they cannot settle themselves,
Miss Betsey is always applied to, to make up the Matter, and her Decision is
never disputed by either Party.

Miss Betsey says her Prayers constantly every Night and Morning, and says
Grace before and after Meat. She never attempts to contradict her Papa or
Mamma, but cheerfully does every Thing she is bidden to do. By these Means she
pleases every one around her, and is herself perfectly happy; for it is
impossible for a Child to be happy, who is perpetually whining and pining after
every Thing, and equally restless and unhappy even if it gets what it asks for.

Miss Betsey's Pap and Mamma were wise People, and often remarked, that the
Pervisity of Children is oftentimes more owing to the Mismanagement of Parents,
than to the Children themselves. When Children cry for any Thing, it should
never be given them; because, if they get it by that Means, when they want any
Thing that is improper for them, they will think they have only to cry, and
then they will obtain it.

Thus you see, my pretty little Readers, that Miss Betsey never cries for any
Thing she wants, nor asks for any Thing a second Time, which has been once
denied her. By this good Behavior, Miss Betsey has acquired so great a
Reputation, as will never be forgotten so long as a Leaf of this Book shall
hold together.

Master BILLY BAD-ENOUGH.
THIS young Gentleman is one of those Kinds of Characters which even we little
great Writers find it difficult to describe; because there is in his
Composition such a strange Mixture of Goodness and Naughtiness, as in some
Degree perplexes us in what Light to place him.

Master Billy Badenough was happy in having the best of Parents, who spared no
Expense to give him the best Education; and, it must be confessed, no Boy
studied his Book closer or better, or made a more rapid Progress than he did.
At the Age of nine Years, he could read, write, and cast Accounts with any one,
had made some Progress in Latin and French, and understood some little Matters
in Geography. He was very goodnatured, and readily parted with any Thing to his
Playfellows.

These were his good Qualities; and I could wish I were not under the Necessity
of repeating his bad ones; but you know that we little Biographers must speak
the Truth, and conceal nothing.

One of his principal Faults was, that of robbing Orchards. It was but the
other Day, that Mr. John Goodwell caught him in his Orchard, hanging with his
whole Weight upon one of the Boughs of a Fruit-Tree, in order to break it off,
and carry away both the Bough and the Fruit thereon. This is an exact
Representation of the Matter.



He was fond of going a Birdnesting; and, indeed, there would have been no Harm
in this, had he, like good Boys in general, taken Care of the poor innocent
little Things, and fed them; but it was his Rule seldom to bring home any. Some
he would throw into Ponds and Rivers, and was even so hard-hearted and naughty,
as to stand and laugh at the poor dear little Things while they were drowning
and struggling for Life. Others, that could neither fly nor walk, he would set
upon the Ground, and shy at them with Sticks until he had killed them, and even
the few that he brought home, he took no Care of them, but suffered them to die
for Want. This, however, is so melancholy a Subject that I cannot pursue it.

His Papa, finding he was guilty of these, and many other naughty Tricks, such
as kicking up Boys Heels on the Ice, and fighting with every one who gave him
the least Offense, determined him to send him to Sea, for which Purpose he is
now learning Navigation. Should he happen to be cast away on a desert Island,
how can he expect to receive Mercy, who has shown so little to poor innocent
Birds? But, I hope, as he grows older, he will grow better, and repent.

Miss NANCY CAREFUL.
THIS pretty little amiable young Lady had the Misfortune to lose her Mamma
when she was only four Years of Age, and to add to her Calamities, she had
hardly reached her seventh Year, when she followed her dear Papa to his Grave.
There certainly cannot be a greater Misfortune happen to little Ones, than the
early Loss of their Parents. Miss Nancy was truly sensible of this. Her Papa
and Mamma lay buried in the same Tomb; and this dear little Girl would often
sreal away from the House of her Guardian to seat herself upon their Grave and
water it with her Tears. Can you view this Picture, and not join in letting
fall a Tear with Miss Nancy Careful?



She had, however, poor little Maiden, two Things which contributed to console
her under these terrible Misfortunes: The first was that she lived in the House
of her Guardian, who faithfully discharged the Trust reposed in him; and
secondly, that she had an only Brother, who was worthy of such a Sister, and
who did every Thing in his Power, to make her forget the terrible Loss they had
both sustained; but I shall forbear saying any Thing here of that little
Gentleman, as I shall particularly speak of him in the next Article of this my
invaluable Work.

Miss Nancy not only attended closely to her Book and her Needle, but hardly
ever spent an idle Moment; and so attentive was she to improve herself in all
useful Knowledge, that her Guardian was frequently obliged to force her out
upon Visits, lest she should hurt her Health by too close an Application to
what she considered as her Duty. This, my pretty little Readers, you know, is a
very uncommon Case.

Before the had reached the Age of ten Years, there was hardly any Youth in the
Neighborhood, either Master or Miss, who could read, write, spell, and cast up
common Accounts with her; and, without mentioning her Excellency in the finest
Needle Work, her Pastry, Pickles, and Preserves, were justly admired by all the
Gentry for many Miles round.

All these Things considered it is no Wonder that a young Gentleman in those
Parts should pay Miss Nancy a Visit on her reaching her nineteenth Year. He
found she possessed an uncommon Share of good Sense, Meekness, and Affability,
without the least Tincture of Pride or Affectation. He soon married Miss Nancy,
who now rides about in her Coach, admired by her Husband, beloved by her
Friends, and envied only by those who do not possess her Virtues.

Master SAMMY CAREFUL.
THIS young Gentleman is the Brother of the Lady, whose Character I have just
given. He is two Years older than his Sister, and is worthy of the best Thing
that can be said of him.

On the Death of his dear Papa, he felt the keenest Agonies, and was truly
sensible of his Loss; but when he saw his poor little dear Sister's Heart ready
to burst with Tears and Grief, he thought it became necessary in him to stifle
his own Sorrows, in order to alieviate those of his Sister.

He would now and then cry with her, with a View to humor her; then he would
suddenly wipe the Tears from her Cheeks, and reason with her on the Impropriety
of their making themselves miserable about what they could not recover, and
which would even make their Parents unhappy in Heaven, did they know it. When
Sammy found he had thus consoled his Sister, whom he most tenderly loved, he
would himself steal out into the Fields set himself down at the Foot of a Tree,
and there have his Cry out by himself. My pretty Readers do not your little
beating Hearts feel an uncommon Emotion at the Sight of the Picture in the next
Page? May you never have Occasion to do the like!



As Master Sammy had always been a very sober and careful Child, and very
attentive to his Books, it is no Wonder that he proved, in the End, to be an
excellent Scholar.

Accordingly, when he had reached the Age of fourteen, Mr. William Goodall, a
wealthy Merchant in the City of Boston, took him into his Compting house, in
order to bring him up in the mercantile Way, and thereby make his Fortune.

This was a sad Stroke upon his poor Sister Nancy, who, after having lost both
her Papa and Mamma, was now likely to lose her Brother likewise; but Sammy did
all he could to appease her, and assured her, that he would spend all his
leisure Time with her. This he most punctually performed, and never were
Brother and Sister so happy in each other's Company as they were.

Mr. William Goodall was highly satisfied with Sammy's Behavior, and, dying
much about the Time that Miss Nancy was married to the Gentleman, he left all
his Business to Sammy, together with a large Capital to carry it on. So much is
Mr. Careful esteemed, (for we must now no longer call him Master Sammy) that he
was chosen, at the late general Election, Representative in the General Court,
for one of the first Towns in New England, without the least Expense to
himself. We here see what are the Effects of good Behavior.

Miss FANNY DAUDLE.
THIS young Lady was an only Child, and therefore, as is too often the Case,
was a ruined one; that is, was suffered to do just what she liked, without any
one being permitted to contradict her. There was no such Thing as getting her
to Bed at Night, or up again in the Morning; for Miss Fanny was said to have so
weakly a Constitution, that she could not bear to be forced to any Thing.

This young Lady in her infant Years, had every Appearance of a good
Constitution, and never could more Pains have been taken to spoil it. She was
covered with a Load of Clothes, in order to keep her warm, and prevent her from
taking Cold. They were constantly feeding her with the richest Things, in order
to nourish her, and make her strong, as they thought; and she was not put upon
her Legs until she was eighteen Months old.

In spite of all these Precautions, however, at the Age of six Years, Miss was
crooked both in her Legs and Shape, owing, no Doubt, to the very Means they
took to prevent it, and this undoubtedly was a Fault of her Friends, and not
her own, for which she was much to be pitied, as are all unfortunate Children,
who are ruined by the mistaken Kindness of their Friends.

It would have been unpardonable in me to take notice of these personal
Defects, had not the Imperfections of her Mind been still greater. Though she
seldom arose until Noon, yet great Part of the remaining Day was spent in this
Manner on the Couch.



So little Time was spent on her Book, that even at six Years of Age she could
hardly tell a great A from a House; and whenever she was desired to take a
Needle in her Hand, she was instantly overcome with the Vapors. She was hated
by all the Servants, to whom she was a constant Plague; and very few of the
young Ladies in the Neighborhood chose to visit her, because she was no less
peevish and obstinate than she was proud and ignorant. It was in one of these
obstinate Humors, and merely out of Contradiction to the Advice of every one,
that she determined to take a Walk out one Day, though it rained much. The
Consequence of this was, that she caught a violent Cold, which brought on a
Fever, and put and End to her Life in the twelfth Year of her Age.

This plainly shows you, my little Readers, how necessary it is to be
industrious in every Thing else, as well as your Book; since Idleness and
Obstinacy are equally pernicious to those who give Way to them.

Master BILLY EASY.
MY pretty little Readers, when they shall be grown up to Years of Maturity,
will have too many Occasions to observe, that it is as great a Misfortune to be
of too easy a Temper, as to be of too violent a one, and here is an unhappy
Instance of it.

Master Billy Easy had always been considered by his Parents as a very dutiful
and obedient Son, and they had conceived great Hopes from so promising a Child.
He paid every due Attention to his Book, minded what was said to him, and
readily and cheerfully did every Thing he was bidden. If these were not
promising Circumstances in his Favor, I know not what may be considered as
such; but such are the unsettled Matters of this Life, that there is no
answering for any Thing, or for any Body.

Master Billy, in the tenth Year of his Age, unfortunately got acquainted with
a Boy of a very naughty and bad Turn of Mind, who made use of very bad
Expressions, told Fibs immoderately, and was always at the Head of every Kind
of Mischief that was going forwards. Billy Easy was of a Disposition, which,
like Wax, might be molded into any Form; and, had he happened to fall in good
Company, he would undoubtedly have learned Good from them.

Lead us not into Temptation, is a Part of our Lord's Prayer, and a very
necessary one it is. Master Billy became the constant Companion of this naughty
Boy, who led him into all kinds of Error; and so powerful was the Force of bad
Example over him, that he was often drawn into the Commission of those Crimes
which his Heart disapproved, but he could not withstand the Temptation.

He was frequently concerned in fobbing Orchards, and even stealing Fruit
wherever he could find it. At last he became so naughty as to take up and put
in his Pocket the loose Halfpence his Papa or Mamma happened to leave any
where. It will be too disagreeable to me to relate every Circumstance, which at
last determined his Parents to send him to Sea, in order to avoid more
disagreeable Consequences. They did so, and poor Billy Easy perished in a
Storm, and had a watery Grave.

My dear little Readers, be cautious of bad Company. Resist the first
Temptation to evil, and you will then have nothing to fear; but if you give Way
to tristing Crimes, greater ones will steal on you insensibly, and you will
even arrive at the highest Degree of Naughtiness before you even see the
Danger, or think you are doing any Thing amiss.

Miss POLLY CHARITY.
THIS young Lady was truly deserving of the Name the bore. It was the constant
Study, even of her infant Years, to do all the Good she could to her little
Playfellows, with whom she never quarrelled in her Life. Whenever she knew of
any poor little Creature in Distress, she would beg a penny of her Papa or
Mamma, and go and give it to it privately. She has been often known, when a
Piece of nice Cake has been given her, to pretend to be eating it, and then
take an Opportunity of sliding it into her Pocket, in order to give into some
poor Neighbor's Child.

One Day, some one of Miss Polly's little Acquaintances, coming along the Road
near Miss Charity's House, found her standing and crying over a little Beggar,
who sat by the Side of the Road. This is a just Representation of this pitiful
Scene. Her Acquaintance asked her what she was crying for. "My dear, (said
Polly) this poor little Creature is starving, and I have not a Penny to give
her; but if you will lend me Two pence, if you have so much about you, I will
certainly pay you again very soon. What a terrible Thing it is to think, that
while we live upon Dainties, this poor little Girl shall be starving!"

"My dear, (said Miss Polly's Acquaintance) I am happy that I have Twopence
about me, which is all I am worth in the World, and those were just now given
me by a Gentleman for my pretty Behavior to him. Here they are, and you shall
be indebted to me only One Penny, for I will give her the other myself." They
eagerly embraced each other. gave the poor Child the Twopence, and then parted
highly delighted.

It seems that Miss Polly was allowed a Halfpenny a Day for Pocket Money, and
she determined not to spend a Farthing of it till she had paid her Debts.
Accordingly, at the End of four Days, she went to carry the Twopence to her
little Acquaintance, who absolutely refused to take any more than One Penny of
it. At last, to settle all Disputes, it was agreed, that the Penny should be
given to a poor Neighbor's Child, which was accordingly done; and here this
important Dispute ended.

This amiable Miss Polly Charity in Time grew up to be a Woman, and had the
Happiness to get married to a Gentleman of large Fortune, who was equally
charitable with herself. They now live happily together amidst all the Comforts
of Life, and have the Prayers of all the poor Families about them.

Master SIMON LOVEPENNY.
THIS was a good Sort of a Boy enough, take him for all in all; and it may be
said of him, that he was neither remarkably good nor remarkably bad. In short
he was one of those Characters, of whom we can say nothing that is very ill or
very good.

He always obeyed his Parents commands, and did as he was bidden. Indeed, he
was at his Books as long as any Boy, and endeavored to learn as much; but his
principal Study, at least that which pleased him most, was casting Accounts,
and he had learned many intricate Interest Tables by Heart. Thus far he was
undoubtedly a good Boy.

In his very infant Years, he showed a great Fondness for Money, and saved up
every Halfpenny that was given him. I am told that he spent a great Part of his
Time in thus counting over his Money.



If he at any Time lent any little Fellow a Penny for a Week, he always took a
Farthing Interest; and if it was only a Halfpenny, he would be contented with
taking a few Peaches, Apples, Pears, or what he could get, and these he always
sold again, and never eat them himself.

Whenever he lent a Penny to any little Boy whom he thought extravagant, he
always obliged him to leave in his Hands a Top, a Battledore, a Gig, or some
such like Thing by way of Security, which he always sold, if the Debt was not
paid in proper Time.

Though it is very necessary for young People to be careful and prudent, yet
Master Simon began so early to have the Love of Money at Heart, that he never
parted with any Thing unless he had some View in it, and this made him selfish,
always ready to partake of what others had, but took Care never to part with
any Thing himself. It appears by a little Book that he left behind him (for he
died in the tenth Year of his Age) that he in one Year, by lending out Money in
the Manner I have mentioned, collected no less than the capital Sum of five
Shillings and Twopence three Farthings, and that his capital Stock consisted
of eighteen Shillings and five Pence Half penny; but to what public Charity he
left all this large Sum of Money, I could never learn. I have, indeed, heard it
reported, that he left it to his Sister to build her a Baby-house, and to
properly furnish it.

Miss BETSEY PERT.
THIS is a very genteel young Lady, and may, in some Degree, be called a pretty
one. She has been brought up at a Boarding School, where she learned the usual
accomplishments of Reading, Writing, Accounts, French, fine Needle work,
Dancing, and Music; but unfortunately for her, her Parents have brought her up
like a Lady, without having any Fortune to give her to support that Character.

I have often heard my Papa say, when I was a Boy (for now I am commenced a
Writer I consider myself as a Man) that "Parents should always educate Children
suitable to the Condition they might be able to place them in; and that it
would be as idle to teach a Girl Dancing and Music who was to be the Wife of a
poor Tradesman, as it would be to teach a Boy Greek and Latin, when he was
designed for a Butcher or a Baker."

But to return to Miss Betsey Pert. This said Boarding-school Education has so
pussed her up, that she cannot even endure those, who have been brought up in
what she considers as the vulgar Way. She has no Idea of any Kind of Industry;
for that she leaves to those, whom she considers as poor and ignorant. Her
whole Time is taken up in dressing herself, and in paying and receiving Visits.

Here she is, now going to pay a Visit to Miss Thoughtless.



Miss Betsey has a good natural Genius; but she has been always so much
suffered to have her own Way at home, that she expects it every where else.
Hence she is very pert when any one contradicts her, and expects all that
Civility and good Behavior which is wanting in herself. Young Ladies, and
young Gentlemen too, before they attempt to find Fault with others, should
carefully examine themselves and see that they are not deficient in those
Points as well as others.

When Miss Betsey grows older, she may perhaps grow wiser; but I would advise
all little Folks to endeavor to be wise as soon as possible; and that they may
easily be, if they will but take a little Pains. Of all Things let them avoid
Pride; for Pride is the certain Forerunner of Folly; and Folly, you know, is an
Enemy to Wisdom. Let them never give pert Answers, nor despise others, because
they may not have had so good an Education as themselves. In short, Wisdom
consists in Prudence, Humility, and Caution.

Master DICKEY SPRIGHTLY.
THIS was a most singular young Gentleman for his Activity and Sprightliness,
as well as for his Learning, Politeness and Affability. No little Gentleman
could make a Bow more gracefully, on coming into, or going out of a Room, than
Master Dickey Sprightly.

In the Winter Season, when the Ground was covered with Frost and Snow, and the
Weather so cold, that his Sisters were not permitted to go out, he would sit by
the Fireside, and tell them such a Number of pretty Stories, which he had read
in his little gilt Books, as charmed every little One that heard him. This
happy Accomplishment of telling pretty little Stories, drew upon him so many
invitations to spend Evening after Evening with Masters and Misses in the most
respectable Families, that he was never at a Loss to know what to do with his
leisure Time. So glad was every one to have his Company, that they always
treated him with Plenty of Fruits, Pies, Tarts, Cheesecakes and Custards, in
order to buy the Pleasure of his Company again.

In the Summer Time, he was here and there and every where; sometimes up in a
Tree, sometimes down in a Fit, and sometimes scampering along the plain Ground,
in Pursuit of any Thing that happened to come in his Way: Here you see him
running after a Rabbit in a Warren; but I will lay a Penny, that he will never
overtake it.



However, amidst all this Gaiety and Sprightliness, he attended properly to his
Books; but then he was so exceedingly quick at learning his Tasks, that he
generally finished his before other Boys had hardly thought of theirs; so that
he had twice the Time on his Hands which other Boys had; and he had besides so
excellent a Memory, that he never forgot what he had once learned.

When Master Dickey had reached the fourteenth Year of his Age, a very learned
Counselor in the Neighborhood prevailed on his Father to let him study the
Law under his Inspection, and the Offer was eagerly embraced by all Parties.
Master Dickey has now left off all Play, and is become as solid as an old Man.
He is now making great Progress in the Knowledge of the Law; and if we may be
permitted to judge of future Events from present Circumstances, there is no
doubt of his one Day becoming a Judge.

Miss CHARLOTTE THOUGHTFUL.
THIS amiable little Maiden was the only Child of very respectable Parents, who
took every Care in their Power to give her a good Education, and to instill
into her Mind the soundest Principles of Virtue. Her Papa was once a wealthy
Merchant; but from Losses which the wisest cannot foresee, his Circumstances
became much reduced. He therefore determined to make one bold Push, in order,
if possible, to retrieve himself. He accordingly fitted out a Ship, in which he
ventured his All, and went on board of it himself; but alas, they had scarcely
got clear of the Land, when a Hurricane arose, the Ship was dashed to Pieces on
a Rock, and every Soul on board perished. What a melancholy Scene is this!



Every Thing was now lost, and the unhappy Widow, Mrs. Thoughtful, was forced
to give up every Thing to unrelenting Creditors. This good Lady took these
Misfortunes so much to Heart, that she died soon after, leaving poor Miss
Charlotte totally destitute of the Necessaries of Life.

Though I am but a young Writer, and little acquainted with the Commerce of the
World, yet I am fully convinced, from the very little I have seen, that Honor,
Probity, and Virtue, will always find some Friend when in Distress.

Miss Charlotte, who was but four Years of Age, was too young to feel all the
Weight of this Misfortune, though she dearly loved her Parents, and shed
Torrents of Tears on the Loss of them. There lived in the Neighborhood a
Maiden Lady of great Fortune, who had always admired the Sweetness and
Affability of Miss Charlotte's Temper. This Lady took the sweet Orphan home to
her House, and treated her, in every Respect, as though she had been her
Daughter. Private Tutors attended her at home to instruct her in every useful
Accomplishment; and her different Tutors found they had very little Trouble in
making her comprehend the most difficult Things. Miss Charlotte always called
the Lady her Mamma, and paid her equally the same Respect as though she had
been such. The Lady, in Return, took the pretty little Orphan with her into the
politest Company, where she was constantly admired by every one for the
Politeness of her Conversation, and the Affability and Sweetness of her
Disposition. In this Manner, Time insensibly stole away, until Miss Charlotte
had nearly reached the nineteenth Year of her Age, when her worthy Friend died,
leaving her possessed of her whole Estate, and recommending her to the Care of
her Nephew, to whom the whole of her Estate was to devolve, in Case Miss
Charlotte should refuse to marry him; but Miss Charlotte loved him: They
married and were happy.

Master JEMMY STUDIOUS.
THIS pretty little Fellow, or, I should rather say, this pretty little young
Gentleman, who is now but in the eighth Year of his Age, seems to be born to be
a great Author. Master Jemmy is my intimate Companion, though I am rather older
than he is; and I do not recollect that, in the course of this important Work,
I have told my little Readers that I am turned of eleven. My little Friend
Jemmy is constantly reading: and here you see him, even at nine o'Clock at
Night, with a Book in his Hand, and sitting by the Fire Side.



For my own Part, though I love my Book very well (and I have the Vanity to
think, that what I have here written will sufficiently prove it) yet I love a
Bit of Play and Fun, now and then, as well as any Boy; for I think it is a just
Observation, that too much of one Thing is good for nothing; and even the wise
Solomon tells us, there is a Time and Season for all Things. I mean not this as
any Reflection upon my dear Companion Jemmy; I only fear, that, by his sticking
so very close to his Books, he may hurt his Constitution; for we may carry too
far even the most laudable Pursuits. I hope my little Readers will not imagine
that I am jealous of Master Jemmy's Abilities, and fearful that he may rival me
in writing such little Books as these: No, though I am but a little Fellow, I
have a great Soul, and am above all thoughts of Jealousy. I will therefore say
no more about it.

There is so (...) that it is impossible to know him without loving him. Though
he is born to a very large Fortune, yet he treats the poorest with the same
Respect as the rich; for it is his Maxim, that it is Virtue and Genius only,
and not Fortune, that should distinguish between the different Beings here
below. Six poor little Boys come constantly twice a Week to his House, on whom
he spends two Hours each Time, in order to instruct them in Reading, Writing,
and Accounts. He likewise lays out most of his Pocket-money in little gilt
Books, which he distributes among the little needy Ones; and even Bibles,
Testaments, and Common Prayer Books he frequently makes a Present of to those
who are grown up to Manhood.

I have already observed, that Master Dickey Sprightly will, in all
Probability, one Day or other, become a Judge; and from the same Degree of
Reasoning, there is every Probability, that Master Jemmy Studious will at last
become a Bishop.

Miss AMELIA LOVEBOOK.
THIS young Lady is of a Character similar to that of the young Gentleman I
have been just mentioning. Miss Amelia has been almost from her Infancy kept at
a Boarding-school, where she is beloved and respected by every one for the
Sweetness and Goodness of her Temper. The following Letters will show what Use
she has made of her Time. Indeed we cannot help admiring them for their Purity
of Stive, and Elegance of Language, when we consider that Miss Amelia is but
just tumed of eight Years of Age. She wrote the following to her Mamma,
immediately on the News being brought her, that her Mamma was just recovered
from a dangerous Fit of Illness.

Dear Mamma,
Though I am many Miles from you, my Mind and my Heart have been with you ever
since I heard you was a little indisposed; for I did not know until just now,
on reading the Letter you was pleased to send me, that you had been dangerously
ill: Had I known as much before, I would have soon seen you, though I had
traveled up to London half naked and barefooted; but I bless God, I now find
you are out of all Danger, and I am the more inclined to believe so, as I see
the Letter was written by your own Hand. I every Night and Morning offer up my
Prayers to God for the Health and Preservation of you and my dear Papa. May you
live until you are wilfully offended by your most dutiful and affectionate
Daughter,

AMELIA.


The following was shortly afterward written by her, to her Brother, on the
same Occasion.

Dear Billy,
Did I not know that you had long since learned to write, I could not have been
angry with your long Silence; but not to let me know of the dangerous Situation
my dear Mamma has been in, is what indeed my Religion tells me I must forgive,
but I fear I shall not soon forget. Had my dear Mamma died without my seeing
her, I am sure I should not have lived long after her. However, as it has
pleased God to preserve to me the best Mamma in the World, I will forgive your
Neglect, provided you most faithfully promise me in your next never again to
conceal from me such important Concerns. Your affectionate Sister,

AMELIA.


The following Letter was written by Miss Amelia to one of her little
Acquaintances in Town, just before her breaking up for the Holidays.

Dear Betsey,
The Thoughts of the approaching Holidays afford me singular Pleasure, not on
the Consideration of the Idieness they may produce, but from that sweetest of
all Pleasures, that of kissing my dear Parents. Next to them my Brother, my
Betsey is nearest to my Heart; and the Pleasure and Improvement I always
receive in your Company, is too well known to you, to need my repeating it
here. I have a great deal to tell you concerning what I have met with in the
different Books I have read through since I had last the Happiness to see you;
but, as it would be idle to attempt it in a short Epistle, I shall defer it
until I see you, which now will not be long: Until then, my dear Betsey, you
must consider, as your most faithful and affectionate Friend,

AMELIA.


My little Readers will perhaps wonder, that I should give so much more Room to
Miss Amelia Lovebook than I have to the rest of my Characters; but I could not
avoid laying before them these pretty Specimens of epistolary Writing; and I
hope they will excuse me, if I intrude one more upon them. It is an Answer she
wrote to an Invitation to a Game at Romps.

Dear Miss,
I received your kind Invitation since I have been in Town, to what you are
pleased to call a Game of Romps. I do not presume to take upon me to say, in
what Manner little Misses should spend their Time; but you must pardon me if I
say, that I think Time, which is so valuable, may be spent in a much better
Manner than romping. Had you invited me to drink a serious Cup of Tea with you,
I should most certainly have accepted the kind offer, which might have,
perhaps, produced a Conversation to the Advantage of us both. However we may
differ in Opinion, with respect to the Employment of Time, I by no Means
presume to censure your Mode of passing it away; and I dare say, that you will
not be angry with me, if I should appear particular in your Opinion. I love all
the World, and wish to be beloved by all the World; and though I cannot accept
of the present Invitation, you may be assured you shall soon receive a Visit
from your faithful Friend,

AMELIA.


Master ISAAC CURIOUS.
THIS little Youth, in some Measure, very properly answered the Name he bore,
that of Master Isaac Curious; for there was no Hole or Corner into which he
would not creep, nor any Secret among the little Ones in the Neighborhood,
which he would not get at the Bottom of. You here see him in full March after a
Secret, like any pretty little Miss, with one Hand in a Muff and the other
holding an Umbrella over his Head, lest the Sun should tan his delicate
Countenance.



It is no Wonder that Master Isaac is a Dunce; for those, who trouble
themselves so much about other People's Business, seldom mind their own. He
seldom sat down to write, unless it was to inform some little Companion of an
important Piece of News: Such as, Master Tommy has been found guilty of telling
a Fib, Master Dickey of stealing some Dumps, Master Sammy of smuggling some
Marbles, and some such Things as every good Child would rather pity than
endeavor to make public; for, as the best of us little Ones are not without
Faults, we should forgive that in others, which we hope will be forgiven in
ourselves.

It is no Wonder, that this Kind of Behavior procured Master Isaac many
Enemies and few Friends; for when it is once known, that a little Boy gives his
Mind to Talebearing, he is soon considered as a dangerous Enemy in the
Assemblies of little Masters and Misses. I do not mean, that little Masters or
Misses should ever say what they are afraid of hearing repeated at any Time;
but the Misfortune of these Tale-bearers is, that they seldom represent Words
as they were really spoken, but give them a different Turn by the Manner in
which they relate them, and often embellish them with a great Variety of Fibs.
What Sort of a Man Master Isaac will make, is as yet difficult to say, and I
will not be uncharitable in my Conjectures.

I would advise all my pretty little Readers to behave in such a Manner, that
the Tongue of Slander may never have it in his Power to injure their
Reputation. If they should at any Time learn that any Thing had been said amiss
of them, and, if they are convinced, that the Fault found with them is just,
let them endeavor to do better; but, if they are convinced that the Accusation
is false, let them take no Notice of it, and it will die away of itself.

Miss FIDDLE FADDLE.
HAD I not for certain known the contrary, I should have been ready to lay a
Farthing, that Miss Fiddle Faddle was a Sister or very near Relation, of Master
Isaac Curious, so much are they alike in Temper and Disposition.

Miss Fiddle Faddle is undoubtedly a very petty, genteel Child, about seven
Years of age, and does not want a tolerable Share of good Sense, though Pride
and Assectation seem in a great Measure to have destroyed it. And here give me
Leave to observe to you, that Prettiness is an Injury to a young Lady, if her
Behavior is not as pretty likewise; for bad Behavior makes the prettiest Face
that ever was born, ugly and deformed.

Miss Fiddle Faddle would not be seen in the Morning with a Nightcap on,
however decent it might be, no, not for the World. All the Forenoon is spent at
her Glass, which she is sometimes ready to break in Anger, because she cannot
put her Cap on to her Mind; and she has already been near an Hour in piching
upon the proper Part of her Face to stick that Pach on. See what a Piece of
Work she makes about it.



When Miss Fiddle Faddle is in the Company of little Females of her
Acquaintaince, her whole Discourse turns on the prevailing Fashion of
Head-dress; what an elegant Taste one little Miss has, and how terribly
unpolite is another. As to entering on any Discourse on little Books, she
cannot bear it, for Reading, she says, spoils her Eyes, and makes her Head ach.
As to making up her own Caps and Linen, her Mamma will not suffer her to do it,
because it would spoil the Milliner's Trade. So that her whole Time is spent in
little more than eating, drinking, gossipping, dressing, undressing, and
sleeping. In short, should Miss Fiddle Faddle live to be a Woman, I do not know
of a better Husband for her than Master Isaac Curious.

My dear pretty little Readers, I would by no Means advise you to be careless
or negligent of your Dress, but to be always neat and decent, and dress
suitably to your Fortunes; but let me advise you to recollect, that the finest
Dress in the World will be of very little Service, if you neglect to read your
Book and improve your Minds. A thousand Accidents may unite to deprive you of
Beauty and fine Clothes; but nothing can deprive you of Learning when once
acquired.

Master BILLY BASHFUL.
THIS young Gentleman, though in the seventh Year of his Age, is by no Means
fond of Company, though I know of no little Gentleman better qualified for it
than he is, as he has always loved his Book, read a great deal, and has a very
good Memory, nor do I know of anyone among my little Acquaintance whom I more
esteem than Master Billy Bashful. But this is his Way of walking in the Street,
so shame-faced that he cannot hold up his Head.



Though I would by no Means wish any of my pretty little Readers to be pert or
impudent in Company, yet I do not like to see Children over bashful; for a
cheerful and lively Turn in Conversation is always the most agreeable, and
never fails to make either a Master or Miss taken Notice of; but poor Billy
Bashful, though he possesses so many Talents for Conversation, seldom opens his
Mouth in Company, and therefore passes for a Blockhead in the Opinion of those
who do not know him. This, however, should be a Lesson to my Readers, not to
despise any little One, merely because they do not talk much; for Experience
has convinced us, that those who sit still and say nothing, are often wiser
than those who talk a great deal.

My little Readers must adapt their Conversation to the Company they may happen
to be in. When they are in Company with none but little Ones like themselves,
they may then, if they now and then choose it, let their little Clappers run
nineteen to the Dozen; but when they are in Company with their Superiors, they
must not be too fond of hearing themselves talk, in order, as they may think,
to show their Wit: On the contrary, they must never speak but when they are
spoken to, and, when a Question is asked them, they must give a direct Answer
in as few Words as possible. This will be considered as Modesty and not
Bashfulness. And here it may be necessary for me to explain to my little
Readers, the Difference between Bashfulness and Modesty.

Modesty requires, that a young Gentleman or Lady should give a direct Answer
to any Question that is asked them, without Fear or Trembling; but, at the same
Time, it requires you to say no more than is necessary; whereas Bashfulness
prevents little Ones answering any Questions that are put to them, until the
Question has been asked them three or four Times over, which is always
disagreeable, as it borders upon all Manners. Thus you see, that Modesty is
desirable, but Bashfulness should be shunned.

Miss FANNY SQUEAMISH.
I AM afraid my pretty little Readers will begin to think me an ill-natured
Sort of an Author, who is more pleased with picking out faulty Characters than
good ones; but I would beg Leave to remind them, that by pointing out to them
what is a Blemish in other little Folks, it may enable them to avoid the like
in themselves. Were I to lay before my little Readers nothing but good
Characters, they would be of no Use to them, as Self Love and Vanity would
induce them to think that they were equally good themselves; whereas, by seeing
the Errors of other little Ones laid before them, they begin to enquire in
themselves, whether they are not guilty of the like. I would advise all my
Readers to compare every Character they here read with themselves, and the
Comparison may perhaps prove useful to them.

It must be confessed, that Miss Fanny Squeamish was of but a weakly
Constitution; but this was in a great Measure owing to her being too much
indulged in her Infancy. Not a Breath of Air from Doors or Windows, that could
be excluded, was suffered to approach her; and, when she went abroad, she was
wrapped up in such a Manner, that you would suppose the Air of this Country was
like that of Norway or Friezeland.

Sometimes she was carried about the Streets in this Manner; and you may easily
judge what Benefit she could receive from the Air, when shut up in a Sedan
Chair.

There are some young Ladies, and Miss Fanny is one of them, who would be
exceedingly unhappy, should any one tell them, that they never looked better in
all their Lives; for these squeamish Sort of young Ladies are never more happy
than when they are pitied, and some of them expect, that a whole Company should
be sad and melancholy, because they happen to fancy themselves indisposed. If
their Finger does but ach, from the Scratch of a Pin, or any other trifling
Accident, the whole House is in an Uproar, the Doctor and Apothecary sent for,
and the Knocker instantly muffled, as a Token to all the Neighbors that Miss
Fanny is very ill.

My little Readers may perhaps think, that I am telling them this as a Tale to
amuse them; but I do assure them, upon my little Honor, that I do, at this
Time, know a young Lady, who answers, in every Point, to the Description I have
here given of Miss Fanny Squeamish. But I hope my Readers will ever have too
much good Sense, to attempt to make People believe they are ill when nothing
ails them, for we have real Evils enough, without raising imaginary ones.

Master TOMMY PRUDENCE.
THE Case of this little young Gentleman was, in the infant Part of his Years,
much to be pitied. He was born of affluent Parents, but his Mother died while
he was an Infant, and his Father, having met with great Losses in Trade, became
a Bankrupt, and left poor Tommy entirely unprovided for at the Age of nine
Years.

His Father's Effects were all sold for the Benefit of his Creditors, and poor
Tommy was left to the wide World to seek his Fortune. He had cried bitterly
enough for the Loss of his dear Father; but, as soon as these first Struggles
were over, he very wisely reflected, that, though he had lost a kind and
indulgent Father, yet he was sensible, that all the Tears in the World would
not restore him to his Caresses, and that it was now his Duty to consider of
what Steps were to be taken, in order to preserve himself from Want, and
thereby prevent any Reflection being thrown on the Memory of his dear Father.

As Tommy had already learned to read, write, and cast Accounts most prettily,
he determined to offer his Services to Mr. Worthy, who was a Merchant of great
Reputation, and had formerly dealed with his Father. Tommy walked up and down
the Street a long Time before he had Resolution enough to knock at the Door. At
last he did, was let in, and introduced to Mr. Worthy, who having listened with
great Attention to his innocent and artless Tale, eagerly embraced him,
promised to be his Friend, took him instantly into his House, and made him one
of his Clerks; and here he is at Business.



Tommmy, Night and Morning, thanked God for these Marks of his Goodness, and
employed all his leisure Hours in the Improvement of his Mind, and in such
Accomplishments as he thought might be useful to him in his present Station.

By these means he soon became a very accomplished young Gentleman, and gained
the Esteem of his Master and all the Gentlemen their House had Dealings with.
So that, in a few Years, he became first Clerk. In this Capacity he continued
until he was twenty-one Years of Age, when Mr. Worthy was happy to discover
that there was a secret Liking between Mr. Prudence and his only Daughter. Mr.
Worthy gave him his Daughter in Marriage, and Mr. Prudence accepted of her as
one of the greatest Blessings this World could bestow. They now joined in
Partnership, and all three live a Life of Happiness, blessing that Hour, in
which it pleased God to bring them acquainted with each other.

Miss POLLY HONEYCOMB.
THIS pretty little Miss is one of the most worthy Characters I have attempted
to hand down to Posterity, by inserting it in this valuable Work, which will
undoubtedly be read by the little Children of future Ages.

Miss Polly Honeycomb (will you believe it my little Readers!) is never out of
Temper. Let what will happen, she constantly preserves the Serenity of her
Temper, and looks upon those Disappointments, which vex and torment other
little Maids, with the utmost Indifference. If that Day happens to turn out
rainy, which she and some other little Ones had appointed to go abroad upon a
Party of Pleasure, it gives her not the least Concern, and she endeavors to
console her Companions by saying, "To be sure, we did intend to have a good
deal of Pleasure Today, and I dare say we should, had the Weather proved fine:
But who can tell, but that it has pleased God to order it to rain Today, in
order to keep us at home, and thereby avoid some dreadful Accident, which might
have happened to us had we gone abroad? Besides, this Rain will do more Good to
the Husbandman and Farmer, than we shall all our Lives. You know we can go
abroad another Day."

It was in this Manner this amiable young Lady reconciled herself to every
Disappointment that happened; for she considered God as the Director of all
Things, and thought it would be very naughty in her to repine at what he was
pleased to direct. I once heard her say (which I shall never forget) "To be
sure, it is a most terrible Thing to lose our dear Papa or Mamma, or even any
particular Friend; but then we should remember, that they are taken from this
World, which I am told is a very wicked one, to enjoy everlasting Rest in
Heaven."

Were every little Maiden, and I may say Master too, to act in this Manner,
what a World of Uneasiness would they save themselves. There would then be no
crying and sobbing about the meerest Trifles, and often about what it would be
dangerous to let them have. Miss Polly is not only always gay, happy, and
cheerful herself, but makes others so also wherever she is. In short, so sweet
and amiable is her Temper, that she more resembles a little Angel than a
Descendant of Adam and Eve. Strive to imitate her, my dear little Readers, if
you wish to be wise and happy as this young Lady is.

Master FRANCIS BACON.
WHETHER this young Gentleman was descended from the Family of the great Sir
Francis Bacon, or not, is a Matter I never could positively discover. Indeed,
all that I can learn of him, is, that he was a remarkably good Scholar for his
Age, that he wrote many pretty Things, and that he unhappily died at the Age of
eleven Years. The following Letters, written by this young Gentleman, will give
my little Readers some Idea of his Knowledge and Abilities.

To Master TOMMY LENOX.
YOU will see, my dear companion, from the Letter I now send you, that I am
still capable of writing. I thank God, I am now much better than I have been
for some Time past. I should be happy to see you again at Windsor, as I think I
should now be better able to entertain you than I was when you was last here.
My Tutor has taken away my Books from me; so that, in the tenth Year of my Age,
I am obliged to turn Child again, in order to find some Amusement to pass away
my Time. Will you believe me? I have made a Kite as tall as myself, and I have
filled it full of Stars. I wish you would come and see how prettily it flies. I
have a thousand Things to say to you, which I cannot tell you in Writing. Do
come quickly, and see your affectionate Friend,

F. BACON.

To Master TOMMY LENOX.
My dear little Friend,
I received your very kind Letter, which you sent me in Answer to mine; and I
am exceedingly sorry that you have been forced to put off your Visit until a
future Day, as I shall by that Time be perhaps in my Grave. Since I last wrote
to you, my Disorder has relapsed, and I am now bad enough. I have struggled
hard to write this Letter to you; and, as soon as I have finished it, I will
lay down my Pen forever. My Physician gives me no Hopes; but advises me to be
resigned: I am perfectly so. Why should I be otherwise? As soon as I have
quitted this sickly Frame of mine, I shall find myself in the Presence of a
good God, and in the Company of my dear Parents, who have undoubtedly prepared
a Seat for me among the Blessed, where no worldly Disorders can reach us. The
Bishop last Night honored me with a Visit. -- I was going to make a long
Letter of this; but I find the Moment is hastily approaching, in which I must
set out on a long Journey. Farewell, my dear little Friend, farewell forever.

F. BACON.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LITTLE AUTHOR.
WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.
IT is but just and reasonable, after I have taken the Liberty to write so
freely of so many little Masters and Misses, that I should give some short
Account of myself, and prove my Right to the important Character I have here
assumed, in presuming to judge of the Conduct of others.

To proceed. -- My Papa is a Clergyman, and one of the finest Scholars in the
Kingdom. He has written several valuable Sermons, which have received the
Approbation of almost all the religious old Ladies in the Kingdom. My Mamma was
formerly the Governess of a very capital Boarding-School for young Ladies,
which she retired from with the pleasing Reflection of seeing several young
Ladies arrived at the Age of Maturity, who, under my Mamma's Directions, had
acquired an uncommon Share of polite Education, and every female
Accomplishment. It is therefore no Wonder, that I should imitate my Parents,
and thus, in a very early Period of my Life, take upon me to direct little
Masters and Misses, as I hope, hereafter, when I shall become a Man, and a
Clergyman, to point out to my Flock the sublimest Truths of Religion and
Morality.

I was born on the 1st of January, in the Year of our Lord, 1770; and as soon
as I was born, I was declared to be the very Model of my Parents: I was
instantly pronounced to have Mamma's Eyes, Papa's Nose, Aunt's Mouth, and
Uncle's Chin; and one old Lady in particular, putting on her Spectacles, in
order to examine my Features more minutely, cried out in a prophetic Strain,
"I will venture to prophesy, that this sweet Babe will one Day or other become
a great Writer and a valuable Preacher."

I can recollect very little of my infant Years, further than that my Nurse
would frequently observe, that I was always exceedingly displeased whenever she
made Use of the Bells on my Choral, by shaking them to amuse me; and she has
since told me, that nothing would quiet me so soon as taking up a Book and
reading to me, though I certainly could not, at that Age, understand a single
Syllable she pronounced. This Circumstance I have often heard my Papa himself
confirm.

When I came to be breeched, I laid aside all juvenile Sports, and was a very
poor Hand at Marbles, Trap-Ball, or Cricket. Indeed I was so little attentive
to Play, that I was soon disregarded by the rest of the Boys, who considered me
as a dull heavy little Fellow. If ever they got quarrelling together, I never
used to intermeddle, but retired to a Corner, pulled out some little Book,
which I always carried about me, and left them to fight it out among
themselves, as you here see.



I was never happier than when I could get into my Papa's Study, and, even long
before I had any Idea how to form a Letter, I would get a Pen in my Hand, and
fill a large Piece of Paper, with what may be called Pot-Hooks and Hangers.

My Papa soon discovered my natural Inclinations, and encouraged and cherished
my early and eager Pursuit after Knowledge. He accordingly taught me how to
hold my Pen, then how to make small Letters, then larger ones, and so on, until
within ten Months, when I had learned to write as good a Hand as most of the
little Boys in our Neighborhood who were twice my Age. I likewise conquered
the four first Rules in Arithmetic in a Trice, and my Papa tells me, that he
doubts not, but that I shall by and by be a great Mathematician and Divine.

After I had learned to write and read like a Man, my Papa advised me to sit
down and write short Letters out of my own Head, which I accordingly did; and,
as I have a great many of these by me, I may, some time or other, find Leisure
to peruse and correct them for the Press, when I shall lay them before my
little Readers for their Amusement as well as Improvement.

After I had finished a vast Number of these Letters, my Papa advised me to
rise one Step higher, and write the Characters of all the little Masters and
Misses I could recollect; but of all Things commanded me to conceal the proper
Names of the Parties and give them borrowed Titles. How far this first
Publication of a little Writer may please the little World, I cannot tell; but
they may be assured, that it has cost me much Labor and Study.

I would advise all the little Readers, into whose Hands this Book may fall,
carefully to notice all the different Characters they have here read, and
thereby regulate their Conduct and Behavior, not only when they are at their
own Homes, but more particularly when they are abroad upon Visits. If they
carefully observe the Conduct of others, they will often have Occasion to
lament, that Masters and Misses are not always so good as they should be. When
they evidently discover Imperfections in others, before they venture to censure
or find Fault with them, they should carefully examine themselves, whether they
likewise have not been guilty of the same Kind of naughty Actions, or at least
others equally as bad. By accustoming themselves to this Kind of
Self-Examination, they will acquire not only a Knowledge of others, but of
themselves also, which is the most desirable Thing in this Life to be
thoroughly acquainted with.

Thus, my little Readers, have I finished this original Work, not a single Line
of it having been taken from any Book whatever. Is there any great Author
living, who can, as truly say so much of any of his Works?

FINIS.
BOOKS for the Instruction and Amusement of Children, which will make them wise
and happy, printed and sold by I. THOMAS, in Worcester, Massachusetts, near the
Courthouse.
THE BROTHER's GIFT; or the naughty Girl reformed. Published for the Advantage
of the rising Generation.

The SISTER's GIFT; or the naughty Boy reformed.

The FATHER's GIFT; or the Way to be wise and happy.

The MOTHER's GIFT; or a Present for all little Children who wish to be good.

The FAIRING: Or, a golden Toy for Children of all Sizes and Denominations.

In which they may see all the Fun of the Fair,

And at Home be as happy as if they were there.

The SUGAR-PLUMB; or Sweet Amusement for Leisure Hours: Being an Entertaining
and instructive Collection of Stories. Embellished with curious Cuts.

The History of little GOODY TWO-SHOES; otherwise called Mrs. MARGERY TWO-SHOES
-- With the Means by which she acquired her Learning and Wisdom, and in
consequence thereof her Estate.

TOM THUMB's EXHIBITION; being an account of many valuable and surprising
Curiosities which he has collected in the Course of his Travels, for the
Instruction and Amusement of the American Youth.

Mother GOOSE's MELODY; or Sonnets for the Cradle. In two Parts. Part 1st
contains the most celebrated Songs and Lullabies of the old British Nurses,
calculated to amuse Children and to excite them to Sleep. Part 2d, those of
that sweet Songster and Nurse of Wit and Humor, Master William Shakespeare.
Embellished with Cuts, and illustrated with Notes and Maxims, Historical,
Philosophical, and Critical.

Little ROBIN RED BREAST; a Collection of pretty Songs, for children, entirely
new.

Tom Thumb's PLAY-BOOK, to teach Children their Letters as soon as they can
speak. Being a new and pleasant Method to allure little Ones in the first
Principles of Learning.

The little PUZZLING-CAP, or a small Collection of Riddles.

The big PUZZLING-CAP; or a large Collection of Riddles.

The Travels of ROBINSON CRUSOE. Written by himself.

HAGAR in the Desert. Translated from the French.

The BEAUTY and the MONSTER.

History of the HOLY JESUS. Containing a brief and plain Account of his Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven; and his coming again at
the great and last Day of Judgment. Being a pleasant and profitable Companion
for Children; composed on Purpose for their Use.

Be MERRY and WISE; or the Cream of Jests and the Marrow of Maxims.

The natural History of four footed Beasts.

By Tommy Trip.

The HOLY BIBLE abridged; or, the History of the Old and New Testament.
Illustrated with Notes and adorned with Cuts. For the use of Children.

The History of little King PIPPIN; with an Account of the melancholy Death of
four naughty Boys, who were devoured by wild Beasts. And the wonderful Delivery
of Master Harry Harmless, by a little white Horse.

A BAG of NUTS, ready cracked; or instructive Fables, ingenious Riddles, and
merry Conundrums. By the celebrated and facetious Thomas Thumb, Esquire Published
for the Benefit of all little Masters and misses who love reading as well as
playing.

Nurse TRUELOVE's new Year's Gift; or the Book of Books for Children. Adorned
with Cuts: And designed for a Present to every little Boy who would become a
great Mam, and ride upon a fine Horse; and to every little Girl, who would
become a great Woman, and ride in a Governor's gilt Coach.


