MR. LYMAN's ELECTION SERMON.

MAY 30, 1787.

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. IN SENATE, May 30, 1787.
ORDERED, That Cotton Tufts, Josiah Thatcher and Elijah Dwight, Esq'rs. be a
Committee to wait on the Reverend Mr. LYMAN, and thank him, in the name of the
Senate, for the SERMON delivered by him this day, before his Excellency the
Governor, the Council, and the two branches of the General Court; and also to
request of him a copy for the press.

Attest. SAMUEL COOPER, Clerk.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JAMES BOWDOIN, ESQUIRE. GOVERNOR; HIS
HONOR THOMAS CUSHING, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOUR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL,
AND THE HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 30, 1787.

BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

By Rev. JOSEPH LYMAN, PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN HATFIELD.

BOSTON* PRINTED BY ADAMS AND NOURSE, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL
COURT.

N. B. The Address to His Excellency JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire; Governor elect, was
omitted in the delivery, as his choice and acceptance of the office, was not
then declared.

AN Election SERMON.
ROMANS, CHAP. XIII. VERSE 4, first clause. For he is the Minister of GOD to
thee for good.
IT is the appropriate privilege of christianity, to afford doctrines and
precepts adapted to the circumstances of all characters of men. Other systems
of morality are partial in their instructions, deficient in motives, and
erroneous in the maxims of human life. But the author of our says has
grounded our obligations upon a rational foundation, excited us to duty by
suitable and efficient motives, and extended his instructions to every class of
men. With equal regards he respects the wise and the noble, the uninstructed
and him of low degree. To render his system the more beneficial, he has
appointed ministers to explain its principles, and inculcate his saving
doctrines upon men of all degrees; to vindicate and magnify his institutions
before Kings, and to preach the gospel to the poor.

AND this is the minister's happiness, that he is ready furnished with
instructions suited to every auditory before whom he may speak. All men need
instruction, to be prompted to the discharge of their supreme obligations to
God, and their relative obligations to each other. And this is their common
privilege, that the blessed Jesus by his written word and preached gospel,
provides for all a portion in due season.

THE words selected for the basis of a discourse upon the present occasion,
contain instruction for rulers; to point them to the origin of their power and
the use they should make of it: They comprize a lesson equally useful to
subjects; how to conduct themselves in relation to their rulers, and what views
to entertain of their authority.

SHOULD the Preacher conform himself to the text, and place to view the solemn
importance of it, the present occasion might be richly profitable to this great
assembly. May that Divine Teacher, who spoke as never man spoke, by the aids of
his Spirit, assist the Preacher to find out acceptable words and the words of
truth and soberness; to recommend his doctrines in their purity and power to
his servants, now convened to learn the law in his sanctuary.

For he is the minister of God to thee for good.

OUR first enquiry is, Who is this minister of God? The context informs us,
that he is the civil magistrate, called in a preceding passage, the higher
powers, since the magistrate is raised in the community to a station above his
brethren, and entrusted with authority to govern others, by ordaining and
executing laws for the common good. That magistrates are designated by the
Apostle, appears from his terming them, Rulers who are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil; they are appointed to support good morals and punish
vice. And this part of the description agrees with the civil magistrate, He is
a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: And as an acknowledgement
of his services and dignity, he receives tribute. It is thus evident from the
Apostle's calling him the Higher Powers, the Ruler and the Revenger, that the
civil magistrate is intended by the minister of God. In speaking upon this
subject, four general propositions will merit our attention, viz.

I. That civil authority is of divine institution. II. That civil authority is
instituted for the good of the people in general, and for the benefit of the
church of Christ in particular. III. What measures must the civil authority
pursue to answer the end of their institution? IV. What are the obligations of
subjects to the civil authority?
1. Civil authority is of Divine institution.

He is the minister of God.

Order is Heaven's first law. Without it the gracious designs of the Creator
cannot be accomplished. He has made his creatures of various powers and
degrees; rising by an easy and happy gradation, from the lowest species of
animals, to the most exalted rank of heavenly intelligencies. Creatures of the
same species are constituted with certain differences, by which they greatly
excel each other. Men, who are said to be born in a state of equality, are yet
endowed with unequal measures of strength and wisdom. And hence there is a
greater variety amongst men, than amongst several different species of animals.
Some are qualified to teach and guide; others to be taught and led by their
superiors. To affirm that in the qualifications to rule and guide, all men are
equal, is to blend characters totally diverse, to confound wisdom with folly,
and affability and condescension with ill nature and pride. There have ever
been distinctions in the world, and various degrees amongst men; while endowed
with such various qualities and affections, the distinction will remain. To
gainsay this distinction, is to counteract one of the principal laws of
humanity. Some must be in authority; others in subordination. And happy is that
people who are allowed in Providence, to look out from among their brethren
persons of the best disposition, and most aptly qualified to rule over them.

THAT particular persons should be distinguished and exalted in society, may be
argued from the methods of Providence, ever since man has been upon earth. No
people were ever able to subsist for any length of time, without forming into
some kind of civil government, and setting aside those boasted equalities, with
which men are born into the world. They must be subject to some common rule and
authority, in order to possess any measure of happiness and security. Where
there are no rulers to govern the community, all things are immediately
involved in confusion and misery. The continuance of our original equality, is
a state of nature, and all ages have found a state of nature to be a state of
war. Therefore it has pleased the common Parent of men, to lead them to a state
of civil subordination, by which a part of the community are entrusted to
ordain and carry into effect, laws and regulations for the whole.

THAT the establishment of civil government is by the counsel and wisdom of
God, we are taught both from the history of his Providence, and the testimony
of his inspired truth. Israel, the people of his love, were formed into a civil
community, and made subordinate to established laws, to be administered by
rulers appointed for that purpose. And it was a time of sore rebuke, when there
was no magistrate in the land of sufficient authority, to put them in fear. The
exaltation and degradation of rulers is the work of God, and not the production
of a blind and fortuitous chance, according to the opinion of idle and infidel
wits. For says the word of enlightening truth, Psalm, lxxv. 6, 7.
Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south.
But God is the Judge; he puts down one and sets up another. The
prerogative of ordaining magistracy and civil authority, belongs to our Lord
Jesus Christ; this claim he assumes to himself under the name of Wisdom. Prove.
viii. 15, 16.
"By me Kings reign and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and nobles,
even all the judges of the earth." These words imply the power of God, in
supporting civil authority, and also his approbation of civil magistracy, as
one of the blessings of the Redeemer's purchase. In what estimation the
blessing of civil government is holden by God, may be learned from that
apostolical direction to Titus, how to teach the flock of Christ. Titus, iii. 1.
"Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
magistrates." So far is Christ interested in the support of civil authority,
that he will acknowledge those only to be his followers, who willingly obey
rulers, and submit to their administrations.

BUT we need not go far for arguments: Our text is encompassed with proofs of
the Divine institution of civil authority. The argument in the first verse, for
subjection to the higher powers, is, For there is no power but of God: the
powers that be, are ordained of God. The reason alleged for not opposing the
power, is in the second verse. Whosoever resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God* and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
Thrice in this argument the Apostle styles the magistrate, God's minister; that
is, a public servant appointed by God. He is styled also God's revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. And Christians must needs be subject,
not only from fear and constraint, but cheerfully in discharge of a good
conscience. Therefore our argument for the Divine institution of civil
authority, rests upon the uniformity of Providence, in bringing mankind under
government; upon the clear testimony of scripture; and upon our Lord's repeated
instructions to his disciples to yield a willing homage to rulers, even when
they are neither of their faith, nor even of exemplary morals.

NOT that God has ordained any particular form of Government. This is left to
the judgment of men, and the circumstances of particular countries and
communities. But some government is necessary. God wills mankind to be in
subordination, and that they stand to each other in the relation of rulers and
subjects. He does not set up the claim of Kings, to an indefeasible and
hereditary right: Such a claim is without support in scripture, and is
repugnant to common sense. The leading idea of scripture is, That communities
constitute certain of their brethren to rule over them: and thus constituted,
they are the ordinance of the Supreme Ruler.

OUR argument is not, That every power which assumes to be authority is really
so; or that God would have it acknowledged as his institution. Usurpers and
incurable tyrants are not the ordinance of God. Invaders are to be rejected as
hostile to civil authority and subversive of government* The Apostle would
show, That rulers allowed by long use, submitted to by promises of allegiance,
or introduced according to the stated maxims of the community over whom they
preside, are invested with power by God himself, and are to be obeyed by
Christians as his ordinance; and this, however their characters may be faulty,
and their administrations in many respects injudicious and reprehensible.

I proceed to prove,

II. THAT civil authority is instituted for the good of the people in general,
and for the benefit of the church of Christ in particular.

He is the Minister of God to THEE for GOOD.

THAT God has instituted civil authority for the common good, is a full
demonstration, that he utterly abhors that tyranny and oppression, which is so
frequently practiced by the insolent Rulers of the earth: His benevolence is
incensed at the abuse of his gifts, and the perversion of those powers and
talents which he has bestowed upon magistrates for the happiness of his
creatures. Rulers, who misapply their authority for their personal advantage,
and use the force of the State, to feed their ambition and revenge, or to
gratify the guilty passions of minions and favorites, at the expense of
public misery, are singular objects of Divine resentment, and a strange
punishment is prepared for them by the righteous Avenger. No man has authority
from God for partial advantage, but for the common good. And while God suffers
such rulers to hold dominion among men, he utterly abhors the injustice and
wickedness of their administrations; he will bring to swift destruction these
haughty oppressors of the nations, and proportion his plagues to their
violence, and to the sorrows which they have produced to their fellow men. He
will eventually show his power, and make his wrath known in their wonderful
perdition.

BUT let none imagine, that God has no gracious purposes to answer by an
iniquitous administration of civil government. Insatiable oppressors, bloody
conquerors and imperial butchers, are of use in the scheme of Providence, to
correct and amend the revolting tribes of men. While they make the earth to
tremble, and turn fruitful fields into a desolate wilderness, they are the
messengers of divine displeasure, the rod of God's anger, and the staff of his
indignation, against an hypocritical and rebellious people. If a wise and
merciful administration will not correct the dissoluteness of an obdurate
people, God scourges them with the stings of scorpions, with the relentless
cruelty and ambition of unprincipled tyrants Such dispensations are necessary,
both to reclaim the disobedient, and as an example of retributive justice upon
the incorrigible, that others may shun the rocks on which they split.

GOD's judgments are full of mercy. That greatest temporal calamity which men
experience, an unrighteous administration of civil power, has yet a gracious
mixture of compassion, and tends to make perfect the scheme of Providence.

BUT a good and equal administration of government, is a blessing to the
community in a different sense. The enjoyments and tranquillity of subjects are
secured by the protection of rulers. To advance general happiness, to secure
property, to increase true, rational liberty, and to preserve the lives of men,
are the original purposes for which civil laws and magistrates are ordained by
heaven. The Supreme Ruler has given to magistrates no warrant to pursue unequal
or partial measures; to consult personal or family interests; nor to foster the
wishes and pursuits of cringing favorites. -- The sword of the state is not
committed to them for the exclusive advantage of particular societies or
classes of men. To promote the general good, to cherish virtue, and to diffuse
joyous prosperity through the whole community, are the ends for which God has
exalted them to power. And they may pursue the interests of individuals, only
in consistency with the public benefit. The design of their institution, is to
encourage virtue, to protect good men, to frown upon the courses of the wicked,
and to repress that fraud and injustice, by which oppressors consume the
faithful of the land, and devour the widow and him who has no helper.

OUR Apostle would teach the civil authority, that the great objects of their
care, are to cherish virtue, and extirpate vice; to avenge public and
individual wrongs; to curb the excesses of selfish avarice and ambition, and to
foster that philanthropy and integrity, by which alone, nations can be built up
and established. And they would do well to remember, that not only the general
welfare of the community is a principal object with all rulers who pursue the
end of their appointment, but that God requires of them, a constant and
watchful attention to the happiness of the church of Christ; and for this plain
reason, that magistrates can in no way so substantially promote the common
good, as by honoring the doctrines and followers of Jesus. Whatever infidel
wits may dream to the contrary, Jesus Christ is appointed by the Father to an
universal kingdom. John, v. 2^.
For the Father has committed all judgment to the Son. Ephesians. 1. 2^.
And gave him to be head over all things to the Church. By him Kings reign, and
at his pleasure he sets up and casts down all human rule and authority. And
those are short sighted politicians, who pay no special regard to Christ. As
the Governor of all States, he will be acknowledged Supreme, sitting in the
assemblies of the mighty, and judging among the Gods. States who have heard of
Christ and his exaltation, and give him no public acknowledgements, are
profanely impious against the Father and the Son, and may well fear the wrath
of the Lamb. Let rulers then receive their power, as proceeding from Christ,
and by solemn testimonies of respect to him and to his disciples, honor him as
their Sovereign: And thus kiss the Son, lest he be angry and they perish from
the way. They are ordained for the particular benefit of the Church, for the
prosperity of which, all the wheels of Providence, and all the revolutions of
empire, have been in motion from the morning of time. It should lie upon the
minds of rulers, especially of those who make a profession, that they believe
the truth of the Christian religion, to honor Christ by a true profession, and
an answerable life, and by their immediate regards in all their
administrations, to the prosperity and dignity of Christ's family upon earth.
This is God's governing end in their appointment to rule, that his children may
lead peaceable and quiet lives in godliness and honesty. It is a gross mistake,
an affront upon the Lord of all worlds, to affirm, that civil magistrates have
nothing to do for the church of Christ. Their paramount Sovereign, has taught
them, that they cannot discharge their civil trust, without a diligent
attention to his church upon earth. As well may the minister of an earthly
Prince allege, that he has nothing to do for the peace and dignity of his
master's family, as civil rulers can allege, that they have no concern with
the church, the family of the King of Zion. The magistrates most assiduous and
unwearied labors are due by his appointment to the church of God.

OUR attention is called under the next head, to specify,

III. WHAT measures the civil authority must pursue, to answer the end of their
institution.

THE God of Heaven, who sets up Kings, and removes Kings at his pleasure,
gives to rulers the kingdom, strength, power, and glory, for the benefit of his
people. To answer this benevolent purpose of Heaven, should be the magistrates
first employment. How this purpose may be most effectually answered is our
present enquiry. And here I shall be indulged in several particulars. And

1st, To be the minister of God for good, the ruler must enterrain an ardent
love for his people.

LOVE is the main spring of every interchange of kind offices amongst men. In
no case has this Divine principle a more efficacious operation, than when the
ruler's heart is inspired with a paternal affection toward his subjects. To be
the father of his people, is the magistrate's dignity: This constitutes his
nearest conformity to our universal Parent: This will animate him to prosecute
the common happiness, under all temptations, and in seasons of the most
pressing trials and difficulties: Without this, he will faint under the
perverseness and ingratitude of his people, when they oppose his labors for
their good, and ill requite his faithful and painful services for national
establishment and prosperity. Love animated the patience and perseverance of
Moses, to plead for Israel in their numerous rebellions, and finally to pledge
his own prosperity, for their salvation, when he prayed that God would spare
them, although to vindicate his justice, he should blot him out of his book; that
is, cut him off from a name and inheritance among the tribes of the Lord, in
the land of promise.

THIS noble affection filled David with all the agonies of distress, and the
importunity of prayer, that God would spare the sheep of his flock, from the
sword of the destroying Angel, which was drawn over Jerusalem. This fortified
Nehemiah, to a life of self-denial, conflict and danger, while he built the
city of his father's sepulchers. And this will give energy to the endeavors of
all magistrates for the prosperity of their brethren, and make them to esteem
diligence, watchfulness, personal expense, self-denial, continual humiliation
and supplication before God, but reasonable and pleasant services for the
public benefit. That he may pursue their prosperity, the ruler must cultivate
at tender and benevolent affection for his people. Again,

2dly, To be God's minister for good, the ruler must learn the characters and
interest of his people.

IGNORANT and uninformed Statesmen, however honest in their intentions, can do
very little for the happiness of the community. Their limited views create
local prejudices, and subject them to the artifices of interested politicians.
While a part of the community make undue advantages of their ignorant
mismanagement, the body languishes and withers away for want of counsel, energy
and uniformity in the civil administration. It concerns rulers, therefore, to
be well acquainted with the tempers, capacities, views and interests of the
citizens, in all parts of their government, that they may adapt their
administration to the advantage of the whole, without material injury to
individuals. Rulers unacquainted with the interests of the several professions,
and the reputation and capacities of the principal characters, will make
grievous mistakes in government, by confining their labors to a narrow circle,
and by losing the services of the most suitable men in the community. What is
more preposterous, than for rulers to exert their influence and authority, for
the partial interest of the territory in their vicinity, to make the interest
of one class or profession yield to the avarice and ambition of another; to be
a stickler for this or that faction in the State? A ruler should have an
enlarged heart, a noble, well-instructed mind; able to comprehend the
characters and interests of his brethren, and disposed, with a generous
impartiality and diffusive benevolence, to speak peace to all his seed. And for
this end he must study the dispositions, the employments, the weaknesses and
abilities, and the substantial interests of all his subjects. This knowledge is
essentially requisite to be an useful and reputable magistrate. Again,

3dly, To be a minister for good to the people, the ruler must be instructed in
the political maxims and laws of the State, in which he governs.

THE safety of a people, especially of a free people, depends upon a sacred
adherence to the original principles of their government. When those principles
are disregarded, every blessing is insecure, and the administration degenerates
into an arbitrary despotism. Therefore rulers should understand the system of
laws, and those forms of administration, to which the people are accustomed,
and conform themselves to those original principles; then they will have a line
of conduct in their office, and the people will know what to expect from them.
As a general knowledge of civil policy is necessary to make an accomplished
ruler, so a thorough acquaintance with their own state policy, is necessary to
make a tolerable one. When ignorance is in place, the people will mourn, and
folly and wickedness be exalted on every side. It was an essential
qualification for government in Solomon, 1 Kings, iv. 29.
That God had given him wisdom and largeness of heart, very much, even as the
sand upon the seashore. Eccles. x. 16.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy King is a child. The curse of ignorant uninformed
rulers, is taught us by the prophet Isaiah, Isaiah, iii, 4, 12.
And I will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them:
As for my people, children are their oppressors, and woman rule over them: O my
people, they which lead thee, cause thee to err. And says Solomon, Prove.
xxviii, 16.
The Prince that wants understanding, is also a great oppressor. But by
wisdom and understanding the throne is established, and the expectations of the
people are richly gratified. No man therefore, should undertake to rule amongst
men, until he is fully instructed into the civil constitution and laws of the
community, where he is to govern. Again,

4thly. To promote the public good, rulers must be controuled in all their
measures, by truth and integrity.

FOR wisdom without integrity, will soon degenerate into cunning and artifice,
by which the interests of the community will fall a prey to those who should be
their friendly protectors. A magistrate without truth and sincerity, is the
snare and perdition of his subjects. All power should be founded in truth, both
in the attainment and exercise of it. Prove. xii, 19.
The lip of truth shall be established forever: but a lying tongue is but for a
moment. Prove. xvii, 7.
Excellent speech becomes not a fool, much less do lying lips a prince. An
administration founded in truth and righteousness, will bear the test of
scrutiny: and measures dictated by honesty, shall come forth approved and
prosperous in the end: while the duplicity of deceitful politicians shall
perish, and involve both rulers and subjects in the snares of perplexity and
ruin. All men, especially all leading men, carry their measures with the most
success and reputation, when they prosecute them with simple uniformity and
honest sincerity. It should therefore be the first object with him who rules
over men, to be just, to be true in his administrations: not having a
mysterious system of delusion to deceive others into his fraudulent intentions.

To gain the confidence of their subjects, rulers must be men upon whom they
may safely depend. And without this confidence, subjects can derive very little
advantage from government. Men in place, therefore, must make declarations and
promises strictly just and clearly intelligible, and by adhering to them, the
subject must know what to expect from authority. Rulers, to be useful, must
deal fairly and honestly with the people; distribute equal justice; protect
them from wrongs, and punish injuries with integrity and decision: not leave
honest men the prey of fraud.

IT is a sad time, when rulers are so inattentive to justice and veracity, that
truth falls in the streets, and he who departs from iniquity, makes
himself a prey. Good rulers make fair promises and keep them, and are exemplary
in fulfiling contracts. The magistrate who defrauds his subjects, will have a
poor face to punish individuals who defraud one another. Do rulers wish to be
public blessings? then let them keep good the public faith, sustain the credit
of the state, and pay punctually the public contracts. This will give energy to
government, establish the influence and credit of authority, and teach the
people that uprightness and veracity, by which alone the various members of
society can be closely cemented. A dissembler and a cheat among individuals, is
a base character; and a fraudulent administration of government, is a character
as much more detestible, as the number and authority of the rulers exceed one
individual. Some have acted as though a fraud or falsehood might be lost in the
number of partners, or be sanctified by great and powerful names: But he who
sits in the Heavens, will manifest their error, and prove, Prove. xii. 22.
that lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, that they are but for a
moment, that the feet of unrighteous rulers stand in slippery places; and when
the good man sees their end, he shall suddenly curse their habitation. Does
the ruler wish to be useful and reputable? Let him be a true and honest man.
Would he involve himself and the community in infamy and perplexity? Let him be
unequal in his administrations; let his performances contradict his promises;
by false weights and false measures of justice and equity, let him frame
iniquity by law, and teach the Lord's people to transgress. Again,

5thly, To rule well, the magistrate must cultivate habits of industry and
frugality.

RULERS have so much to do, that they have no time to lose. An indolent ruler,
like the useless and unwieldly drone, devours the honey which others have
gathered. He consumes the people's tribute without earning it. The support
which subjects should liberally furnish for the maintenance of government,
rulers should merit by their diligent services. And while they carefully avoid
avarice in withholding expenses for the public good, it concerns them to use
the revenues of the State, with economy, that no part of the public treasure
be applied to useless and triffling purposes. Covetousness and prodigality are
both mischievous vices in rulers, and they should avoid each extreme, if they
would be blessings to the people.

INDOLENT rulers will be otherways vicious. Idleness will cloud their minds and
extinguish the nobler sensations of the soul, and the most noxious weeds will
spring up in their place. By their example, habits of idleness, intemperance,
dissipation, gaming and profaneness, like some infectious contagion, will
spread through all ranks of people. An enervated, poor and contemptible people
will be the consequence of an indolent and dissipated administration of
government. Such wicked rulers will rule over a poor, worthless people; the
community will sink into effeminacy, dependence and wretchedness. It becomes
the magistrate then to be a man of business, not a man of pleasure; to be
attentive to his office, and painful in his exertions for the common good. Thus
shall his example recommend hardiness, patience, frugality and self-denial to
his subjects, and through the prevalence of these virtues, they shall be able
to meet the enemy in the gate, and rise with luster among the nations. It was
the maxim of a Grecian Prince, worthy to be adopted by the Christian
magistrate, It ill becomes a Statesman, to sleep all night.

THE virtues of industry, and well-judged frugality, are the support of
republican governments, and are therefore peculiarly requisite in their civil
authority, who by their example, should teach the people habits of diligence,
hardiness and economy, not to consume, according to the baneful customs of our
republics, in dissipation and luxury, much more than we earn by our labor and
industry. Again,

6thly, To answer the purpose of their institution, civil rulers must protect
good citizens, and punish the wicked.

THE scripture character of rulers is, That they are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Power is grossly abused and perverted, when wicked
citizens are fostered and protected by authority. God has ordained rulers to
average the wrongs of injustice and oppre^^^^^, and the (...) of sedition and
rebellion. It is only when bad men are in authority, that vile men are exalted
and screened from justice. No favor or friendship, no relation or connection
with men in power, should cover the wicked from punishment. Rulers are to
execute the laws: And the laws are made for the lawless and disobedient. All
delays of justice, the exemption from chastisement, which corrupt citizens
receive in breaking the peace and violating the ordinances of justice, is a
sore malady in the State, and proves that the head is sick and the heart faint.
Good magistrates, by their influence, suppress immorality, and every
transgression of relative justice. God commands it, and faithful subjects have
a claim upon their rulers, to be protected from fraud and oppression, to have
the laws executed, their persons, their liberty and property protected, from
the depredations of designing and unprincipled men. And the magistrate who does
not endeavor to punish and reclaim, or utterly to purge from the State wicked
and disobedient subjects, forgets the main design of his exaltation. And when
good men are left to the fear and danger of losing their privileges and
possessions, they are sadly neglected; and the God of Heaven, will avenge their
quarrel against such slothful and unrighteous magistrates. To let the wicked go
unpunished, and the righteous live without protection, is both a contemptible
weakness and a scandalous wickedness in authority. Prove. xvi. 12.
For it should be an abomination to Kings to do wickedness, and the throne is
established by righteousness. Prove. xiv. 34.
Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is the reproach of any people. Prove.
xvii. 15.
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both
are abomination to the Lord. For this end rulers wait upon their work to make a
clear distinction between the just and the unjust; and it is an illustrious
display of benevolence, to over-whelm incorrigible offenders by the arm of
power, and raise to safety and honor the faithful of the land. It is a precept
grounded upon moral reasons, and consequently of perpetual obligation, -- Deuteronomy.
xvii. 12.
The man that will do presumptuously and will not hearken unto the Priest,
which stands there to minister before the Lord thy God, or unto the judge,
even that man shall die; and thou shall put away the evil from Israel. The
State must employ punishments adequate to the suppression of vice, and rewards
commensurate to the encouragement of virtue and fidelity: And the ruler who
permits the rod of the wicked to rest upon the lot of the righteous, is
disobedient to God, and an enemy to his people. Again,

7thly, RULERS, to be ministers of God for good, must be men of religion.

ALL christian graces are of immediate use in the administration of government.
And as rulers receive their ordination from God, he expects that as servants
they honor him, and obey his Son Jesus Christ, as their liege Lord. Since
religion furnishes men with those excelling gifts and good dispositions, which
qualify them to govern, so they can never cultivate faith and piety with too
careful an assiduity. Their success in office, and their usefulness among their
subjects, depend primarily upon the Divine presence and blessing. Therefore
they should be men of exemplary faith in their King and Savior, and not lean
unto their own understanding. That illustrious magistrate Nehemiah, thought it
a most essential qualification in his brother Hananiah, to take charge over
Jerusalem. Neh. vii. 2.
Because he was a faithful man and feared God above many. Magistrates should be
men of prayer, that God may dwell with them and direct their counsels. They
should be accustomed to appear before God in the posture of suppliants, that he
would enlighten their ignorance, and prosper their exertions. None have more
need of wisdom, than they; and to whom should they apply but to him who gives
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. Would they be honored by the
obedience of their subjects? Let them obtain this honor by obeying God, by
lives of temperance, sobriety and a becoming gravity. Like their blessed
Master, let them be meek, humble and gentle toward all men; like him, love
righteousness and hate iniquity, be constant, watchful and fervant in duty,
bearing the sorrows, and relieving the distresses of their fellow men; like him
go about doing good. It is incumbent upon them, to honor Christ in his
institutions, setting a pattern before their brethren of family religion,
resolving with the pious and valiant Joshua, That as for us and our houses, we
will serve the Lord; attending uniformly upon the ordinances of public worship,
hallowing God's Sabbaths, and reverencing his sanctuary, attentively waiting
upon the dispensation of the gospel. From rulers we may well expect submission
to all God's commandments, and that they cherish the appointed means of
diffussing christian knowledge, and by honoring Christ's ministers and
followers, become nursing fathers to the Church. Some have thought that
religion is no important part of a ruler's character: It is true, that rulers
without religion are to be obeyed. But when it is considered that they are made
rulers ultimately for the good and prosperity of the Church, we must censure
those for their ignorance or irreligion, who adopt a maxim so pernicious to
civil society, and embarrassing to the interests of virtue and morality.
Without religion, rulers have no God, unto whom they may repair and expect his
blessing upon their administration. God is not with them, and when his presence
is withdrawn, darkness and perplexity will fill their paths with snares and
adversity. Immoral and ungodly rulers may affect courtesy, affability and
patriotism to gain popularity; but they have no moral principle upon which the
public may depend, and too often have they proved the scourge of the community,
and the rod of God's indignation against a profane or hypocritical people.
Therefore we lay it down as a qualification of great moment to the State, that
magistrates be men of piety, who have a governing regard to the glory of God,
and a warm affection for the gospel of Christ. Such are the sentiments avowed
in our form of government, which requires the great officers of government,
before they enter upon their trust, to declare their belief of the Christian
religion, as the religion taught from Heaven, for the happiness and salvation
of lost men. Again.

8thly, To influence them to a useful discharge of their trust, it is
important, that rulers keep in mind their mortality and their future account
before the bar of God.

Psalm. lxxxii. 6 7.
I have said, ye are Gods: and all of you are children of the Most High. But ye
shall die like men. Like their brethren of the dust they shall go to the grave,
the house appointed for all the living. To death succeeds their solemn account
at the tribunal of the son of man, who will judge the secrets of men according
to our gospel. The wise, the great and the mighty of the earth, will stand
before the impartial judgment seat, upon a level with the despised and
indigent of their subjects. At that solemn hour when the opinions of men shall
be lighter than the dust of the balance, and the flattering tongue shall be put
to perpetual silence, when the judgment shall be the Lord's and shall be
administered without respect of persons, the enquiry will be, not whether we
have been great in the earth, enjoyed the applauses of our fellow worms, and
exercised dominion among the sons of the dust: but whether we have filled our
station, kept in view our last account, and prepared matters for our acquittal
at the solemn trial. Rulers should remember that their reward will be in exact
proportion to their benevolence and fidelity, not according to their power and
authority; and that their punishment will not be alleviated by any instances of
present impunity from the impotence of human justice: but according to their
sloth and luxury, their wantonness and ambition, their oppression and avarice,
such will be their retribution from the sentence of the Lord of Sabbath, who
hears the groans of injured and neglected subjects, and has prepared a strange
punishment for the haughty oppressors of the earth.

WERE this day of retribution, which will soon overtake us all, duly realized
by magistrates, how could they fail to discharge with assiduity and care their
sacred trust, and to be in earnest to become ministers of God for good, to the
people? Having stated the methods, by which rulers may answer the benevolent
purposes of Heaven in their appointment, it concerns us under the last general
head,

IV. To point out the obligations of subjects to the civil authority.

IT is the prerogative of a free people to appoint men from among their
brethren to rule over them. It is their duty and only security to use this
prerogative with discretion and fidelity, 1 Pet. ii. 16.
not using their liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of
God. They are required to look out from among them, chosen and faithful men,
who know the times, men of unshaken integrity and fortitude, of industry and
temperance, who love their nation, and are examples of gentleness and
philanthropy, who fear God and hate covetousness. When they have appointed
their rulers, both obligation and interest require them to be in subjection to
them, as the ordinance of God; and under them to lead peaceable and quiet
lives, in all godliness and honesty. They should strengthen the hands of their
rulers in the work of government, treat with liberality their administrations,
and studiously avoid a mean spirit of jealousy and suspicion, that bane of
society and destruction of public blessings. A haughty, unyielding and
murmuring disposition, is the infamy of subjects, and will prove their eventual
ruin from the justice of God, who wills that his ordinances be respected by
men. They who despise government, are presumptuous, self-willed, and are not
afraid to speak evil of dignities, and speak evil of things which they know
not, have little sense of their duty to magistrates, are disturbers of the
public peace, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption. II. Pet. ii.
10, 12.
The word of inspiration testifies to us the will of Christ, respecting the
obligations of subjects to civil authority. It is a leading duty, That subjects
pray for their rulers, and offer up in public and private, acknowledgements for
the blessings of government, and supplications for Divine favor upon the civil
administration. Says the Apostle, 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2, 3.
I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions
and giving thanks, be made for all men. For Kings and for all that are in
authority; that we may live a peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and
honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. It is
a Divine injunction, 1 Pet. ii. 13.
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it be
unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
it is the will of God, that with well doing, ye put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men. Fear God, honor the King. If kingly government deserves such
conscientious obedience, how much more does a free government deserve it? It is
required of Christian ministers to inculcate this duty upon their hearers.
Titus, iii. 1.
"Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
magistrates, to be ready to every good work. All who hope in his mercy, and
would be saved by the righteousness of Christ, must imitate that example of
submission to civil authority, which in his life he has set before them; not
by ambition and turbulent passions, disturb the quiet of society; not by
tumults and sedition augment the miseries of this miserable world. Men who have
not a temper of subordination, are not charitable, humble and quiet in their
demeanor, are poorly qualified for heaven. Men who resist lawful authority, and
are engaged in tumults and confusion, may be fit for the realms of anarchy,
darkness and despotism; but without repentance they shall never behold the
seats of the blessed, where every man is content with his station. Do we wish
for present security and enjoyment, for national strength and dignity? Do we
wish to behold the seats of the blessed? Then we must obey magistrates.

I HAVE finished my doctrinal observations; may I be indulged in some practical
reflections, and sundry cursory observations upon the present situation of this
Commonwealth, and the methods which God requires to be pursued for restoring
and lengthening out our tranquillity, and then conclude with addresses suited to
this important occasion. As I have endeavored in the whole, so in this branch
of discourse I would wish to speak with the unfettered freedom of a Servant of
that Prince, whose Kingdom is not of this world.

THIS country was planted by men of singular piety, of whom the old world was
not worthy. God found them a refuge from the oppression of civil and spiritual
tyranny. Having planted, he protected them from the most pressing dangers.
Often has he delivered them by signs and wonders, and by an outstretched arm.
In some feeble measure our Forefathers lived worthy of the Divine care over
them, and by grateful obedience acknowledged the salvations wrought for them.
But their children forgot his benefits, and by irreligion and sensuality, by
dissipation and luxury, by worldliness and pride, they provoked the Holy One of
Israel, to threaten them with the loss of those privileges and blessings, which
he had so richly bestowed, and they had so unthankfully abused.

MANY have celebrated the virtues, and confidently predicted the rising glories
of the American States. But while we continue our provocations, we may do well
to enquire, Whether these flattering panegyrists do not speak to us smooth
things, and prophesy deceits? Would not the sublime prophet Isaiah address us
in another style? Isaiah i. 2, 4.
"Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth! for the Lord has spoken. I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. Ah sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel unto anger, they have gone away backward. Because the Lord was wroth
with his heritage, he did of late raise up adversaries unto them of their
brethren. The British parliament, in support of a groundless claim, levied an
unnatural war against us, and assumed without warrant to be the Higher Powers
in our governments.

BY the will of God, and the direction of his ordinance, our civil authority,
to whom our first, allegiance was due, we were called to contend for our
possessions, our liberties and our lives, even unto blood. Long and distressing
was the conflict. In the confusions of war, and especially in the perplexities
of such a war, in which the minds of the people were divided as to their duties
of allegiance, order and government were essentially injured amongst us, and
that spirit of subordination and loyalty, which was before habitual, was nearly
lost, and for a season we were threatened with all the miseries of that people,
who have no magistrate to put them in sear. But in the season of our
declensions, He who remembereth mercy for his people, interposed for our help,
and in due time ordained peace for us. But in nothing was his grace more
remarkable than in leading us out of a distempered state of partial anarchy
into a state of order and government. He gave us laws and testimonies right and
good, a civil constitution perhaps the most perfect in the world, which is the
security of good citizens, the admiration of the wise, and the envy of tyrants:
To which if if we strictly adhere, we cannot in a political sense, fail of
being a happy people.

SINCE this mercy of our God upon us, in saving us from the evils of war, and
plucking us from the confusions of anarchy, we have walked unworthy of his
great goodness. We sang his praises, but soon forgot his benefits. We have
continued to indulge those follies and excesses, for which he had already
chastized us. While deeply involved in debt, our distempered passion for the
fashions of luxurious and affluent nations, plunged us into our former
prodigality and unprofitable expenses. Instead of applying ourselves to
discharge the claims of public and private creditors, and thus to vindicate our
honor and independence, we employed the riches of our soil in purchasing the
trappings of an exotic dress, and in indulging our vitiated appetites in the
expensive productions of distant regions, and thus are we become the servants
of foreigners, and strangers rule over us. Poor and dependent, our minds are
enervated to the pursuits of national freedom and dignity. And yet restless
under the unavoidable pressure of our follies, we are little inclined to
satisfy our creditors, and pay the price of our beloved dissipation. Like the
prodigal, exhausted and worn down by riot, we complain of our pains and
embarrassments, and idly resolve into a grievance, that poverty, from which no
created power but our own can save us. Jaded by our vices, indigent through
profuse living, rendered untractable by long exemption from the restraints of
human and Divine laws, and proud in a licentious liberty, that forerunner of
despotism, we have become restless under necessary burdens, and with a mistaken
resentment, have complained of public requisitions as the source of our sorrows
and perplexities. Lavish expenses have made us poor, and a temper not duly
subordinate, has turned our complaints from our own follies, against our
Fathers, our best friends and benefactors. How many of us have labored to free
ourselves from the necessary burdens of public and private debts, that we might
obtain a wider scope for the indulgence of appetites, which it were much better
to mortify?

WILL the enquiry be thought immodest, when I ask, whether our wealthy and
leading characters, have not been first in this transgression? Of the
legislators of our republican government, we might have expected effectual laws
to discourage excesses, by which the citizens are so certainly degraded to a
state of servility and dependence. They knew better than their constituents,
the evil of such excesses. Might they not in due season, have encouraged
industry, temperance and frugality, among the people; laid restrictions upon
foreign luxuries, and made it as necessary as it was useful, for the people to
produce the accommodations of life by their own labor, and upon their own
soil. And especially might not the examples of men in power, and families of
fashion and affluence, in preferring the productions of our own country, to
commodities received from abroad, have produced the most salutary effects among
all classes of our citizens? Such examples would have been more influential and
authoritative, than a whole code of commercial regulations. This is one of our
wounds; I mention it freely, since I hope in a good Providence, that our
rulers, our public teachers and the multitude of our brethren, will think it
important to apply themselves to a radical cure of the evil. For nothing kills
the noble spirit of freedom, like a state of dependence, which will ever attend
the folly of spending more than we earn. Let our rulers not merely in word, but
in deed, by a laudable example, be first in this matter, and teach republicans
to be honest, industrious and frugal in their modes of living. Then shall
substantial wealth and independence be the joyous portion, of all classes of
our happy citizens.

THAT we have been transgressors in many moral and Christian duties, the God of
judgment has testified, in the calamities brought upon us. To punish and to
reclaim us, he has sent among us the rod of his visitation. Amos, iii. 6.
Shall there be evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it?

THE last year, a year equally distinguished for the gifts of Providence, and
for our unthankfulness and disobedience to human and Divine authority, has been
fruitful in new and perplexing evils. God has suffered a spirit of insurrection
and resistance of lawful authority to rise up in this Commonwealth. As a
correction from him, it is a righteous testimony of his holy displeasure; as
proceeding from man, perhaps an opposition to government, and a war against the
community, has been seldom more wanton and unprovoked. The objects sought
after, in these tumults, have been of the most faulty kind. One avowed end was
to compel the Legislature, into an emission of a paper currency, to be a tender
in payment of all public and private contracts. A measure wholly preposterous,
when the public ought to be discharging their old obligations, and not
contracting a new debt by borrowing money by an emission of paper; a measure
totally unjust, and as truly impolitic as to administer opiates to cure a
lethargy. The faultiness of such violent attempts arose also from the utter
impossibility in the present state of our affairs, that the Legislature could
make a promise upon their paper and keep it; that is, they could never honestly
redeem the money, by saving it from a rapid depreciation, and making punctual
payment. Such a measure then, would have been a gross violation of commutative
justice, the unwavering observance of which, is enjoined upon all bodies of men
under all possible circumstances. To endeavor by hostility to compel the
Legislature into a measure, which they wisely thought impolitic, and knew to be
palpably unjust, was an high handed offense, and clearly proves, that
multitudes were under the clouds of God's anger, and were sadly forsaken of
restraining grace.

BUT the design was filled with other mischiefs. It was to wrest from the
Legislature the power of governing; from the tribunals of law the power of
decreeing justice; and from the Executive, the essential prerogative of
carrying into effect the laws of the Commonwealth. Thus were our foundations to
have been destroyed. The declared intentions of the malcontents, and what
they attempted by levying an impious war upon their country, was to arrest the
arm of government, and seize the administration of a despotic rule into their
own hands; to sap the foundations of our glorious constitution, to change its
essential forms, and thus to break down the barriers of our rights, and
overwhelm this great republic in dreary confusion and irretrievable ruin.
Whoever has been acquainted with their complaints and their claims, and has
been the witness of their proceedings, will consider this, as a charitable
representation of their views and pursuits.

BLESSED be the Lord God of our salvation, that in the midst of our
unworthiness and provocations, he has interposed and saved us from the sword of
the oppressor, and the violence of wicked men. Ardent thanksgivings are this
day due to the Father of mercies, That in the season of alarming dangers, he
raised up an administration of government, who, in the faithful page of
history, will be celebrated for their wisdom, their moderation and integrity.

AFTER many outrageous and treasonable excesses, had prevailed, in several
parts of the State, and the lives and estates of their guilty authors were
forfeited to their country, our Chief Magistrate, at the request of the
Legislature, offered a free and full pardon to all the promoters and abettors
of those seditious tumults. Through an infatuated obduracy, that pardon was
scornfully rejected, even under the clearest light and evidence exhibited to
them, that their complaints were groundless, and that the government had been
administered with great integrity. Former violences were renewed, the criminal
demands of the insurgents increased, and the existence of the Commonwealth, was
put to the hazard. When unmixed mercy could not reclaim but raised to higher
excesses the resistance of the offenders, authority assumed a more firm and
decisive tone, and raised a military force to repel their violence. Yet great
was the forbearance and compassion of government in all their exertions to
suppress the rebellion. Forgiveness was still extended to the body of the
rebels, the leaders only were left to the justice of the law, and even with the
leaders much lenity was used by proffering terms of pardon to many of them. The
steps of our civil administration were the marks of their justice and humanity.
The wisdom and decision of the Council, demand our admiration and gratitude:
the measures of our Chief Magistrate all denoted the firmness of his spirit,
his regard for our laws, his inflexible adherence to the principles of the
constitution, and his unshaken determination to protect his country, and
repress the violence of wicked men. His conduct was equally distinguished for
benignity and moderation, that aversion from bloodshed and that ardent wish to
recover and preserve offenders, which is a shining part of the character of a
good man and a christian magistrate. He has showed himself the FATHER and
FRIEND of his country. The minister of God for good to his people.

THAT worthy personage who acted under his immediate orders in suppressing the
public commotions, has added fresh laurels to his former honors, and evinced
how much he deserves the appellation of the CHRISTIAN HERO. The officers and
men employed in this important and unwelcome service, by their firm, temperate
and wise conduct, discovered that excellent spirit which ought ever to reign in
the bosoms of free citizens. Ye authors and leaders of these happy operations,
if we forget your services, let our right hand forget its cunning. Thou country
thus saved of the Lord from the horns of the unicorn, if we do not remember
thee above our chief joy, let our tongue cleave to the roof of our mouth.

THRONES of judgment are established, and the seat of violence is driven from
us: and by the uninterrupted execution of our wholesome laws, we may sit
quietly under our own vines and under our own fig trees. And we may gladly
hope, that without connivance from men of influence, these seeds of sedition
will ever long be totally eradicated from our republic. The methods of
Providence in protecting the Commonwealth and succeeding the measures of
government, merit particular notice and unfeigned gratitude. The singer of God
has been conspicuous in directing and prospering our public counsels.
Operations dictated by wisdom and moderation, have been succeeded by remarkable
interp^^^^ions of Heaven. The hearts of those in rebellion melted like wax, and
they could perform no part of their enterprise; and the measures of
administration were crowned with the wished for success.

MAY the author of all effectual influences impress the minds of deluded
citizens with a conviction of the criminality of their conduct, and of the
evident hand of God, which was lifted up against them. It is but justice to
observe, that the measures of government, have been conformable to the system
of God's government over a sinful world. Mercy has been freely proffered, and
when despised, has been followed by a mixture of judgment and mercy. Because
the Lord loved his people, he has inclined the hearts of their rulers into
such a prosperous and salutary administration. To regard these footsteps of
Providence, and pursue a similar system of administration, can scarcely fail to
recover us from our confusions, and establish our public tranquillity. But
inattention to the singer of God, and an abuse of his healing mercies, the
continuance of our rebellions and resistance of his civil ordinance, will
provoke him to empty us from vessel to vessel, and for the iniquities of our
land, many will be the rulers thereof: unstable as water we shall not excel.
But if conscious of past ingratitude and abuse of blessings, we will turn unto
him by repentance and works of righteousness, will speak the truth one to
another and love as brethren; if our rulers will go before us in the duties of
prayer, faith and obedience, submission to Christ, and respect to his doctrines
and institutions; if they will love the people and consult their interest by
integrity and goodness, study rat^^r to do them good than to gratify their idle
humors; if they will measure their administrations by the line of truth and
honesty, although thousands frown; if they will be temperate and industrious in
their work, will punish the wicked and protect obedient subjects, and thus set
the Lord always before their face, then shall their reputation flourish and
their authority prove an unspeakable blessing to the people: Isaiah xxxiii. 5,
6.
God shall fill Zion with judgment and righteousness, and wisdom and knowledge
shall be the stability of our times and strength of salvation: And the fear of
the Lord shall be our treasure; and he shall lift us high among the nations.

The time calls me to a conclusion, in suitable addresses.

Our first attention is due to our worthy Chief Magistrate, called by God and
his country to the chair of government.

May it please your Excellency,

THAT happy tranquillity which we enjoyed under your former administration,
cannot fail to excite our congratulations, that God has so far restored your
health, that you are able to accept the Chief Magistracy in this Commonwealth.
Appointed by God to bear rule over your brethren, you will be pleased to accept
our best wishes that your health may be adequate to the weighty burdens of
your high and sacred office. Our prayer to the Almighty is, that he would be
the health of your countenance and your God; that he would strengthen you to
eminent usefulness among his people. May divine preservation and illumination
accompany your administrations, that you may continue to act worthily for
Christ our King, and be accepted of the multitude of your brethren. May that
diffusive love which you so early manifested for your country, by placing
yourself in the first rank of dangers, to repel foreign usurpation, and
vindicate the privileges and laws of your country, still animate you, to pursue
the happiness of the community, by supporting the dignity of civil authority,
the prerogatives and independence of the Supreme Executive, and the other
branches of administration; by making law terrible to all invaders and usurpers
of the powers of government, and by drawing a line of distinction between
faithful subjects, and those who may be so lost to virtue, as to disturb the
public peace, and assail the property, the liberties and the lives of their
fellow-citizens.

WITH pleasing anticipation, we behold your Excellency God's minister for good,
bearing the sword of the State, not as a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Our eye with delight marks your path, while you lead us your children into the
duties of relative and Christian life, and by your example teach us, that
self-denial, frugality and industry, so essential to the happiness of a free
people. From your Excellency, will our Legislature expect advice in those
measures, which may maintain inviolate the principles of our civil constitution
against every species of encroachment; how the public good is to be pursued,
honesty and integrity, diligence and application encouraged, and dissipation
driven from the State; how the laws of justice may be effectually vindicated,
and the seat of fraud and oppression, be removed far from us. Our expectations
are from your Excellency, That liberty shall be maintained by law, and all
subjects be secure in their possessions; that public faith, and national credit
and dignity, be sollicitously preserved.

MAY the institutions of literature flourish under your friendly patronage;
especially may that illustrious university to which the public is so much
indebted for laying the foundation of science in your Excellency, and
qualifying you for such extensive services in this, and through the United
States, be the object of your peculiar care, and by your powerful influence be
protected in all its important rights and immunities.

WE hope in the goodness of the universal Parent, that by affording you his
presence and grace, he will show, that because he loved his people, he has
therefore appointed you to rule over them. From your Excellency, the interests
of piety and the Christian religion, justly expect continual aid and friendly
countenance. May the Angel of the Divine presence, enlighten and beautify the
paths of your administration. In your days, religion, truth and peace dwell on
the earth, and after you have served your generation by the will of God, may
you receive the rewards of your fidelity, from the approbation of your Judge.
May you here enjoy a portion, better than many sons, and late be welcomed to
the presence of your Divine Savior and Judge, and from him obtain that Crown
of glory which fades not away.

OUR respects are now due to the Gentlemen who compose the Honorable the
Senate, and the Honorable the House of Representatives.

Fathers of our country, and Elders of our tribes,

YOU are this day constituted by Jesus Christ, the ordinance of God, for the
good of his church, and the welfare of this Commonwealth. The oath of God is
upon you, to maintain the laws of the State, and the sacred principles of our
excellent constitution: A constitution which wisdom will approve, as the
national bulwark of our independence and sovereignty, the effectual protection
of good citizens, the security of freedom, property and life, and our defense
against the rude encroachments of anarchy and despotism. You have this day
declared your belief of the Christian religion. Integrity in this profession
will lead you to prize our constitution the more, since it is so friendly to
morality, and the Christian faith. You have bound yourselves in the discharge
of your office, to promote the common good upon gospel principles; by
cultivating in your temper, and practice, those benevolent graces of
Christianity, which will enable you to rule with reputation to yourselves, and
advantage to the people. You have pledged yourselves to honor Christ's
institutions, to protect his servants, to discountenance all contempt of the
doctrines and maxims of his holy faith. Thus from the manner of your
inauguration, we may expect, that you be nursing Fathers to the Church. It
becomes a minister of that Church, (and will therefore be acceptable to you) to
stir up your pure minds to use the gift that is in you, for the good of the
people. You are the Ministers of God, and as such, accountable at the tribunal
of the Son of Man, in the great day of dread decision. Let me exhort you as
candidates for eternity, to keep in mind that solemn day, and as faithful
servants, to be habitually prepared for it. And that through Divine grace, you
may give up a good account at last, be entreated to regard the eye of God,
which is upon you, and look to him to pardon your unworthiness, to counsel you
by his unerring wisdom, and to quicken you by his truth: That he would not take
his Holy Spirit from you, but by his effectual influences, guide you into the
paths of uprightness. The scriptures will teach you your liableness to err; and
your desire to be useful, will excite your applications for that anointing of
the Holy One, by which you will not err fatally. As Rulers, it concerns you to
be men of prayer, to maintain an intercourse with Heaven, and an humble
dependence upon Divine teaching and guidance. Do you wish to be honored of God
in your office? You must honor him by submiting your administrations to his
government, by a respect to his name, his institutions and those eternal laws
of righteousness, ordained for the careful observance of all his rational
subjects. With you the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to
depart from evil is understanding. -- To you as their Fathers, will the people
look for patterns of moral and Christian duty. You will therefore go before
them in personal, in family and public religion and obedience. Care for the
State will arm your zeal and fortitude against vicious and immoral practices,
to frown upon gross breaches of human and Divine laws. Your services will be
approved of God, and useful to the community, whenever you shall punish with
decision and impartiality, the lawless practices of vicious and disobedient
subjects. Through your example and official exertions shall those virtues of
benevolence, integrity, industry and frugality, so essential to a republican
and Christian community, greatly prevail. And your testimony shall suppress the
insolence of fraud and injustice, falsehood and perjury, by which the bonds of
society are dissolved. May the oath of God become terrible, and all human
promises and contracts be held sacred. Punctuality in Rulers to their
contracts, is the first step toward a general honesty in the State. Their
example gives energy to laws against private fraud and injustice. You will feel
the bond of that law of your Master, to owe no man any thing; but according to
the ability of the people, to make a punctual and satisfactory payment of
public debts. You will utterly disallow all measures, which may put honest and
feeble citizens into the power of griping and unprincipled oppressors; than
such measures, nothing is more repugnant to that Gospel, by which you are to be
judged. Every indirect method to extricate the people from embarrassments, is a
new load to sink them in the mire. The Fathers of our tribes will therefore
cultivate public and private faith, and learn us all not to go beyond, or to
defraud our neighbor.

MAY the good God influence our honorable Legislature, into a system of
administration, which shall defend our Constitution, render venerable our laws,
protect from violence the seats of Justice and the Throne of Judgment, and by
a due mixture of mercy and justice, allure offenders to obedience, or by
adequate penalties incapaciate them from disturbing the public tranquillity. You
will think nothing too much to encourage a spirit of loyalty and patriotism;
and to this end you will encourage the means of grace and education. To your
wisdom does it belong to discover the political measures, for promoting the
good designs which have been mentioned, but I may suggest, that they should be
such as are approved by the gospel of Christ.

OUR national concerns, as a confederated Republic, are serious concerns. Your
deliberate counsels will be requisite to invent some remedy for our national
imbecility and reproach. Unless effectual and liberal measures are soon taken,
our glory and independence will vanish into air. Be entreated Fathers, to lay
aside limited views and local prejudices, and to encompass the Union in the
exertions of your wisdom and patriotism.

THE better (...) answer the ends of your appointment, you will consider it
highly important, in siding up the vacancies in the Legislature, and in
constituting a Council for His Excellency, to choose faithful and approved men,
who fear God and obey Christ above many, men of noble minds, superior to
intrigue, and unfettered by faction, of independent sentiments, who abhor
covetous practices, men whose circumstances are not embarrassed, and who will
not fear to do the thing which is just, who love the people, and will by
personal labors and self-denial, and unwearied diligence, pursue their solid
and lasting advantages, and yet disdain by meanness and artifice, and by
sacrificing their own judgment, to gain an empty popular applause.

A LEGISLATURE thus constituted, and what a respectable number of such amiable
and worthy characters do I now behold; such a Legislature, shall in the issue
enjoy the blessings of their country, while time serving politicians, shall
sink in the dirt of their deserved ignominy: Such a Legislature may hope to
have God with them, to prosper the work of their hands. From the faithful
discharge of an earthly trust, they shall in their time and order, be received
to the plaudit of their final Judge. Such is the reward which we pray that
every member of our public administration, in the Executive, Legislative and
Judicial department, may now deserve, and in future obtain from the mouth of
him, who siteth upon the Throne.

MAY we all repent, and do our first works, that God may be in the midst of us.
That he may sit in the assembly of our Rulers, is the devout supplication of
all, who hope in his mercy, and wish well to this Commonwealth.

BLESSED art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season. Happy is that people, that is in such a case; yea happy is
that people, whose God is the Lord.

THUS with sincerity, and as well as I was able, have I spoken unto you the
Lord's message. May the effectual co-operations of the Blessed Spirit, render
the truths which have been delivered, useful to this whole Assembly, and by the
consequent fruits may it appear, that in very deed God has been among us. And
when we shall severally stand in the great congregation of the assembled
universe, by a precious holy life, may we be prepared to be found of our Judge
in peace.

AMEN.

