ALL FULLNESS DWELLING IN CHRIST: A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF A NEW
BUILDING, ERECTED FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP, By the INDEPENDENT or CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH, IN CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.

By WILLIAM HOLLINSHEAD, A. M. PASTOR OF SAID CHURCH. Published at their
Request.

Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. I
COR. III. 11. CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY JOHN MARKLAND, No. 45, CHURCH-STREET,
MDDLXXXVII.

Charleston, October 28, 1787.
At a Meeting of the Members and Supporters of the Independent or
Congregational Church, On Motion, Resolved, That the thanks of this Church be
presented to the Rev. Mr. Hollinshead, for his Sermon at the opening of the New
Building in Archdale-Street, on Thursday the 25th Instant; and that he be
requested to furnish a copy thereof for publication.

Extract from the Minutes, S. BALDWIN,
Sec'ry.
A SERMON, etc.
COLOSSIANS, CHAP. I. VER. 19. For it pleased the Father, that in him should
all fullness dwell.
IN some preceding verses of this chapter, St. Paul describes the personal
excellency and dignity of our Lord Jesus Christ in his divine nature, and as
the creator of the universe: Who is the image of the invisible God, the first
born of every creature: by whom were all things created that are in heaven, and
that are in earth, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or
powers; all things were created by him and for him: he is before all things,
and by him all things consist. In the 18th verse, he considers the excellency
of Christ's offices in the human nature, which he assumed into personal union
with himself, not only as the political head of direction, authority and
government, but also of vital influences, to communicate all spiritual life,
nourishment, growth, and activity to every member of the church, "which is his
body." The more evidently to show his sufficiency for these glorious purposes,
it is added in the words of our text, For it pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell. The word Father is not in the original, and perhaps
the passage may be justly paraphrased thus: For it is the result of eternal
counsel, that correspondent to the excellency of Christ's divine person, and
the greatness of his mediatorial work, he should posse^s all fullness of gifts
and qualifications, to render him a savior worthy of the most unreserved and
perfect reliance of believers.

It is certainly, among many others, a very powerful support of our confidence
in the redeemer, that he exercises none of his offices, but under the seal of
divine appointment. The whole scheme of salvation is a device of infinite
wisdom: and Christ, the great high priest of the new covenant is, accordingly,
chosen from all eternity, to fulfill the gracious offices which he exercises in
the recovery of sinners, and in accomplishing their reconciliation to God.

From all eternity he was the elect of God, in whom his soul delights; his
servant whom he upholdeth, upon whom he puts his spirit, that he might show
judgment to the Gentiles. He was set up from everlasting, -- from the
beginning, or ever the earth was: and he glorified not himself, to be made an
high priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, to day have I begotten
thee. And so in the text Christ is not self-exalted in the all sufficiency
which is committed to him as the head of the church; but by the decree of
eternal wisdom it is determined, that in "him should all fullness dwell.

As some of the most illustrious displays of this fullness are exhibited in the
spreading and establishment of the gospel, in the enlarging of the borders of
Zion, and in extending the means for bringing men to the knowledge of
salvation, it will be a proper subject of meditation on the present occasion.
In further treating of it, I shall endeavor to show some of the most important
respects in which all fullness dwells in Christ, and then to lead to the
suitable application of the subject.

1st. I am to point out some of the most important respects, in which all
fullness dwells in Christ.

It may be necessary to observe here, that our text considers the Lord Jesus
only in his mediatorial character, and speaks not of the fullness which is
essential to his divine nature, but of that which is communicated to him as
Messiah. As God indeed, he is over all blessed forever, and by reason of the
union of his two natures, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him
bodily. The essential perfections of deity are, in this respect, the same in
him as in the Father and the Holy Ghost: not depending on the divine decree,
but co-essential with his eternal existence. For this reason his name is called
wonderful, counselor, and the mighty God, as well as the prince of peace, --
his throne is forever and forever: and he counted it not robbery to be equal
with God, for he is the true God.

In respect, therefore, to his divine nature, distinctly considered, Christ
has all the fullness of infinite being, glory, blessedness and perfection,
independent and underived.

But in his mediatorial offices, the scriptures represent him as receiving his
qualifications according to, and in consequence of the divine appointment.
Agreeably to which he declares his authority to publish the glad tidings of
salvation to guilty men: he claims it by virtue of the unction which he had
received of the Father: The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor: he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted; to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind; to set at liberty them that are bruised. And when he testified
the authority by which he fulfils all his offices in the character of the
Messiah, he declared it not to be from himself, but by the direction of the
Father: I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear I judge, and my judgment
is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which
has sent me. Yet in the character of mediator, considered as a subordinate
character, all, even infinite fullness is committed to Christ, to be employed by
him in accomplishing the purposes of infinite mercy; and this fullness is more
particularly exercised and evidenced, in the

1st place, in his almighty power: -- It is a glory in Christ's character that
he is mighty to save -- that he can save to the uttermost, them that come unto
God by him.

But barely to deliver the guilty from destruction, is not the utmost of that
illustrious power which he possesses; nor indeed is it the utmost that divine
grace has intended should be exercised for them that believe. In the great
scheme of redemption, the minutest circumstances of the saints have been
attended to, and all provision is made for them during a wearisome pilgrimage,
as well as for their eternal safety. They are liable to no changes, either in
spiritual or temporal concerns, which are not fully under the control of the
great high priest and captain of their salvation: and for this purpose both
nature and providence are subjected to his hand. In the days of his
humiliation, he evidenced, in innumerable instances, the influence of his
almighty power. The visible and the invisible creation lay prostrate at his
feet. He disposed and directed all the human faculties, both of body and mind,
at his pleasure. The most inveterate diseases yielded to his healing word. With
case he arrested the unruly elements, and bound or loosed them at his will.
Death and the grave submitted to his all-subduing dominion: and even apostate
spirits, hardened in their rebellion, trembled and confessed his power. Nor was
this only a temporary exercise of power, given to him as a testimony of his
heavenly descent and mission; but after his resurrection, when all that was
necessary as a meritorious foundation for the redemption of his church was
accomplished, he declared, for the everlasting support of his humble followers,
that all power was given to him in heaven and upon earth. And it is a
consideration demanding attention, that this declaration peculiarly relates to
his offices as Messiah. All things are put under him, and he reigns until he
shall have put down all opposing rule, authority and power; until all his
enemies are put under his feet: he is gone into the highest heavens, and is on
the right hand of God, having angels, authorities and powers made subject to
him; and he has entered into this state of exaltation, as head over all things
to his church, to exercise a dominion for the benefit of his believing
subjects. The sun, moon and stars shine not but by his command -- the revolving
seasons continue, and are productive or unfruitful, healthful or noxious,
according to his sovereign direction, -- states and empires flourish, or are
extinguished by his power alone. Nor is this all -- the thoughts and actions of
men are equally subjected to him: he succeeds or disappoints the wisdom of the
prudent, as shall best answer the purposes of his own government -- he turns
the hidden and intricate counsels of the wicked into foolishness, and
frequently causes their best concerted measures to operate against themselves;
while on the other hand, neither the want of abilities or influence in the
agents he is pleased to employ, can prevent the success of any of his designs.
If it is necessary, he will give them a mouth and wisdom, which all their
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist; and if he choose it, the
weak things of the world shall confound the mighty, and the things which are
not, bring to naught things which are. In fine, whether he works by visible
instruments or without them, whatsoever his will determines in heaven, or upon
earth, his hand is able to perform.

But 2dly. Christ has all fullness of authority as well as power. The plenitude
of his power implies, indeed, an authority to use it. It could not be a fullness
of power* if circumscribed in its exercise, by the least degree of limitation.
And when we consider Christ's mediatorial power, we must always conceive of it
not as it exists in him as an essential attribute of his divine nature, but as
delegated to him for the special purposes for which he has assumed the
mediatorial character, which of consequence includes authority; and accordingly
all those passages which assert Christ's power as the Messiah speak of it as a
moral, and not a natural faculty; and the same word is uniformly used to
express it in the original, which is always used to signify his authority: thus
when he says, I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it
again; and when he declares, that the son of man has power on earth to
forgive sins, it is evident that it is the same as to say, I have authority to
lay down my life and to take it again; and the son of man has authority on
earth to forgive sins. And so when it is said, "he taught them as one having
authority;" and when the chief priests and the elders asked him, By what
authority do thou these things? using the word in the above signification,
we might read, he taught as one having power, and by what power do thou
these things? All authority then dwells in Christ; and not only is all just
and equitable authority on earth derived from him, as by him kings reign and
princes decree justice; but as king on the holy hill of Zion, the heavens as
well as the earth are under his government -- all the angels of God worship and
obey him -- the heavenly hosts rejoice to do his pleasure. And in the exercise
of the same righteous dominion, he both governs the universe and gives laws to
his church. -- He appoints the station of every individual of its members;
directs their peculiar circumstances while in their pilgrimage state; orders
the measure of their trials, calling them forth, either to the special exercise
of their faith, hope and patience, under adversity and affliction; or of
humility and thankfulness, in the experience of distinguishing bounty. And he
dispenses to all that proportion of grace and spiritual advantages which he
determines to be best and most expedient for them. In like manner he has
instituted the means of grace, and appointed the several ordinances of the
gospel, for the regular and orderly worship of God; has given the exact rule
of faith, in all things that pertain to the glory of God, or the salvation of
our souls; and prescribed that rule of conduct, which is to be the guide of all
our actions through the various changes of life. And finally, Christ will
hereafter appear in all the glory of his authority, when, as sovereign and
righteous judge of all the earth, he shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and the trump of God; -- when all the tribes
of the earth shall see him coming in the clouds with power and great glory; and
as the son of man he shall appear in his own glory, in the glory of the Father
and of his holy angels; -- when by the authority he has received, he shall fix
the everlasting condition of saints and sinners; assigning to the one a crown
of righteousness, and receiving them to the kingdom of his Father; while the
others shall go away into everlasting fire.

3d. Christ has all fullness of wisdom and grace. Omniscience is his as God;
and boundless wisdom is given to him as mediator. It was a glorious prediction
concerning him even in his lowly humiliation; The spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of knowledge and
of the fear of the Lord. This prophecy was eminently fulfilled in the redeemer,
who not only displayed the wisdom and power of God in the qualifications of his
person for the mediatorial offices, but had all the treasures of infinite
wisdom committed to him, as head of the church, for the use and benefit of the
saints: and though its influence is often beyond their comprehension, and
concealed from carnal minds, yet it is employed in conducting all the affairs
of his kingdom, and all things that relate to their happiness, either in the
dispensation of his providence or grace. And as infinite grace is combined with
his unspeakable wisdom; as he is ever touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, and has a sympathy with his people under all their necessities,
and under all their temptations, it is impossible that his power or authority
should ever be misapplied. He is acquainted with the circumstances of every
individual believer; knows how, and is disposed seasonably to supply all their
wants spiritual or temporal, and so to overruled every occurrence of time to
them, that at length they shall see how he has caused light to shine out of
the obscurest darkness; and that he is able to give them the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness He discerns
the state of his church at large, and not only has power and a gracious
disposition to build up its interests in the world, but has wisdom to direct
all circumstances relating to it; so that his children shall be gathered from
all quarters of the globe, and none of them be left without the needful
dispensations of his grace.

APPLICATION.
Such, my brethren, is the fullness which dwells in our Lord Jesus Christ. You
have this day an evidence of the gracious manner in which he condescends to
exercise it, in his enabling you to open another house for the honor of his
name. This building will indeed be a lasting monument of the zeal and assiduity
of your former pastor, whose active mind first projected the plan, and with
your concurrence, pursued it with unwearied application, until, by the
convulsed state of his country, he was interrupted in the design, and shortly
after called from his labors here below into the joy of his Lord. Here,
however, his memory shall long survive and flourish; here new glories shall be
added to the crown of his immortality, while angels rejoice over those, who
from time to time are called to repentance in this sacred place; and here the
name of TENNENT shall be handed down, with endearment, to your children's
children, to the latest generations.

Upon you the task devolved to finish the work, which at length you have thus
far accomplished. Much credit is due to the cheerful piety you have expressed,
in prosecuting an undertaking of such utility; and with pleasure I anticipate
the days when you shall obtain a most grateful reward in the virtues of the
rising generation, who shall here be instructed in the living principles of
religion. But, to thee, O blessed Jesus! to thee we are indebted for the
disposition and ability thou have given thy servants to fulfill thy pleasure. Of
thy fullness have they received, and of thine own do they this day present an
offering to thy name. Yes, my dear brethren! to Christ Jesus do you owe the
honor of all that you have been able to perform: and suffer me to remind you,
that you are to depend upon him for all the benefits which you expect to arise
from it in future. The means of grace with which you may be favored, are
entirely at his disposal, and the success of them wholly rests on his blessing.
He says to his servant go, and he goes; and to another come, and he comes.
He walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, his churches, to view their
order, disposition and necessities. He holds his ministers in the right hand
of his power, to place or displace them at his pleasure. He sheds his holy
influence on their minds, and clothes them with light and salvation, that they
may be the happy instruments of joy to his people: -- or if his love be
disregarded, he turns away from his ungrateful subjects; and whatever outward
means he may then leave them, they only serve, through their own perverseness,
to render them the more blinded and hardened. As therefore, through your care
and liberality, this new temple is erected for the advancement of the gospel, I
flatter myself you will not forget its prosperity, in your daily supplications
at the throne of grace. And, with the blessings that hereafter crown your
devout intentions, may you ever be able to say, agreeably to the disposition
which I am persuaded you now feel, -- "Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name be the glory!" --

And now permit me to conclude this discourse, with a short address to such of
my hearers as expect to be of the congregation of stated worshippers in this
place. To you, my brethren, I hope the present occasion will be the
introduction to many happy days of gospel opportunities, which you shall enjoy
within these walls. Let it be your care to improve them, by a regular
attendance, by diligently cultivating the knowledge of the gospel in your own
minds, and by a serious endeavor to reduce it to practice in your life and
conversation. As a society, ever study the things which make for peace; and let
your most ardent emulation be to provoke unto love and good works. As
individuals, strive to attain to the highest degrees of the christian temper,
not being forgetful hearers, but doers of the word; and evidencing, by a
regular and decent deportment, that you mean not only to profess, but to lead a
life of religion. Keep in view the example of Jesus, the great apostle and high
priest of your profession, who has left you an example that ye should follow
his steps; and study to know more and more of him, the knowledge of whom is
life eternal, and to bring you to an acquaintance with whom is the proper end
of all gospel institutions. We have now set out among you by proclaiming his
adorable name, as the fountain of all power, authority, grace and wisdom. I
humbly hope you will make it a principal object of your future attention to
know him as the author of redemption; and that those doctrines will be most
acceptable to your minds, which favor most of Jesus. Though you do not in this
walk in the fashion of the wise of this world, you will find that Christ is the
wisdom of God and the power of God unto salvation to them that believe; while
you experience the happy influence of a saving knowledge of his cross on the
temper and disposition of your souls, in supporting your hope of immortality,
in redeeming you from the pollutions of the world, in refining the sentiments
of your hearts, and in meetening you for the happiness of the heavenly state,
to which you will finally be received, when the career of your attendance in
the courts of God on earth shall be accomplished, and you shall know by happy
experience, the efficacy of that infinite fullness, which dwells in the ever
blessed Jesus:

To whom, with the Father and Holy Spirit, be glory, dominion and power for
ever and ever. AMEN.

