Dr. GOODRICH'S ELECTION-SERMON.

M.DCC.LXXXVII.

The Principles of civil UNION and HAPPINESS considered and recommended.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, ESQUIRE. L.L.D.
GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER IN CHIEF, AND THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
STATE OF CONNECTICUT.

CONVENED AT HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 10th, 1787.

BY ELIZUR GOODRICH, D. D.

Pastor of the CHURCH of CHRIST in DURHAM.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

M,DCC,LXXXVII.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A.D. 1787.
ORDERED, That the Hon. JAMES WADSWORTH, Esquire. and Capt. SIMEON PARSONS, return
the Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev. Dr. ELIZUR GOODRICH, for his Sermon,
delivered at the General Election, on the 10th of May Instant, and request a
Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

PSALM cxxii. 3. JERUSALEM IS BUILDED, AS A CITY THAT IS COMPACT TOGETHER.
JERUSALEM was a city, defended with strong walls, the metropolis of the
kingdom of Israel, and the capital seat of the Hebrew empire. -- It Is
inhabitants were not a loose, disconnected people, but most strictly united,
not only among themselves, but with all the tribes of Israel, into a holy
nation and commonwealth, under JEHOVAH their king and their God. -- And as
Jerusalem was the place, which he was pleased to honor as the seat of his
royal residence and government, it was most truly the city of the Great King.
Hence both by divine appointment, and the common consent of the nation, it was
established as the local center of communion in all the privileges of their
civil and sacred constitution. There were the thrones of judgment, the thrones
of the house of David, and the supreme courts of justice, and of the public
administration: There were the Levites, waiting in their courses, and the
Priests, ministering in their offices, before the LORD: There was the
testimony, the ark of the covenant, the temple, and the solemn services of
religion: And there all the tribes and sceptres of the people, assembled three
times in the year, to present national homage to JEHOVAH, their king and their
God.

IN all these respects, whether Jerusalem be considered in a natural, civil or
religious view, its strength and beauty consisted, in being builded "as a city,
that is compact together." Hence the Psalmist's affection for Jerusalem
expressed in this Psalm was not a mere partial and local fondness; but had in
view, and was excited by the most noble objects. These were the exaltation of
JEHOVAH, the king and God of Zion -- the honor and happiness of the nation --
the preservation of the true religion, and the peace and best good of all the
tribes of Israel. Religion therefore, and public spirit were untied in the
ardent affection of the pious Israelites, toward Jerusalem, which they
preferred above their chief joy.

WE have also a Jerusalem, adorned with brighter glories of divine grace, and
with greater beauties of holiness, than were ever displayed, in the most august
solemnities of the Hebrew-temple-worship; and presents, to our devout
admiration, gratitude and praise, more excellent means of religion and virtue,
peace and happiness, than ever called the attention of the assembled tribes of
Israel. We enjoy all the privileges of a free government, the blessings of the
gospel of peace, and the honors of the church of GOD. This is our Jerusalem.

THE safety and preservation of it depend, under GOD, on the friendly agreement
of its citizens in all those things, necessary for its honor and defense,
happiness and glory. Without this agreement, it cannot be "builded as a city,
that is compact together." There will be no peace within its walls, nor
prosperity within its palaces: It can have neither strength or beauty, nor
administer protection to its inhabitants; but it will be as a city broken down,
and without walls.

THE text therefore, and the great occasion, on which we are assembled in the
house of GOD, justify a discourse on the great principles and maxims, of civil
union -- the importance of a good, public administration, to answer the great
ends of government -- and the necessity of the joint exertions of subjects,
with their rulers, in promoting the public peace and happiness.

I AM then, in the first place, to point out some of the great principles and
maxims, which are the foundation and cement of civil union and society.

THE principles of society are the laws, which Almighty GOD has established in
the moral world, and made necessary to be observed by mankind; in order to
promote their true happiness, in their transactions and intercourse. These laws
may be considered as principles, in respect of their fixedness and operation;
and as maxims, since by the knowledge of them, we discover those rules of
conduct, which direct mankind to the highest perfection, and supreme happiness
of their nature. They are as fixed and unchangeable as the laws which operate
in the natural world.

HUMAN art in order to produce certain effects, must conform to the principles
and laws, which the Almighty Creator has established in the natural world. He
who neglects the cultivation of his field, and the proper time of sowing, may
not expect a harvest. He, who would assist mankind in raising weights, and
overcoming obstacles, depends on certain rules, derived from the knowledge of
mechanical principles, applied to the construction of machines, in order to
give the most useful effect to the smallest force: And every builder should
well understand the best position of firmness and strength, when he is about to
erect an edifice. For he, who attempts these things, on other principles, than
those of nature, attempts to make a new world; and his aim will prove absurd
and his labor lost. No more can mankind be conducted to happiness; or civil
societies united, and enjoy peace and prosperity, without observing the moral
principles and connections, which the same Almighty Creator has established for
the government of the moral world.

MORAL connections and causes in different circumstances produce harmony or
discord, peace or war, happiness or woe among mankind, with the same certainty,
as physical causes produce their effect. To institute these causes and
connexions belongs not to men, to nations or to human laws, but to build upon
them. It is no more in the power of the greatest earthly potentate to hinder
their operation, than it is to govern the flowing and ebbing of the ocean.

THE great and most universal principle and law of rational union and
happiness, is the love of GOD and of our neighbor: This in the moral, is like
the great law of gravitation and attraction in the natural world; and its
tendency in human society, is to universal good. The first maxim derived from
it, is that divine precept in the gospel, "whatsoever ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye also the same unto them." Hence religion and virtue are the
great principles on which the happiness of human societies must be built; and
from these principles must be derived the knowledge of all laws, which
determine the order of that benevolence, we owe to one another, and point out
the means of attaining the greatest good.

IF this were a state of so much innocence and perfection, that the law of
reason and of love directed and influenced all the views and actions of
mankind, there would be no necessity for the coercion of civil government. But
in the present depraved state of human nature, the various dispositions and
differing pursuits, the jarring interests, and unruly passions, the jealousies
and misapprehensions of neighbors would spoil their harmony and good
agreement; and, when disputes arose, there would be no common judge, to whom
they might refer their differences; but every one would be an avenger of his
own wrong: This would soon end in a state of hatred and war; and destroy all
human peace and happiness. To prevent this mischief, and to secure the
enjoyment of rational liberty, which summarily consists in the unmolested
privilege and opportunity of "leading a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty," is the great end of the institution of civil society
and government.

THE end therefore, and nature of civil government imply that it must have for
its foundation, the principles and laws of truth, justice and righteousness,
mercy and the fear of GOD; or it can never advance the happiness of mankind.
For that mankind by uniting into society, and putting themselves under a common
government, can promote their true interest, otherwise than by observing these
laws, is as contrary to reason as, that a machine may be of great and
beneficial use in human life, when its whole construction is contrary to all
the principles, by which the world of nature is actuated and kept together.

THERE can be no beneficial union among the members of a community, where these
great principles of righteousness and truth integrity and the fear of GOD, are
not maintained, both among themselves, and toward all mankind. Any number of
men, confederated together in wickedness and injustice, can have no strength,
but what they derive from being faithful to oneanother. Such a combination may
exist among robbers and pirates: but their agreement ought not to be dignified
by the name of civil union: it ought rather to be esteemed a wicked conspiracy
against the rights of mankind, which can never be justified by number, nor on
any pretense of public good.

THESE moral principles and connections are moral laws, not only, as they point
out a fixed order of events respecting moral ends, in which view the mere
politician, who has no fear of GOD before his eyes, may consider them; but to
the enlightened and religious mind, they are moral laws, in a higher sense --
laws of our creator, for the conduct of our life and manners. They cannot
therefore be transgressed, without offending against his will and authority --
without incurring guilt in his sight, and rendering ourselves obnoxious to his
wrath and displeasure, as the great and righteous governor of the world. The
LORD is in his holy temple, the LORD'S throne is in heaven; his eyes behold,
his eyelids try the children of men. The LORD tries the righteous; but the
wicked and him that loves violence, his soul hates. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimstone and an horrible tempest. This shall be the
portion of their cup. For the righteous LORD loves the righteous, his
countenance does behold the upright.

IF we can find what are the laws and rules, which men, as rational creatures,
must observe, that they may arrive at the greatest happiness and perfection of
their nature, these are the laws which they must observe, when united in
political bodies, in order to promote the common good of society. The same
virtue and integrity, truth, justice and honor, which, we venerate in a
private character, must be found in the public administration, and generally
prevailing among a people, or a state, cannot be united, peaceful and happy in
itself, and respectable in the world.

HENCE in all well regulated civil communities, laws of natural, universal and
unchangeable obligation hold the first rank: They are such fixed means of
union, peace and happiness, that no other can or ought to be substituted in
their room. It may however be observed, that the force of civil society cannot
extend to all laws of this kind; but only to such upon the observation of which
the common quiet of mankind entirely depends. To do to our neighbor as we
would that he should do to us is one of the plainest dictates of reason, and a
law of universal equity and obligation. It comprehends the whole of social
duty, and extends to kindness, humanity and mercy, as well as to truth and
justice. But although it is the great rule of our conduct and the bond of
society, it cannot in its whole extention have the force of a civil law in
commonwealths. Controversies about the violation of it would be perplexed and
intricate: Litigious suits would be infinitely multiplied: The good and
virtuous would be deprived of the most valuable part of their character: and
the state would be torn with intestine division and discord.

BUT, though all the laws of nature cannot be enforced with civil sanctions, yet
every righteous state adopts those, which are necessary for the preservation of
the public peace, and for an equal and impartial distribution of rewards and
punishments. The good and virtuous, who are influenced to do well out of
reverence to GOD, and sincere love to mankind, must be protected and
encouraged; and the wicked and disorderly, restrained by the dread of
punishment. The great laws of justice must be armed with a civil force, and
never allowed to be transgressed with impunity. Such, for instance, is that
statute of JEHOVAH, the GOD and King of Israel, Ye shall do no unrighteousness;
in judgment, in mete-yard, in weight or in measure. Just balances, just
weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have. This law must be admitted
into every civil state; but, that it may have force in society, the public
standard must be fixed; the most convenient weights and measures, determined;
the manner of their being tried, ascertained; and an awful penalty annexed to
transgression. These are circumstances, which are not determined by the law of
nature; but must be adjusted by civil regulations suited to the condition of
particular commonwealths.

THE principles and laws of justice are fixed and unchangeable -- they depend
not on human authority; but the particular regulations, by which they have
force in society, as civil laws, not being determined by the law of nature, may
be changed, when they are found inconvenient and hurtful to the community.
Hence the legislative authority of a state, extends to the repealing of old, as
well as the making of new laws.

NEVERTHELESS, great care should be taken in framing laws, that they may be
suited to the peculiar state of a people, and have an equal and uniform
operation for the public good. New and different circumstances require new and
different regulations in society fitted to the occasions which produce them:
But the fundamental laws, by which a people are compacted together, like the
laws of the natural world, must have a fixed consistence and duration. Such, in
general, are laws relating to personal liberty, the privileges of the subject,
and the powers of the magistrate -- to private property and the execution of
justice -- to the punishment of evildoers and the preservation of the public
peace -- to marriage, education, religion, and the rights of conscience -- to
the public forms, and order of government -- and to the revenues and taxes, by
which the state is supported. Frequent changes even in the external appendages,
much more an unfixedness in the laws, and a want of stability in the public
administration, diminish the energy and dignity of government, and will be
attended with uneasiness and discord.

I SHALL only add, that as the best and most useful laws can be of no use,
unless subjects be trained up and educated in a manner of living conformable to
them, every wise state will pay great attention to the education of children,
and to all such regulations, as are necessary for the instruction of the people
in the principles of piety and virtue. The best security men can have, of
living together in harmony and love, is from the prevalence of true religion,
and a due regard to the will and authority of the supreme being. Religion and
virtue, are the strongest bond of human society, and lay the best foundation of
peace and happiness in the civil state.

I PROCEED, in the next place, to consider the importance of a good
public-administration of government, to the peace and happiness of a people.

ALL the qualifications of a good administration may be summed up in two heads,
the ability and faithfulness of those, who are entrusted with the weighty
concerns of the state: To one or the other of these two things may be referred,
whatever can be desired or expected in a good ruler. These qualifications are
of the highest importance, in every administration. A free people, under GOD,
may justly put confidence in such an administration, and not find themselves
disappointed, as they must unavoidably be if they commit themselves into the
hands of weak or wicked men* The former, though they mean never so well, are
unable to do good; the latter may improve their great talents, to do mischief:
Neither of them are fit to be entrusted with the great affairs of state. Who,
on the one hand, would willingly trust his whole interest to the power and
disposal of a man of the greatest abilities, but destitute of honor and
conscience; or on the other hand, who would undertake a dangerous voyage, on
the boisterous ocean, under the command of the most upright and honest man, who
had no knowledge of the art of navigation, nor any acquaintance with the seas.
In common affairs no honest man will undertake any business for which he knows
he is unfit, though he should be solicited to do it: The same should be
observed by men, invited to serve the public. When a people have raised men of
weak abilities to posts of honor, it may seem hard to neglect them; and it
must, indeed, be ungrateful, if in any good degree, they maintain the dignity
of their stations, and advance the public good; and especially, if the posts
they hold, were unsought, and conferred without solicitation. Nevertheless it
should be considered, that those, who undertake the affairs of the public, are
as answerable for their abilities, as the soldier for his courage, when he
inlists into the service of his country. The safety of the public is to be
preferred to the honor of an individual.

HERE I might delineate more fully the character of an able and faithful
administration; but I will not enlarge, and shall say only in a few words, that
the principal lines of it, are knowledge, wisdom, and prudence, courage and
unshaken resolution, righteousness and justice, tempered with lenity, mercy,
and compassion, and a steady firmness of public measures, when founded in
wisdom and the public good, together with inflexible integrity, the fear of
GOD, and a sacred regard to the moral and religious interests of the community.
These are the great characteristics of an administration, which will procure
respect and confidence; and has the best tendency to promote the happiness,
union and strength of a people, and to render them as a "city, that is compact
together."

IF a virtuous people venerate rulers of this character, and unite their
endeavors with them in advancing all the noble ends of society, they will have
the fairest prospect of peace and prosperity; which was the last thing, I
proposed to be considered.

LET the first object, exciting the attention of a free people, be the
character of those, whom they introduce into public offices; and, the next,
that they reverence the worthy magistrate, support him in his office and
dignity, and show a ready obedience to the laws of the state.

NOT only may a people be delivered into the hands of tyrants, as the rod and
scourge of heaven for their impiety and madness; but through their own folly,
"children may be their princes, and babes rule over them." Such a "people shall
be oppressed every one by another, and every one by his neighbor."

HAPPY the free and virtuous people, who pay strict attention to the natural
aristocracy, which is the institution of heaven; and appears in every assembly
of mankind, on whatever occasion, thy are met together. Happy the people who
have wisdom to discern the true patriot of superior abilities, in all his
counsels ever manifesting a sincere regard to the public good, and never with a
selfish view attempting to deceive them, into hurtful measures; and happy the
people who distinguish him from the designing demagogue, who, while he sooths
them in their vices, and flatters them with high notions of liberty, and of
easing their burdens, is plunging them into the depths of misery and bondage.

HOW idle are all disputes about a technical aristocracy, if people disregard
that divine injunction, given by Moses, to the free electors of Israel, when he
was about to appoint some assistants in government. Take ye wise men and
understanding and known among your tribes for their great abilities and good
deeds, "and I will make them rulers over you."

SUCH an aristocracy is founded in merit and designed by the GOD of government
and order to direct a free people in the choice of their judges and public
magistrates. Riches are so far necessary as to raise the judge and counselor
above the temptation of transgressing for a peace of bread, nevertheless this
aristocracy is derived from merit and that influence, which a character for
superior wisdom, and known services to the commonwealth, has to produce
veneration, confidence and esteem, among a people, who have felt the benefits,
and enjoy the advantage of being under so happy a direction.

THIS influence of character in the language of the Roman republic, was called
Auctoritas patrum, and the veneration paid to it by the people, Verecundia
plebis. It is essentially necessary in all good governments, but especially the
life and spirit of a happy, free and republican state, which subsists on the
virtues of its citizens, and can never, while any found wisdom is left to
direct the public choice, by design commit the civil administration into the
hands of men destitute of political abilities, or who are the patrons of vice.

IT is therefore, of the highest importance to the being, happiness and peace
of free republics, to show a fixed and unalterable regard to merit in the
choice of their rulers: The next thing is to discover a deference and
submission to authority, obedience to the laws, a spirit of righteousness and
peace, and a disposition to promote the public good.

HONOR and respect are due to rulers: The order and good of society require
external marks of distinction, and titles of eminence to be given them. This is
due to their office; an honor paid to the institution of government; but there
is a further honor due to them, when they are faithful in executing the trust
committed to them, and direct all their actions to advance the true interest of
the state. In this view, good rulers alone can be honored, because they alone
deserve esteem and respect. We owe obedience and subjection to all rulers in
the execution of their office, according to the laws of the land; but, as to
cordial affection, veneration, esteem and gratitude, these are due only to the
worthy magistrate; and the debt will be paid by all virtuous citizens, although
he should be blasphemed, arraigned, and condemned by the factious and
discontented, who wish that there should be no righteous government in the
world.

IF we wilfully transgress the laws of society and resist the just commands of
civil authority, we do an injury not so much to the magistrate, as to the
community, and expose ourselves to the high displeasure of Almighty GOD, whose
authority is above all human constitutions, and can never be annulled by the
decrees of kings and nobles, the consults of senates, or the joint consent of a
people.

THIS is the sentiment of a great and good man, who well knew the rights of
human nature, and the privileges of a subject, which he had the courage to
plead before kings and magistrates; I mean the apostle Paul, who, illuminated
with the knowledge of christianity, and inspired with the benevolence of the
gospel, the slave of no party, in the greatest transports of zeal, spoke only
the words of truth and soberness. The doctrine he delivered was not the effect
of servile flattery and shameful cowardice: It proceeded not from the spirit of
fear, but of love and a sound mind: It is so expressed as at once to declare
the great end of civil government, the duty of the magistrate, and the
reasonableness of the subjects obedience. It contains both an effectual guard
against supporting tyranny and oppression, and a most serious and solemn
warning against lawless rebellion, anarchy and confusion: It is delivered as a
divine injunction upon christians, in a letter to the saints at Rome, and is
profitable for all ages, and especially seasonable for the present. Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers. For there is no power but of GOD. The
powers that be are ordained of GOD. Whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of GOD, and they that resist shall receive judgment to
themselves. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Would
thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same. For he is the minister of GOD to thee for good. But if
thou do evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the
minister of GOD, a revenger to execute wrath, upon him that does evil.
Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake. For, for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are GOD'S ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues:
tribute to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear to whom fear;
honor to whom honor.

WHEN a constitutional government is converted into tyranny, and the laws,
rights and properties of a free people are openly invaded, there ought not to
be the least doubt but that a remedy consistent with this doctrine of the
apostle, is provided in the laws of GOD and reason, for their preservation; nor
ought resistance in such case to be called rebellion. But who will imagine,
that GOD, whose first law, in the world of nature and reason, is order and
love, has commissioned men of a private character, with a lawful power, on
every pretense of some public mismanagement, to inflame and raise the
multitude, embroil the state, and overturn the foundations of public peace.

CIVIL society can exist no longer, than while connected by its laws and
constitution: These are of no force, otherwise than as they are maintained and
defended by the members of the commonwealth. This regular support of authority
is the only security, a people can have against violence and injustice, feuds
and animosities, in the unmolested enjoyment of their honest acquisitions:
Hence the very end of civil society demands, that the orders of government b^
enforced; the fountains of justice, kept open; the streams, preserved pure; and
the state, defended against all internal and foreign violence. These ends can
never be attained, under the most excellent constitution and laws, but by means
of an able and faithful administration, and the concurring zeal and assistance
of all good and virtuous citizens.

ALTHOUGH some exclude religion and the profession and worship of the gospel
from having any concern in the happiness of civil society and in the choice of
rulers among a free people, yet without religion, a people happily united in
all other respects, want the bond, most essentially necessary to preserve the
union, and to excite every one to faithfulness in his station.

THE chief glory of the gospel is, that it opens the way of salvation to a
fallen world, and contains the words of eternal life: And were not this its
great and distinguishing excellence, it would be of so much less importance to
mankind, as the concerns of eternity are greater than those of time. It does
every thing for our happiness in this world, which can be effected by the most
excellent precepts of morality, and by instructing us in all the duties, we owe
to GOD, our neighbor and ourselves: At the same time, it binds us to the most
unremitting diligence and perseverance in all good works, by the solemn account
we must give to our righteous judge, for all the deeds done in the body.

THE blessed gospel is therefore the best privilege which a people can enjoy;
and were its precepts duly observed, the civil state would be in the best
order, and in the most excellent condition. Persons of all ranks, according to
their abilities, would be blessings to the community. The foundations of our
Jerusalem would be laid with polished stones, and the city of our habitation be
built up without the noise of saws and hammers. The stone would not cry out of
the wall of public fraud and oppression, nor the beam out of the timber answer
it; but our officers would be peace, and our exactors righteousness; our walls
would be called salvation and our gates praise, and no wasting violence and
destruction would be heard in our borders.

HAVING pointed out the principles and maxims, on which civil union and
happiness depend, and considered both the character of a good administration of
government, and what is required of the subjects and citizens of a free state,
I proceed to address and exhort the several orders of men present, that in
their several places they use their best and most faithful endeavors for
promoting the public peace and prosperity, that this and the United States,
may, after the model of Jerusalem, be "builded, as a city that is compact
together."

IN the first place, duty requires, that with the greatest respect and
reverence the public exhortation be addressed to his Excellency, Governor
HUNTINGTON, the Chief Magistrate of this free State.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

WHILE I congratulate my fellow-citizens, on the return of this joyful
anniversary, I beg leave to address your Excellency, with the honors of the
day, and the thanks of a grateful people for all the peaceful blessings of your
administration.

THE many faithful and important services rendered to your country, in the most
difficult and interesting affairs of this and the United States have
distinguished you with honor, among the patriots of America -- enrolled your
name, in the immortal list of those great and noble personages, who in the most
heart-searching times, sealed the independence of America, adventured to sit at
the head of the national council -- and added you to the bright constellation
of the illustrious Statesmen and Governors of this free commonwealth.

How different is the station of a chief magistrate in a free government, who
lives in the hearts of the people, from that of the arbitrary despot, who has
many slaves, but not a loyal subject? All seem to adore the tyrant, and tremble
at the least motion of his eye, while they sigh for a change; and at the first
blow, the idol is pulled down, and trampled under foot. The confidence and
esteem of a virtuous and free people are derived from known and approved merit,
and have a lasting foundation. The chair of state is marked with this motto,
FOR THE BEST AND THE WORTHIEST CITIZEN.

I SINCERELY wish your Excellency, the most pleasing satisfaction, in the
esteem, veneration and gratitude of your citizens; but I persuade myself, you
look to an higher source of joy, and to a greater witness of integrity, than
the most unanimous approbation of a sensible and grateful people: I mean the
witness of conscience, appealing to the great searcher of hearts, that in the
whole of your public conduct, and in all the private walks of life, you have
considered yourself, as the servant of the Most High GOD, and devoted all your
abilities, ultimately to the honor and service of the eternal king.

THIS is that rectitude of intention and endeavor, which is able to give calm
peace through all the changing scenes of life, and all the uncertainties of
earthly greatness; and even in the view of approaching death, and the prospect
of the appearing and kingdom of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. It cannot therefore,
fail of affording your Excellency serene joy, while with an unreproaching
heart, you look round on the assembled commonwealth; and with an unruffled
mind, meet the great event of this day.

SHOULD the providence of GOD, and the voice of this free people continue your
Excellency in the first seat of government, I would with the deepest humility
and respect, honored sir, beseech and even charge you, in the presence of the
supreme judge and this great congregation, to look to the grace of the eternal
JEHOVAH, that you may be furnished for, and be found faithful in the high
employment. You will not think it, beneath your exalted dignity, to be exhorted
by one of the meanest of CHRIST'S servants, to acknowledge the infinite source
of wisdom, in all your ways, and to ask the direction of heaven, in all your
paths, that truth and integrity may ever guide you; and righteousness and mercy
be the girdle of your loins.

I AM persuaded, that the peace and happiness of this, and the United States,
cannot be built up and established, but upon the maxims I have pointed out and
recommended. You, Sir, are a master builder on the walls of our Jerusalem: Let
not these walls be daubed with the untempered mortar of injustice, jealousy and
discord; but may they be cemented by the uniting principles of justice,
benevolence and public spirit.

THE post assigned your Excellency, in divine providence, is high and
honorable, -- the employment, great and weighty, the objects in view,
beautiful and glorious, and the motives, such as may well inspire a noble and
generous breast, with the warmest zeal, the most unshaken fortitude, and the
most unremitting perseverance, in the most faithful endeavors, to answer the
great ends of the exalted station, you hold in this commonwealth. Some of these
objects, motives and ends are the exaltation of JEHOVAH, the King and Governor
of the universe -- the high importance and dignity of government, the great
foundation of peace and quiet -- your own honor in being furnished by GOD with
great abilities of eminent usefulness -- the loss or preservation of public
liberty, and the rights of a free people, on which depends the happiness of
thousands, or the misery of millions, -- the cause of religion and virtue, and
the consequences of them on the present and eternal interests of mankind -- the
peace and best good of civil society, and the honor and safety of this, and
the United States, -- and finally the joys or the sorrows of that great and
glorious day, when dignity and power will be no defense; but the highest
potentate, and the meanest slave, will stand without distinction before the
supreme and eternal judge, and receive the solemn, and decisive sentence from
his mouth.

THESE, Sir, are weighty considerations, which I humbly address to your
constant attention, that under the influence of them, you may be found
faithful, and meet the final approbation of your Lord. In the weight of
government, you will be encouraged and assisted by good men and virtuous
citizens; whose continual and earnest prayer will be, that the blessing of
Almighty GOD may attend and render your administration successful for the
honor of GOD, the advancement of piety and virtue, the true interest of this
and the United States of America, and the general good of mankind.

MAY your Excellency long live, the ornament of your country and the church of
CHRIST. -- May you be happy in the consciousness of faithfully serving GOD and
your people; and have the unspeakable joy of beholding them safe, virtuous and
free. -- And, when the Supreme Disposer of all events, shall dismiss you from
the services of this world, whether you shall then be in public life, and the
chief magistracy over this people, or free from public cares in the serene
retirements of a peaceful old age, may you experience the solid supports of the
christian hope, share in the rewards of grace, and shine with unfading glories,
in the kingdom of the Redeemer.

LET the public exhortation in the next place be acceptable to His Honor,
Lieutenant Governor WOLCOTT, the Honorable COUNC^^LORS, and the Respectable
REPRESENTATIVES of this State.

HONORED GENTLEMEN,

How happy will it be if the Magistrates and Representatives of this State
shall enter upon public business, with a noble spirit of true patriotism,
having no narrow and private interests at heart; but seeking the good of our
Jerusalem, build it up on the great foundations of truth and righteousness.
Then peace will be within our walls, and prosperity within our palaces.

A SELFISH and contracted spirit in any member of society is a great blemish;
but in a chief ruler -- in a senator -- in the representative of a free people,
it is vile -- it is odious, and unpardonable. Let this spirit be banished from
public counsel; or it will destroy all harmony of sentiment, and lead into the
narrow bypath of private ambition and self-exaltation: The builders will not
understand each other's language; scenes of confusion ensue, and the public
resolutions show more the complexion of party-attachment, than the public good.

IF the leaders of a people are not united in the great maxims of government,
and maintain not steadiness in the public administration, the people never
will, nor can be easy. And when a community is rent by the animosities and
different views of their principal leaders and citizens, a republic is verging
toward an ochlocratical state, in which the prevalence of a party, is no sure
token of truth. In this situation, justice may be overborne by the violence of
misguided passion, blind to the true interest of the people and, the best means
of safety. An Aristides through envy, was banished by his citizens; and Cicero,
the friend of liberty, of the laws and constitution of his country, for his
wise and vigorous measures, in defeating and crushing the Catalinarian
conspiracy and rebellion, under the administration of a furious tribune was
driven from Rome: But, when the (...) of party had subsided, and the people
were recovered to their senses, they recalled him, with every mark of public
honor; and styled him the father and preserver of his country; an honor never
before conferred, on a Roman citizen.

NEVER was union in counsel and in public exertions, more necessary in America,
than at the present day. If we improve the advantages, which Providence has put
into our hands, we may be a great and flourishing people, happy and united
among ourselves, and our name be respectable among the nations. But, if we
forget the GOD of our salvation, and neglect the means of virtue and religion,
with which we are favored above any people on earth -- if we are divided, and
contend about every plan devised for strengthening the national union, and
restoring the national honor and safety -- if the several states, losing sight
of the great end of the confederation, are influenced by mere local and partial
motives, and if, in their respective and distinct jurisdictions, they forsake
the paths of righteousness, we shall become the scorn and contempt of foreign
nations, a prey to every bold invader; or fall by intestine divisions, till we
sink into general ruin, and universal wretchedness.

IF any one doubt this, let him consult the history of nations, and especially
of Israel* Let him look into the book of the Lamentations of Jeremiah. There,
the Hebrew Prophet and mourner appears a man of sorrows, and compacted with
griefs: He breaths in sighs, and speaks in groans: Complicated scenes of horror
and distress strike all our senses, while we hear the lamentations of his
broken heart, mourning the ruins of Jerusalem, the cruel slaughter, and
captivity of the people, the desolation of the temple, and that "from the
daughter of Zion, all her beauty" was "departed."

I THEREFORE, pursuade myself, Gentlemen, that in full confidence of your zeal
for the public good, I may with all deference and freedom, recommend to your
attention, the honor and safety of the confederate republic, as being of the
same importance to the happiness and defense of the several states, as the
peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, were to the several tribes of Israel.

IF the national union, by concentrating the wisdom and force of America, was
the means of our salvation from conquest and slavery -- if the existence,
liberty and independence of these states, and their national character,
importance and glory depend still upon their united firmness and strength -- if
this union be necessary for the decision of controversies, which might
otherwise engender wars among themselves, and be the only probable means of
their safety and defense against foreign nations, -- and if without it, the
American commerce and intercourse can never be respectable, safe and extensive
in the various parts of the world. -- If these things are true, which I leave,
Gentlemen, to your own consideration, certainly there are no objects of greater
magnitude and importance, more loudly calling the attention of America, than
the national union, the necessity of supporting the national honor, and to
give the federal government energy at home, and respectability abroad.

I WOULD, Gentlemen, beg leave to ask, whether to neglect the great interest of
the whole, and to imagine that each state can singly preserve and defend
itself, be not as absurd, as if several men, at an amazing cost, should lay a
costly foundation, and erect the mighty frame of a most magnificent palace; and
then, before the expense be paid, from a fondness of finishing, each one, his
own room, and of enjoying the pleasures of his separate apartment, they should
fall into such contention and division, as not only to leave the frame
neglected, uncovered and exposed to continual decay and ruin, but the whole
undertaking liable to that curse, pronounced in the book of GOD. Woe unto him,
that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that
uses his neighbors service without wages, and gives him not for his work.

I OWN, Gentlemen, I am concerned for the national honor and happiness; and
were I to consult only my own feelings, I might hold up to your view, the dying
languors of the national union, as foreboding ruin, division, or some dreadful
convulsion, to these states. But perhaps, my fears are grounded not in the
state of the nation, but in the want of an extensive knowledge of public
affairs. You will, however, give me leave to hope, that the greatest attention
will be paid to all just and reasonable measures, for supporting and maintaing
the liberty and glory of the American states, and republic.

I ONLY add, Gentlemen, on this subject, my most sincere prayer, that heaven
would gui^^ all your deliberations, and collect and unite the wisdom and
patriotism of America, in the proposed convention of the states, in some just
and equal system of federal subordination, effectually securing the internal
liberty and sovereignty of the states, and giving such dignity and authority to
the federal government, that it may be the means of securing the peace, and
prosperity of the whole; and the benefit of it reach to the most distant ages,
and increase from generation to generation to the latest posterity.

I PERSUADE myself, Gentlemen, you will have a watchful regard to the rights
and privileges of this people; and in all reasonable ways, ease their burdens
and relieve their sorrows. You are too well acquainted, to need any information
of the uneasiness, discontent and complaints, which prevail in the state. I
will not presume to say, how far, these complaints are without any just
foundation -- how far, they arise from the real distresses and burdens of the
times -- how far, they are founded in any real, or supposed mistakes, in the
public administration -- or how far they have been nursed and cherished, by men
of power and influence; whose office required them, to quiet the voice of
murmuring, instead of inflaming the public, in order to answer their own ends,
and procure self exaltation, or to prevent that of others. But, from whatever
different and opposite sources, these complaints arise, you cannot do your
people more essential service, than to apply the most faithful counsels and
prudent means, for the removing and healing them.

IF any of the evils, the people suffer* have been occasioned by their own
imprudent conduct, you will nevertheless pity them; and afford all the relief
in your power. This is to act the part of a kind and tender father, who would
not by unreasonable severity, push his children on to ruin and despair. But,
though you pity and study to relieve them in trouble, you must not support them
in vice and disorder. As a faithful physician will sometimes use palliatives,
but will never gratify a sick patient to his destruction: So as far as may be
consistent with the great rules of righteousness: you will suit the public
conduct to the infirmities of the people, but you cannot consent to measures of
iniquity, which will work ruin and misery to the state.

HEAR all the equitable petitions of the people; but should they ask you to be
unrighteous, stop your ears: Be merciful and compassionate; but maintain a
conduct consistent with the dignity, faith and honor of government, and with
those fixed rules and everlasting maxims, by which it is to be administered. It
is a day, in which trimmers and time-servers are very unfit to direct the
affairs of state. I wish, none such may be found among the honorable
personages, whom I now address. If any of you, Gentlemen, for acting the
dictates of an upright conscience, should fall under the displeasure of the
people, you will have infinitely greater support and consolation in the
rectitude of your own minds, than the highest applause fellow-mortals can give.
Superior dignity and virtue, in these circumstances of trial, appear to the
best advantage, and shines with the brightest luster; and will meet the
approbation of the great judge in the presence of an assembled world. The
frowns of a misguided, and the resentments of an ungrateful people, cannot bend
the true patriot to meanness; nor the loss of honor and public station, tempt
him to iniquity, and to consent to such measures, as in his fixed opinion and
judgment, will end in public shame and ruin.

REMEMBER, Gentlemen, that while you are examining the rights of individuals,
and their claims on one another, or on the public, you drop the character of
legislators, and should act by the same fixed rules of law and equity, as the
judge on the bench. In causes of a judicial kind, your high character of
sovereignty will not excuse an arbitrary decision, or denial of justice, any
more than the same may be excused in the lowest executive court. In granting
favors, you have only to consider, whether they are equitable and consistent
with the good of the community; but in doing justice, you have no sovereign
discretion. No wise man thinks his life and estate safe in the hand of a
tyrant, bound by no restraint of law: Excuse me, Gentlemen, when I add, that
the discretion of a popular assembly, acting by no fixed and known rules of
equity, is a different expression, but the same in effect, as the arbitrary
will of a despot. Sovereign power should never be perverted to acts of
unrighteousnnss: Let not therefore the notion of omnipotence, and of being
above control, insensibly insinuate itself into your deliberations, and lead
to a different determination, from what you would give in a different
character. With deference to your high stations, I am warranted with all
freedom to assure you, in the fear of GOD, the almighty and eternal Judge, that
the consideration of not being accountable to an higher court on earth, should
be one of the most forcible motives, to engage you to the greatest uprightness
and impartiality, not only between subject and subject, but especially the
subject and the public. Remember, that as in this world, there is an appeal
from a lower to an higher court, so when the most sovereign and uncontrollable
court on earth, gives an unrighteous sentence, and wickedly perverts judgment,
there is immediately entered in the high court of heaven, an appeal, which, in
the great day of general assise, will be called, and must be answered. Then
you, my honorable Auditors, and all the kings and judges of the earth shall
appear, and give an account for your conduct, while you acted in the character
of Gods, on earth.

I HAVE not pointed out, wherein the difficulties and embarrassments of the
present day consist; nor what political measures are best to extricate the
people from them: These things, Gentlemen, belong to you, and demand the
exercise of your superior wisdom and prudence; but I am confident of the real
advantage of those principles and maxims, I have insisted on as the gteat
foundation of the happiness and strength of civil society. In this, I think, I
have kept within my own limits, and can therefore with an humble freedom,
commend them to your attention and consideration. To you it belongs to build
upon them, and to improve all your dexterity, zeal and authority to compact us
together. To you we look to heal our wounds, to appease our disquiet, to
rectify our disorders, and to apply those bands and ligaments, which shall hold
us together, and prevent our dissolution and ruin. This is the righteous
expectation of GOD, and the desire and hope of all good men. Be not like the
ten spies, who brought up an evil report of the good land of Canaan, and
discouraged the hearts of their brethren: but like Joshua and Caleb, who
endeavored to still the people with the assurances of good hope, that under
GOD they were able to surmount the difficulties before them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the darkness of the present day, and the public difficulties
we labor under, be of good courage, and the LORD be with you: Though the earth
and it is inhabitants be dissolved, hold up the pillars thereof; and never let
this state be removed from the foundations of righteousness and truth. If these
foundations have by any means received a shock, and seem to be in a tottering
condition, let your wisdom and courage give them stability. If the pillars of
public faith and justice, judgment and equity have been bent and twisted, like
the limber offer, give them that strength and firmness, that they may hereafter
stand unshaken as the aged oak: and let this people, and all the world know,
that you mean to be a righteous legislature; and wish to rule over a righteous
people.

I SHALL add only in a few words, that while in all other ways, you endeavor
the good of this people, and expect from them a reverential regard for
magistracy, and a peaceable behavior in the state, you will, Gentlemen,
appoint men of virtue and religion to all important offices of executive trust:
And be yourselves the best examples of righteousness and the fear of GOD. Show
yourselves friends to religion and virtue -- to the church of CHRIST, and the
worship of GOD -- to the ministers of the gospel -- and to the great and
important interests of education and learning in the state: By this you will do
honor to yourselves, and essential service to your country, merit the esteem
and gratitude of good men, and meet the approbation of GOD. If religion and
good manners be legible, not only in your laws, but in your lives, rendering
you conspicuous for piety and mercy, justice and sobriety, your authority will
be strengthened, and your administration supported. The attractive force of
your examples, will engage your people to that behavior, which is necessary to
the peace and prosperity of the state; and the endeavors of good citizens will
be united in procuring and advancing the noble and beneficial ends of society.
Thus you will be the lights of the world, the ornaments of mankind; and having
with eminent usefulness served your generation according to the will of GOD,
may you finally enjoy the rewards of faithful servants.

THE public exhortation and address now turns itself to the Ministers of the
Gospel.

MY FATHERS AND BRETHREN,

WE are members of civil society, equally interested in it is peace and
prosperity, with the rest of our fellow-citizens; and especially "because of
the house of the LORD our GOD," we are bound "to seek" it is "good." The
immediate ends of the magistracy and ministry are different, but not opposite:
They mutually assist each other, and ultimately center in the same point. The
one has for its object the promotion of religion and the cause of CHRIST; the
other immediately aims at the peace and order of mankind in this world: Without
which, there could be no fixed means of religion; nor the church have a
continuance on earth, but through the interposition of a miraculous providence,
constantly displayed for its preservation. Hence the church of CHRIST will have
no fixed residence, where there is no civil government, until he, whose right
it is, shall take to himself his great power, and reign King of nations, even
as he is King of saints.

How thankful then should we be for the ordinance of civil government, which is
a token of divine forbearance to a guilty world; and will continue till the
designs of the christian ministry, are accomplished. How many have no higher
conception of the christian ministry, and the wisdom and goodness of GOD in
appointing it, than as relating to this world? Hence, while they pride
themselves in civil privileges, and perhaps, allow the morality of the gospel
to have some good influence on the happiness of society, they have no idea of
the glory of the christian scheme of salvation, and despise the gospel, the
ministry and the church of GOD. And yet, were it not, that the gospel might be
preached, and the church have a being on earth, civil government would cease
among men.

To preach the gospel of the Redeemer, to open his salvation, to explain and
urge his precepts, and to represent the motives of the religion taught by him,
together with the administration of the ordinances, which he has appointed,
are the immediate end; and the peculiar work of the christian ministry. This is
the part, my Fathers and Brethren, assigned to us, on the walls of our
Jerusalem; and whoever is faithful in this divine employment, will at once
advance the temporal and eternal interests of mankind.

To this work, therefore, let us attend with all diligence and faithfulness,
and use our utmost endeavors to promote the designs of redeeming love; in
recovering sinful, guilty and miserable men, to the image and favor of GOD, in
bringing them to a life of holiness, and to the practice of all righteousness
and virtue. In doing this, we shall be the happy instruments of advancing the
best good of society, by leading them to the diligent practice of all the
duties of the social and christian life; and render them, most useful in their
respective places: But, more especially, we shall be happy, in being made
instruments, under the sacred influence of our divine LORD, of plucking them
from the jaws of destruction, and the power and tyranny of Satan, of raising
them to the greatest dignity and perfection of their nature, and of preparing
them for the new Jerusalem, the city of our GOD, "wherein dwells
righteousness."

WHILE we look to our civil fathers for their kind countenance and protection,
it will be our constant care to strengthen and encourage them, in the great and
weighty concerns of government, by our prayers, by our public instructions, and
by our examples, not only of civil subjection and obedience, but of all
virtues, which adorn the christian profession and ministry, and conduce to the
peace and prosperity of the commonwealth.

IN this let us strive to excel, and unite all our endeavors. What is more
necessary, than union among the ministers of CHRIST? What gives the enemies of
religion more advantage, than the discord, which has prevailed among
christians? Or what stabs the cause of the Redeemer, with deeper wounds, than
the contention of his ministers? Let us not look to the coercive power of the
civil sword, to heal these wounds; but to our divine and almighty Savior, to
give us one heart and one way; and let us study his gospel, which contains not
only the doctrines we are to teach, and the duties we are to inculcate; but the
most forcible motives of mutual love, kindness and forbearance. If we drink at
this pure fountain of benevolence, and imbibe the spirit of the meek and lowly
JESUS, it will cleanse away our envy, pride and ambition, the great sources of
ministerial contention. We shall love one another, and strive together in our
endeavors, and in our prayers for the success of the gospel, and the peace of
churches.

BRETHREN, our time is short: Our fathers many of them are gone: Every year
makes breaches upon our order. May GOD sanctify the heavy strokes of the year
past, upon the churches, and the ministry that we may be quickened to greater
zeal and diligence in our important work. He that is faithful to the death,
shall receive the crown of everlasting life and love, in the kingdom of our
heavenly Father.

AN Address to the numerous audience present, on this joyful occasion, shall
conclude my discourse.

FRIENDS AND FELLOW CITIZENS,

A CONSTITUTION of Government, which gives a people the liberty of choosing
their own rulers, and of being governed by laws, established by common consent,
while they make a wise use of it, is a privilege more valuable, than the gold
of Ophir, and of greater importance to public happiness, than the rich
mountains of Peru. What shall you do to render this privilege, a blessing to
the present age, and hand down the joys of it to future generations? Make it
your constant aim to choose able and faithful men, who fear GOD and hate
covetousness, to be your rulers; honor and encourage them in all their
endeavors to make you a virtuous, prosperous and happy people, and apply
yourselves with diligence to your own business, that in your several stations,
you may contribute to the public good.

THE burden of government at all times, and especially at the present, is very
great: We may so behave as to render it, far greater and more difficult, by our
misconduct and disorderly practices; and prevent the best fruits of the most
wise and righteous administration. We may discourage the hearts and slacken the
hands of the most worthy magistrates, by an unruly and discontented spirit, and
by an opposition to all their designs for the public good. How many endeavor
to enervate and avoid the force of the most wholesome laws of society; and use
every art to make the people discontented, and to promote factions in the state.

I THINK it my duty on this solemn occasion, to warn my fellow citizens,
against all such vile and wicked practices, which tend to the ruin of
magistracy, and the destruction of peace and order. I wish, my Fellow-Citizens,
all had a due sense of the high importance of civil government, and the
protection afforded us by the laws of our country. Whatever security and peace,
we enjoy by day or night, at home or abroad, in the house, in the field, or by
the way, are by means of civil union and society. Without this bond, and the
restraint of civil institutions, no one would be safe in his person or
property. The weak would be continually exposed to the oppression and injustice
of a more powerful neighbor. Civil government therefore, well constituted, and
impartially administered, is one of the most important blessings, a gracious
GOD has bestowed upon a guilty world; and the laws and constitution of our
country are our best inheritance, which we should defend at the hazard of our
lives and fortunes.

IF any real or supposed grievances should arise in a republic, they may be
examined and redressed, without having recourse to arms, and opposing the
government of the people, in the hands of the constitutional authority of the
state. Good rulers will esteem it, an honor that the public conduct should be
examined, and the errors of administration rectified: And if rulers appointed
by the people abuse their authority, they may be displaced. A republic has the
means of redress within itself; and cannot be oppressed, but by its own fault
and neglect.

BUT while in a free government, the public conduct is open to inspection and
discussion, there is a great difference between the reproof of friendship, and
the reproach of an enemy; much more between personal slander and abuse, and a
candid examination of public mistakes and grievances, that they may be
rectified and redressed. The latter is the right of the people and may be
encouraged; the former is to be detested, nor can its venom be hidden, or
justified, under the cloak of public good. Its tendency is to introduce an
imbittered party-spirit, and to promote factions and disturbances: It savours,
not of that wisdom from above, pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, but
of that which is earthly, sensual, devlish: It is not a cement, having the
least tendency to add strength to the foundations, beauty to the walls, or
peace and prosperity to the palaces of our Jerusalem.

I SINCERELY condole with my country, under the heavy burden lying on the
people. If a considerable part of this burden has been brought upon ourselves
by imprudent conduct, we ought not to complain to our rulers, and think
ourselves hardly used, if the foundations of justice be not removed for our
sakes. If any part of it be occasioned by unnecessary expenses in government,
and by salaries and rewards, too lavishly bestowed on those, who serve the
public, we have right to complain, and to expect redress. And if the claims of
any men on the public, or other burdens in the state, be unjust, we may boldly
apply to our rulers for relief: For to execute judgment, to do justice, to
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed
go free, and to break every yoke, is the great end of their institution and
office: Surely then, a righteous Legislature will hear all our reasonable
complaints, and ease our sorrows.

BUT if these burdens are just, the price of our liberty, and of all the
privileges which we enjoy, what can our rulers do, but encourage us to be a
righteous and industrious people, and contrive the best, most easy and
effectual measures for discharging the public debt? -- They cannot deny that we
have had an army -- hired soldiers, and carried on a long and expensive war, in
which through the signal interposition of a wonder-working Providence, we have
been gloriously successful -- that we are indebted to France, Holland and
Spain, in sums to a large amount -- and that thousands of our citizens have
lent their substance and treasure to this and the United States; many of whom
are distressed by the public failure. -- They cannot create silver and gold:
But supposing, it were in their power to furnish a full and rich store of these
articles, for which we might sell and mortgage our estates, would not this be
the ruin of the greater part of the debtors in the state, and of many other
citizens, now in flourishing circumstances? -- But, it will be said, they can
emit a bank of paper money, the benefit of which was experienced in former
times. A mighty benefit; a blessed privilege, indeed, if it be on such a
sinking foundation, that the dishonest taking advantage of its depreciation may
defraud their creditors, and live and riot on the simplicity of their
neighbors, and the spoils of public faith. Would it be right, my
Fellow-Citizens, to force such a medium into the hands of the people, against
their will and consent? A tyrant may compel his vassals for gold or silver
promised, to take lead, tin, wood or stubble: But this would be esteemed in an
eastern despot no better, than open and bare faced robbery. Such a thought
ought not to be entertained of the righteous Legislature of a free people, who
enjoy the bible, in which we are taught, that whoever expects to be an
inhabitant of the heavenly Jerusalem, though he swear to his hurt, changes
not. If this bank of paper-money be on a sure foundation, and have a currency,
equal to gold and silver, the question returns, how shall we obtain it, unless
we earn it, or pledge our estates for the redemption of it? In the first
method, we might as well obtain silver and gold; the latter is big with ruin to
thousands, and would tend to discourage the frugality, industry and economy,
which begin to have so promising an appearance; and must be the means of
freeing us from the great embarrassments we are under.

A SUDDEN plenty of money, would not help us; nay it would do us hurt, unless
it were obtained in that way, which would encourage those virtues in society,
which are the strength, the happiness, and beauty of a people. These are
industry, honesty, frugality, and the reciprocal acts of friendship, kindness,
and mercy, which arise from the dependencies of one upon another. Had we a
thousand tons of silver dispersed in this state, in such manner as should check
the growth of those virtues, it would be truly the root of all evil, and
dispose us to such a conduct, that in a few years, this mighty sum would vanish
and the people become reduced to a more wretched state of indigence and want,
than before: The years of plenty would soon be over, and there arise a louder
cry for the suspension of public and private justice, than has ever been heard
in America.

I CANNOT my Fellow-Citizens but flatter myself, that the necessity of the
times has begun to work for its own relief, in a way conducive to the public
good, and the virtue and peace of the people. Agriculture is more encouraged
and attended to -- the herds and flocks of large and small cattle are
increasing creasing -- wool and flax are more prized -- home-manufactures begin
to be thought necessary -- the distaff, the wheel and loom are becoming more
fashionable -- the shops of trifling baubles and gewgaws are less crowded --
suits at law diminished -- a general spirit of industry is more prevalent, and
patience and perseverance seem only necessary to crown the work.

BUT to close this discourse and address; let us my Friends and
Fellow-Citizens, faithfully attend to our true interest and safety, in all
those ways which are pointed out in wisdom and the circumstances we are under*
Encourage your rulers in building up our Jerusalem, on the strong foundations
of truth and righteousness -- maintain in your hearts and conduct, those
principles and maxims of love, benevolence and goodness, which will render you
a united, happy and prosperous people. Let GOD be honored, and the grace of
the Redeemer exalted; the sabbath sanctified; the worship and ordinances of the
LORD'S house, maintained: The pious and virtuous education of the rising
generation, religiously regarded; and a firm and inviolable adherence to the
laws and institutions of CHRIST, manifested by all orders and ranks of men.
Then virtue and peace, righteousness, mercy and the fear of GOD, will flourish;
and every member of the community, will be found, fixed in his proper place,
and discharging the duties of it.

THIS is that peaceful and happy state, which King David so earnestly desired
might be the portion of Jerusalem, and make it a joy and a praise in all the
earth. Let his holy and pious wish be the language of all our hearts: Pray for
the peace of our Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love thee: Peace be within
thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces: For my brethren and companions
sake, I will now say, peace be within thee; because of the house of the LORD
our GOD, I will seek thy Good.

AMEN.

