THE DIGNITY OF MAN. A DISCOURSE Addressed to the Congregation in FRANKLIN,
Upon the Occasion of their receiving from Dr. FRANKLIN, The Mark of his
Respect, in a rich DONATION OF BOOKS, Appropriated to the Use of a
PARISH-LIBRARY.

BY NATHANAEL EMMONS, PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN FRANKLIN.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER, IN WESTMINSTER-STREET.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE. PRESIDENT OF THE STATE OF
PENNSYLVANIA; THE ORNAMENT OF GENIUS, THE PATRON OF SCIENCE, AND THE BOAST OF
MAN; THIS DISCOURSE IS INSCRIBED, With the greatest Deference, Humility and
Gratitude, by his most obliged, and most obedient Servant, THE AUTHOR.

Franklin, in Massachusetts, March 1, 1787.
A DISCOURSE ADDRESSED TO THE CONGREGATION IN FRANKLIN.
1 KINGS II. 2. -- Show thyself a Man.


DAVID closed the scene of life, with that propriety of conduct, and that
composure of mind, which at once displayed the beauty of religion, and the
dignity of human nature. When the time of his departure drew nigh, he had
nothing to do to prepare for death, but only, like other pious and illustrious
Patriarchs, to converse with his friends, and to give them his last and best
advice. And, as he had, some time before, committed to Solomon the care of his
Family and government of his Kingdom; so he felt a strong and ardent desire,
that this beloved Son, in whom he had reposed such important trusts, should
appear with dignity, and act a noble and worthy part upon the stage of life.
Accordingly he called him into his presence, and with equal solemnity and
affection, addressed him in these memorable words, "I go the way of all the
earth: be thou strong therefore, and show thyself a man." This appellation
sometimes signifies the dignity, and sometimes the meanness of our nature. Job
makes use of it to express our meanness and turpitude in the sight of God. "How
can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a woman?
Behold, even to the moon and it shines not, yea the stars are not pure in his
sight. How much less man that is a worm, and the Son of Man which is a worm."
But Isaiah employs this same appellative to represent the dignity of human
nature, when he calls upon stupid idolaters to "remember this, and show
themselves men." So here, David in his dying address to Solomon, "show thyself
a man," evidently means to use the term in the best sense, and to urge him to
act up to the dignity of his nature, and the end of his being.

AGREEABLY therefore to the spirit and intention of the text, the subject which
now properly lies before us, is the dignity of man. And, I hope, the
observations which shall be made upon this subject, will do honor to our
nature in one view, and pour contempt upon it in another, and so lead us all
into a clear and just apprehension of ourselves, which is the most useful, as
well as the most rare and high attainment in knowledge.

THE dignity of man appears from his bearing the image of his Maker. After God
had created the heavens and the earth, and furnished the world with a rich
profusion of vegetive and sensitive natures, he was pleased to form a more
noble and intelligent Creature, to bear his image, and to be the lord of this
lower creation. "And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." This
allows us to say, that man is the offspring of God, a ray from the fountain of
light, a drop from the ocean of intelligence. Though, man, since the fall,
comes into the world destitute of the moral image of God, yet, in the very
frame and constitution of his nature, he still bears the natural image of his
Maker. His soul is a transcript of the natural perfections of the Deity. God is
a spirit, and so is the soul of man; God is intelligence and activity, and so
is the soul of man. In a word, man is the living image of the living God, in
whom is displayed more of the divine nature and glory, than in all the works
and creatures of God upon earth. Agreeably therefore to the dignity of his
nature, God has placed him at the head of the world, and given him the
dominion over all his works. Hence says the Psalmist, "Thou have made him a
little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor. Thou
made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put all
things under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yea the beasts of the field; the
fowls of the air; and the fish of the sea." How wide is the kingdom of man! how
numerous his subjects! how great his dignity!

GOD has, besides, instamped a dignity upon man by giving him not only a
rational, but an immortal existence. The soul, which is properly the man, shall
survive the body and live forever. This might be argued from the nature, the
capacity, and the desires of the human mind, and from the authority of the
wiser Heathens, who have generally supposed the soul to be a spiritual and
immortal principle in man. But, since the Heathen Moralists might derive their
opinion from a higher source than the light of nature, and since every created
object necessarily and solely depends, for continued existence, upon the will
of the Creator; we choose to rest the evidence of this point upon the authority
of the sacred Oracles. Here indeed we find the immortality of the soul
sufficiently established. Solomon says, "Who knows the spirit of man that
goes upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth?"
And, in another place, after describing the frailty and mortality of the body,
he adds, "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it." Agreeably to this, our Lord declares that
men are able to kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. And God has
told us that he will, at the last day, separate the righteous from the wicked,
and fix the latter in a miserable, but the former in a blessed immortality.
Hence immortality appears to be the common property and dignity of the human
kind.

THE creatures and objects, with which we are now surrounded, have but a short
and momentary being. One species of insects, we are told, begin and end their
existence in twenty-four hours. Others live and flutter a few hours longer, and
then drop into their primitive dust. The larger animals, which people the air,
the earth, and the sea do, day after day, in a thick and constant succession,
die and dissolve in their own elements. And even the whole material system
will, after a few ages, either by the immediate hand of God, or by the gradual
operation of the laws of nature, be rolled together as a scroll, and tumbled
into one vast and promiscuous ruin. But we shall survive all these ruins and
ravages of time, and live the constant spectators of the successive scenes of
Eternity. And this renders us infinitely superior, in point of dignity and
importance, to all the objects and creatures, whose existence expires with time.

THE dignity of man also appears, from the great attention and regard, which
God has paid to him. God indeed takes care of all his creatures, and his
tender mercies are over all his works: But man has always been the favorite
child of Providence. God, before he brought him into being, provided a large
and beautiful world for his habitation; and ever since the day of his creation*
he has commanded all nature to contribute to his support and happiness. For his
good, he has appointed the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night.
Into his bosom, he has ordered the Earth and the Sea to pour all their rich and
copious blessings. And for his use and comfort, he has given the fowls of the
mountains, the beasts of the forests, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. He
has also given his Angels charge over him, to keep him in all his ways.
Accordingly they have appeared from time to time, to instruct him in duty, to
deliver him from danger, to bring him good tidings, to attend his dissolution,
and to convey his departing spirit to the mansions of rest. But, the most
distinguishing and most astonishing display of the divine mercy, is the
Incarnation and Death of the Son of God for the salvation of man. By the
Incarnation of Christ, our nature was united with the divine, and the dignity
of man with the dignity of Christ. Hence all the sufferings, which Christ has
endured on earth, and all the honors, which he has received in heaven, have
displayed the dignity of man. And for the same reason, the dignity of man will
be eternally rising, with the rising honor and dignity of Christ.

BUT, we must furthermore observe, that the large and noble capacities of the
human mind, set the dignity of our nature in the clearest and strongest light.
Let us therefore consider, in this place, several of these with particular
attention.

First, MAN has a capacity for constant and perpetual progression in
knowledge. Animals, indeed, appear to have some small degree of knowledge. "The
ox knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib." But, as all the lower
species are destitute of the power of reasoning, or the faculty of arranging
and comparing their ideas; so they are totally incapable of enlarging their
views, by intellectual improvements. The be cannot improve her skill, nor the
ant her prudence, by observation or study. All their knowledge is the mere gift
of God, which he bestows upon them without any application or exertion of
theirs.

BUT, man is capable of improving in knowledge as long as he enjoys the means
or materials of improvement. Indeed he has power to improve the smallest stock
forever. The faculty of Reason, with which he is endowed, enables him to
proceed from one degree of knowledge to another, in a constant and endless
progression. The grounds of this are obvious. As a certain chain, or connection
runs through all branches of knowledge; so the acquisition of one degree of
knowledge facilitates the acquisition of another, and the more a man knows, the
more he is capable of knowing. And, as all the powers and faculties of the mind
brighten and expand by exercise; so a man's capacity for improvement increases,
as the means and thirst for improvements increase. Accordingly the path of
knowledge, has resembled the path of the Just, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. One generation have been improving upon another, from age to
age. And the improvements and discoveries of the last and present Century are
truly surprising, and justify this grand and bold description,

"Earth's disembowell'd, measured are the skies,
"Stars are detected in their deep recess,
"Creation widens, vanquished nature yields,
"Her secrets are extorted, art prevails.
"What monuments of genius, spirit, power!"
BUT to show that reality in this case surpasses description, let me here
mention Solomon, that great man, who is addressed in our text, and whose
astonishing improvements in knowledge are recorded by the pen of Inspiration,
for the encouragement, as well as the instruction of all future ages. "And
Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of the East country, and all the wisdom of
Egypt. For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and
Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in all nations round
about. And he spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and
five. And he spoke of trees, from the cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto
the hyssop that springs out of the wall: he spoke also of beasts, and of
fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes." The children of the East country
were the Chaldeans, who, after the flood, made the first advances in Astronomy,
Philosophy and other abstruse sciences. Next to them the Egyptians turned their
attention to Learning, and soon outrivalled all other nations in literary fame.
Solomon therefore surpassed all the Priests and Poets, all the Physicians and
Historians, and all the Naturalists, Philosophers, and Astronomers of the two
most ancient, and most refined nations in the world. What an exalted idea does
this exhibit of his wisdom and learning! And, as we must suppose that he made
these improvements by reading, by observation, and study; so he stands a
lasting ornament of human nature, and a perpetual monument of man's capacity
for constant and endless advances in knowledge.

Secondly, MAN has a capacity for holiness as well as knowledge. The horse and
mule which have no understanding, and indeed all the lower animals, are utterly
incapable of holiness; and even Omnipotence himself, to speak with reverence,
cannot make them holy, without essentially altering the frame and constitution
of their natures. But man is capable of holiness. His rational and moral
faculties both capacitate and oblige him to be holy. His perception and
volition, in connection with his reason and conscience, enable him to discern
and feel the right and wrong of actions, and the beauty and deformity of
characters. This renders him capable of doing justly, loving mercy, and walking
humbly with God. In a word, this renders him capable of every holy and virtuous
affection. And, as he is capable of growing in knowledge, so he is capable of
growing in grace, in a constant and endless progression. What a dignity does
this give to man, and how near does it place him to principalities and powers
above! This leads me to observe,

Thirdly, THAT man has a capacity for happiness, equal to his capacity for
holiness and knowledge. Knowledge and holiness are the grand pillars which
support all true and substantial happiness; which invariably rises or falls,
accordingly as these are either stronger or weaker. Knowledge and holiness in
the Deity are the source of all his happiness. Angels rise in felicity as they
rise in holiness and knowledge. And saints here below grow in happiness as they
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of holy and divine objects. Of this, we
have a beautiful and striking instance in Solomon. View him at the Dedication
of the Temple, when he fell upon his knees, and lifted up his hands and his
heart to God, and poured into the ear of the divine Majesty the voice of prayer
and supplication, the voice of joy, of gratitude and praise. How near did he
approach to God! how high did he rise in felicity! how much did he anticipate
the joys of the blessed! And, if we now follow him to the Temple above, where
his views, his affections, and his joys are incessantly enlarging; we may form
some faint conception of that amazing height, to which man is capable of rising
in pure and divine enjoyments. What a vessel of honor and dignity will man
appear, when all his capacities for knowledge, for holiness, and for happiness,
shall be completely filled! And to all this we must add,

Fourthly, THAT man has a capacity for great and noble actions. Of this, we
might find numerous monuments, if we had time to survey the land of Shinar,
where Babel, Babylon, and Ninevah stood; or the land of Egypt, where so many
grand and costly Pyramids, Tombs, and Temples were erected; or the famous
cities of Greece and of Rome, where the nobler efforts of human power and
genius, have been still more amply displayed. But, the bounds of this discourse
will allow us only to mention a few Individuals of our race, who, by their
great and noble exertions, have done honor to human nature. Noah, the second
Father of mankind, saved the world from total extinction. Joseph preserved two
nations from temporal ruin. Moses delivered the People of God from the house of
bondage, and led them through hosts of enemies and seas of blood to the land of
promise. David settled the kingdom of Israel in peace; and Solomon raised it to
the summit of national glory. Paul, in spite of Pagan superstition, laws and
learning, established Christianity in the Heathen world. Luther, by the tongue
and pen of controversy, brought about a great and glorious revolution in the
christian Church. Newton, by his discoveries in the material, and Lock, by his
discoveries in the intellectual world, have enlarged the boundaries of human
knowledge, and of human happiness. And, to name no more, Franklin in the
Cabinet, and Washington in the Field, have given Independence and Peace to
America. But greater things than these remain to be done. The kingdom of
Antichrist is to be destroyed, the Mahomedans are to be subdued, the Jews are
to be restored, the Barbarous nations are to be civilized, the Gospel is to be
preached to all nations, and the whole face of things in this world, is to be
beautifully and gloriously changed. These things are to be done by the
instrumentality of man. And by these, his capacity for great and noble actions,
will be still more illustriously displayed. Thus the image, which man bears of
his Maker, the immortal spirit which resides within him, the distinguishing
favors, which he has received from the Father of mercies, and all his noble
powers and faculties, unite to stamp a dignity upon his nature, and raise him
high in the scale of Being.

IT now remains to make a few Deductions from the subject, and to apply it to
the happy occasion of our present meeting.

First, WE may justly infer from the nature and dignity of man, that we are
under indispensible obligations to Religion. Our moral obligations to religion
are interwoven with the first principles of our nature. Our minds are so
framed, that we are capable of knowing, of loving, and of serving our Creator;
and this lays us under moral obligation to worship and obey him. Nor is there
one of our race, who is incapable of feeling his moral obligations to religion.
Only draw the character of the Supreme Being, and describe his power, wisdom,
goodness, justice, and mercy, before the most ignorant and uncultivated Savage;
and, as soon as he understands the character of God, he will feel that he
ought, that he is morally obliged to love and obey the great Parent of all. He
will feel himself under the same moral obligation to pay religious homage to
God, as to speak the truth, or to do justice to man. Every man in the world is
capable of seeing that the worship of God is a reasonable service. Religion
therefore takes its rise and obligation not from the laws of Politicians, nor
from the ignorance and superstition of Priests; but from the immutable laws of
nature, and the frame and constitution of the human mind. Hence it is utterly
impossible for men wholly to eradicate from their minds all sense of moral
obligation to religion, so long as they remain moral agents, and are possessed
of common sense.

AND, as man is formed for religion, so religion is the ornament and perfection
of his nature. The man of religion is, in every supposable situation, the man
of dignity. Pain, poverty, misfortune, sickness and death, may indeed veil, but
they cannot destroy his dignity, which sometimes shines with more resplendent
glory, under all these ills and clouds of life. While the soul is in health and
prosperity; while the mind is warmed with holy and religious affections, the
man appears with dignity, whether he is in pain, or in sickness, or even in the
agonies of death. But, Atheism and Infidelity, with their evil offspring, serve
more than all other causes put together, to defile the nature, and sink, the
dignity of man. This appears from the black description, which the great
Apostle Paul has drawn of those nations, who liked not to retain God in their
knowledge. "They changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made
like to corruptibl^ (...) and to birds, and to four-footed beasts, and ^^^eping
things. They changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator. They dishonored their own bodies by the most
mean and infamous vices. And they became of a reprobate mind, being filled with
all unrighteousness, fornication, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy,
murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God,
despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful." These are things which defile the nature, and degrade
the dignity of man.

AND these too are prejudicial to all learning and mental improvements. These
debilitate the mind, cloud the imagination, and cramp all the noble powers and
faculties of the soul. These degraded the Alexanders, the Pompeys, and the
Caesar's of the world, below the human kind. Had they been influenced by truly
virtuous and religious motives, their great exertions would have done honor to
human nature, but now they have stained the glory of all flesh. Nay, even a
declension in religion has left indelible stains upon the brightest Characters
recorded in sacred story; I mean Noah, David, and Solomon. Solomon was at the
height of his glory, when at the height of religion; but when he declined into
vice and idolatry, he fell into shame and disgrace, and lost that dignity,
which had filled the world with his fame.

NOW there is nothing that can wipe off from human nature these blemishes, and
restore the dignity of man, but true religion. That charity which seeks not
her own, that love which is the fulfilling of the law, is the essence of
religion and the bond of perfection. This cures the mind of Atheism, Infidelity
and Vice. This fills the soul with noble views and sentiments, and directs all
its powers and faculties to their proper use and end. This exalts the dignity
of human nature, and spreads the greatest glory around any human character.
This rendered Noah superior to Nimrod, Moses superior to Pharaoh, David
superior to Saul, Solomon superior to Socrates, Daniel superior to the wise men
of Babylon, and Paul superior to Plato, and all the Sages of the Pagan world.
"Happy is the man who finds religion: For the merchandise of it is better
than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She is
more precious than rubies; and all the things thou can desire, are not to be
compared to her. Length of days are in her right hand; and in her left hand
riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is the
man that retains her." Let us all then put on this rich and beautiful
ornament, and show ourselves men.

Secondly, THIS subject may help us to ascertain the only proper and immutable
boundaries of human knowledge. I mean such boundaries of our knowledge, as
arise from the frame and constitution of our nature, and not from any
particular state or stage of our existence. Our rational powers, it is often
said, are limited, and therefore all our intellectual pursuits and improvements
must be equally limited. This is doubtless true in a certain sense, but not in
the sense in which it is generally understood. It appears from what has been
observed in this discourse, concerning the powers and faculties of the human
mind, that men are capable of making constant and eternal progression in
knowledge. The only bounds therefore that can be set to their intellectual
improvements, must be such as have respect to the kinds, and not to the degrees
of their knowledge. There are, indeed, certain kinds of knowledge, which men
are totally incapable of understanding; but these are only such kinds of
knowledge, as require more than created faculties to understand. For, whatever
kinds of knowledge any created beings are capable of understanding, men are
also capable of understanding, though with more difficulty, and less rapidity.
As Newton knew nothing, which any man is now incapable of knowing, in a certain
time, and under certain circumstances; so there is nothing, which any
intelligent creatures now know, that men are incapable of knowing, in a given
time, and under proper advantages. The truth is, rationality is the same in all
intelligent beings. Reason is the same thing in God, in Angels, and in Men. As
men therefore bear the image of God, in point of Rationality; so they possess
all the rational powers and faculties, which bear any analogy to the divine
intelligence; or, which can be communicated to created beings. Accordingly
Angels are superior to men in the same sense, and perhaps nearly in the same
degree, that Newton was superior to most of his own species. As Newton had no
rational power or faculty peculiar to himself; so Angels have no rational
powers or faculties which are not common to all intelligent creatures. Every
man therefore is capable of learning all that any man, or any intelligent
creature has learned, or can learn. Hence the only natural and necessary
distinction between Angels and men, and between one man and another is this;
that Angels are capable of acquiring knowledge more easily, and more swiftly
than men; and some men are capable of acquiring knowledge more easily, and more
swiftly than others. And this difference between Angels and men, and between
man and man, to whatever cause it may be owing, will probably continue forever;
and forever keep up a distinction in their knowledge and improvements for the
time being.

NOW this being a settled point, we may easily, perhaps, fix the proper
boundaries of human knowledge, or determine the proper subjects of human
enquiry. It is a caveat given to men, but especially to inquisitive men, not to
pry into things above their measure. This caveat, undoubtedly, in some cases,
may be very proper and necessary; but generally, I imagine, it is not only
needless but absurd. For, unless men attempt to pry into things which surpass
created powers and faculties, I do not know that they transgress the boundaries
of human knowledge. There are some things, which, in a moment, we know cannot
be understood by creatures. And there may be many others, which, by a little
attention, we may perceive come under the same predicament. All therefore that
Divines and Metaphysicians, as well as Philosophers have to do, in order to
know where to begin, and, where to end their researches, is only to determine
whether or not, the proposed subjects require more than created abilities to
investigate them. If they do require more than created abilities, it is vain
and absurd to proceed: but if they do not, we have the same grounds to proceed,
that men have ever had, to attempt new discoveries.

Thirdly, THIS subject gives us reason to suppose, that men, in the present
state, may carry their researches into the works of nature, much further than
they have ever yet carried them. The fields of Science, though they have been
long traversed by strong and inquisitive minds, are so spacious, that many
parts remain yet undiscovered. There may be therefore room left in Divinity and
Metaphysics, as well as in Philosophy and other sciences, to make large
improvements. The large and growing capacities of men, and the great
discoveries and improvements of the last and present Century, give us grounds
to hope, that human learning and knowledge will increase from generation to
generation, through all the remaining periods of time. Men have the same
encouragements now, that Bacon, Newton and Franklin had, to push their
researches further and further into the works of nature. It is, therefore, as
groundless, as it is a discouraging sentiment, which has been often flung out,
that all the subjects of Divinity, all of human inquiry, are nearly exhausted,
and that no great discoveries or improvements, at this time of day, are either
to be expected or attempted. The present Generation have superior advantages,
which, with capacities no more than equal to their Fathers, may enable them to
surpass all who have gone before them in the paths of Science. Let this thought
rouse their attention, and awaken their exertions, to show themselves men.

Fourthly, THE observations, which have been made upon the noble powers and
capacities of the human mind, may embolden the Sons of Science to aim to be
Originals. They are strong enough to go alone, if they only have sufficient
courage and resolution. They have the same capacities and the same original
sources of knowledge, that the Ancients enjoyed. All men are as capable of
thinking, of reasoning, and of judging for themselves in matters of Learning,
as in the common affairs and concerns of life. And would men of Letters enjoy
the pleasures of knowledge, and render themselves the most serviceable to the
world, let them determine to think and judge for themselves. Their progress may
perhaps, in this way, not be so rapid; yet it will be much more entertaining
and useful. When I say their progress may not be so rapid, I mean with respect
to those only, who possess moderate abilities; for as to those of superior
powers, they will make much swifter progress by going alone out of the common,
beaten track. The way to outstrip those who have gone before us, is not to
tread in their steps, but to take a nearer course. What Philosopher can expect
to overtake Newton, by going over all the ground, which he traveled? What
Divine can expect to come up with Mede, Baxter, or Edwards, while he pursues
their path? Or, what Poet can hope to transcend Homer and Milton, so long as he
sets up these men as the standards of perfection? If the Moderns would only
employ Nature's powers, and converse freely and familiarly with Nature's
objects, they might rise above the Ancients, and bear away the Palm from all
who have gone before them in the walks of Science.

Fifthly, WHAT has been said concerning the nature and dignity of man, shows
us, that we are under indispensable obligations to cultivate and improve our
minds in all the branches of human knowledge. All our natural powers are so
many talents, which, in their own nature, lay us under moral obligation to
improve them to the best advantage. Being men, we are obliged to act like men,
and not like the horse or the mule which have no understanding. Besides,
knowledge, next to religion, is the brightest ornament of human nature.
Knowledge strengthens, enlarges, and softens the human soul, and sets its
beauty and dignity in the fairest light. Learning has made astonishing
distinctions among the different nations of the earth. Those nations, who have
lived under the warm and enlightening beams of science, have appeared like a
superior order of beings, in comparison with those, who have dragged out their
lives under the cold and dark shades of ignorance. The Chaldeans and Egyptians,
as well as the Greeks and Romans, while they cultivated the arts and sciences,
far surpassed, in dignity and glory, all their ignorant and barbarous
neighbors. Europe, since the resurrection of Letters in the sixteenth Century,
appears to be peopled with a superior species. And the present Inhabitants of
North America owe all their superiority to the Aboriginals, in point of
dignity, to the cultivation of their minds in the civil and polite arts.
Learning has also preserved the Names, Characters, and mighty Deeds of all
ancient nations from total oblivion. A few learned men in each nation, have
done more to spread their national fame, than all their Kings and Heroes. The
boasted glory of Britain is more to be ascribed to her Newtons, her Locks, and
her Addisons, than to all her Kings, and Fleets, and Conquerors.

BUT the cultivation and improvement of the mind is more necessary for use,
than for ornament. We were made for usefulness and not for amusement. We were
made to be the servants of God, and of each other. We were made to live an
active, diligent, and useful life. As men therefore we cannot reach the end of
our being, without cultivating all our mental powers, in order to furnish
ourselves for the most extensive service in our day and generation. Knowledge
and learning are useful in every station; and in the higher and more important
departments of life, they are absolutely and indispensibly necessary.

PERMIT me now, therefore, My Hearers, to suggest several things, which may
serve to excite you to improve your minds in every branch of useful knowledge
which, either your callings, or your circumstances require.

I AM happy to congratulate you, my Countrymen, that we live in an age, which
is favorable to mental and literary improvements. In the present age, our
Country is in a medium between Barbarity and Refinement. In such an age, the
minds of men are strong and vigorous, being neither enfeebled by luxury, nor
shackled by authority. At such an happy period, we have come upon the stage,
with the fields of science before us opened but not explored. This should rouse
our dormant faculties, and call up all our latent powers in the vigorous
pursuit of knowledge. Those, who have gone before us in these pursuits, have
only set us an example, and facilitated our progress, without damping our
hopes, or forbidding our success.

AGAIN, we live under that Form of government, which has always been the friend
of the Muses, and parent and nurse of Arts. It was while Greece and Rome were
free, republican States, that Learning there sprang up, flourished, and rose to
its height; and enrolled their Names in the annals of Fame. Liberty, which is
the birthright of man, and congenial with his nature, ennobles and exalts the
mind; inspires it with great and sublime sentiments; and, at the same time
invites and encourages its highest exertions, with hopes of success and the
promises of reward. For, in free Republics, where liberty is equally enjoyed,
every man has weight and influence in proportion to his abilities, and a fair
opportunity of rising, by the dint of merit, to the first offices and honors
of the State.

ANOTHER motive to improvement, you will allow me to say, may be taken from
your past singular and laudable efforts to cultivate and diffuse useful
knowledge in this place. It is now more than Thirty years, since this single
and then small Congregation collected a very considerable Parish-Library, in
order to improve their minds in useful and divine knowledge. This was such an
effort to promote mental improvements as, I imagine, cannot be easily found in
this Country. The benefit of this Library you have all perhaps more or less
experienced; and, to its happy influence owe, in a measure, your general
Character as a Religious and Intelligent People. May this consideration have
all its weight upon you, since our Lord has said in the Parable of the
Talents, "Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance."

IN this respect, how wonderful the smiles of Providence upon you! Whose heart
does not glow with gratitude for the auspicious occasion which has now brought
us together! How great our obligations to God for the unmerited and unexpected
Favor of a rich Collection of Books now received, as a mark of Respect of the
first literary Character in America, his Excellency President FRANKLIN! This
well chosen and very valuable Library, while it sets the divine kindness in a
high and engaging light, lays you under the strongest ties of gratitude to
improve the means of cultivating your minds for the service of God and of your
fellow-men. Should you second the views of that great Man, and build upon the
broad foundation which he has generously laid, you may enjoy ample advantages,
in point of Books, to improve your mental powers, and furnish yourselves for
usefulness in all your various stations and employments of life. Nor can you
neglect or abuse such advantages, without drawing upon yourselves the reproach
of the world, and which is infinitely more, the reproach of your own
consciences. Be entreated then to improve to the best advantage, every price
put into your hands to get wisdom.

THERE are three grand sources of knowledge before you, Nature, Men, and Books.
Attentively read each of these great Volumes.

READ Nature, which is truly an original author. King David, studying this
large and instructive volume, which filled his mind with the noblest views and
sentiments, broke forth in a rapture of praise, "The heavens declare the glory
of God; and the firmament shows his handy work. Day unto day utters speech,
and night unto night shows knowledge."

READ Men. "For as in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to
man." This volume David perused and digested in the Court and Camp of Saul,
where human nature, with, and without a veil, was very visible to his critical
and discerning eye.

BUT the design of this discourse more directly leads me to urge the reading of
Books in particular. These are a grand magazine of knowledge, and contain the
Learning and Wisdom of ages. But, you must know, that Books are a peculiar
fountain, from whence may be drawn either sweet waters or bitter, the waters of
life, or the waters of death. For this reason, you will allow me here to advise
you, to take heed how you read.

AND, in the first place, read with Caution. A person may be undone by a single
volume. Nothing contains such secret and fatal poison as Books. Though they
profess a kind and friendly intention, yet they often bite like a serpent and
sting like an adder. Be careful what books you read. There are many, which the
young and inexperienced at least, should totally avoid. In this particular, if
you are wise, and faithful to yourselves, you will endeavor to obtain and
follow good advice.

READ with Judgment. This is, in every view, indispensibly necessary, in order
to read to advantage. This will enable you to discover and ascertain the main
object of your Author, which will be a key to all he says in the various parts
and branches of his subject. This will help you to distinguish truth from
error, good sentiments from bad, and sound reasoning and strict demonstration,
from mere conjectures and bold assertions. But if you read without judgment,
you will be in danger of imbibing error as well as truth, of always believing
the last Author you read, and of never having any fixed and settled sentiments
of your own.

READ for Use and not for Amusement. The time is worse than thrown away, which
is spent in reading for amusement, without any particular end or object in
view. We should be careful how we take up a Book, especially, if it be an
entertaining one, with which we have no particular concern; for it will require
a considerable effort of the mind to throw it aside, and if we do not throw it
aside it will steal away our time, and prevent our being better employed.
Almost any book, if read for use, may be of advantage. We may read amusing,
and, even corrupting books to advantage, if we read them in order to make a
good use of them. The be can suck honey from the same flowers, from which
other insects suck poison. But we may read all our lives to very little
purpose, if we read every book which happens to fall in our way for amusement
and not for use. We should always read with reference, either to our own
particular profession, or to the particular state and situation of our own
minds. When we read with either of these objects in view, we shall be apt both
to understand and digest what we read. There is great and singular advantage in
reading proper books at a proper time, when we really stand in need of them.
This is of the same happy tendency, as eating and drinking at the proper
seasons, when it serves to nourish and strengthen, instead of clogging and
surfeiting the body.

READ with Patience. Many Authors are both prolix and obscure in conveying
their ideas; and after-all, have much more chaff than wheat in their writings.
In reading such, we must go over a great deal of ground in order to reap a
small harvest of ideas. It is difficult, however, for any man to treat any
subject in a method entirely new. We must expect therefore to find many common
and familiar thoughts in every Author, which we must patiently read, if we
would properly come at those which are more new, entertaining and instructive.
And for this reason it is generally best perhaps, if Authors are of any
tolerable size, to read them through, with patience and attention. This is but
justice to them, and prudence to ourselves.

READ with Confidence. In our first essays after knowledge, we are obliged, by
the laws of our nature, to depend upon the assistance and instruction of
others, and in consequence of this, we are apt to feel, through life, too great
a sense of our own weakness and imbecility, and to despair of going a step
further than we are led. This, however is very unfriendly to all improvement by
reading. We ought therefore to feel that we are men, and place a proper degree
of confidence in our own strength and judgment. We ought to fix it in our minds
that we are capable of improvement. Such a confidence in ourselves as this,
will embolden us to read with a view not only of understanding, but of
improving upon the Authors we read. Very few Authors have exhausted the
subjects upon which they have treated, and therefore have generally left us
ample room to improve upon what they have written. And by reading with this
view, if we fail of improving upon those we read, we shall, however, more
clearly and fully understand their meaning, and more thoroughly make their
ideas and sentiments our own.

YET, at the same time, every one should read with Humility. Reading, more than
any other method of improvement, is apt to puff up the mind with pride and
self-conceit. For, persons of reading are very prone to estimate their
knowledge more according to the number of books which they have read, than
according to the number of ideas which they have collected and digested. And so
are ready to imagine, that they have engrossed to themselves all knowledge;
though, in reality, they have not read enough, to learn their own ignorance.
This should teach us to take the Poet's advice.

"A little learning is a dangerous thing:
"Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring.
"There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain;
"And drinking largely sobers us again."
NOR is pedantry peculiar to those only, who begin to read and study late in
life; for it is too often found among those, who have enjoyed a regular and
liberal education. Do not Physicians and Attorneys, by reading a few books in
Divinity, sometimes fancy themselves masters of that sacred and sublime
science? And, on the other extreme, do not Divines, by reading a few books in
Law and Physic, sometimes fancy themselves masters of those two learned
professions? But this is rank pedantry. It is an easy matter to gain a
superficial acquaintance with the general objects of science; but it is a
laborious task to acquire a deep and thorough acquaintance with any single
branch of knowledge. It is easy to know something about every thing; but it is
difficult to know every thing about any thing. If men of reading would collect
the whole stock of their knowledge, and the whole force of their genius more to
a point, and aim to be complete masters of their own professions; they would
become at once, much less pedantic, and much more useful to the world. Many men
of real abilities and learning, have defeated their own usefulness, by
attempting to know, and to do too much.

IN the last place, read prayerfully. "If any of you lack wisdom, says the
Apostle, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not; and it shall be given him." This Solomon found to be true, by happy
experience. "In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night; and
God said, Ask what I shall give thee. And Solomon said, Thou have showed unto
thy servant David my father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in
truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou
have kept for him this great kindness that thou have given him a son to sit on
his throne, as it is this day. And now, O Lord my God, thou have made thy
servant king instead of David my father; and I am but a child; I know not how
to go out or come in. And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou
have chosen, a great people that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart; to judge thy people, that I
may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a
people? And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. And
God said unto him, Because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for
thyself long life; neither have asked riches for thyself, nor have asked the
life of thine enemies, but have asked for thyself understanding to discern
judgment; behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a
wise and understanding heart." It was Dr. Doddridge, I think, who never used to
take up a new book to read, without an ejaculatory prayer for divine influence
and direction. This example is worthy of universal imitation. Let us therefore
always accompany our essays after knowledge with a humble and prayerful spirit;
and then we may hope to read and study with safety and success.

TO all these directions, I might now add, Diligence and Perseverance, which
always have had, and always will have, a mighty influence, in all the great
things done by mankind. But I shall only add a few words to those, who are very
immediately and deeply interested in the things which have been said in this
discourse.

THIS subject calls upon Parents in particular, to show themselves men. You
are, my respectable Hearers, men in years, be men also in virtue, in religion,
and in understanding. Let the dignity of man appear in all your conduct, and
especially in your conduct toward your children. Let them see the dignity of
human nature exemplified before their young and attentive minds. They are every
day, and every hour, watching your conduct, and looking up to you for example
and instruction. Take heed, that none of your words, none of your actions, none
of your pursuits, be unworthy of men. But, let all your conversation and
behavior be such as your children may follow with propriety, with safety, and
dignity. And while you are teaching them by example, teach them also by
precept. Give them good instruction; and for this purpose, provide them good
instructors. These are of great importance to your children, whose progress in
knowledge, will generally bear a very exact proportion to the abilities and
fidelity of their Teachers. The education of children has always been an object
of great attention among all wise nations, and especially among all wise and
good Parents. Let this then be the object of your attention. Consider the
dignity of man. Consider the worth of the soul. Consider the rich and
invaluable treasure put into your hands. Consider how much the dignity and
happiness of your children both in time and in Eternity, depend upon your care
and fidelity. And let the ties of nature, the authority of God, and your own
solemn vows, engage you to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, and to cultivate and embellish their opening minds in every branch of
useful and ornamental knowledge. Admit not the thought, that such little, such
weak, and to appearance, such useless creatures, are of small importance; but
remember that they are men in miniature, and may, one day, surprise the world
with their dignity. When a young Prince is born, all the Kingdom feel the
importance of his education, and are anxiously concerned to have the ablest
instructors employed, to form him for great and noble actions. But you have
more than Princes, even young Immortals, committed to your care, whose powers
and capacities, whose dignity and importance, will astonish you, at the great
Day, if not before. How happy will that parent be, who shall then be found to
have been faithful to his children! "He will then join, as a celebrated Writer
observes, his virtuous offspring in the habitations of the just, and there see
them rise up and call him blessed. But if a parent neglects his duty to his
children; if he sets before them an example of irreligion, and suffers them to
grow up loose and unprincipled, he may expect that their blood will be required
at his hands, and he should tremble to think of that period of retribution,
when probably they will curse him for that negligence which has ruined them."

Finally, LET this subject awaken the attention of the Youth, to the dignity of
their nature and the end of their being. My dear young Friends, you will soon
be called to act your various parts upon the stage of life. You are now the
Hope of your Parents, of your Pastors, and of your Country. The eyes of the
world are upon you. Be entreated then to cultivate all your noble powers, and
to show yourselves men, in whatever departments of life, divine Providence
shall place you. Piety and Knowledge will prepare you for a useful and
honorable life, and for a peaceful and triumphant death. Let these then be the
supreme objects of your pursuit. Early consecrate all your time and all your
talents to the service of God, and of your fellow-men. Seek for knowledge, as
for silver, and search for it, as for hid treasures; and sacrifice every object
which obstructs your pursuit of it. "Through desire a man having separated
himself, says Solomon, seeks and intermeddleth with all wisdom." If you would
make progress in learning, and rise to any distinguishing degrees of knowledge,
you must separate yourselves from the vanities of youth, and devote those
vacant hours to mental improvements, which, too many of your age trifle away in
folly and vice. In particular, flee youthful lusts, which war against both the
body and the mind. Shun that all-devouring monster, Intemperance, by which so
many strong minds have been cast down and destroyed. Avoid bad company and
unmanly diversions, which are an inlet to every vice. Hold in steady contempt,
Beaus and Fops, those butterflies which live upon the filth and dregs of the
earth. Diogenes walking the streets of Athens at noonday with a lanthorn in
his hand; and being asked, as he intended to be, what he was searching after,
tartly replied, "I am looking for Men." A severe satire upon the luxury and
effeminacy of that once manly and virtuous People. The dignity of man appears
in the ornaments of the mind, and not in those of the body. Seek therefore to
adorn and embellish your minds both by reading and observation, and your gifts
and abilities will make room for you, and bring you before great men. You have
peculiar advantages and encouragements to animate you to great and noble
exertions. Therefore set your Mark of intellectual seize as high as you
please, and, according to the common course of events, you will, by uniformity,
diligence, and perseverance, infallibly reach it. Your generous Benefactor has
set you an example, as well as given you the means of intellectual
improvements. That Great Man, in the morning of life, was surrounded with
uncommon difficulties and embarrassments, but by the mere dint of genius and of
application, he surmounted every obstacle thrown in his way, and by his rapid
and astonishing progress in knowledge, he has risen, step by step, to the
first offices and honors of his Country, has appeared with dignity in the
Courts of Britain and of France, and now fills more than half the globe with
his Fame. Keep this illustrious example in your eye, and show yourselves men.


