REMARKS ON THE PROPOSED PLAN OF AN EMISSION OF PAPER, AND ON THE MEANS OF
EFFECTING IT, ADDRESSED TO THE CITIZENS OF MARYLAND, BY ARISTIDES.

When in a popular Government there is a Suspension of the Laws, as this can
proceed only from the Corruption of the Republic, the State is certainly undone.

MONTESQ. SP. of LAWS, b. 3, chapter 3. ANNAPOLIS: PRINTED BY FREDERICK GREEN.

REMARKS ON THE PROPOSED PLAN OF AN EMISSION OF PAPER.
HOW long a constitution, under which we enjoy equal rights, may endure, it is
not for short-sighted mortals to predict. In the annals of the world there are
few instances, where a direct attack has been made by any part of the citizens
of a free state, against the liberty of the rest. It has ever been the practice
of those, who meditated its destruction, to avert suspicion from themselves, by
warning the people of danger from others. Thus it is that a people are
sometimes precipitated into that state of anarchy and confusion, which is most
favorable to insidious designs.

Although the frequent prostitution of professions renders it almost
disgraceful to use them, I must assure you, that from the moment I began
seriously to reflect, your happiness has been dear to my heart. At the hazard
of my peace and fortune, without the least hope of reward, and with the certain
prospect of provoking the malice of weak and wicked minds, I have for many
years devoted my attention to the public concerns. On this head however I
should have maintained a becoming silence, had not certain ungenerous remarks
been thrown out in a place where it was impossible for me, in a proper manner,
to expose them. Besides these there is a recent publication, in which my real
name has been used with an unwarrantable freedom; but this I consider as the
effusion of habitual insolence, not meriting a more particular notice. A
sufficient answer may be collected from the following remarks.

When a disagreement takes place between the two branches of the legislature,
on a question involving with it other questions of still greater moment, every
freeman in the community is concerned in its decision. The freedom of the press
has been indirectly attacked by men who should guard it with the fondest care.
It has been repeatedly asserted, that the officers of government have exerted
their influence, acquired through public money, in opposing the wishes of the
people, and that therefore they have merited punishment from the
representatives of the people. An assertion repeatedly made is generally the
result of reflection. The purpose of this is to wound the feelings of some,
restrain others by their fears, and bind the rest by their interests. The
spirit of a genuine republican must revolt at the idea. What? Shall he, who in
some respects, is constituted the guardian of your rights, be himself debarred
the common right of speaking his opinions? Does his situation separate his
interests from those of the people, or render him less capable than the most
illiterate demagogue of deciding on questions of policy?

Thus far is premised to remove unreasonable prejudice. The author has been
charged with adhering to the senate, courting their favor, and reposing a
faith in their decisions. The truth is, on the maturest deliberation, he thinks
them justifiable in rejecting the bill for an emission of paper, and it is
partly his intention to adduce some arguments in their vindication.

When a man coolly and deliberately acts against his interest, there is a
presumption, that he conceives himself in the right. It cannot escape your
penetration, that if a servant of the people were capable of sacrificing on the
altar of ambition his opinion, his conscience and his duty, he would, with
every appearance of the most fervent zeal, espouse the cause of those who might
most effectually requite his endeavors.

The senate having rejected the proposed plan of an emission upon loan, the
house of delegates declines all overtures of a conference, and determines to
close the session without making any provision for the necessary supplies. In
an address to the people they state the disagreement, and urge many arguments
in support of their own system. They tell them an appeal is made by both
branches of the legislature, that the opinion of the people only can decide,
and that both branches will be equally bound by instructions. The senate makes
no direct address; but as they conceive their fellow-citizens entitled to know
the principles of their conduct, the messages respecting the money bill are
published by their direction. In one of these is a declaration, that they make
no appeal; and they suggest the inconveniences which they apprehend may flow
from the precedent. The house of delegates adjourns to the 20th of March, and
the senate to the 20th of April.

This brief narrative suggests a variety of points, a thorough discussion
whereof is absolutely necessary, before you can prudently take any step on this
peculiar great occasion.

In the first place it is proper to decide, whether an appeal is made by both
branches, and your instructions requested by each. Whatever might possibly be
implied from the senate's first message, their subsequent express declaration,
published at the same time, must render void that implication. This
construction is conformable to a known maxim of law and common sense --
Expressum facit cessare tacitum; that is, according to a liberal translation,
positive words set aside that which without them would be implied. I conceive,
that nothing can be fairly construed into an appeal to the people, except an
address soliciting their instructions in the most plain unequivocal terms.

But it is insisted by a crowd of writers, that although the senate make no
direct application, if the people shall think proper to instruct, the senate is
constitutionally bound to obey.

This second point must be determined on a view of the constitution and the
declaration of rights. To me this point also is abundantly clear, from the
single consideration, that the constitution creates two distinct branches only;
and that neither that nor the declaration any where intimates, that the people
at large are immediately a part of the legislature. Had the respectable framers
intended, that whenever a bill proposed by one is rejected by the other, the
people may afterward direct it to be passed into a law, they would have said
so in plain positive terms; but then they would have rendered of no avail the
institution of the two branches. The senate would have been calculated for
little more than to produce delays, and to afford occasions for inflaming the
passions, and disturbing the public quiet. There would not have been two
distinct regular branches to decide, but two distinct branches to propose. A
bill proposed by either would be a law, not being dissented to by the other,
or, in case of a dissent, the people would constitute a third or a single
branch occasionally. No business would be settled in the appointed legislature,
unless the two branches agreed. Had the framers entertained such ideas, they
would unquestionably have prescribed the manner of collecting the peoples
decision.

I believe there never existed a government, in which, notwithstanding every
freeman had a suffrage in framing laws, the question was decided by a majority
of single voices. In the purest democracies, the people have voted by classes,
tribes or companies, into which they were distributed, agreeably to some
rational principle. I pretend to no great historical researches. I conceive
that many ages have elapsed since any civilized nation, state, or even single
independent city, has placed the power of legislation in the people at large;
and I think, that no virtuous citizen, who is acquainted with the history of
ancient democracies, would wish this power amongst us to reside constantly in
the people. In abstract theory, such a legislation appears consonant to their
natural rights; but the shocking inconveniences attendant on the mode, have
long since occasioned mankind to renounce it. It was calculated only for small
cities in their beginnings; and he that wishes for it in a state of equal
extent and population to ours, must either be a political madman, or, under the
convenient cloak of public good, he veils the most dark and traitorous intent.

Let us examine the true import of the fourth article of the declaration of
rights; for on that article, if on any, is founded the doctrine that both
branches of the legislature are bound to obey the instructions of the people,
and that by so doing, they act agreeably to the constitution. The article
speaks so plain a language it will be difficult for any exposition to render it
more intelligible:

That all persons invested with the legislative or executive powers of
government are the trustees of the public, and as such accountable for their
conduct; wherefore, whenever the ends of government are perverted, and public
liberty manifestly endangered, and all other means of redress are ineffectual,
the people may, and of right ought, to reform the old or establish a new
government; the doctrine of non-resistance against arbitrary power and
oppression, is absurd, slavish, and destructive of the good and happiness of
mankind.

If the period has actually arrived, when it is necessary for the people to
interpose, they should act in a way very different from that of commanding the
senate's assent to a bill, which, on the maturest deliberation, they have
unanimously rejected. Such an interference of the people might only prevent,
for a season, that, which without many subsequent interferences, would be
likely to take place; and the danger threatened from the corruption of their
trustees would probably continually increase. The truth is, that from the
obvious meaning of the fourth article, and upon every sound principle of
government, the interference of the people is a resumption of all delegated
powers; the whole frame is ipso facto dissolved; and it becomes their business
either to reform its errors and abuses, and to declare it again in force, or to
adopt an entire new system. If experience has evinced two distinct legislative
branches to be inconvenient, they will probably abolish that which is not of
their immediate appointment. But to say, that the senate shall still subsist,
and enjoy their powers and privileges uninterrupted, and that notwithstanding
they shall be obliged to give their assent, which, after a full interchange of
sentiment with the delegates, they have unanimously declined, seems uttering
manifest contradictions to be saying, that a thing is so, and is not so, in the
same sentence.

This fourth article was unnecessary, as indeed are many others. It affords a
striking lesson to legislators never to use sentences or words without
necessity or meaning. It was never surely foreseen, that an article asserting
only a natural right, could by any possibility be construed into a positive
institution. I have on many occasions lamented, that the convention in
composing a declaration did not content themselves with recognizing generally
the law, and laying down certain maxims of government for the conduct of future
legislatures. Instead of that they have thrown together natural rights,
principles of government, and particular provisions of the common law. Had this
and the first article been omitted, there would have been no sentence or word
in the whole declaration or the form of government, countenancing the doctrine
in question; and yet the rights of the people would have been precisely as they
are. With respect to the fifth article, which speaks of the people's right to
participate in the legislature, that article is manifestly opposed to the
doctrine; because it explains the right into a right of immediate
representation, and frequent elections.

When the happiness of the people, the true end of all society and government,
cannot be preserved on account of some original fault in the constitution, or
when the trustees betray their sacred charge, and the people are roused by a
sense of injuries no longer to be borne, the indelible rights of nature
authorize them to enforce that redress to which all constitutional means are
incom^^^^nt. This is the principle of the English revolution in 1008. This is
the principle of the revolution in America, which every good man still flatters
himself will be deemed the most important era in the history of the world. It
would be slavish to imagine, that without the first and fourth articles, or
even with one directly repugnant, the people might not annul a compact intended
for their good, when experience evinces the framers of that compact to have
been mistaken; or that a mode of government which suited its framers, might not
be changed by their posterity.

But whether a right be inherent in the people, and whether this be a proper
occasion for using it, are two distinct questions. Has ten years experience
demonstrated the senate to be either a dangerous or useless body? Has the
rejection of the paper system perverted the ends of its appointment, or exposed
your liberties to danger? The warmest advocates for the measure surely will not
maintain the affirmative of these questions to be a self-evident position. Let
them remember, that the attempt to introduce this very scheme miscarried two
years successively, and yet the people murmured not. In the third year the
house of delegates were induced to adopt it. The senate unanimously dissented.
The people still made no complaints. Indeed, had the conduct of the senate
excited their displeasure, it might have been easily manifested in the late
election. In this election the gentlemen most distinguished for opposition to
paper, were honored with almost every suffrage. It will be strange indeed, if
you can now be persuaded, that the new senate has perverted the ends of
government by declining an expedient rejected by the old, and by two successive
houses of delegates.

The mode of appointing your senate is esteemed by wise men the most admirable
institution in all the United States* and I make no doubt, that in Europe it
has done honor to American genius. The senate of Maryland has been continually
acquiring the esteem and confidence of the people, whilst other senates have
fallen in repute. The difference arises from the different modes of election.
It is not a man's popularity in a single county or district, it is his general
good character, and his real dignity and importance, that confer on him this
honor. The suffrage of the electors is a tribute paid to worth. The arts of
intrigue, and even the magic powers of eloquence, should these be essayed, will
probably be found unavailing.

In spite of these circumstances attempts are made to excite your suspicions of
the senate. You are told, that in this select body prevails a baneful
aristocratic spirit. Enemy as I am to arbitrary sway of every kind, I was at
first startled at the suggestion. But as this was a weighty charge, I thought
some proof should be required superior to the bare assertion of any man. An
aristocracy is properly when the sovereign power of a state resides in a
permanent body of men distinct from the people. At present the senate is not
that permanent body; because it is appointed once in five years, and the
supreme power resides not in it to so great an extent as in the house of
delegates. Neither of them alone can pass a law. If an aristocracy be the
government of a few, uncontroled and unchecked by any other power, an
aristocratic spirit must mean a disposition to bring about such a government.
In what instance has even a single senator evinced an inclination to confine
the powers of legislation to the senate, or to change that branch into a
permanent hereditary body. I now ask, whether the address of your delegates be
not an attempt to have their own proposition passed into a law, without the
consent of the senate. I beseech you to reflect soberly, whether this conduct
of the delegates does not tend indirectly to confer on them alone the power of
making laws.

I am thoroughly, and upon the best grounds, persuaded, that no man in the
senate conceives himself at liberty to disregard the wants, wishes, or
sentiments of the people. He is perfectly apprized, that the institution was
not intended to cloathe individuals with honor merely for their own
gratification; but, like every other part of the constitution, to consult the
general good. There may be a variety of instances where this general good is
promoted by gratifying the inclination of the people. But is there a man so
lost to common sense as not to foresee, that if the people shall take upon
themselves to decide nice questions of policy by a majority of voices, they may
frequently be wrought upon to choose things which will injure them the most. I
repeat that their will, provided they persist long enough to pursue effectual
measures, must stand for a law. But on what ground can a man who breathes the
true spirit of patriotism, persuade them to exercise their will on the present
occasion? Can he seriously believe them better qualified than the senate to
decide on the expediency of an emission? It is not sufficient to say, they best
know their own wants; because that is only a begging of the question, which is,
whether an emission would supply those wants. Behold the glaring monstrous
absurdity. The people do not immediately choose the senate. They appoint their
most intelligent men to choose for them; and their electors make the most
diligent inquiry into every corner of the state. Well, the senate, after all,
is ignorant of the true interests of the state; and the general body of the
people, from which they were selected, is to supply their wants, and enlighten
their understandings.

If any man says the senate are interested, or otherwise corrupt, let us have
an opportunity to decide on his testimony; for confident assertions, and noisy
declamation, will, I trust, at last, stand for naught.

It may be said the comparison is not proper between the people and the senate;
that the people are called to decide between their immediate representatives
and the senate, on a question, the right decision of which is essential to your
happiness; and that, until this decision, all operations of the legislature
will be suspended. In the same way might any other rejected bill be brought
before the people. It is indeed natural for every projector to esteem his own
system of the last importance. In a contest between the two branches, to be
determined in the proposed manner, is it at all probable, that the question
will come fairly before the people? The number of delegates exceeds that of the
senate in a ratio of five for one. This circumstance could not fail to operate,
if even the arts of popularity were laid aside, the inhabitants of each county
assembled, the merits fairly discussed, and instructions signed only at that,
or a subsequent meeting of the same kind. The delegates being far more
intimately connected with their constituents, it must be a plain question
indeed, which the people will decide in favor of the senate. Would to Heaven
my countrymen could see the business in a true light. Their representatives
appeal to them for instructions -- So far I should have no objection, if their
representatives were themselves undetermined. But these instructions are to
govern the senate, and at the same time to be dictated by the delegates. In
this kind of service the My readers will understand, that whenever I speak of
the people, I mean a majority of the great body of our citizens.
people are not volunteers, and they feel not enough to stimulate them to a
voluntary exertion. Can the interposition of the people thus obtained, be
termed an interference, dictated by a sense of wrongs, a defense of natural
rights, and a promotion of the true ends of government? Can a man wish the free
unbiassed sentiments of the people to prevail, when he exerts every nerve to
obtain their decision before each side of the question can be fairly examined?
A draught of instructions is circulated before the close of the session. Its
preamble asserts the appeal of the senate, and the people are pressed to
subscribe before they can possibly examine the allegation, or hear the senate's
reasons.

Is this such a mode as naturally suggested itself to men anxious in the
pursuit of truth? Were these instructions in other respects constitutional,
they would be void on one certain ground. Had the senate, being at a loss how
to decide, really appealed to the people, instructions would be strictly
proper; but the personal influence of any member or either branch, would even
in that case have been extremely improper.

Were I an advocate for the principle, I should be puzzled respecting the true
manner of communicating the sense of the people. Are instructions to be signed
only at public meetings? Is there to be one meeting only? Is that meeting to
take place at each county courthouse, or in each hundred? Is one general form
to be pursued? Or may each man choose his own form? By whom are the several
papers to be collected in each county or district? With whom shall they all be
lodged? What shall be deemed a sufficient authentication? On a suggestion of
forgery, how shall the fact be ascertained, or the crime punished? A thousand
such questions may be asked, and the ingenuity of many gentlemen might be
sufficient to prescribe suitable provisions. But as to these questions no
answer is found in the constitution, the conclusion is obvious, that its
framers had no idea of the thing, consistent with the regular administration of
the government by them devised. I repeat, that whenever the great body of the
people shall declare their will (in whatever way it be done) this declaration,
agreeably to the fourth article of the declaration, and the unalienable rights
of nature, ought to be law; but then the whole frame of the government is
either dissolved or suspended. I mean not, that any act of violence committed
by only a part, and obstructing the exercise of a constitutional authority,
would amount to this dissolution or suspension. I mean such an interference as
is mentioned in that article. I contend that, according to the plain import of
the words, the authors had not in contemplation an interference, without a
total dissolution or a suspension, until it could be reformed, and again
declared in force.

Had the constitution made express provision, and prescribed the manner in
which instructions should be given, so as to bind both branches of the
legislature, the people ought nevertheless to be extremely sparing in the
exercise. Were the corrupt motives of the senate apparent; if by their conduct
your liberties were manifestly endangered; if proving false to their trust,
they sacrificed the pubic good to their own private views -- it would be proper
to teach them their duty, and at the same time to address them in the terms of
a severe reprimand. And further, as the people are to exercise the right, the
people only should determine on the occasion. I repeat again and again, that
with or without a constitutional provision, the people ought unquestionably to
interfere on occasions like these. The difference between me and my adversaries
is, whether an interference will not abolish or suspend the constitutional
legislature; and whether this be a proper season for an interference. The
doctrines imputed to me by scribblers, I detest as much as I do all insolence,
domineering, sedition, malice and calumny.

I should imagine any prudent, cautious, disinterested citizen, who has a
valuable stake in the community, whose welfare is intimately connected with the
public prosperity, who wishes no change in a government under which none hold
superior rights, who would hazard all, and could gain nothing by a new
revolution -- I should imagine that such a man, let his opinion respecting an
emission be what it may, will be induced by no solicitation to subscribe. The
point was simply, whether bills of credit should be emitted on loan. The house
of delegates was divided. A member whose reputation is not limited to these
states, who, sometime ago, possessed your almost unbounded confidence, and to
whom nothing had since been imputed, this gentleman, with about two fifths of
the house, was steadfastly opposed to the plan. The senate were unanimous. But
what again is the senate? It is a select body of men of enlarged minds, and
unblemished characters, having no interest whatever distinct from yours,
bearing with you a full proportion of burdens, and out of the senate house at
their own homes, to all intents and purposes, composing a part of the people.
If these fifteen men can harbor a design of erecting an arbitrary power on the
ruins of the constitution, of enjoying their dignities for life, and
bequeathing them to their issue, they have conceived ideas of which I did not
think the brain of man susceptible. Suppose the last convention had conferred
the whole legislative authority on the senate, appointed fifteen men senators
for life, and rendered the office hereditary. Is it possible such an odious
establishment could have subsisted even unto this day. No senator under the
present form can meditate an extension of his authority, and no rational being,
on a moment's reflection, can retain his suspicions, unless jealousy of your
trustees be like the jealousy of love, excited without cause, and subsisting on
idle fancies. If a senator were really capable of such designs, he would become
a much fitter object of derision, than of any well grounded apprehension. Happy
will it be for you, my countrymen, if that constitution which perhaps owes its
existence, and has done honor to men, who no longer view it with a parent's
eye, shall withstand this powerful attack. Oh! listen to a man who defies the
tongue of envy and detraction to fix one improper motive for this address, who
has long been a faithful guardian to that constitution, and feels for it more
than a father's love. Be assured, if it must receive a deadly wound, the fatal
blow will be dealt by yourselves, or your immediate representatives. Far from
me be the wish of narrowing the powers of the popular branch of the
legislature. The defect of human policy, arising from human nature, is such,
that in instituting the frame of a government, it is impossible to guard
against dangers on one side, without being exposed on another. Were every thing
submitted to my discretion, I declare solemnly I would not abridge the
established power of your delegates. my only wish and aim is to protect that
sacred palladium of your rights, which you have sworn to defend, against all
open and secret combinations. Permit not either branch, by any method, to
exercise the office of both. The very use and intent of one is to check any
unadvised hasty proceedings, or intemperate sallies of the other more numerous
assembly. Think not, that a prediliction for the former has blinded my
understanding. I further declare, that if it were left to me to abolish one or
the other, I would by all means preserve the house of delegates. There is
nothing more hateful to my soul than the idea of a proud, worthless, tyrannical
order of nobility, like the senate of Venice. But, although this government may
hereafter possibly degenerate into an arbitrary one, there is no reason to
dread, that it will become an aristocracy erected by the senate.

If it be the meaning of the fourth article, that the people shall act as an
umpire, wherefore is it, that in every instance of a dissent the bill is not
laid before them? To this may be said, they are called upon only with respect
to bills of the last importance. The constitution however creates no
distinction. The constitution contains no provision in any case.

An idea has been started, that both branches are to be considered as agents of
the people, and the constitution a letter of instructions; that as it was
impossible for the principal to foresee the necessity of an emission at this
time, he may now give additional instructions. There is a disposition in
mankind to be imposed on by similitudes. They captivate the imagination, and
are much better received than solid argument. Behold another similitude. --

There are fifty persons, the far greater part having no knowledge or
experience in trade, who agree to join st^^^^, and commence merchants. In a
little time they find it extremely inconvenient for so large a company to
transact their own affairs. They enter into articles to be binding until at two
several meetings of the company a majority shall vote for dissolving the
partnership. By the principal clause in the indenture, the business for a
limited time is committed to the management of only two, without any proviso,
that if these two should differ respecting a proposition made by either, the
matter shall be referred to the company. One of them, a fine, bold, (...) the
ordinary profits of a slow (...), and (...) only in capital strokes, proposes
(...) a considerable part of the stock in a venture to (...) object is to
import rice for supplying the want of Indian corn, the apprehension of a short
crop having suggested the thought. The other merchant, a cautious, calculating
man, considers it as a mere chimera. The first thereupon calls a meeting of the
company, produces his calculations, displays his brilliant prospects, and
actually brings over a majority. His associate continues fixed. His judgment is
not convinced, and he adheres to his opinion. Should the law authorize the
majority, notwithstanding their agreement, to displace their agents, and should
they take the management into their own hands, they are again in the situation
which induced them to choose managers. Again they perceive the necessity of
appointing; and it is not improbable, that they will trust the whole concern to
him who has impressed an high opinion of his talents.

The meaning of this allegory is to guard you against sophistry.

Let us trace the consequences of the doctrine, that, notwithstanding the
express provisions of the constitution, the people, without violating or
suspending, may control a delegated power. If it be good with regard to the
legislature, it must likewise be good with respect to the executive and
judiciary.

A citizen levies constructive war against the state. He is thereon indicted in
the general court, arraigned, takes his trial, and is found guilty by the
unanimous suffrage of twelve men, the petit jury. This man is a favorite of
the people. His friends make strenuous exertions, and a great majority of the
people are induced to sign a declaration of their will, and an order, that he
be discharged. There is no doubt the prisoner will escape punishment, provided
the people shall enforce their mandate. But will any man pretend, that, it
authorizes the judge legally and constitutionally to pronounce the discharge?
And yet the court may be considered the agent of the people, deriving authority
like every other department of government, immediately or ultimately from the
people.

Suppose now the address to succeed, and in ten countries a greater number to
have signed the instructions for an emission, than have either signed against
it, or declined signing at all It surely will not be maintained, that any
writing can be justly styled the declaration of a county's sense, unless more
than one half of the voters, or of the freemen, shall have signed it. If it
can, where shall the line be drawn? Or what prevents a paper signed by a dozen,
when there is no counter paper, from being styled instructions?
. The senate taking the constitution for their guide, and finding it no where
expressed, that in any case they shall be bound to pass laws against their own
opinion, still viewing the system as injurious to our affairs, esteeming it
their inviolable duty to preserve the constitution unimpaired, and thinking
too, that the free unbiassed opinion has not been obtained, will most probably
continue firm in rejecting the bill. The house of delegates will then most
probably decline for a season all further intercourse. The people then, or a
part of them in behalf of the rest, mistaking the firmness of virtue for an
obstinate contempt of their rights, will perhaps repair to the capital, and in
thunder pronounce their will. If then the senate, still holding themselves
bound by superior obligations, and manifesting a zeal for their country's
permanent happiness, shall disdain to assent to that which their judgments
disapprove, and thereby establish a precedent, leaving to their successors
little more than a name, and shall either instantly adjourn, or relinquish
their seats, this posture of affairs will, in all human probability, be
construed a dissolution of government. Immediately may ensue scenes, the bare
contemplation of which must touch the stuotest heart, not interested to produce
them. But passing over these scenes of discord, riot, violence, and perhaps
bloodshed, let us calmly consider what best can posssibly happen. On a
resignation of the senate, provided such a measure would not be construed void
on the principle of duresse, there can be no senate under the present form
until the year 1791. In such a case the house of delegates may do one of two
things. They may proceed, on the pretext of necessity, to exercise alone the
powers of legislation, or they may address their constituents to elect a
convention. The latter being more safe and decent, will probably be adopted.
Alas, my beloved countrymen, we shall be fortunate indeed, if the convention
will recognize the present constitution, reforming only a few errors and
abuses, and rendering it from this convulsion more stable than before, or if a
new constitution from its ashes shall arise superior to the present! The
members of a convention will be composed principally of the present delegates,
irritated and inflamed as they are against the senate.

You will be told, that this is an attempt, by alarming your fears, to
intimidate you from doing that which is right. To him who attentively, and with
a proper frame of mind, considers the conduct and address of your delegates,
the messages of the senate and the aforegoing remarks, the condition of our
affairs will appear critical and alarming. If I know my own heart, although I
were thoroughly convinced, that bills of credit would produce the promised
effects, I would steadfastly set my face against this mode of effecting the
plan. Nothing short of a conviction, that on the scheme depended your safety
and happiness, would reconcile me to the idea. At the same time were I certain
that the people, left to themselves, would feel the want of an emission, and
without it could not be content, I would renounce my opinion, and reprobate the
man who could hold out against the free voice of the people, his masters.

When I consider, that independent of impelling the people, like a blind
machine, to break down the fixed barriers of the constitution, the scheme for
an emission is pregnant with a thousand ills, I regret the poor extent of my
powers. I wish for immediate inspiration. When indeed alone, and in my study, I
contemplate on all these things, my whole frame becomes agitated and convulsed.
I feel as it were the resistless impulse of an invisible agent.

I PROCEED now to offer some remarks on the nature of the plan. -- After the
messages of the senate, and another recent publication, it is perhaps
unnecessary to advance any thing further on bills of credit. There are however
some things which either escaped that honorable body, and the ingenious
Commentator on that great and good man Mr. Necker, or did not strike them so
forcibly as they do me. The conduct of the advocates for an emission, in the
first instance, affords a presumption that the paper will depreciate. Not a man
who subscribes instructions, at the same time obliges himself to receive it as
specie. If he did, I would then remind him of the red money, founded on real
public property to an amount far superior to the sum emitted, on private
subscriptions to four times that amount, on a considerable tax payable in the
bills, on the solemn association of a great part of the people, and on their
authority exercised in the appointment of committees. It came out too at a time
when the extreme scarcity of a medium was universally acknowledged. It is
supposed, that the critical period of that emission constitutes a material
difference between the red money and the emission now proposed. With respect to
the doubtful issue of the war, you well remember, that red money funds, every
particle of your property, your liberty, and perhaps your lives, depended on
the same event. The red money was, besides, the only immediate resource left to
this state for feeding the army.

The history of this money might convince you, that the season for bills of
credit is past. There was a time, when, in all respects, they were equal to
cash. But we ought rather to be surprised at the circumstance, than from it to
expect they will be so again.

Consider, I beseech you, the true nature of bills of credit. They are
promissory notes, for sums of money payable at a distant day. What then shall
give them value equal to so many sums of ready money? A kind of popular
illusion, an opinion universally, or very generally, prevailing, that they will
answer all the purposes of specie, will give them this value as effectually as
if there were a sum of money deposited in places convenient to every person for
exchanging on demand. Under such an opinion, no man would hesitate to take them
from another.

This opinion, having existed before the war, was unfortunately lost by the
continental bills. Every attempt to restore it has miscarried. I will not say,
that no man possesses a faith in bills of credit; but I remark, that a very
great part of the people do not. There exists not then this popular illusion,
or opinion. It is indeed extraordinary to contend that it does, when so many
reprobate the very name of paper money.

Opinion is the support of almost every species of legal authority. When the
people in a county believe, that the sheriff has power to do every act
enjoined, this belief confers the power in reality. When they want this belief,
he is no more than a common man. In like manner, bills of credit not being from
their nature ready cash, if the people do not think them so, there is nothing
which can make them so.

The loudest clamours for an emission afford no proof of the opinion's
existence. That clamor may be raised, because men conceive that an emission
would diminish the tax; because debtors may entertain the idea either of
discharging their debts with facility, or of staying the importunity of their
creditors; because the more paper is scattered abroad, the better chance have
public debtors of every kind; because there are abundant subjects of
speculation, which render it profitable to borrow paper at par, and exchange it
at discount; because thoughtless improvident men are ever prone to prefer
present ease to the greatest distant good.

The sticklers for paper appeal to the recent experience of sister states. A
person from Philadelphia has lately assured the inhabitants of this city, that
in Philadelphia he generally agrees to take half cash, half paper, and
contrives pretty well to get rid of the paper. The stipulation of half and half
demonstrates a difference, which indeed the house of delegates discovered to be
ten per cent. I flatter myself I shall explain why it maintains so high a
value, without answering the purpose of its emission.

In Pennsylvania the sum emitted is moderate. It is receivable by the public in
so many ways, that there is a continual demand, and numerous competitors. It
changes from its original nature of promissory notes, becomes an article of
merchandise, and its value depends on principles similar to those of
merchandise in general. Attend to every circumstance. It is the doctrine of
some men who pretend to reason on principle, that if there he a demand, or
several demands, exceeding the amount of an emission, the value of the paper
must be equal to that of specie, and a dollar of the one will be no better than
a dollar of the other. Here is plain proof to the contrary, and unerring
principle might have convinced them without the experiment.

So long as paper will not answer every purpose of specie, so long will a
silver dollar be worth more than a paper dollar, redeemable at a distant day.
In Pennsylvania, paper can pay all taxes and duties. A man owes taxes, and has
nothing but specie; there is no inducement for him to exchange it, unless for
so doing he be allowed a premium. As, however, there are numbers in the same
situation, he cannot make his own terms. Hence it is, that he is obliged to
give L.90 in coin for L.100 in paper. At this price have the demands fixed the
paper. There is a general demand, calling for a greater sum than is in the
hands of the people; and, besides this, there are several other demands.
Superadded to this consideration, almost the whole of each demand centers in
Philadelphia, and very little of the paper finds its way out of the city.
Advert now to the main reason assigned for issuing paper. -- It is to increase,
throughout the state, the circulating medium. No man in Philadelphia pretends
to assert, that the circulating medium is at all increased by the emission of
the bills of credit, or promissory notes. The paper only constitutes an
additional article of merchandise, which indeed is sometimes bartered for other
commodities. Shopkeepers advertise, they will take paper as specie for their
commodities. This they may well do, for the sake of a more rapid sale, and from
having imperceptibly raised their prices. They know the amount of the emission,
of the ta^^s, and of the duties; and the demand created by the uses, cannot
fail to enable them to dispose of their paper at a discount, for which their
amends a^^ ^^^ple.

Now for the operation and effect. -- The people can pay any given tax with
greater facility; but then this tax being so much the less productive, there is
a necessity for supplying the defect by additional taxes. The people in (...)
therefore are not benefited by the facility, and those obliged to pay specie,
are more burdened than the rest. The benefit is confined to a class, for whose
benefit the government was under no obligation to devise systems and plans.

I have that skill in paper (and I pretend to no more than is possessed by a
thousand others) that, let we know the amount, funds, period of redemption,
uses and demands, and, from sure principles, I can calculate pretty nearly the
value at which it will be at different stages. If the sum, not very large, be
redeemable within ten years, without having created uses and demands, I then
calculate the value of a (...) of hand, payable at the end of ten years,
without interest. Suppose the use of money for one year to be worth twelve per
cent. and no doubts entertained of the redemption, L.100 will be then worth
about L.45.

If there be any immediate uses, the value then depends on them. The period of
redemption, and the funds, are out of the question. They become strictly an
article of merchandise. Are matters on such a footing, that the holders of the
paper shall seek purchasers, or those wanting paper shall seek sellers? On this
question much depends. In Philadelphia the holders advertise, and the uses
immediately bring them purchasers.

Let us examine the plan of our delegates. -- L.250,000 to be emitted on loan,
and, as I apprehend, L 100,000 to be laid out in purchases of one kind or
another.

I take it as a settled point, I reason not with the man who denies it, that,
in this state at least, opinion does not place paper on a footing with specie.
The values at which the emissions of 1780 have been held since the peace are
notorious, and yet many times the amount are receivable by the treasurer as
specie. The value of the projected paper must depend on the funds, and a
confidence that it will be redeemed, or on immediate uses. I have fully
explained the first principle. There remains something to be said on the
second. It is not sufficient that a demand call for the whole of an article --
the demand must be general. If one person only wants the article, and the
quantity he wants exceeds the whole quantity in the state, which is in the
hands of one hundred persons, it is evident that he has them at his mercy. If
only one person has an article, wanted by one hundred, the quantity, provided
it be not very great, is not of much moment. He has them at his mercy, until
they are fully supplied, and then his commodity becomes a drug. But if there be
many buyers and many sellers, and the former have more than is wanted by the
latter, it is a drug in the beginning.

For the proposed paper of Maryland there is proposed only one general demand,
and that is to be created by taxes of the present year. Suppose their amount
L.150,000, (which by the bye is much greater than can or ought to be laid) this
demand will not place the holders of paper in the eligible situation of being
sought by the purchasers. The demand owing to duties is small, and confined to
the men best acquainted with the mystery of buying and selling. Arrears of
taxes indeed, amount pretty high; but a great part is due from collectors, and
the residue is by no means apportioned amongst the people. It is chiefly due by
men of large unproductive estates. With respect to arrearages, if paper be
equal to specie, they will remain due after an emission, except only from those
who shall borrow. These, from the nature of the plan, must be few. In short,
the arrears will constitute only a particular demand, and this will be very
small, until a depreciation shall ensue.

Upon the whole, therefore, I do not say, that I apprehend a very considerable
appreciation. I assert positively, that the paper, in the course of six months
after an emission, would depreciate more than thirty-three and one third per
cent. and, were my (...) depending on the truth of my prediction, I should feel
no more concern than if it depended on the old Chesapeake's keeping to its
channel.

It was reported during the session, that the paper at New York was even by
brokers exchanged at two and a half. That brokers could make an advantage
demonstrates, that suspicions were entertained, or, in a place abounding with
cash, there could be no necessity for applying to them. I have heard the
following account of that emission: That parties having run high, there was a
kind of compromise. In consideration of the emission's not exceeding a certain
sum, the enemies of the scheme agreed to give it support; and attempts to
depreciate it were deemed infamous. The premium to brokers was deemed
allowable, as a reasonable satisfaction for their trouble. I again go back to
the history of red money. For a short season that also was even here said to
pass as specie; that is, in the few payments and purchases made with it in the
beginning, there was no actual discount. But, so soon as without infamy a man
might distinguish, you may remember how rapid the depreciation. Attend to that
emission on another account. -- It was made receivable at par for all taxes.
Wheat and tobacco was also receivable, the former at seven and sixpence, when
the actual value was about five shillings. This measure soon fixed the value of
red money at two for one, when, according to the aforesaid principle of the
paper advocates, a dollar of it ought to have been worth five shillings. If men
will not listen to experience, nor determine upon plain evident principles, it
is an error to call them rational animals. With respect however to the emission
of New York, the experiment is not complete. We know not its exact
circumstances. Too little time has elapsed, to have the value ascertained as at
Philadelphia, on certain solid grounds. I am well assured, that at the last
place the idea of bills of credit serving for a circulating medium, or
answering any valuable purposes, is relinquished by its warmest friends. And
thus, before our emission could take place, will it be also at New York. Why do
they not speak of the Rhode Island and the Carolina paper?

I shall make no apology for the liberty I shall take with the delegates
address. We well know, that the measures of public bodies are not the result of
every individual's wisdom, uniting in one mind. On genuine republican
principles, the address presents an invitation to a general discussion; and
this is no time to respect persons, or even bodies. Should they view it in a
different light, and resent this, or a similar attempt, I would say, it is that
body which acts in the true spirit of a corrupt aristocracy.

In their address there are principles either misapplied, or explained so as to
contradict self-evident positions. Say they, in every state there ought to be
as much circulating money as will represent all the property bought and sold
for cash; and the current money of every country ought always to be in
proportion to its trade, industry, consumption, alienation and taxes. Do they
mean by "represent" purchase? And do they mean the property and labor actually
sold at the same instant, or in the course of a year? Do they mean, that if the
property and labor sold annually in the state, be worth 1,000,000 of money,
that there ought to be that million in the state? If they mean the last, they
are certainly mistaken; because the same sum, in the course of a year, may
perform a great variety of offices.

Were the state of Maryland separated from, and inaccessible to, the rest of
the world, These two quantities are worth about L. 180,000 current money.
1,000lb. of gold, and 20,000lb. of silver, would represent the property and
labor bought and sold, and bear a proportion to the enumerated articles, as
fully as if these quantities were trebled, so as to produce nearly that
quantity of money which the delegates think necessary to the state, connected
with, and accessible as it is, to the inhabitants of other countries. If in the
supposed separation, the presence of 1,000lb. of gold, and 20,000lb. of silver,
would cause a bushel of wheat to be sold for two shillings and sixpence, or
about 6 dwt. of silver, the augmentation of them to thrice the quantity would,
in the end, occasion a bushel of wheat to be sold for seven shillings and
sixpence, or about 18dwt. of silver, provided there were no change in the
quantity or demand. So that the quantity of specie would not be material.

But as Maryland is connected with, and accessible to, the inhabitants of other
countries, there will, without the introduction of paper, be always as much
money as will do the offices mentioned in the address. The influx and reflux of
specie depends on as sure principles as the flowing and ebbing of the sea.

In every independent country, not having mines, or receiving tribute, the
quantity of money depends on the balance of trade. If her export of merchandise
exceed her import, the balance is brought in coin. And this will be done until
the quantity of cash, by degrees, raising the prices of her commodities, it no
longer suits her merchants to send these commodities to other countries for the
purpose of importing for them other commodities. They then remit coin. The
surplus commodities now lying on hand, and the quantity of cash being lessened
by these remittances, they again fall to that price which will enable merchants
to export them on better terms than specie. Again the hard metals flow into the
country; and again their reflux is infallibly brought about. This is a
complicated subject, and requires fuller explanation. Confused writers have
perplexed themselves, and rendered it unintelligible to their readers. My
position is not that prices are constantly proportioned to the quantity of
circulating coin, and that a sudden influx of coin would instantly raise
prices, or a sudden export occasion an immediate fall. I mean, that a
considerable and permanent augmentation, or a considerable diminution, and none
brought in its room, will, in a moderate space of time, produce a rise or fall
of those commodities which are in constant and general demand, allowing for
accidental plenty or scarcity. Particular articles may rise even on a
diminution of coin, or fall on an augmentation, the demand for these depending
on fashion, whim or fancy. To a clear head, the whole doctrine of demand is
easily unfolded, and I hope my principle is now fully comprehended.


On this principle, when coin is sent out because the prices of commodities
will not allow an export, notwithstanding they abound as much as usual, the
quantity in other countries not being increased, and the demand there
continuing as it was, there is a presumption that the state has more than its
proper share of specie. But if all the surplus commodities be exported, and
they are insufficient to pay for the merchandise brought in their stead, the
balance must be remitted in coin, or remain a debt to a foreign country. The
latter was precisely our case before the war. We imported from Great Britain
more than our tobacco, and sometimes wheat, and the little foreign trade
allowed us, would pay for. Hence arose the "old distressing" debt to British
subjects. The commerce of this country was managed principally by their
factors. These did not make ample remittances. For a great part of their goods
they took bonds; and without the revolution, the result must have been the
vesting a great part of our real property in British merchants.

The situation of America during her vassallage, and indeed of most dependent
colonies, is different from that of independent nations. This country was, in a
manner, inaccessible to all but one people. The principle, that in every
country there will be as much circulating cash as will represent the labor and
property sold, etc. is meant only for an independent country. Not having
perused all the books on this subject, I am not certain that some of my ideas
are not entirely new. They ought not surely, on that account, to be deemed less
just; and I hope, that my labors will throw a ray of light on a subject
heretofore deemed obscure and impenetrable.

Wherefore bills of credit, bearing no interest, and redeemable at a far
distant period, should, in America alone, have been on a footing with solid
coin, has never yet been sufficiently explained.

Under the circumstances of America before the war, the prices of her
commodities were much higher than might have been expected from the quantity of
her circulating cash. These prices were adjusted on the principle of affording
a reasonable profit to the merchant who purchased the surplus for exportation.
The fact was, there was a kind of barter between America and her parent
country, so far as that surplus extended; and a credit was given for the
balance. These colonies, having no mines, and their trade nearly confined to
Great Britain, it was impracticable to obtain the quantity of cash required by
their domestic concerns, which would bear the due proportion to the property
and labor to be bought and sold, and afford means of improving new
plantations. Prices were regulated to a great degree by our intercourse with
Great Britain. Here then was the true necessity of falling on some expedient
"for melting down solid property." We could nor institute banks for want of
coin. If they had been instituted, the coin would have been drawn out by
factors to make remittances, and the banks would have broken almost as soon as
instituted. Under these circumstances, with the addition that speculation on
government securities had never yet been thought of, bills of credit, after a
few bungling essays, succeeded to a charm. Specie not being wanted for
exportation, the factors having regulated their operations on a different plan,
and domestic purposes constituting almost the entire use for a circulating
medium, the opinion of the people was easily obtained; and as no suspicions of
the public faith had been created by infractions of public engagements, there
was a mutual tacit consent that the paper of each colony should be received by
its neighbors.

We are now, from the signal interposition of Heaven, a free independent
people. We are on a footing with other nations, and specie will find its level
amongst us as with them. Without going into the idle disquisition of the exact
proportion of circulating cash, so as to preserve any given prices of the
property and labor bought and sold, I do confidently pronounce, that without
impolitic forcing measures during peace, we shall find a Extravagant imports
must indeed diminish for a time the circulating coin; but as these cannot be
kept up, the evil soon regulates itself.
sufficient quantity for trade, consumption, alienation and taxes. A bank on a
solid rational foundation, has its uses as well as inconveniences. But as the
question is not concerning a bank, I proceed not on that fruitful, perplexing,
entertaining subject.

If there be a man incapable of perceiving the difference between a time when
opinion was in favor of bills, and times of a general distrust; between times
of vassallage, with a severe restriction of our trade, and a period when we
have taken our just station, and our commerce courted by the world; between the
infancy and ripe age A country cannot be called young, when there are daily
emigrations, which would perhaps be facilitated by an unusual abundance of cash.
of a country -- if he cannot make these plain distinctions, I could almost
say, that a false pride, a defect of understanding, the dictates of interest,
or an overbearing private influence, has induced him obstinately to maintain
opinions condemned by a vast majority of the best characters It is remarkable,
that the savior of his country has never yet been quoted on this subject.
Although upon his resignation he was determined to keep aloof from public
affairs, he has lately interposed, with success, against an attempt to emit
paper in his native state.
in the union.

The address states the amount of specie before the war at about L.200,000, and
that if even this sum be now circulating amongst us, fifteen millions of
property can pay only L.200,000. To the man who considers the efficacy of a
brisk circulation, and the energy of a faithful administration of justice, this
statement appears extraordinary indeed. In France one third of their ninety
millions sterling of cash, is paid annually for taxes and duties; but the
amount of sums paid from one to another, in the course of a year, amongst
twenty-odd millions of souls, is not to be reckoned. When L.200,000 are paid
for debts today, what prevents it from being paid for other debts tomorrow?
It is not annihilated by the first payment. It is not like a soldier's ration,
which, if it does its office today, is for ever gone, and another ration must
be provided for tomorrow. Let justice take its course, or fall upon some
rational expedient for satisfying both creditor and debtor. Let us on every
occasion respect the public faith, and, without pursuing any other
extraordinary measures, you would find, that in the course of one year
L.100,000 might pay debts to the amount of more than a million.

The paper is, it seems, devised as a medium of taxes, and government is to
furnish you with something, wherewithal to pay itself. There is a novelty in
the idea of a creditor's enabling the debtor by a new loan to pay his debt, and
of a right medium of taxes distinct from a medium of commerce or exchange. It
may be prudent for a creditor sometimes to venture a little further, in order
that by aiding his debtor to execute a well laid scheme, he may secure his
whole debt. There is nothing like this promised by the bill, and the reverse
would most probably take place. "But the people, at present unable to pay
scarcely anything, will be put into a condition to pay a tax of thirty
shillings in the hundred pounds." No such thing. It is clear, that the paper
would not be lent from the treasury to one man in a hundred. Of the first
L.100,000, 11,000 is destined to Baltimore county. No person can take less than
L.50, and suppose none to take more. The fifties in 11,000 are only 220, and in
that county there cannot be fewer than 4400 men chargeable with the tax. On
these suppositions then, only one man in twenty can borrow from the public.
Suppose no person to borrow less than L.500, and only one in 200 can be a
borrower. I think in the present state of credit, few will borrow for the sake
of administering to the necessities of their neighbors. From all this, the
plan appears inadequate to the purpose of furnishing the people with the means
of discharging the tax.

But it is said, the medium being supplied, the people may procure it with
their produce. Should the paper be really cash, the difficulty of procuring
that, and of procuring specie, will be equal. An idea has been propagated, that
specie has, all at once, vanished from the land. That is impossible; because
there has been very little export of cash since the very late period, when a
man could procure a reasonable quantity for anything he had to sell. Take
notice that I admit, only for the sake of argument, that merchantable
commodities or provisions brought to any market in the state, do not command
specie at this moment. I admit freely, that the artificial scarcity of cash,
has lately and suddenly increased. The expectation, or the probability, or even
the mere possibility, of an emission, has determined most men not to part with
a single shilling of cash which they can consistently preserve. Each expects to
receive no more, and therefore, if he can avoid it, he will pay none. Let the
paper system be fairly abandoned. Let the legislature inspire a confidence,
that contracts shall be enforced, and the true medium which improvident laws
have confined to private coffers, and perhaps reburied in the earth, will again
circulate, and do its office.

I have been always surprised, when men of intelligence have inferred the
actual scarcity of coin from the low prices of negroes, stock, etc. taken in
execution. The demand for these things is much less than it was before the war;
and as the quantity at market has increased, it has followed from the
invariable principles of demand, that the prices are greatly diminished. The
abundant articles of a gainful speculation have absorbed all the spare cash;
and lessened the demand for those things in which savings of money were
formerly invested. To them too is owing that high premium for the use of money,
which, after all, has been much oftener talked of than really given.

The spirit of speculation, however, has occasioned another conclusion equally
false. From the avidity with which a small class of men has purchased up public
securities, is inferred a confidence in government. It is pleasant to infer
this from a man's purchasing at four, six, and eight for one, when it is
evident that he purchases with a view of disposing of them in a short time to
advantage. His reliance on the public faith would indeed be effectually proved,
if he purchased at par, or hoarded them as solid coin.

The most plausible argument for an emission, is the opportunity offered, if we
had cash, of sinking our share of the continental domestic debt with far less
than the sum due to creditors. Final settlements may be procured at six or
eight for one. Should they not be obtained with bills of credit, these bills
will nevertheless procure flour and tobacco. And as specie is not in the state,
these articles are to be sent out, and the state becomes a merchant. Let us
examine freely this whole process.

How long will it be before the paper can be struck and issued? How long after
that before it can be returned by way of taxes? How much time will be consumed
in procuring tobacco (I will not ask the price) shipping it, and bringing back
coin in its stead? Do you suppose that the state will trade to advantage? In
whom shall it confide? The other states being competitors, is it not probable
the price of securities will be advanced before this process can furnish the
cash? I put these queries to evince the superiority of the plan mentioned by
the senate. To the plan, however, of an emission to be exchanged immediately
for securities at a reasonable rate, it has been deemed sufficient to object
the benefit which would accrue to ADVENTURERS. But it would seem, that the
delegates plan would not be less favorable to adventurers. They are
adventurers chiefly from whom securities can now be obtained. The address says,
that the proposed paper can depreciate only a trifle, and intimates, that the
senate's would depreciate to a great degree. Surely, the more valuable the
paper, exchanged for securities at a given rate, the more benefit will be
derived to adventurers. I will not be understood to advocate the scheme hinted
at by the senate. I disdain all species of deception. I reprobate all kinds of
paper; and, if I can suggest a more eligible mode of obtaining facilities, this
last argument in its favor must fall to the ground.

The address compliments you on your "solid property," and asserts the
difficulty of discharging the tax to be owing more to the want of a medium,
than to your embarrassed circumstances.

We may account much better for the default in collections, than from the
inability of the people. Does the middling and most valuable class of citizens
complain of the tax? Are they incapable of paying? Are they in arrears? If they
are, is the fault imputable to them? Suppose an industrious planter possessed
of 300 acres of tolerable land, 4 or 5 working hands, and stock, etc. in
proportion. This property is perhaps assessed to L.700. Suppose the produce he
raises for sale to bring only L.140. A tax of 20 s in the L.100 requires L.7,
the twentieth part of his income. The calculation is easy and plain. Consider
now the case of the poor, in whose favor we have heard such moving
declamation. To men of very minute capitals it makes scarcely a palpable
difference, whether taxes be high or low, receivable in paper, or in coin only.
But now turn to men of overgrown property, with their thousands of acres, and
hundreds of slaves. On these taxation is heavy; because their annual incomes,
in proportion, are small. But who is there that pities a man for owing L.100,
when the debt arises merely from his possessing perhaps 15,000? After all this
mighty bustle then for the poor, the clamor is, in truth, raised for the rich.
These are the men who have set the pernicious example of withholding the tax.
These are the men who declaim against heavy impositions, the want of a medium,
and the necessity of postponing collections. It is their pernicious influence,
which even without their intending it, may have prevented men both able and
well-inclined from paying their public dues, and prevented money, after being
paid, from coming to the treasury.

That you may not suppose I affect superior wisdom on all "political and
constitutional questions," I acknowledge that the original hint of the plan I
mean to propose was borrowed from a member of the legislature. And that the
whole of my reasoning may be more heartily received, I further acknowledge,
that most of my ideas are borrowed -- not indeed principally from books. These
too often contain the wild dreams of visionary projectors, or of men attached
to a fine spun theory. I would be ashamed to quote any writer beyond the
Atlantic on a subject relative to bills of credit; because those writers can
reason only on speculation; and because, in America, we have experience to give
every observing man more real knowledge than could possibly have been possessed
by such a man as Sir James Stewart. Not that I despise his book. It is a
repository of much useful knowledge; and where he confines himself to facts or
principles established by experience, his work is extremely valuable. I take
particular notice of this laborious writer, because his volumes have been
produced on account of his authority. Neither he nor Aristides, nor any other
man, should have any influence to which his reasons adduced do not entitle him.

It is well known, that in Europe almost any sums may be borrowed on ample
security. The interest is from two and an half to five per cent. Neither
congress, nor any individual state, could perhaps borrow even L.1,000 upon any
terms, on the faith of government generally pledged. But suppose the paper
scheme entirely discarded, and an act of assembly imposing a tax of 6/3 in the
L.100 for ten years, for the sole and express purpose of procuring a loan, and
authority given to proper persons to negotiate it in Europe, the principal
payable one tenth annually, and an interest in the mean time, not exceeding
eight per cent. Such a scheme has been tried by no state in the union. I have
no doubt that this high interest, and this abundant security, would tempt
monied men in Europe to advance, and that, by this expedient, we might procure
cash far more speedily than under the paper system.

In Europe money is frequently invested in public funds, for the sake of
security, and for establishing a sure annual income, without trouble or
diminution of the capital. Some of the persons who thus lay out their money,
have no thought, at the time, of ever receiving back the principal; but they
have it in their power at any time to receive it by selling out. Such is one
great advantage that a well ordered government enjoys by having inspired a
confidence in the public. It is not probable at this period, that men could be
found willing to lend us on any reasonable terms, without a stipulation of
receiving the principal at a fixed time. I therefore propose to borrow two
hundred thousand pounds for ten years. A tax of six shillings and threepence
in the L.100, on 11,000,000 of property, gives the gross sum of L.34,375.
Suppose it to produce, in ten years, only enough to discharge the equivalent of
a tenth of the principal annually, with the interest accruing, until the whole
be paid, and the expense of the negotiation. On this plan we borrow immediately
L.200,000; and that sum laid out in continental securities would purchase, at
five for one, to the amount of L.1,000,000, which is considerably more than our
balance of the continental domestic debt, at present bearing interest. It is
incumbent on me to explain how the contract is to be made.

Should we agree to pay actually a tenth of the principal annually, and the
whole interest due at the end of the year, our payments would be made in the
following manner: In the first year we should have to pay L.20,000 of the
principal, with the interest on the whole, which at eight per cent. would be
L.16,000. -- Total 36,000. In the second year L.20,000 more of the principal,
and the interest on the remaining L.180,000, which would be L.14,400 -- Total
L.34,400 Let us state every payment. --

1st year L.36,000 2d year 34,400 3d year 32,800 4th year 31,200 5th year
29,600 6th year L.28,000 7th year 26,400 8th year 24,800 9th year 23,200 10th
year 21,600 Total L. 288,000

But as the plan would not raise enough for the first years, I would propose,
that the gross sum of L.28,800, being a tenth of the amount, be paid at the end
of every year, and then for L.200,000 immediately advanced, the lender would,
in ten years, receive L.288,000. And besides, the annual payments might be
immediately placed out by him at interest in Europe. He would in such case have
to receive an interest for nine years on the first payment, eight years on the
second, seven on the third, and so on to the ninth. Now calculate his whole
gains, supposing his annual receipts placed on simple interest, at four per
cent.

His interest on the first L.28,800 for nine years, would be 10,080 On the 2nd
for 8 years 8,960 3d for 7 7,840 4th for 6 6,720 5th for 5 5,600 6th for 4
4,480 7th for 3 3,360 8th for 2 2,240 9th for 1 1,120 50,400 Add 288,000 Total,
L.338,400 Instead of what the principal would have amounted to, if laid out in
Europe at a simple interest of four per cent. 280,000 Clear gain, L.58,400 And
the clear gain, more than an interest of five per cent. in Europe would be, is
L.38,400

Should we calculate on compound interest, the difference would not be so
great, although still very considerable. I have made the above calculation to
evince, that my scheme would probably succeed. The stipulation with the lender
ought to be, that he should sustain no loss from tardy payments.

I beseech cool dispassionate men to compare the several plans. The proposer of
the last, sears not the imputation of sinister views. It is proposed in
sincerity, and relied on by the author. It were easy to demonstrate how deeply
some men may be interested in an emission. I forbear from respect. I detest
personality. The attempt to injure my reputation excites no resentment. I pity
the slave to malignant passions. Were the attack even such as to endanger my
good name, recrimination would at best be a paltry mode of defense.

The operations under the loan would be this: It would entitle us to draw
bills, which being sold in Philadelphia, would bring specie to the state; and
the agents or commissioners of the loan might make their annual payments by
tobacco.

Were the hint adopted, I might suggest other things in the draught of the
bill. It might perhaps please the lenders to have a power of appointing their
own collectors, whose receipts, produced by the people to our collectors, might
be allowed and charged to their principal. Amendments might occur; but I am
satisfied the outline deserves well the attention of the legislature. It is a
scheme to deliver this state of an annual burden of L.60,000, at the expense
of a 6/3 tax, for only ten years, and this without producing dissensions among
the people, or violating public faith.

To men of selfish contracted minds, who measure not on the large scale of
general good, the profit to be gained by an emission on loan, may be very
alluring. The translator of Mr. Necker on bank-notes, has demonstrated, that
the gain never could be made. Suppose it should; the burden of contributing so
much to the public revenue must fall heavily somewhere. It would to all intents
and purposes be a tax, and a very unequal one. If an equal moderate tax cannot
be paid, it will require something more than sound to prove, that an unequal
one, without loss or deduction, will come into the treasury. The fact is, that
public debtors already constitute a numerous and powerful body; and it cannot
be good policy to augment it. These debtors have either had value from the
public, or escaped burdens borne by the rest. Their debts are just, and ought
to be paid. By increasing their number, is there no cause to apprehend a
pernicious combination? Should the thought hereafter suggest itself, that the
best step for a public debtor is to procure a seat in the great public
councils, you will run the hazard either of having your burdens greatly
increased, or of a public bankruptcy, the ruin of your creditors, convulsions
in the state, and ultimately the destruction of your freedom.

I proceed to a more invidious dangerous task. Do thou sacred love of truth
assist and bear me up! It is by plain simple calculation to demonstrate the
mistakes in the delegates address. It has mistated your resources, and
exaggerated your embarrassments. Its errors are amazing, and the following
instances shall establish my charge

The debts due from individuals to Great Britain before the war, are estimated
by them (the grounds I know not) at L.600,000 0 0 sterling. And the debt
contracted in the four years of peace 400,000 0 0 L.1,000,000 0 0 sterling.

How can this debt arise, except from a wrong balance of trade? Examine their
estimate.

They state your exports at 538,333 6 8 currency. Your imports at 600,000 0 0
Difference L.61,666 13 4 currency.

Now suppose the whole imports to be from Great Britain, and the whole exports
to it (as nothing is said of any other part) this annual difference in four
years, amounts to only L.246,666 13 4, which in sterling is only 148,000 0 0
Instead of 400,000 0 0 Error L.252,000 0 0

But from their own showing, our exports have considerably exceeded the
imports. They have committed an error of L.100,000 in the value of 700,000
bushels of wheat, at six shillings and eight-pence the bushel.

They have extended it 133,333 6 8 Instead of 233,333 6 8 Difference L.100,000
0 0

They estimate twenty-five thousand hogsheads of tobacco at thirty shillings
per hundred, and at that rate the tobacco rightly amounts to L.375,000 0 0 But
since the peace, tobacco has averaged at least a guinea. Put down then 437,500
0 0 Another difference L.62,500 0 0

They allow nothing for skins, flax-seed, bar and pig-iron, and smaller
articles. The annual amount of these articles cannot be short of L.25,000 0 0.

They allow nothing for the export of cash. If none has been sent out, there
can be no scarcity. If some has been sent out, it ought to be charged in the
account. Behold their dilemma! But suppose, as they do, a great and dreadful
scarcity; it cannot be occasioned by an annual export of less than L.50,000 0 0
currency.

Cast up the four sums which we have thus gained. Error in extending wheat
100,000 0 0 Short in value of tobacco 62,500 0 0 Articles omitted 25,000 0 0
Cash 50,000 0 0 The amount is L.237,500 0 0 Which added to their amount of
exports 538,333 6 8 Produces L.775,833 6 8 The difference between which, and
their amount of imports, 600,000 0 0 Is L.175,833 6 8 4 Which multiplied by
four for the four years of peace, gives L.703,333 6 8 And this balance must
have either added to our wealth, or lessened the former debt. Suppose the
latter, and we have diminished this debt L 703,333 6 8 currency, instead of
increasing it 400,000 sterling. But the account is not yet closed. We have
still goods on hand. These will either save future imports, or their value must
be set against past imports. I do the latter; and we may surely estimate these
goods at 296,666 13 4 Which added to the 703,333 6 8 Gives 1,000,000 0 0 And
this total turned into sterling at the rate of sixty-six two thirds, is just
600,000 0 0 Which subtracted from the debt before the war of 600,000 0 0 Leaves
L.0,000,000 0 0 With which I am willing to reward any noted calculator who will
condescend to assist me.

Thus taking their data, correcting their figures, and adding things, which
cannot be well denied, I demonstrate that we owe not one farthing to
Great Britain, except what we must have elsewhere gained, and except a sum, the
value of which we have on hand. But the case is not so. Their data I reject,
and I will correct other mistakes. The imports since the peace, have greatly
exceeded L.600,000 currency; although no proof is presented, that the balance
has been against the state. It is most probable, that imports and exports, upon
an average, have been nearly equal. The following I conceive pretty nearly (for
I choose to be under the mark) a true average state of our exports since the
end of the war, which will continue for a few years to come, after which it
cannot fail to increase: Twenty-seven thousand hogsheads of tobacco, at L.17 10
0 the hogshead, L.472,500 0 0 Four hundred thousand bushels of wheat, at seven
shillings the bushel 140,000 0 0 One hundred thousand barrels of flour, at 37/6
the barrel, 187,500 0 0 Indian corn and lumber 35,000 0 0 Skins, flax-seed,
iron, bread, biscuit, and smaller articles, (allowing nothing for corn) 25,000
0 0 Total L.860,000 0 0

The idea of private economy and frugality extricating us from all
embarrassments, has been ridiculed. It has been triumphantly said, that a free
government cannot prevent men from spending their money, or living as they
please. It is true, that government cannot limit the number of dishes at a
man's table, the quantity of madeira, to be consumed in a year, or the kind and
number of his carriages. But when men, having by a thoughtless profusion
incurred heavy debts, are obliged to retrench, and begin seriously to reform,
the legislature may certainly forbear to furnish them with the means of
continuing their extravagance, enhancing their debt, and only postponing their
evil day. Would not, I pray you, an emission operate in this way for the
borrowers? Would it not again hurry men into their wild ill concerted schemes?
But government can go further than a mere forbearance. It can encourage home
manufactures. It can either prohibit certain importations, or lay such a duty
as would answer three good ends, an increase of its revenue, a diminution of
imports, and a discouragement of luxury. The force of prejudice, and the magic
of declamation, must be great indeed, to prevent men from seeing these glaring
truths!

Suppose our imports from every part to be only L.800,000, and our exports to
every part to be equal. Suppose too our embarrassed circumstances, aided by the
prudence of our legislature, to lessen the importation of merchandise a
fortieth part, This gives us an annual balance of L.20,000. The diminution of a
twentieth gives us L.40,000, and of a tenth L.80,000. The whole balance would
be brought in solid coin, provided we did not remit commodities to pay old
debts. But from our situation these debts must be slowly paid, and it is proper
to adopt some fair mode of composition, or installment This might be termed a
violation of past contracts, if creditors were not universally consenting to
the measure.
. I will suppose wise measures to be pursued, so as to lessen our imports a
twentieth. This might produce in our favor a balance of L.10,000 in coin, and
30,000 to be applied in discharge of those debts. In a few years, if we have
not now coin enough, we shall have abundance, our debts From all the
information I can get, the debts due to Great Britain before the war cannot
exceed the debts due to us more than L. 300,000 currency, supposing the
payments made into the treasury to be bad. If they be good, the balance is not
near so much. Although the balance of trade was formerly against us, we must
recollect, that great part of it was invested in real property, which has since
been confiscated.
will be discharged, and we cannot be otherwise than a free and happy people.
Those schemes, which promise all at once, without any thing on your part, will
be ever fallacious. Consider a little further the result of an emission on
loan. We shall proceed in our luxuries, and provided credit be obtained, our
imports from abroad will be augmented, or (which will have a more pernicious
effect) we shall get merchandise from a neighboring state. Of consequence
there will be a constant drain of our hard cash. At the period assigned for
redeeming the paper, we shall find money far more rare, and the people
laboring under a debt far heavier than that which is said already to bear them
down. In the name of common sense and common justice, for the sake of your
neighbors, yourselves, your posterity, your country, reflect on all these
things, and bestow on this scheme, the sure instrument of your destruction,
such decisive marks of disapprobation, as shall for ever deter its advocates,
demonstrate your good sense, retrieve the national character, and make rapid
advances to that grand consummation of policy -- the RESTORATION of PUBLIC and
PRIVATE FAITH.

I must note a few other remarkable passages in the address. It informs you of
no other amount of debts, for confiscated property, than the sum of L.275,600 3
11. By the auditor's account, the whole sum due for principal and interest,
exclusive of the interest on unbonded debts, is L.411,919 12 1.

Add to this the arrears of taxes equal, according to the address, to 197,320
14 7 And the sum proposed to be loaned 250,000 0 0 Total L859,240 6 8

The emission would afford the strong body of public debtors such an accession
of influence, as, if they pleased, might produce a combination not to be
withstood. L.250,000 divided into five hundreds, might possibly give 500 new
debtors. Divided into fifties, 5000. But old debtors would be the principal
borrowers. Suppose then an addition of only 250 debtors, and these to be men of
some enterprise and influence. How contemptible the suspicions suggested
against the senate, compared to the well grounded apprehensions, which these
might excite!

The address says nothing of the two and a half impost, as a productive fund in
ease of the assessment. I am most credibly informed, that the product of this
tax, in 1786, appeared to the house to be L.33,093 9 8. This ought undoubtedly
to have lessened their estimate of an assessed rate, about 6/8 in the L.100.

I come now to the account of the continental debts. If gentlemen are possessed
of any means to correct my state of the debt, let them do it. When wrong, I
ever wish that I may be set right
On the first of January, 1783, the foreign debt, according to the published
estimate of congress, was 7,885,085 dollars. It has not since been increased,
except by arrears of interest, and some loans, which have been applied to pay
off the old interest, and maintain ministers and agents. Suppose it to be now
raised to 10,000,000 dollars, bearing an interest of five per cent. Our tenth
of that sum is only 1,000,000, equal to L.375,000, the interest of which is
only L.18,750: So that the address has erred in stating the interest of the
foreign debt to be 1,723,626 dollars; because that is an interest at five per
cent. on the enormous sum of 34, 472,520 dollars. Congress however is under an
obligation to pay a part of the principal of the foreign debt at this time.
Hence it is, that for the year 1786, they have called on the states for a sum,
not to be paid every year. And hence it is, most probably, that the address has
so materially mistated the annual interest of the foreign debt. There is indeed
a great difficulty in comprehending the exact state of continental affairs.
Since the year 1783, there has been no statement from congress that has been,
at the same time, full, explicit, intelligible and clear. It is no wonder that
new requisitions, balances of the old, interest now due, interests annually
arising, a million of figures, and references to statements not at hand, should
perplex an ordinary brain, and produce mistakes. But a common man, without a
full comprehension of the subject, would not have undertaken to publish for the
information of others. From the whole body of the delegates, in an appeal to
their constituents, nothing but accuracy and precision ought to be expected;
and a considerable time actually elapsed before I ever thought of questioning
their statements and calculations. That I was wrong in taking any thing upon
trust, I hope already appears.

I will now present you a more complete general view of your affairs, than any
you have yet seen. My groundwork for the state of the continental debt, is the
estimate of 1783, which I am well assured is the groundwork that has ever since
served congress itself.

The continental debt arises in a great measure from a noncompliance with their
requisitions. Suppose the whole debt to be 50,000,000 of dollars, and that
although a state has not complied fully with these requisitions, it has
complied in as great a proportion as the rest. Now these fifty millions are
apportioned. Surely a state cannot owe its quota of the debt, and its balance
of requisitions at the same time. Congress, however, being disappointed in one
year, in the next year makes a new requisition, and calls for the balance of
some former demand, in order to prevent the accumulation of her principal debt,
and to comply with her positive engagements. Could congress think proper, and
could all its creditors agree, to convert the whole debt into a principal,
bearing interest, and would the states obey their just requisitions in
providing permanent funds, the burden would every year be equal, their affairs
simplified, and errors not likely to be made. But of this hereafter.

The foreign debt paying interest, I have before stated in 1783 to be 7,885,085
dollars.

The interest of which, partly at four, and the rest at five per cent. is
369,038 dollars. Our tenth I am assured, that our quota is nearer an eleventh
than a tenth. This makes an important difference. Congress in the requisition
for permanent funds, made it something less than 2/21, which in L. 100,000
would save us above L. 5000.
thereof (discarding petty fractions, as I shall continue to do) is 36,903 --
equal to L.13,838 12 6.

But suppose, as I have already done, the whole foreign debt 10,000,000
dollars, and our quota of the interest, being the interest 1,000,000, at five
per cent. is L.18,750 0 0.

The domestic debt, paying interest, is 27,115,290 dollars. The interest of
this at six per cent. is 1,626,917. Our tenth of this is 162,691, equal to
^^161,009 0 0.

Against this last sum we have to set the interest due on loan-office
certificates, belonging to this state. The principal, according to the address,
amounts to L.80,517 4 9; and the interest being L.4,831, deducted from our
tenth, leaves only 56,178 0 0 So that adding the two interest sums together,
18,750 0 0 You have the balance of our quota of the annual interest now payable
by congress, L.74,928 0 0

We have now to reckon arrears of interest, and the gross sum not yet paying
interest. The interest of the foreign debt being already supposed to be
consolidated with the principal, and to make it 10,000,000 dollars, there is
nothing to be set down for foreign arrears.

Four years interest due on that part of the domestic debt, being 27,115,290
dollars, which pays interest, amounts to 6,507,668 dollars, equal to 2,440,375
0 0 To this add the There appears a disposition in some states to withold
from the army this commutation for their half-pay. May God prevent such
unprecedented iniquity and disgrace! The nonpayment of this most just of all
debt, would prove us "dishonest to our neighbors, false to our benefactors,
and ungrateful to Providence."
commutation 5,000,000, dollars, equal to 1,875,000 0 0 L.4,315,375 0 0

I take it for a settled unavoidable point, that as congress cannot pay the
arrears, or the commutation, these two articles must at last be consolidated
with the principal now bearing interest. Should congress be unable to reconcile
foreign creditors to this measure, she may, notwithstanding, so soon as she is
invested with the five per cent. impost, by borrowing on that fund, exchange
her creditors. And thus, when her powers are enlarged, and her credit
established, like that of other sovereign powers, a property in the American
funds will be transferrable like the stocks in England, without, however, that
fluctuation in their value. This is "a consummation devoutly to be wished."
Until this happy period shall arrive, the confederacy is little better than a
rope of sand, to be parted by the first rude blast. God grant that a
dissolution of the union be not the secret wish of too many in these states.

The interest of the new principal of L.4,315,375, would be L.258,922 10 0, our
tenth thereof would be 25,892 5 0 To this add the balance of our quota of the
interest now payable 74,928 0 0 Total Aristides flatters himself, that he will
be ever found consistent. In a pamphlet, published in 1784, which some of you
remember, he estimated our share of the continental interest, without deducting
the interest of our continental certificates, at about L. 85,000. The
accumulation since that period, and the difference between one tenth and less
than two twenty-ones, has occasioned the difference between the two estimates.
In that publication, he breathed the very spirit which actuates him in this
address. Is not this a rare instance for a politician?
L.100,820 5 0 And this I aver to be within a trifle more or less, the whole
which we should have annually to contribute for interest, supposing the whole
continental foreign and domestic debt consolidated into a principal, bearing
interest.

To demonstrate this more simply. Remember, that in 1783 congress estimated the
whole debt at 42,000,375 dollars. Very little has since been borrowed, and even
that applied chiefly to discharge interest. Current expenses and arrears of
interest have raised it to near 50,000,000 dollars. Our tenth of that is
5,000,000 -- equal to L.1,875,000, from which we have a right to deduct the
arrears of interest on our continental loan-office certificates, equal to about
30,000 0 0 And our contributions since peace, equal perhaps to 120,000 0 0
Total 150,000 0 0 Which subtracted from 1,875,000 0 0 Leaves L.1,725,000 0 0
The interest of which, reckoning the whole at six per cent. is 103,500 0 0 The
difference between which and 100,820 5 0 Is L.2,679 15 0

But as the foreign debt of 10,000,000 dollars, pays only five per cent. and
the difference between the rate of five and six per cent. makes a difference on
our 1,000,000, of 10,000 dollars, equal to L.3.750. The latter calculation
being a lumping one, is reduced below the former more particular one.

Now subtract from the delegates account of your annual contributions for
interest, which is 137,057 12 2 My amount of 100,820 5 0 And we find the
important difference of L.36,237 7 2

Of which surely every friend to his country will be happy in feeling a
thorough conviction.

Let me now inform you of the burdens to which you are in duty bound to submit.

I have stated, that an assessment of 6/3, in ten years, would release you from
an annual burden of 60,000 0 0 The two and an half per cent. I should wish not
to exceed 25,000 0 0 These two amount to L.85,000 0 0 Which subtracted from
your annual charge for continental interest, 100,820 0 0 Leaves a balance of
L.15,820 5 0 Add to this the annual expenses of our own government; suppose
18,179 15 0 And the interest on the balance of our state debt, although the
debts due to the state are far more than she owes, 3,000 0 0 Total L.37,000 0 0

To raise this last sum, suppose a recourse to the old mode of assessment.
Seven shillings and sixpence in the L.100 on 11 millions of property, gives
L.41,250 gross, which surely might produce more than L.37,000 net. The two
rates of 6/3 and 7/6, with the 2/6 imposed by the consolidating act, make 16/3.
And this, upon the plainest calculation, is the whole burden necessary to be
borne along with the 2 per cent. for your whole continental and domestic debt,
and the liberal support of government. To this add 3/9 for county charges,
which you are sensible ought to be less than at present. And your whole burden
is just twenty shillings annually for every L.100. From this 2/6 are to be
shortly deducted, and 6/3 more are to cease at the end of ten years, and then
the rate will be only 11/3.

But suppose my scheme for a loan rejected, you have then to provide for an
annual interest of L.60,000, until we can sink the principal. In that case
twelve shillings, instead of the 6/3, would be required. And then your whole
contribution (exclusive of the 2 duty) to congress, the state and the county,
would be 25/9 until the deduction of the 2/6, which would reduce it to 23/3.
But inasmuch as property is undervalued in assessments, perhaps the real value
of L.100 would contribute only fifteen shillings.

Suppose my scheme adopted, the five per cent. impost settled on congress, and
our 2 per cent. of course done away, there would at the end of ten years, be an
annual balance due by congress of L.9,179 15 0, as appears by the following
state: My scheme sinking the principal of 60,000 0 0 Five per cent. producing
50,000 0 0 Total L.110,000 0 0 From which deduct the balance of our quota,
100,8^0 5 0 And the remainder is L.9,179 15 0 Which I conceive would be
sufficient for our contribution to the expenses of congress civil
establishment, considering that congress has the back lands still to dispose of.

There would then remain only the charges of our own internal government, and
the county expenses, for which an imposition of 8/9 in the L.100, would be more
than enough.

I have said nothing of the residue of our quota of the continental money. To
this may be opposed the paper purchased by the intendant, and part of the tax
arrearages.

It is now time to close my remarks. On the bill for the relief of debtors, and
on certain repealing bills, I say nothing at present. The fertility of my
subjects has already drawn me too far.

I have never addressed you, except on occasions of importance, and I have
hitherto had the pleasing reward of your approbation. On this occasion above
all others, I deserve it. You will at least acquit me of "an officious dabbling
in politics." I know, that when men are rooted in opinion, they are disposed to
condemn all who oppose them, and the foundest (...) to irritate and inflame.
With an appeal to the great Searcher of thoughts, I again protest, that my
heart is exempt from hatred and malice. It gives me pain to be obliged to speak
in a manner displeasing to any one, and particularly to those whom I still
regard, and who lately honored me with their esteem. I beseech all who have
attempted to injure me, to forgive my not being hurt. They may rest assured,
that one of the first wishes of my soul, is to live in amity with all. -- Let
that be the principle of all! May the sufferings of their country awaken a true
zeal, and uniting in her cause, they will bid fair at last to coalesce in
brotherly love.

ARISTIDES.
Annapolis, Feb. 26, 1787.
ERRATA.
IN the 7th page, near the bottom, for "1668," read "1688."

In the 19th page, in the 17th line from the bottom, for "let we know," read
"let me know."

In the 20th page, near the bottom, for "appreciation," read "depreciation."

Besides these may be others, which the candid reader will readily excuse.


