THE Young GENTLEMAN and LADY's MONITOR, AND English Teacher's Assistant BEING
A COLLECTION of SELECT PIECES from our Best MODERN WRITERS: CALCULATED TO
Eradicate vulgar Prejudices and Rusticity of Manners; Improve the
Understanding; Rectify the Will; Purify the Passions; Direct the Minds of Youth
to the Pursuit of proper Objects; and to facilitate their Reading, Writing, and
Speaking the English Language, with Elegance and Propriety.

Particularly adapted for the Use of our eminent Schools and Academies, as well
as private Persons, who have not an Opportunity of perusing the Works of those
celebrated Authors, from whence this Collection is made.

DIVIDED INTO Small Portions for the Ease of Reading in Classes.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

By J. HAMILTON MOORE, Author of the Practical Navigator and Seaman's New Daily
Assistant.

LONDON: PRINTED: NEW YORK: Reprinted by HUGH GAIN, at the BIBLE, in
Hanover-Square, 1787.

PREFACE.
AS the design of Learning is to render persons agreeable companions to
themselves, and useful members of society; to support solitude with pleasure,
and to pass through promiscuous temptations with prudence; it is presumed, this
compilation will not be unacceptable; being composed of pieces selected from
the most celebrated moral writers in the English language, equally calculated
to promote the principles of religion, and to render youth vigilant in
discharging the social and relative duties in the several stations of life; by
instilling into their minds such maxims of virtue and good-breeding, as tend to
eradicate local prejudices and rusticity of manners; and at the same time,
habituate them to an elegant manner of expressing themselves either in Writing
or Speaking.

And as the first impression made on the minds of youth is the most lasting,
great care should be taken to furnish them with such seeds of reason and
philosophy, as may rectify and sweeten every part of their future lives; by
marking out a proper behavior both with respect to themselves and others, and
exhibiting every virtue to their view which claims their attention, and every
vice which they ought to avoid. Instead of this, we generally see youth
suffered to read romances, which impress on their minds such notions of
Fairies, Goblins, etc. that exist only in the imagination, and, being strongly
imbibed, take much time to eradicate, and very often baffle all the power of
philosophy. If books abounding with moral instructions, conveyed in a proper
manner, were given in their stead, the frequent reading of them would implant
in their minds such ideas and sentiments, as would enable them to guard against
those prejudices so frequently met with amongst the ignorant.

Nor is it possible that any person can speak or write with elegance and
propriety, who has not been taught to read well, and in such books where the
sentiments are just and the language pure.

An insipid flatness and languor is almost the universal fault in reading;
often uttering their words so faint and feeble, that they appear neither to
feel nor understand what they read, nor have any desire it should be understood
or felt by others. In order to acquire a forcible manner of pronouncing words,
let the pupils inure themselves, while reading, to draw in as much air as their
lungs can contain with ease, and to expel it with vehemence in uttering those
sounds which require an emphatical pronunciation, and to read aloud with the
exertion they can command; let all the consonant sounds be expressed with a
full impulse of the breath, and a forcible action of the organs employed in
forming them; and all the vowel sounds have a full and bold utterance.

These reasons, and to inspire youth with noble sentiments, just expression, to
ease the teacher, and to render a book cheap and convenient for schools, as
well as private persons who have neither time nor opportunity to peruse the
works of those celebrated authors from whence this Collection is made, was the
cause of the following compilation.

And as speeches in both houses of parliament, pleadings at the bar,
instructions in the pulpit, and commercial correspondence, are delivered and
carried on in the English Language; the clothing our thoughts with proper
expressions, and conveying our ideas, either in writing or speaking, agreeably,
cannot fail of making an impression upon the hearer or reader. For, a man's
knowledge is of little use to the world, when he is not able to convey it
properly to others; which is the case of many who are endowed with excellent
parts, but are either afraid or ashamed of writing, or speaking in public,
being conscious of their own deficiency of expressing themselves in proper
terms.

In order to remedy these defects, and to ease the teacher, I would advise,
that several young gentlemen read in a class, each a sentence in this book, (it
being divided into small portions for that purpose) as often as convenient: and
let him who reads best, be advanced to the head, or have some pecuniary reward;
and every inferior one according to his merit: this will create emulation among
them, and facilitate their improvement much more than threats or corrections,
which stupifies and intimidates them, and often ends in contempt of their
teachers, and learning in general. This will draw forth those latent abilities,
which otherwise might lie dormant for ever.

It may not be improper for the teacher, or some good reader; to read a
sentence or two first, that the learners may gain the proper emphasis, and read
without that monotony so painful to a good ear: for they will improve more by
imitating a good reader, than any rules that can be laid down to them. When
they come to read gracefully, let them stand up in the school and read aloud,
in order to take off that bashfulness generally attending those who are called
upon either to read or speak in public.

The next thing I would recommend, is the English Grammar, (the best I know of
is Buchanan's Syntax) the knowledge of which is absolutely necessary, as it is
the solid foundation upon which all other science rests. After they have run
over the rules of syntax, the teacher may dictate to them one or more sentences
in false English, which they may correct by their grammar rules, and also find
out the various significations of each word in the dictionary; by which means
they will soon acquire a copious vocabulary, and become acquainted not with
words only, but with things themselves. Let them get those sentences by heart
to speak extempore: which will, in some measure, be delivering their own
compositions, and may be repeated as often as convenient. This will soon give
the young gentlemen an idea of the force, elegance, and beauty of the English
language.

The next thing I would gladly recommend, is that of letter-writing, a branch
of education, which seems to me of the utmost utility, and in which most of our
youth are deficient at their leaving school; being suffered to form their own
style by chance, or imitate the first wretched model that falls in their way,
before they know what is faulty, or can relish the beauties of a just
simplicity.

For their improvement in this particular, the teacher may cause every young
gentleman to have a slate or paper before him, on Saturdays, and then dictate a
letter to them, either of his own composition, or taken out of some book, and
turn it into false English, to exercise them in the grammar rules if he thinks
proper, which they should all write down, and then correct and transcribe it
fairly in their books.

After the young gentlemen have been accustomed to this some time, a supposed
correspondence may be fixed between every two of them, and write to one another
under the inspection of the teacher, who may correct and show their faults when
he sees occasion; by such a method he will soon find them improve in epistolary
writing. The same may be observed with regard to young ladies, who are very
often deficient, not only in orthography, but every other part of grammar.

If something similar to this method be pursued, it will soon reflect honor on
the teacher, give the highest satisfaction to judicious parents, and entail
upon the scholar a pleasing and lasting advantage.

THE EDITOR.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN AND LADY's MONITOR, AND ENGLISH TEACHER's ASSISTANT.
Pursuit of Knowledge recommended to Youth.
1. I AM very much concerned when I see young gentlemen of fortune and quality
so wholly set upon pleasure and diversions, that they neglect all those
improvements in wisdom and knowledge which may make them easy to themselves and
useful to the world. The greatest part of our British youth lose their figure,
and grow out of fashion, by that time they are five and twenty.

2. As soon as the natural gaiety and amiableness of the young man wears off,
they have nothing left to recommend them, but lie by the rest of their lives,
among the lumber and refuse of the species.

It sometimes happens indeed, that for want of ^plying themselves in due time
to the pursuits of knowledge, they take up a book in their declining years, and
grow very hopeful scholars by that time they are threescore. I must therefore
earnestly press my readers, who are in the flower of their youth, to labor at
those accomplishments which may set off their persons when their bloom is gone,
and to lay in timely provisions for manhood and old age. In short, I would
advise the youth of fifteen to be dressing up every day the man of fifty; or to
consider how to make himself venerable at threescore.

3. Young men, who are naturally ambitious, would do well to observe how the
greatest men of antiquity made it their ambition to excel all their
cotemporaries in knowledge. Julius Caesar and Alexander, the most celebrated
instances of human greatness, took a particular care to distinguish themselves
by their skill in the arts and sciences. We have still extant, several remains
of the former, which justify the character given of him by the learned men of
his own age.

4. As for the latter, it is a known saying of his, that he was more obliged to
Aristotle, who had instructed him, than to Philip, who had given him life and
empire. There is a letter of his recorded by Plutarch and Aulus Gellius, which
he wrote to Aristotle, upon hearing that he had published those lectures he had
given him in private. This letter was written in the following words, at a time
when he was in the height of his Persian conquests:

5. Alexander to Aristotle, Greeting.

YOU have not done well to publish your books of select knowledge; for what is
there now in which I can surpass others, if those things which I have been
instructed in are communicated to every body? For my own part I declare to you,
I would rather excel others in knowledge than power. Farewell.

6. We see by this letter, that the love of conquest was but the second
ambition in Alexander's soul. Knowledge is indeed that, which, next to virtue,
truly and essentially raises one man above another. It finishes one half of the
human soul. It makes being pleasant to us, fills the mind with entertaining
views, and administers to it a perpetual series of gratifications.

It gives ease to solitude, and graceful^ess to retirement. It fills a public
station with suitable abilities, and adds a luster to those who are in the
posssession of them.

7. Learning, by which I mean all useful knowledge, whether speculative or
practical, is in popular and mixed governments the natural source of wealth and
honor. If we look into most of the reigns from the conquest, we shall find,
that the favorites of each reign have been those who have raised themselves.
The greatest men are generally the growth of that particular age in which they
flourish.

8. A superior capacity for business, and a more extensive knowledge, are the
steps by which a new man often mounts to favor, and outshines the rest of his
cotemporaries. But when men are actually born to titles, it is almost
impossible that they should fail of receiving an additional greatness, if they
take care to accomplish themselves for it.

9. The story of Solomon's choice, does not only instruct us in that point of
history, but furnishes out a very fine moral to us, namely, that he who applies
his heart to wisdom, does at the same time take the most proper method for
gaining long life, riches and reputation, which are very often not only the
rewards, but the effects of wisdom.

10. As it is very suitable to my present subject, I shall first of all quote
this passage in the words of sacred writ, and afterward mention an allegory,
in which this whole passage is represented by a famous French Poet; not
questioning but it will be very pleasing to such of my readers as have a taste
of fine writing.

11. In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said,
"Ask what I shall give thee." And Solomon said, Thou have showed unto thy
servant David, my father, great mercy, according as he walked before thee in
truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee, and thou
have kept for him this great kindness, that thou have given him a son to sit on
his throne, as it is this day. And now, O Lord my God, thou have made thy
servant King instead of David my father; and I am but a little child: I know
not how to go out or come in.

12. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people,
that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so
great a people? And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this
thing. And God said unto him, because thou have asked this thing, and have not
asked for thyself long life, neither has asked riches for thyself, nor have
asked the life of thine enemies, but has asked for thyself understanding to
discern judgment: behold I have done according to thy words, so I have given
thee a wise and understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before
thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

13. And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and
honor, so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy
days. And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments
as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days. And Solomon awoke,
and behold it was a dream. --

14. The French poet has shadowed this story in an allegory, of which he seems
to have taken the hint from the fable of the three goddesses appearing to
Paris, or rather from the vision of Hercules, recorded by Xenophon, where
Pleasure and Virtue are represented as real persons making their court to the
hero with all their several charms and allurements.

15. Health, wealth, victory and honor are introduced successively in their
proper emblems and characters, each of them spreading her temptations, and
recommending herself to the young monarch's choice. Wisdom enters last, and so
captivates him with her appearance, that he gives himself up to her. Upon which
she informs him, that those who appeared before her were nothing but her
equipage, and that since he had placed his heart upon wisdom, health, wealth,
victory and honor should always wait on her as her handmaids.

Directions how to spend our Time.
1. WE all of us complain of the shortness of time, says Seneca, and yet have
much more than we know what to do with. Our lives, says he, are spent either in
doing nothing at all, or in doing nothing to the purpose, or in doing nothing
that we ought to do: we are always complaining our days are few, and acting as
though there would be no end of them. That noble philosopher has described our
inconsistency with ourselves in this particular, by all those various turns of
expression and thought which are peculiar to his writings.

2. I often consider mankind as wholly inconsistent with itself in a point that
bears some affinity to the former. Though we seem grieved at the shortness of
life in general, we are wishing every period of it at an end. The minor longs
to be at age, then to be a man of business, then to make up an estate, then to
arrive at honors, then to retire. Thus, although the whole of life is allowed
by every one to be short, the several divisions of it appear long and tedious.

3. We are for lengthening our span in general, but would fain contract the
parts of which it is composed. The usurer would be very well satisfied to have
all the time annihilated that lies between the present moment and next quarter
day. The politician would be contented to lose three years in his life, could
he place things in the posture which he fancies they will stand in after such a
revolution of time.

4. The lover would be glad to strike out of his existence all the moments that
are to pass away before the happy meeting. Thus, as far as our time runs, we
should be very glad in most parts of our lives, that it ran much faster than it
does. Several hours of the day hang upon our hands, nay, we wish away whole
years; and travel through time as through a country filled with many wild and
empty wastes, which we would fain hurry over, that we may arrive at those
several little settlements or imaginary points of rest, which are dispersed up
and down in it.

5. If we may divide the life of most men into twenty parts, we shall find,
that at least nineteen of them are mere gaps and chasms, which are neither
filled with pleasure nor business. I do not however include in this calculation
the life of those men who are in a perpetual hurry of affairs, but of those
only who are not always engaged in scenes of action; and I hope I shall not do
an unacceptable piece of service to these persons, if I point out to them
certain methods for the filling up their empty spaces of life. The methods I
shall propose to them are as follow:

6. The first is the exercise of virtue, in the most general acceptance of the
word. That particular scheme which comprehends the social virtues, may give
employment to the most industrious temper, and find a man in business more than
the most active station of life. To advise the ignorant, relieve the needy,
comfort the afflicted, are duties that fall in our way almost every day of our
lives.

7. A man has frequent opportunities of mitigating the fierceness of a party;
of doing justice to the character of a deserving man; of softening the envious,
quieting the angry, and rectifying the prejudiced; which are all of them
employments suited to a reasonable nature, and bring great satisfaction to the
person who can busy himself in them with discretion.

8. There is another kind of virtue that may find employment for those retired
hours in which we are altogether left to ourselves and destitute of company and
conversation; I mean that intercourse and communication which every reasonable
creature ought to maintain with the great Author of his being.

9. The man who lives under an habitual sense of the divine presence, keeps up
a perpetual cheerfulness of temper, and enjoys every moment the satisfaction of
thinking himself in company with his dearest and best of friends. The time
never lies heavy upon him; it is impossible for him to be alone.

10. His thoughts and passions are the most busied at such hours when those of
other men are the most unactive: he no sooner steps out of the world but his
heart burns with devotion, swells with hope, and triumphs in the consciousness
of that presence which every where surrounds him; or, on the contrary, pours
out its fears, its sorrows, its apprehensions, to the great supporter of its
existence.

11. I have here only considered the necessity of a man's being virtuous, that
he may have something to do; but if we consider further, that the exercise of
virtue is not only an amusement for the time it lasts, but that its influence
extends to those parts of our existence which lie beyond the grave, and that
our whole eternity is to take its color from those hours which we here employ
in virtue or in vice, the argument redoubles upon us, for putting in practice
this method of passing away our time.

12. When a man has but a little stock to improve, and has opportunities of
turning it all to good account, what shall we think of him if he suffers
nineteen parts of it to lie dead, and perhaps employs even the twentieth to his
ruin or disadvantage? But because the mind cannot be always in its fervor nor
strained up to a pitch of virtue, it is necessary to find out proper
employments for it in its relaxations.

13. The next method therefore that I would propose to fill up our time, should
be useful and innocent diversion. I must confess I think it is below reasonable
creatures to be altogether conversant in such diversions as are merely
innocent, and having nothing else to recommend them but that there is no hurt
in them.

14. Whether any kind of gaming has even thus much to say for itself, I shall
not determine; but I think it is very wonderful to see persons of the best
sense, passing away a dozen hours together in shuffling and dividing a pack of
cards, with no other conversation but what is made up of a few game phrases,
and no other ideas but those of black or red spots ranged together in different
figures. Would not a man laugh to hear any one of his species complaining that
life is short?

15. The stage might be made a perpetual source of the most noble and useful
entertainments, were it under proper regulations.

But the mind never unbends itself so agreeably as in the conversation of a
well-chosen friend. There is indeed no blessing of life that is any way
comparable to the enjoyment of a discreet and virtuous friend. It eases and
unloads the mind, clears and improves the understanding, engenders thoughts and
knowledge, animates virtue and good resolution, sooths and allays the passions,
and finds employment for most of the vacant hours of life.

16. Next to such an intimacy with a particular person, one would endeavor
after a more general conversation with such as are able to entertain and
improve those with whom they converse, which are qualifications that seldom go
asunder.

There are many other useful amusements of life, which one would endeavor to
multiply, that one might on all occasions have recourse to something rather
than suffer the mind to lie idle, or run adrift with any passion that chances
to rise in it.

17. A man that has a taste in music, painting, or architecture, is like one
that has another sense when compared with such as have no relish of those arts.
The florist, the planter, the gardener, the husbandman, when they are only as
accomplishments to the man of fortune, are great reliefs to a country life, and
many ways useful to those who are possessed of them.

SPECTATOR, No. 93. 18. I WAS yesterday busy in comparing together the industry
of man with that of other creatures; in which I could not but observe, that
notwithstanding we are obliged by duty to keep ourselves in constant employ,
after the same manner as inferior animals are prompted to it by instinct, we
fall very short of them in this particular.

19. We are here the more inexcusable, because there is a greater variety of
business to which we may apply ourselves. Reason opens to us a large field of
affairs, which other creatures are not capable of. Beasts of prey, and I
believe all other kinds, in their natural state of being, divide their time
between action and rest. They are always at work or asleep. In short, their
awaking hours are wholly taken up in seeking after their food, or in consuming
it.

20. The human species only, to the great reproach of our natures, are filled
with complaints, That the day hangs heavy on them, that they do not know what
to do with themselves, that they are at a loss how to pass away their time,
with many of the like shameful murmurs, which we often find in the mouth of
those who are styled reasonable beings.

21. How monstrous are such expressions among creatures, who have the labors
of the mind, as well as those of the body, to furnish them with proper
employments; who, besides the business of their proper callings and
professions, can apply themselves to the duties of religion, to meditation, to
the reading of useful books, to discourse; in a word, who may exercise
themselves in the unbounded pursuits of knowledge and virtue, and every hour of
their lives make themselves wiser or better than they were before.

22. After having been taken up for some time in this course of thought, I
diverted myself with a book, according to my usual custom, in order to unbend
my mind before I went to sleep. The book I made use of on this occasion was
Lucian, where I amused my thoughts for about an hour among the dialogues of the
dead, which in all probability produced the following dream.

23. I was conveyed, methought, into the entrance of the infernal regions,
where I saw Rhadamanthus, one of the judges of the dead, seated in his
tribunal. On his left hand stood the keeper of Erebus, on his right the keeper
of Elysium. I was told he sat upon women that day, there being several of the
sex lately arrived, who had not yet their mansions assigned them.

24. I was surprised to hear him ask every one of them the same question,
namely, What they had been doing? Upon this question being proposed to the
whole assembly, they stared upon one another, as no^ knowing what to answer. He
then interrogated each of them separately. Madam, says he, to the first of
them, you have been upon the earth about fifty years: What have you been doing
there all this while? Doing, says she, really I do not know what I have been
doing: I desire I may have time given me to recollect.

25. After about half an hour's pause, she told him, that she had been playing
at crimp; upon which Rhadamanthus beckoned to the keeper on his left hand, to
take her into custody. And you, Madam, says the judge, that look with such a
soft and languishing air; I think you set out for this place in your nine and
twentieth year; what have you been doing all this while? I had a great deal of
business on my hands, says she, being taken up the first twelve years of my
life, in dressing a jointed baby, and all the remaining part of it in reading
plays and romances.

26. Very well, says he, you have employed your time to good purpose. Away with
her. The next was a plain country woman: Well, mistress, says Rhadamanthus, and
what have you been doing? An't please your worship, says she, I did not live
quite forty years; and in that time brought my husband seven daughters, made
him nine thousand cheeses, and left my eldest girl with him, to look after his
house in my absence, and who, I may venture to say, is as pretty a housewife as
any in the country.

27. Rhadamanthus smiled at the simplicity of the good woman, and ordered the
keeper of Elysium to take her into his care. And you, fair lady, says he, what
have you been doing these five and thirty years? I have been doing no hurt, I
assure you, sir, said she. That is well, says he, but what good have you been
doing? The lady was in great confusion at this question, and not knowing what
to answer, the two keepers leaped out to seize her at the same time; the one
took her by the hand to convey her to Elysium, the other caught hold of her to
carry her away to Erebus.

28. But Rhadamanthus observing an ingenuous modesty in her countenance and
behavior, bid them both let her loose, and set her aside for a re-examination
when he was more at leisure. An old woman, of a proud and sour look, presented
herself next at the bar, and being asked what she had been doing? Truly, says
she, I lived three score and ten years in a very wicked world, and was so angry
at the behavior of a parcel of young flirts, that I past most of my last years
in condemning the follies of the times.

29. I was every day blaming the silly conduct of people about me, in order to
deter those I conversed with from falling into the like errors and
miscarriages. Very well, says Rhadamanthus, but did you keep the same watchful
eye over your own actions? Why truly, says she, I was so taken up with
publishing the faults of others, that I had no time to consider my own.

30. Madam, says Rhadamanthus, be pleased to file off to the left, and make
room for the venerable matron that stands behind you. Old gentlewoman, says he,
I think you are four score? You have heard the question, what have you been
doing so long in the world? Ah! sir, says she, I have been doing what I should
not have done, but I had made a firm resolution to have changed my life, if I
had not been snatched off by an untimely end.

31. Madam, says he, you will please to follow your leader; and spying another
of the same age, interrogated her in the same form. To which the matron
replied, I have been the wife of a husband who was as dear to me in his old age
as in his youth. I have been a mother, and very happy in my children, whom I
endeavored to bring up in every thing that is good.

32. My eldest son is blessed by the poor, and beloved by every one that knows
him. I lived within my own family, and left it much more wealthy than I found
it. Rhadamanthus, who knew the value of the old lady, smiled upon her in such a
manner, that the keeper of Elysium, who knew his office, reached out his hand
to her. He no sooner touched her but her wrinkles vanished, her eyes sparkled,
her cheeks glowed with blushes, and she appeared in full bloom and beauty.

33. A young woman observing that this officer, who conducted the happy to
Elysium, was so great a beautifier, longed to be in his hands, so that pressing
through the crowd, she was the next that appeared at the bar. And being asked
what she had been doing the five and twenty years that she had passed in the
world, I have endeavored, says she, ever since I came to years of discretion,
to make myself lovely, and gain admirers.

34. In order to it I pass my time in bottling up May-dew, inventing
white-washes, mixing colors, cutting out patches, consulting my glass, suiting
my complexion, tearing off my tucker, sinking my stays. -- Rhadamanthus,
without hearing her out, gave the sign to take her off. Upon the approach of
the keeper of Erebus her color faded, her face was puckered up with wrinkles,
and her whole person lost in deformity.

35. I was then surprised with a distant sound of a whole troop of females that
came forward laughing, singing, and dancing. I was very desirous to know the
reception they would meet with, and withal was very apprehensive, that
Rhadamanthus would spoil their mirth: but at their nearer approach the noise
grew so very great that it awakened me.

36. Employment of time is a subject that, from its importance, deserves your
best attention. Most young gentlemen have a great deal of time before them, and
one hour well employed, in the early part of life, is more valuable and will be
of greater use to you, than perhaps four and twenty, some years to come.

37. Whatever time you can steal from company and from the study of the world
(I say company, for a knowledge of life is best learned in various companies)
employ it in serious reading. Take up some valuable book, and continue the
reading of that book till you have got through it; never burden your mind with
more than one thing at a time: and in reading this book don't run it over
superficially, but read every passage twice over, at least do not pass on to a
second till you thoroughly understand the first, nor quit the book till you are
master of the subject; for unless you do this, you may read it through, and not
remember the contents of it for a week.

38. The books I would particularly recommend, are Cardinal Retz's maxims,
Rochefoucault's moral reflections, Bruyere's characters, Fontenelle's plurality
of worlds, Sir Josiah Child on trade, Bolingbroke's works; for style, his
Remarks on the History of England, under the name of Sir John Oldcastle;
Puffendorff's Jus Gentium, and Grotius de Jure Belli et Pacis: the last two are
well translated by Barbeyrac. For occasional half hours or less, read the best
works of invention, wit and humor; but never waste your minutes on trifling
authors, either ancient or modern.

39. Any business you may have to transact, should be done the first
opportunity, and finished, if possible, without interruption; for by deferring
it, we may probably finish it too late, or execute it indifferently. Now,
business of any kind should never be done by halves, but every part of it
should be well attended to: for he that does business ill, had better not do it
at all. And, in any point which discretion bids you pursue, and which has a
manifest utility to recommend it, let not difficulties deter you; rather let
them animate your industry. If one method fails, try a second and a third. Be
active, persevere, and you will certainly conquer.

40. Never indulge a lazy disposition: there are few things but are attended
with some difficulties, and if you are frightened at those difficulties, you
will not complete any thing. Indolent minds prefer ignorance to trouble; they
look upon most things as impossible, because perhaps they are difficult Even an
hour's attention is too laborious for them, and they would rather content
themselves with the first view of things than take the trouble to look any
farther into them. Thus, when they come to talk upon subjects to those who have
studied them, they betray an unpardonable ignorance, and lay themselves open to
answers that confuse them. Be careful then, that you do not get the appellation
of indolent; and, if possible, avoid the character of frivolous. For,

41. The frivolous mind is busied always upon nothing. It mistakes trifling
objects for important ones, and spends that time upon little matters, that
should only be bestowed upon great ones. Knick-knacks, butterflies, shells, and
such like, engross the attention of the frivolous man, and fill up all his
time. He studies the dress and not the characters of men, and his subjects of
conversation are no other than the weather, his own domestic affairs, his
servants, his method of managing his family, the little anecdotes of the
neighborhood, and the fiddle-faddle stories of the day; void of information,
void of improvement. These he relates with emphasis, as interesting matters; in
short he is a male gossip. I appeal to your own feelings now, whether such
things do not lessen a man, in the opinion of his acquaintance, and instead of
attracting esteem, create disgust?

Modesty.
MODESTY is the citadel of beauty and virtue. The first of all virtues is
innocence; the second is modesty.

1. Modesty is both in its source, and in its consequence, a very great
happiness to the fair possessor of it; it arises from a fear of dishonor, and
a good conscience, and is followed immediately, upon its first appearance, with
the reward of honor and esteem, paid by all those who discover it in any body
living.

2. It is indeed, a virtue in a woman (that might otherwise be very
disagreeable to one) so exquisitely delicate, that it excites in any beholder,
of a generous and manly disposition, almost all the passions, that he would be
apt to conceive for the mistress of his heart, in variety of circumstances.

3. A woman that is modest creates in us an awe in her company, a wish for her
welfare, a joy in her being actually happy, a sore and painful sorrow if
distress should come upon her, a ready and willing heart to give her
consolation, and a compassionate temper toward her, in every little accident
of life she undergoes; and, to sum up all in one word, it causes such a kind of
angellical love, even to a stranger, as good-natured brothers and sisters
usually bear toward one another.

4. It adds wonderfully to the make of a face: and I have seen a pretty well
turned forehead, fine set eyes, and, what your poets call, a row of pearl set
in coral, shown by a pretty expansion of two velvet lips that covered them
(that would have tempted any sober man living of my own age, to have been a
little loose in his thoughts, and to have enjoyed a painful pleasure amidst his
impotency) lose all their virtue, all their force and efficacy, by having an
ugly cast of boldness very discernibly spread out at large over all those
alluring features.

5. At the same time modesty will fill up the wrinkles of old age with glory;
make sixty blush itself into sixteen; and help a green-sick girl to defeat the
satyr^ of a false waggish lover, who might compare her color, when she looked
like a ghost, to the blowing of the rose-bud, by blushing herself into a bloom
of beauty; and might make what he meant a reflection, a real compliment, at any
hour of the day, in spite of his teeth. It has a prevailing power with me,
whenever I find it in the sex.

6. I, who have the common fault of old men, to be very sour and humoursome,
when I drink my water gruel in a morning, fell into a more than ordinary pet
with a maid, whom I call my nurse, from a constant tenderness, that I have
observed her to exercise toward me beyond all my other servants; I perceived
her flush and glow in the face, in a manner which I could plainly discern
proceeded not from anger or resentment of my correction, but from a
good-natured regret, upon a fear that she had offended her grave old master.

7. I was so heartily pleased, that I eased her of the honest trouble she
underwent inwardly for my sake; and, giving her half a crown, I told her it was
a forfeit due to her because I was out of humor with her without any reason at
all. And as she is so gentlehearted, I have diligently avoided giving her one
harsh word ever since; and I find my own reward in it; for not being so testy
as I used, has made me much haler and stronger than I was before.

8. The pretty, and witty, and virtuous Simplicia, was, the other day, visiting
with an old aunt of here is, that I verily believed has read the Atalantis: she
took a story out there, and dressed up an old honest neighbor in the
second-hand clothes of scandal. The young creature hid her face with her fan at
every burst and peal of laughter, and blushed for her guilty parent; by which
she atoned, methought, for every scandal that ran round the beautiful circle.

9. As I was going home to bed that evening, I could not help thinking of her
all the way I went. I represented her to myself as shedding holy blood every
time she blushed, and as being a martyr in the cause of virtue. And afterward,
when I was putting on my nightcap, I could not drive the thought out of my
head, but that I was young enough to have a child by her; and that it would be
an addition to the reputation I have in the study of wisdom to marry to so much
youth and modesty, even in my old age.

10. I know there have not been wanting many wicked objections against this
virtue; one is grown insufferably common, The fellow blushes, he is guilty. I
should say rather, He blushes, therefore he is innocent. I believe the same
man, that first had that wicked imagination of a blush being the sign of guilt,
represented goodnature to be folly; and that he himself, was the most inhuman
and impudent wretch alive.

11. The author of Cato, who is known to be one of the most modest, and most
ingenious persons of the age we now live in, has given this virtue a delicate
name, in the tragedy of Cato, where the character of Marcia is first opened to
us. I would have all ladies who have a mind to be thought well-bred, to think
seriously on this virtue, which he so beautifully calls the sanctity of manners.

12. Modesty is a polite accomplishment, and generally an attendant upon merit.
It is engaging to the highest degree, and wins the hearts of all our
acquaintance. On the contrary, none are more disgustful in company than the
impudent and presuming.

The man who is, on all occasions, commending and speaking well of himself, we
naturally dislike. On the other hand, he who studies to conceal his own
deserts, who does justice to the merit of others, who talks but little of
himself, and that with modesty makes a favorable impression on the persons he
is conversing with, captivates their minds, and gains their esteem.

13. Modesty, however, widely differs from an awkward bashfulness, which is as
much to be condemned as the other is to be applauded. To appear simple is as
ill-bred as to be impudent. A young man ought to be able to come into a room
and address the company without the least embarrassment. To be out of
countenance when spoken to, and not to have an answer ready, is ridiculous to
the last degree.

14. An awkward country fellow, when he comes into company better than himself,
is exceedingly disconcerted. He knows not what to do with his hands or his hat,
but either puts one of them in his pocket, and dangles the other by his side;
or perhaps twirls his hat on his fingers, or fumbles with the button. If spoken
to he is in a much worse situation, he answers with the utmost difficulty, and
nearly stammers; whereas a gentleman, who is acquainted with life, enters a
room with gracefulness and a modest assurance addresses even persons he does
not know, in an easy and natural manner, and without the least embarrassment.

15. This is the characteristic of good-breeding, a very necessary knowledge in
our intercourse with men: for one of inferior parts, with the behavior of a
gentleman, is frequently better received than a man of sense, with the address
and manners of a clown. Ignorance and vice are the only things we need be
ashamed of; steer clear of these, and you may go into any company you will: not
that I would have a young man throw off all dread of appearing abroad, as a
fear of offending, or being disesteemed, will make him preserve a proper
decorum.

16. Some persons, from experiencing of false modesty, have run into the other
extreme, and acquired the character of impudent. This is as great a fault as
the other. A well-bred man keeps himself within in the two, and steers the
middle way. He is easy and firm in every company; is modest, but not bashful;
steady, but not impudent. He copies the manners of the better people, and
conforms to their customs with ease and attention.

17. Till we can present ourselves in all companies with coolness and
unconcern, we can never present ourselves well: nor will a man ever be supposed
to have kept good company, or ever be acceptable in such Company, if he cannot
appear there easy and unembarrassed. A modest assurance, in every part of life,
is the most advantageous qualification we can possibly acquire.

18. Instead of becoming insolent, a man of sense, under a consciousness of
merit, is more modest. He behaves himself indeed with firmness, but without the
least presumption. The man who is ignorant of his own merit, is no less a fool
than he who is constantly displaying it. A man of understanding avails himself
of his abilities, but never boasts of them; whereas the timid and bashful can
never push himself in life, be his merit as great as it will; he will be always
kept behind by the forward and the bustling.

19. A man of abilities, and acquainted with life, will stand as firm in
defense of his own rights, and pursue his plans as steadily and unmoved as the
most impudent man alive; but then he does it with a seeming modesty. Thus,
manner is every thing; what is impudence in one is proper assurance only in
another; for firmness is commendable, but an overbearing conduct is disgustful.

20. Forwardness being the very reverse of modesty, follow rather than lead the
company; that is, join in discourse upon their subjects rather than start one
of your own; if you have parts, you will have opportunities enough of showing
them on every topic of conversation, and if you have none, it is better to
expose yourself upon a subject of other people's, than on one of your own.

21. But be particularly careful not to speak of yourself, if you can help it.
An impudent fellow lugs in himself abruptly upon all occasions, and is ever the
hero of his own story. Others will color their arrogance with, It may seem
strange indeed, that I should talk in this manner of myself; it is what I by no
means like, and should never do, if I had not been cruelly and unjustly
accused; but when my character is attacked, it is a justice I owe to myself to
defend it. This veil is too thin not to be seen through on the first inspection.

22. Others again, with more art, will modestly boast of all the principal
virtues, by calling these virtues weaknesses, and saying, they are so
unfortunate as to fall into those weaknesses. "I cannot see persons suffer,"
says one of this cast, "without relieving them; though my circumstances are
very unable to afford it." -- I cannot avoid speaking truth; though it is often
very imprudent; and so on.

23. this angling for praise is so prevailing a principle, that it frequently
stoops to the lowest objects. Men will often boast of doing that which, if
true, would be rather a disgrace to them than otherwise. One man affirms that
he rode twenty miles within the hour: it is probably a lie; but suppose he did,
what then? He had a good horse under him, and is a good jockey. Another swears
he has often at a sitting, drank five or six bottles to his own share. Out of
respect to him, I will believe him a liar; for I would not wish to think him a
beast.

24. These and many more are the follies of idle people, which, while they
think they procure them esteem, in reality make them despised.

To avoid this contempt, therefore, never speak of yourself at all, unless
necessity obliges you; and even then, take care to do it in such a manner, that
it may not be construed into fishing for applause. Whatever perfections you may
have, be assured, people will find them out; but whether they do or not, nobody
will take them upon your own word. The less you say of yourself, the more the
world will give you credit for; and the more you say the less they will believe
you.

Affectation.
1. A LATE conversation which I fell into, gave me an opportunity of observing
a great deal of beauty in a very handsome woman, and as much wit in an
ingenious man, turned into deformity in the one, and absurdity in the other, by
the mere force of affectation. The fair one had something in her person upon
which her thoughts were fixed, that she attempted to show to advantage in every
look, word, and gesture.

2. The gentleman was as diligent to do justice to his fine parts, as the lady
to her beauteous form: you might see his imagination on the stretch to find out
something uncommon, and what they call bright, to entertain her; while she
writhed herself into as many different postures to engage him. When she
laughed, her lips were to sever at a greater distance than ordinary to show her
teeth.

3. Her fan was to point to somewhat at a distance, that in the reach she may
discover the roundness of her arm; then she is utterly mistaken in what she
saw, falls back, smiles at her own folly, and is so wholly discomposed, that
her tucker is to be adjusted, her bosom exposed, and the whole woman put into
new airs and graces.

4. While she was doing all this, the gallant had time to think of something
very pleasant to say next to her, or make some unkind observation on some other
lady to feed her vanity These unhappy effects of affectation naturally led me
to look into that strange state of mind, which ^o generally discolours the
behavior of most people we met with.

5. The learned Dr. Burnet, in his Theory of the Earth, takes occasion to
observe, That every thought is attended with consciousness and
representativeness; the mind has nothing presented to it, but what is
immediately followed by a reflection of conscience, which tells you whether
that which was so presented is graceful or unbecoming.

6. This act of the mind discovers itself in the gesture, by a proper behavior
in those whose consciousness goes no farther than to direct them in the just
progress of their present thought or action; but betrays an interruption in
every second thought, when the consciousness is employed in too fondly
approving a man's own conceptions; which sort of consciousness is what we call
affectation.

7. As the love of praise is implanted in our bosoms as a strong incentive to
worthy actions, it is a very difficult task to get above a desire of it for
things that should be wholly indifferent. Women, whose hearts are fixed upon
the pleasure they have in the consciousness that they are the objects of love
and admiration, are ever changing the air of their countenances, and altering
the attitude of their bodies, to strike the hearts of their beholders with a
new sense of their beauty.

8. The dressing part of our sex, whose minds are the same with the sillier
part of the other, are exactly in the like uneasy condition to be regarded for
a well-tied cravat, an hat cocked with an unusual briskness, a very well-chosen
coat, or other instances of merit, which they are impatient to see unobserved.

9. But this apparent affectation, arising from an ill governed consciousness,
is not so much to be wondered at in such loose and trivial minds as these. But
when you see it reign in characters of worth and distinction, it is what you
cannot but lament, not without some indigna^ion. It creeps into the heart of
the wise man, as well as that of the coxcomb.

10. When you see a man of sense look about for applause, and discover an
itching inclination to be commended; lay traps for a little incense, even from
those whose opinion he values in nothing but his own favor; who is safe
against this weakness? or who knows whether he is guilty of it or not? The best
way to get clear of such a light fondness for applause, is, to take all
possible care to throw off the love of it upon occasions that are not in
themselves laudable; but, as it appears, we hope for no praise from them.

11. Of this nature are all graces in men's persons, dress, and bodily
deportment; which will naturally be winning and attractive if we think not of
them, but lose their force in proportion to our endeavor to make them such.

When our consciousness turns upon the main design of life, and our thoughts
are employed upon the chief purpose either in business or pleasure, we should
never betray an affectation, for we cannot be guilty of it: but when we give
the passion for praise an unbridled liberty, our pleasure in little perfections
robs us of what is due to us for great virtues and worthy qualities.

12. How many excellent speeches and honest actions are lost, for want of being
indifferent where we ought! Men are oppressed with regard to their way of
speaking and acting, instead of having their thoughts bent upon what they
should do or say; and by that means b^ry a capacity for great things, by their
fear of sailing in indifferent things. This, perhaps, cannot be called
affectation; but it has some tincture of it, at least so far, as that their
fear of erring in a thing of no consequence argues they would be too much
pleased in performing it.

13. It is only from a thorough disregard to himself in such particulars, that
a man can act with a laudable sufficiency; his heart is fixed upon one point in
view; and he commits no errors, because he thinks nothing an error but what
deviates from that intention.

The wild havoc affectation makes in that part of the world which should be
most polite, is visible wherever we turn our eyes: it pushes men not only into
impertinences in conversation, but also in their premeditated speeches.

14. At the bar it torments the bench, whose business it is to cut off all
superfluities in what is spoken before it by the practitioner; as well as
several little pieces of injustice which arise from the law itself. I have seen
it make a man run from the purpose before a judge, who was, when at the bar
himself, so close and logical a pleader, that with all the pomp of eloquence in
his power, he never spoke a word too much.

15. It might be born even here, but it often ascends the pulpit itself; and
the declaimer, in that sacred place, is frequently so impertinently witty,
speaks of the last day itself with so many quaint phrases, that there is no man
who understands raillery, but must resolve to sin no more: nay, you may behold
him sometimes in prayer, for a proper delivery of the great truths he is to
utter, humble himself with so very well turned phrase, and mention his own
unworthiness in a way so very becoming, that the air of the pretty gentleman is
preserved, under the lowliness of the preacher.

16. I shall end this with a short letter I wrote the other day to a very witty
man, overrun with the fault I am speaking of.

DEAR SIR,
I Spent some time with you the other day, and must take the liberty of a
friend to tell you of the insufferable affectation you are guilty of in all you
say and do.

17. When I gave you a hint of it, you asked me whether a man is to be cold to
what his friends think of him? No; but praise is not to be the entertainment of
every moment: he that hopes for it must be able to suspend the possession of it
till proper periods of life, or death itself. If you would not rather be
commended than be praiseworthy, contemn little merits; and allow no man to be
so free with you, as to praise you to your face.

18. Your vanity by this means will want its food. At the same time your
passion for esteem will be more fully gratified; men will praise you in their
actions: where you now receive one compliment you will then receive twenty
civilities. Till then you will never have of either, further than,

SIR, Your humble servant.


SPECTATOR, Vol. I. No. 38. 19. NATURE does nothing in vain; the Creator of the
universe has appointed every thing to a certain use and purpose, and determined
it to a settled course and sphere of action, from which, if it in the least
deviates, it becomes unfit to answer those ends for which it was designed.

20. In like manner it is in the dispositions of society: the civil economy is
formed in a chain as well as the natural; and in either case the breach but of
one link puts the whole in some disorder. It is, I think, pretty plain, that
most of the absurdity and ridicule we meet with in the world, is generally
owing to the impertinent affectation of excelling in characters men are not fit
for, and for which nature never designed them.

21. Every man has one or more qualities which may make him useful both to
himself and others: Nature never fails of pointing them out, and while the
infant continues under her guardianship, she brings him on in his way, and then
offers herself for a guide (...) what remains of the journey; if he proceeds in
that course, he can hardly miscarry: Nature makes good her engagements; for as
she never promises what she is not able to perform, so she never fails of
performing what she promises.

22. But the misfortune is, men despise what they may be masters of, and affect
what they are not fit for; they reckon themselves already possessed of what
their genius inclines them to, and so bend all their ambition to excel in what
is out of their reach: thus they destroy the use of their natural talents, in
the same manner as covetous men do their quiet and repose; they can enjoy no
satisfaction in what they have, because of the absurd inclination they are
possessed with for what they have not.

23. Cleanthes had good sense, a great memory, and a constitution capable of
the closest application: in a word, there was no profession in which Cleanthes
might not have made a very good figure; but this will not satisfy him; he takes up
an unaccountable fondness for the character of a fine gentleman; all his
thoughts are bent upon this, instead of attending a dissection, frequenting the
courts of justice, or studying the fathers.

24. Cleanthes reads plays, dances, dresses, and spends his time in
drawing-rooms, instead of being a good lawyer, divine, or physician; Cleanthes
is a downright coxcomb, and will remain to all that knew him a contemptible
example of talents misapplied. It is to this affectation the world owes its
whole race of coxcombs: Nature in her whole drama never drew such a part: she
has sometimes made a fool, but a coxcomb is always of a man's own making, by
applying his talents otherwise than nature designed, who ever bears an high
resentment for being put out of her course, and never fails of taking revenge
on those that do so.

25. Opposing her tendency in the application of a man's parts, has the same
success as declining from her course in the production of vegetables (...) the
assistance of art and an hot bed, we may possibly extort an unwilling plant, or
an untimely sallad; but how weak, how tasteless, and insipid? Just as insipid
as the poetry of Valerio.

26. Valerio had an universal character, was genteel, had learning, thought
justly, spoke correctly; 'twas believed there was nothing in which Valerio did
not excel; and 'twas so far true, that there was but one; Valerio had no genius
for poetry, yet he was resolved to be a poet: he writes verses, and takes great
pains to convince the town, that Valerio is not that extraordinary person he
was taken for.

27. If men would be content to graft upon nature, and assist her operations,
what mighty effects might we expect? Tully would not stand so much alone in
oratory, Virgil in poetry, or Caesar in war. To build upon nature, is laying
the foundation upon a rock; every thing disposes itself into order as it were
of course, and the whole work is half done as soon as undertaken. Cicero's
genius inclined him to oratory, Virgil's to follow the train of the Muses; they
piously obeyed the admonition, and were rewarded.

28. Had Virgil attended the bar, his modest and ingenuous virtue would surely
have made but a very indifferent figure; and Tully's declamatory inclination
would have been as useless in poetry. Nature, if left to herself, leads us on
in the best course, but will do nothing by compulsion and constraint; and if we
are not satisfied to go her way, we are always the greatest sufferers by it.

29. Wherever nature designs a production, she always disposes seeds proper for
it, which are as absolutely necessary to the formation of any moral or
intellectual existence, as they are to the being and growth of plants; and I
know not by what fate and folly it is, that men are taught not to reckon him
equally absurd that will write verses in spite of nature, with that gardener
that should undertake to raise a jonq^il or tulip, without the help of their
respective seeds.

30. As there is no good or bad quality that does not affect both sexes, so it
is not to be imagined but the fair sex must have suffered by an affectation of
this nature, at least as much as the other: the ill effect of it is in none so
conspicuous as in the two opposite characters of Caelia and Iras; Caelia has
all the charms of person, together with an abundant sweetness of nature, but
wants wit, and has a very ill voice; Iras is ugly and ungenteel, but has wit
and good sense.

31. If Caelia would be silent, her beholders would adore her; if Iras would
talk, her hearers would admire her; but Caelia's tongue runs incessantly, while
Iras gives herself silent airs and soft langours; so that it is difficult to
persuade one's self that Caelia has beauty, and Iras wit; each neglects her own
excellence, and is ambitious of the other's character; Iras would be thought to
have as much beauty as Caelia, and Caelia as much wit as Iras.

32. The great misfortune of this affectation is, that men not only lose a good
quality, but also contract a bad one: they not only are unfit for what they
were designed, but they assign themselves to what they are not fit for; and
instead of making a very good figure one way, make a very ridiculous one
another.

33. If Semanthe would have been satisfied with her natural complexion, she
might still have been celebrated by the name of the olive beauty; but Semanthe
has taken up an affectation to white and red, and is now distinguished by the
character of the lady that paints so well.

34. In a word, could the world be reformed to the obedience of that famed
dictate, Follow nature, which the oracle of Delphos pronounced to Ci^ero when
he consulted what course of studies he should pursue, we should see almost
every man as eminent in his proper sphere as Tully was in his, and should in a
very short time find impertinence and affectation banished from among the
women, and coxcombs and false characters from among the men.

35. For my part, I could never consider this preposterous repugnancy to nature
any otherwise, than not only as the greatest folly, but also one of the most
heinous crimes, since it is a direct opposition to the disposition of
Providence, and (as Tully expresses it) like the sin of the giants, an actual
rebellion against heaven.

SPECTATOR, Vol. VI. No. 404. Good Humor and Nature.
1. A MAN advanced in years that thinks fit to look back upon his former life,
and calls that only life which was passed with satisfaction and enjoyment,
excluding all parts which were not pleasant to him, will find himself very
young, if not in his infancy. Sickness, ill-humour, and idleness, will have
robbed him of a great share of that space we ordinarily call our life.

2. It is therefore the duty of every man that would be true to himself, to
obtain, if possible, a disposition to be pleased, and place himself in a
constant aptitude for the satisfactions of his being. Instead of this, you
hardly see a man who is not uneasy in proportion to his advancement in the arts
of life.

3. An affected delicacy is the common improvement we meet with in those who
pretend to be refined above others: they do not aim at true pleasure
themselves, but turn their thoughts upon observing the false pleasures of other
men. Such people are valetudinarians in society, and they should no more come
into company than a sick man should come into the air.

4. If a man is too weak to bear what is a refreshment to men in health, he
must still keep his chamber. When any one in Sir Roger's company complains he
is out of order, he immediately calls for some posset drink for him; for which
reason that sort of people, who are ever bewailing their constitutions in other
places, are the chearfulest imaginable when he is present.

5. It is a wonderful thing that so many, and they not reckoned absurd, shall
entertain those with whom they converse, by giving them the history of their
pains and aches; and imagine such narrations their quota of the conversation.
This is of all other the meanest help to discourse, and a man must not think at
all, or think himself very insignificant, when he finds an account of his head
ach answered by another asking what news in the last mail?

6. Mutual good humor is a dress we ought to appear in wherever we meet, and
we should make no mention of what concerns ourselves, without it be of matters
wherein our friends ought to rejoice: but indeed there are crowds of people who
put themselves in no method of pleasing themselves or others; such are those
whom we usually call indolent persons.

7. Indolence is, methinks, an intermediate state between pleasure and pain,
and very much unbecoming any part of our life after we are out of the nurse's
arms. Such an aversion to labor creates a constant weariness, and one would
think should make existence itself a burden.

8. The indolent man descends from the dignity of his nature, and makes that
being which was rational, merely vegetative; his life consists only in the mere
increase and decay of a body, which with relation to the rest of the world,
might as well have been uninformed, as the habitation of a reasonable mind.

9. Of this kind is the life of that extraordinary couple Harry Ter^ett and his
lady. Harry was in the days of his celibacy one of those pert creatures who
have much vivacity and little understanding; Mrs. Rebecca Quickly, whom he
married, had all that the fire of youth and a lively manner could do toward
making an agreeable woman.

10. These two people of seeming merit fell into each other's arms; and passion
being sated, and no reason or good sense in either to succeed it, their life is
now at a stand; their meals are insipid, and time tedious; their fortune has
placed them above care, and their loss of taste reduced them below diversion.

11. When we talk of these as instances of inexistence, we do not mean, that in
order to live it is necessary we should always be in jovial crews, or crowned
with chaplets of roses, as the merry fellows among the ancients are described;
but it is intended by considering these contraries to pleasure, indolence and
too much delicacy, to show that it is prudence to preserve a disposition in
ourselves to receive a certain delight in all we hear and see.

12. This portable quality of good humor seasons all the parts and occurrences
we meet with, in such a manner, that there are no moments lost; but they all
pass with so much satisfaction, that the heaviest of loads (when it is a load)
that of time, is never felt by us.

13. Varilas has this quality to the highest perfection, and communicates it
wherever he appears: the sad, the merry, the severe, the melancholy, show a new
cheerfulness when he comes amongst them. At the same time no one can repeat any
thing that Varilas has ever said that deserves repetition; but the man has that
innate goodness of temper, that he is welcome to every body, because every man
thinks he is so to him.

14. He does not seem to contribute any thing to the mirth of the company; and
yet upon reflection you find it all happened by his being there. I thought it
was whimsically said of a gentleman, That if Varilas had wit, it would be the
best wit in the world. It is certain, when a well corrected lively imagination
and good-breeding are added to a sweet disposition, they qualify it to be one
of the greatest blessings, as well as pleasures of life.

15. Men would come into company with ten times the pleasure they do, if they
were sure of hearing nothing which should shock them, as well as expected what
would please them. When we know every person that is spoken of is represented
by one who has no ill will, and every thing that is mentioned described by one
that is apt to set it in the best light, the entertainment must be delicate,
because the cook has nothing bought to his hand, but what is the most excellent
in its kind.

16. Beautiful pictures are the entertainments of pure minds, and deformities
of the corrupted. It is a degree toward the life of angels, when we enjoy
conversation wherein there is nothing present but in its excellence; and a
degree toward that of demons, wherein nothing is shown but in its degeneracy.

SPECTATOR, Vol. II. No. 100. Friendship.
1. ONE would think that the larger the company is in which we are engaged, the
greater variety of thoughts and subjects would be started in discourse; but
instead of this, we find that conversation is never so much straightened and
confined as in numerous assemblies.

2. When a multitude meet together upon any subject of discourse their debates
are taken up chiefly with forms and general positions; nay, if we come into a
more contracted assembly of men and women, the talk generally runs upon the
weather, fashions, news, and the like public topics.

3. In proportion as conversation gets into clubs and knots of friends, it
descends into particulars, and grows more free and communicative, but the most
open, instructive, and unreserved discourse, is that which passes between two
persons who are familiar and intimate friends.

4. On these occasions, a man gives a loose to every passion, and every thought
that is uppermost discovers his most retired opinions of persons and things,
tries the beauty and strength of his sentiments, and exposes his whole soul to
the examination of his friend.

5. Tully was the first who observed, that friendship improves happiness and
abates misery, by the doubling of our joy and dividing of our grief; a thought
in which he has been followed by all the essayers upon friendship, that have
written since his time. Sir Francis Bacon has finely described other
advantages, or, as he calls them, fruits of friendship; and indeed there is no
subject of morality which has been better handled and more exhausted than this.

6. Among the several fine things which have been spoken of, I shall beg leave
to quote some out of a very ancient author, whose book would be regarded by our
modern wits as one of the most shining tracts of morality that is extant, if it
appeared under the name of a Confucius, or of any celebrated Grecian
philosopher: I mean the little Apocryphal Treatise, entitled, The Wisdom of the
Son of Sirach.

7. How finely has he described the art of making friends, by an obliging and
affable behavior? And laid down that precept which a late exellent author has
delivered as his own, 'That we should have many 'well-wishers, but few
friends.' Sweet language will multiply friends; and a fair-speaking tongue will
increase kind greetings. Be in peace with many, nevertheless have but one
counselor of a thousand.

8. With what prudence does he caution us in the choice of our friends? And
with what strokes of nature (I could almost say of humor) has he described the
behavior of a treacherous and self-interested friend? If thou would get a
friend, prove him first, and be not hasty to credit him: for some man is a
friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

9. And there is a friend, who being turned to ^enmity and strife, will
discover thy reproach. Again, Some friend is a companion at the table, and will
not continue in the day of thy affliction: but in thy prosperity he will be as
thyself, and will be bold over thy servants. If thou be brought low he will be
against thee, and hide himself from thy face.

10. What can be more strong and pointed than the following verse? 'Separate
thyself from thine enemies, and take heed of thy friends.' In the next words ^e
particularizes one of those fruits of friendship which is described at length by
the two famous authors above mentioned, and falls into a general elogium of
friendship, which is very just as well as very sublime.

11. A faithful friend is a strong defense: and he that has found such a one,
has found a treasure* Nothing does countervail a faithful friend, and his
excellency is unvaluable. A faithful friend is the medicine of life; and they
that fear the Lord shall find him. Whosoever fears the Lord shall direct his
friendship aright; for as he is, so shall his neighbor (that is, his friend)
be also.

12. I do not remember to have met with any saying that has pleased me more
than that of a friend's being the medecin of life, to express the efficacy of
friendship in healing the pains and anguish which naturally cleave to our
existence in this world; and am wonderfully pleased with the turn in the last
sentence, That a virtuous man shall as a blessing meet with a friend who is as
virtuous as himself.

13. There is another say; in the same author, which would have been very much
admired in an heathen writer: Forsake not an old friend, for the new is not
comparable to him: a new friend is as new wine; when it is old thou (...) drink
it with pleasure.

14. With what strength of allusion, and force of thought, has he described the
breaches and violations of friendship? Whosoever casts a stone at the birds
frayeth them away; and he that upbraideth his friend, breaks friendship. Though
thou drawest a sword at a friend, yet despair not, for there may be a returning
to favor: if thou have opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not, for
there may be a reconciliation; except for upbraiding, or pride, or disclosing
of secrets, or a treacherous wound; for, for these things, every friend will
depart.

15. We may observe in this and several other precepts in this author, those
little familiar instances and illustrations which are so much admired in the
moral writings of Horace and Epictetus. There are very beautiful instances of
this nature in the following pages, which are likewise written upon the same
subject:

16. Whosoever discovers secrets, loses his credit, and shall never find a
friend to his mind. Love thy friend, and be faithful unto him; but if thou
bewrayest his secrets, follow no more after him: for as a man has destroyed
his enemy, so have thou lost the love of thy friend; as one that lets a bird
go out of his hand, so have thou let thy friend go, and shall not get him
again: follow after him no more, for he is too far off; he is as a roe escaped
out of the snare. As for a wound, it may be bound up, and after reviling, there
may be reconciliation; but he that bewrays secrets, is without hope.

17. Among ^he several qualifications of a good friend, this wise man has very
justly singled out constancy and faithfulness as the principal: to these,
others have added virtue, knowledge, discretion, equality in age and fortune,
and as Cicero calls it, morum comitas, a pleasantness of temper.

18. If I were to give my opinion upon such an exhausted subject, I should join
to these other qualifications a certain aequibility or evenness of behavior. A
man often contracts a friendship with one whom perhaps he does not find out
till after a year's conversation; when on a sudden some latent ill hum^ breaks
on upon him, which he never discovered or ^u^pected at his first entering into
an intimacy with him.

19. There are several persons who in some certain periods of their lives are
inexpressibly agreeable, and in others as odious* and detestable. Martial has
given us a very pretty picture of one of these species in the following
epigram: Difficilis, facilis, jucundus, acerbus, es idem,
Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te. Epig. 47. l. 12.
In all thy humors, whether grave or mellow,
You Are such a touchy, testy, pleasant fellow;
Have so much wit and mirth, and spleen about thee,
There is no living with thee, nor without thee.


20. It is very unlucky for a man to be entangled in a friendship with one, who
by these changes and vicissitudes of humor is sometimes amiable, and sometimes
odious* and as most men are at some times in an admirable frame and disposition
of mind, it should be one of the greatest tasks of wisdom to keep ourselves
well when we are so, and never to go out of that which is the agreeable part of
our character.

SPECTATOR, Vol. I. No. 68. 21. Friendship is a strong and habitual inclination
in two persons to promote the good and happiness of one another. Though the
pleasures and advantages of friendship have been largely celebrated by the best
moral writers, and are considered by all as great ingredients of human
happiness, we very rarely meet with the practice of this virtue in the world.

22. Every man is ready to give a long catalogue of those virtues and good
qualities he expects to find in the person of a friend, but very few of us are
careful to cultivate them in ourselves.

Love and esteem are the first principles of friendship, which always is
imperfect where either of these two is wanting.

23. As, on the one hand, we are soon ashamed of loving a man whom we cannot
esteem; so on the other, though we are truly sensible of a man's abilities, we
can never raise ourselves to the warmths of friendship, without an affectionate
good will toward his person.

24. Friendship immediately banishes envy under all its disguises. A man who
can once doubt whether he should rejoice in his friend's being happier than
himself, may depend upon it, that he is an utter stranger to this virtue.

25. There is something in friendship so very great and noble, that in those
fictitious stories which are invented to the honor of any particular person,
the authors have thought it as necessary to make their hero a friend as a
lover. Achilles has his Patroclus, and, Aeneas his Achates.

26. In the first of these instances we may observe, for the reputation of the
subject I am treating of, that Greece was almost ruined by the hero's love, but
was preserved by his friendship.

27 The character of Achates suggests to us an observation we may often make on
the intimacies of great men, who frequently choose their companions rather for
the qualities of the heart, than those of the head: and prefer fidelity, in an
easy inoffensive complying temper, to those endowments which make a much
greater figure among mankind.

28. I do not remember that Achates, who is represented as the first favorite,
either gives his advice, or strikes a blow through the whole Aeneid.

A friendship, which makes the least noise, is very often most useful; for
which reason I should prefer a prudent friend to a zealous one.

29. Atticus, one of the best men of ancient Rome, was a very remarkable
instance of what I am here speaking. This extraordinary person, amidst the
civil wars of his country, when he saw the designs of all parties equally
tended to the subversion of liberty, by constantly preserving the esteem and
affection of both the competitors, found means to serve his friends on either
side: and while he sent money to young Marius, whose father was declared an
enemy of the commonwealth, he was himself one of Sylla's chief favorites, and
always near that general.

30. During the war between Caesar and Pompey, he still maintained the same
conduct. After the death of Caesar, he sent money to Brutus in his troubles,
and did a thousand good offices to Antony's wife and friends, when the party
seemed ruined. Lastly, even in that bloody war between Antony and Augustus,
Atticus, still kept his place in both their friendships; insomuch, that the
first, says Cornelius Nepos, whenever he was absent from Rome in any part of
the empire, writ punctually to him what he was doing, what he read, and whither
he intended to go; and the latter gave him constantly an exact account of all
his affairs.

31. A likeness of inclinations in every particular is so far from being
requisite to form a benevolence in two minds toward each other, as it is
generally imagined, that I believe we shall find some of the firmest
friendships to have been contracted between persons of different humors; the
mind being often pleased with those perfections which are new to it, and which
it does not find among its own accomplishments.

32. Besides that a man in some measure supplies his own defects, and fancies
himself at second-hand possessed of those good qualities and endowments, which
are in the possession of him who in the eye of the world is looked on as his
other self.

33. The most difficult province in friendship is the letting a man see his
faults and errors, which should, if possible, be so contrived, that he may
perceive our advice is given him not so much to please ourselves, as for his
own advantage. The reproaches, therefore, of a friend should always be strictly
just, and not too frequent.

34. The violent desire of pleasing in the person reproved may otherwise change
into a despair of doing it, while he finds himself censured for faults he is
not conscious of. A mind that is softened and humanized by friendship, cannot
bear frequent reproaches: either it must quite sink under the oppression, or
abate considerably of the value and esteem it had for him who bestows them.

35. The proper business of friendship is to inspire life and courage; and a
soul, thus supported, out-does itself; whereas if it be unexpectedly deprived
of those succors, it droops and languishes.

36. We are in some measure more inexcusable if we violate our duties to a
friend, than to a relation; since the former arise from a voluntary choice, the
latter from a necessity, to which we could not give our own consent.

37. As it has been said on one side, that a man ought not to break with a
faulty friend, that he may not expose the weakness of his choice; it will
doubtless hold much stronger with respect to a worthy one, that he may never be
upbraided for having lost so valuable a treasure which was once in his
possession.

Detraction and Falsehood.
1. I Have not seen you lately at any of the places where I visit, so that I am
afraid you are wholly unacquainted with what passes among my part of the world,
who are, though I say it, without controversy, the most accomplished and best
bred of the town.

2. Give me leave to tell you, that I am extremely discomposed when I hear
scandal, and am an utter enemy to all manner of detraction, and think it the
greatest meanness that people of distinction can be guilty of; however it is
hardly possible to come into company, where you do not find them pulling one
another to pieces, and that from no other provocation but that of hearing any
one commended.

3. Merit, both as to wit and beauty, is become no other than the possession of
a few trifling people's favor, which you cannot possibly arrive at. If you
have really any thing in you that is deserving.

4. What they would bring to pass is, to make all good and evil consist in
report, and with whispers, calumnies, and impertinences, to have the conduct of
those reports.

5. By this means innocents are blasted upon their first appearance in town;
and there is nothing more required to make a young woman the object of envy and
hatred, than to deserve love and admiration.

6. This abominable endeavor to suppress or lesse^ every thing that is
praiseworthy, is as frequent among the men as women. If I can remember what
passed at a visit last night, it will serve as an instance that the sexes are
equally inclined to defamation, with equal malice, with equal impotence.

7. Jack Triplett came into my Lady Airy's about eight of the clock. You know
the manner we sit at a visit, and I need not describe the circle; but Mr.
Triplett came in, introduced by two tapers supported by a spruce servant, whose
hair is under a cap till my lady's candles are all lighted up, and the hour o^
ceremony begins.

8. I say Ja^k Triplett came in, and singing (for he is really good company)
'Every feature, charming creature' -- he went on. It is a most unreasonable
thing that people cannot go peaceably to see their friends, but these murderers
are ^et loo^e.

9. Such a shape! such an air! what a glance was that as her chariot passed by
mine -- My lady herself interrupted him; pray, who is this fine thing -- I
warrant, says another, it is the creature I was telling your ladyship of just
now.

10. You were telling of? says Jack; I wish I had been so happy as to have come
in and heard you, for I have not words to say what she is: but if an agreeable
height, a modest air, a virgin shame, and impatience of being beheld, amidst a
blaze of ten thousand charms -- The whole room flew out -- Oh Mr. Triplett! --
When Mrs. Lofty, a known prude said she believed she knew whom the gentleman
meant; but she was, indeed, as he civilly represented her, impatient of being
beheld. Then turning to the lady next her -- The most unbred creature you ever
saw.

11. Another pursued the discourse: As unbred, Madam, as you may think her, she
is extremely belied if she is the novice she appears; she was last week at a
ball till two in the morning: Mr. Triplett knows whether he was the happy man
that took care of her home; but -- This was followed by some particular
exception that each woman in the room made to some peculiar grace or advantage;
so that Mr. Triplett was beaten from one limb and feature to another, till he
was forced to resign the whole woman.

12. In the end, I took notice Triplett recorded all this malice in his heart;
and saw in his countenance, and a certain waggish shrug, that he designed to
repeat the conversation: I therefore let the discourse die, and soon after took
an occasion to commend a certain gentleman of my acquaintance for a person of
singular modesty, courage, integrity, and withal, as a man of an entertaining
conversation, to which advantages he had a shape and manner peculiarly graceful.

13. Mr. Triplett, who is a woman's man, seemed to hear me, with patience
enough, commend the qualities of his mind; he never heard, indeed, but that he
was a very honest man, and no fool; but for a fine gentleman, he must ask
pardon. Upon no other foundation than this, Mr. Triplett took occasion to give
the gentleman's pedigree, by what methods some part of the estate was acquired,
how much it was beholden to a marriage for the present circumstances of it:
after all he could see nothing but a common man in his person, his breeding, or
understanding.

14. Thus, Mr. Spectator, this impertinent humor of diminishing every one who
is produced in conversation to their advantage, runs through the world; and I
am, I confess, so fearful of the force of ill tongue^, that I have begged of
all those who are my well-wishers, never to commend me, for it will but bring
my frailties into examination, and I ^ad rather be unobserved, than conspicuous
for disputed perfections.

15. I am confident a thousand young people, who would have been ornaments to
society, have, from fear of scandal, never dared to exert themselves in the
polite arts of life. Their lives have passed away in an odious rusticity, in
spite of great advantages of person, genius, and fortune.

16. There is a vicious terror of being blamed in some well-inclined people,
and a wicked pleasure in suppressing them in others; both which I recommend to
your spectatorial wisdom to animadvert upon; and if you can be ^uccessful in
it, I need not say how much you will deserve of the town; but new toasts will
owe to you their beauty, and new wits their fame.

17. Truth and reality have all the advantages of appearance, and many more. If
the show of any thing be good for any thing, I am sure sincerity is better: for
why does any man dissemble, or seem to be that which he is not, but because he
thinks it good to have such a quality as he pretends to? for to counterfeit and
dissemble, is to put on the appearance of some real excellency.

18. Now the best way in the world for a man to seem to be any thing, is really
to be what he would seem to be. Besides that, it is many times as troublesome
to make good the pretense of a good quality, as to have it; and if a man have
it not, it is ten to one but he is discovered to want it, and then all his
pains and labor to seem to have it is lost. There is something unn^tural in
pai^^ing, which a skilful eye will easily discern from native beauty and
complexion.

19. It is hard to personate and act a part long; for where truth is not at the
bottom, nature will always be endeavoring to return, and will peep out and
betray herself one time or other. Therefore, if any man think it convenient to
seem good, let him be so indeed, and then his goodness will appear to every
body's satisfaction; so that, upon all accounts sincerity is true wisdom.

20. Particularly as to the affairs of this world, integrity has many
advantages over all the fine and artificial ways of dissimulation and deceit;
it is much the plainer and easier, much the safer and more secure way of
dealing in the world; it has less of trouble and difficulty, of entanglement
and perplexity, of danger and (...) in i^: it is the shortest and nearest way
to our end* carrying us thither in a straight line, and will hold out and last
longest.

21. The arts o^ ^ec^it and cunning do continually grow weaker and less
effectual and serviceable to them that use them* whereas integrity gains
strength by use, and the more and longer any man practices it, the greate^
service it does him, by confirming his reputation^ and encouraging those with
whom he has to do, to repose the greatest trust and confidence in him, which
is an unspeakable advantage in the business and affairs of life.

22. Truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help it out;
it is always near at hand, and sits upon our lips, and is ready to drop out
before we are aware; whereas a lie is troublesome, and sets a man's invention
upon the rack, and one trick needs a great many more to make it good.

23. It is like building upon a false foundation, which continually stands in
need of props to shore it up, and proves at last more chargeable, than to have
raised a substantial building at first upon a true and solid foundation; for
sincerity is firm and substantial, and there is nothing hollow and unsound in
it, and because it is plain and open, fears no discovery:

24. Of which the crafty man is always in danger, and when he thinks he walks
in the dark, all his pretenses are so transparent, that he who runs may read
them; he is the last man that finds himself to be found out, and whilst he
takes it for granted that he makes fools of others, he renders himself
ridiculous.

25. Add to all this, that sincerity is the most compendious wisdom, and an
excellent instrument for the speedy dispatch of business; it creates confidence
in those we have to deal with, saves the labor of many enquiries, and brings
things to an issue in a few words:

26. It is like traveling in a plain beaten road, which commonly brings a man
sooner to his journey's end than by-ways, in which men often lose themselves.
In a word, whatsoever convenience may be thought to be in falsehood and
dissimulation, it is soon over; but the inconvenience of it is perpetual,
because it brings a man under an everlasting jealousy and suspicion, so that he
is not believed when he speaks truth, nor trusted when perhaps he means
honestly; when a man has once forfeited the reputation of his integrity, he is
set fast, and nothing will then serve his turn, neither truth nor falsehood.

27. And I have often thought, that God has, in his great wisdom, hid from men
of false and dishones^ minds, the wonderful advantages of truth and integrity
to the prosperity even of our worldly affairs; these men are so blinded by
their covetousness an^ ambition, that they cannot look beyond a present
advantage, nor forbear to seize upon it, though by ways never so indirect; they
cannot see so far, as to the remote consequences of a steady integrity, and the
vast benefit and advantages which it will bring a man at last.

28. Were but this sort of men wise and clear sighted enough to discern this,
they would be honest out of very knavery; not out of any love to honesty and
virtue, but with a crafty design to promote and advance more effectually their
own interests; and therefore the justice of the Divine Providence has hid this
truest point of wisdom from their eyes, that bad men might not be upon equal
terms with the just and upright, and serve their own wicked designs by honest
and lawful means.

29. Indeed if a man were only to deal in the world for a day, and should never
have occasion to converse more with mankind, never more need their good opinion
or good word, it were then no great matter (speaking as to the concernments of
this world) if a man spent his reputation all at once, and ventured it at one
throw.

30. But if he be to continue in the world, and would have the advantage of
conversation whilst he is in it, let him make use of truth and sincerity in all
his words and actions; for nothing but this will last and hold out to the end;
all other arts will fail, but truth and integrity will carry a man through, and
bear him out to the last.

31. When Aristotle was once asked, what a man could gain by uttering
falsehoods? he replied, not to be credited when he shall tell the truth.

The character of a liar is at once so hateful and contemptible, that even of
those who have lost their virtue it might be expected, that from the violation
of truth they should be restrained by their pride. Almost every other vice that
disgraces human nature, may be kept in countenance by applause and association.

32. The corrupter of virgin innocence sees himself envied by the men, and at
least not detested by the women: the drunkard may easily unite with beings,
devoted like himself to noisy merriment or silent insensibility, who will
celebrate his victories over the novices of intemperance, boast themselves the
companions of his prowess, and tell with rapture of the multitudes whom
unsuccessful emulation has hurried to the grave: even the robber and the
cutthroat have their followers, who admire their address and intrepidity,
their stratagems of rapine, and their fidelity to the gang.

33. The liar, and only the liar, is invariably and universally despised,
abandoned and disowned: he has no domestic consolations, which he can oppose to
the censure of mankind; he can retire to no fraternity where his crimes may
stand in the place of virtues, but is given up to the hisses of the multitude,
without friend and without apologist. It is the peculiar condition of falsehood,
to be equally detested by the good and bad: "The devils,' says Sir Thomas
Brown, do not tell lies to one another; for truth is necessary to all
societies; nor can the society of hell subsist without it.

34. It is natural to expect, that a crime thus generally detested should be
generally avoided; at least that none should expose himself to unabated and
unpitied infamy, w^^hout an adequate temptation; and that to guilt so eas^^y
detec^, and so severely punished, an adequate temptation would not readily be
found.

35. Yet so it is, that in defiance of censure and contempt, truth is
frequently violated; and scarcely the most vigilant and unremitted
circumspection will secure him that mixes with mankind, from being hourly
deceived by men of whom it can scarcely be imagined, that they mean an injury
to him or profit to themselves; even where the subject of conversation could
not have been expected to put the passions in motion, or to have excited either
hope or fear, or zeal or malignity, sufficient to induce any man to put his
reputation in hazard, however little he might value it, or to overpower the
love of truth, however weak might be its influence.

36. The casuists have very diligently distinguished lies into their several
classes, according to their various degrees of malignity: but they have, I
think, generally omitted that which is most common, and perhaps, not less
mischievous; which, since the moralists have not given it a name, I shall
distinguish as the lie of vanity.

To vanity may justly be imputed most of the falsehoods, which every man
perceives hourly playing upon his ^^r, and, perhaps, most of those that are
propagated with success.

37. To the lie of commerce, and the lie of malice, the motive is so apparent,
that they are seldom negligently or implicitly received: suspicion is always
watchful over the practices of interest; and whatever the hope of gain, or
desire of mischief, can prompt one man to assert, another is by reasons equally
cogent incited to refu^e. But vanity pleases herself with such slight
gratifications, and looks forward to pleasure so remotely consequential, that
her practices raise no alarm, and her stratagems are not easily discovered.

38. Vanity is, indeed, often suffered to pass unpursued by suspicion; because
he that would watch her motions, can never be at rest; fraud and malice are
bounded in their influence; some opportunity of time and place is necessary to
their agency; but scarce any man is abstracted one moment from his vanity; and
he, to whom truth affords no gratifications, is generally inclined to seek them
in falsehoods.

39. It is remarked by Sir Kenelm Digby, that every man has a desire to appear
superior to others, though it were only in having seen what they have not seen.

Such an accidental advantage, since it neither implies merit, nor confers
dignity, one would think should not be desired so much as to be counterfeited:
yet even this vanity, trifling as it is, produces innumerable narratives, all
equally false, but more or less credible, in proportion to the skill or
confidence of the relater.

40. How many may a man of diffusive conversation count among his
acquaintances, whose lives have been signalized by numberless escapes; who
never cross the river but in a storm, or take a journey into the country
without more adventures than befell the knight-errants of ancient times in
pathless forests or enchanted castles! How many must he know, to whom portents
and prodigies are of daily occurrence; and for whom nature is hourly working
wonders invisible to every other eye, only to supply them with subjects of
conversation!

41. Others there are who amuse themselves with the dissemination of falsehood,
at greater hazard of detection and disgrace: men marked out by some lucky
planet for universal confidence and friendship, who have been consulted in
every difficulty, entrusted with every secret, and summoned to every
transaction: it is the supreme felicity of these men, to stun all companies
with noisy information; to still doubt, and overbear opposition, with certain
knowledge or authentic intelligence.

42. A liar of this kind, with a strong memory or brisk imagination, is often
the oracle of an obscure club, and, till time discovers his impostures,
dictates to his hearers with uncontrouled authority; for if a public question
be started, he was present at the debate; if a new fashion be mentioned, he was
at court the first day of its appearance; if a new performance of literature
draws the attention of the public, he has patronized the author, and seen his
work in manuscript; if a criminal of eminence be condemned to die, he often
predicted his fate, and endeavored his reformation: and who that lives at a
distance from the scene of action, will dare to contradict a man, who reports
from his own eyes and ears, and to whom all persons and affairs are thus
intimately known?

43. This kind of falsehood is generally successful for a time, because it is
practiced at first with timidity and caution; but the prosperity of the liar is
of short duration; the reception of one story is always an incitement to the
forgery of another less probable; and he goes on to triumph over tacit
credulity, till pride or reason rises up against him, and his companions will
no longer endure to see him wiser than themselves.

44. It is apparent, that the inventors of all these fictions intend some
exaltation of themselves, and are led off by the pursuit of honor from their
attendance upon truth: their narratives always imply some consequence in favor
of their courage, their fagacity, or their activity, their familiarity with the
learned, or their reception among the great; they are always bribed by the
present pleasure of seeing themselves superior to those that surround them, and
receiving the homage of silent attention and envious admiration*

45. But vanity is sometimes excited to fiction by less visible gratifications:
the present age abounds with a race of liars who are con^ent with the
consciousness of falsehood, and whose pride is to deceive others without any
gain or glory to themselves. Of this tribe it is the supreme pleasure to remark
a lady in the playhouse or the park, and to publish, under the character of a
man suddenly enamoured, an advertisement in the news of the next day,
containing a minute description of her person and her dress.

46. From this artifice, however, no other effect can be expected, than
perturbations which the writer can never see, and conjectures of which he can
never be informed: some mischief, however, he hopes he has done; and to have
done mischief, is of some importance. He sets his invention to work again, and
produces a narrative of a robbery, or a murder, with all the circumstances of
time and place accurately adjusted. This is a jest of greater effect and longer
duration: if he fixes his scene at a proper distance, he may for several days
keep a wife in terror for her husband, or a mother for her son; and please
himself with reflecting, that by his abilities and address some addition is
made to the miseries of life.

47 There is, I think, an ancient law in Scotland by which Leasing-making was
capitally punished. I am, indeed, far from desiring to increase in this kingdom
the number of executions; yet I cannot but think, that they who destroy the
confidence of society weaken the credit of intelligence, and interrupt the
security of life; harrass the delicate with shame, and perplex the timorous
with alarms; might very properly be awakened to a sense of their crimes, by
denunciations of a whipping post or pillory: since many are so in sensible of
right and wrong, that they have no standard of action but the law; nor feel
guilt, but as they dread punishment.

The Importance of Punctuality.
1. IT is observed in the writings of Boil, that the excellency of
manufactures and facility of labor would be much promoted, if the various
expedients and contrivances which lie concealed in private hands were by
reciprocal communications made generally known; for there are few operations
that are not performed by one or other with some peculiar advantages, which,
though singly of little importance, would by conjunction and concurrence open
new inlets to knowledge, and give new powers to diligence.

2. There are in like manner several moral excellencies distributed among the
various classes of mankind, which he that converses in the world should
endeavor to assemble in himself. It was said by the learned Cujacius, that he
never read more than one book, by which he was not instructed, and he that
shall enquire after virtue with ardour and attention, will seldom find a man by
whose example or sentiments he may not be improved.

3. Every profession has some essential and appropriate virtue, without which
there can be no hope of honor or success, and which, as it is more or less
cultivated, confers within its sphere of activity different degrees of merit
and reputation. As the astrologers range the subdivisions of mankind under the
planets which they suppose to influence their lives, the moralist may
distribute them according to the virtues which they necessarily practice, and
con^ides them as distinguished by prudence or fortitude, diligence or patience.

4. So much are the modes of excellence settled by time and place, that men may
be heard boasting in one street of that which they would anxiously co^ in
another. The grounds of scorn and esteem, (...) topics of praise and satire are
varied according (...) several virtues or vices which the course of our lives
has disposed us to admire or abhor; but he who is solicitous for his own
improvement, must not suffer his affairs to be limited by local reputation, but
select from every tribe of mortals their characteristical virtues, and
constellate in himself the scattered graces which shine single in other men.

5. The chief praise to which a trader generally aspires is that of
punctuality, or an exact and rigorous observance of commercial promises and
engagements; nor is there any vice of which he so much dreads the imputation,
as of negligence and instability. This is a quality which the interest of
mankind requires to be diffused through all the ranks of life, but which,
however useful and valuable, many seem content to want; it is considered as a
vulgar and ignoble virtue, below the ambition of greatness or attention of wit,
scarcely requisite among men of gaiety and spirit, and sold at its highest rate
when it is sacrificed to a frolie or a jest.

6. Every man has daily occasion to remark what vexations and inconveniences
arise from this privilege of deceiving one another. The active and vivacious
have so long disdained the restraints of truth, that promises and appointments
have lost their cogency, and both parties neglect their stipulations, because
each concludes that they will be broken by the other.

7. Negligence is first admitted in trivial affairs, and strengthened by petty
indulgencies. He that is not yet hardened by custom, ventures not on the
violation of important engagements, but thinks himself bound by his word in
cases of property or danger, though he allows himself to forget at what time he
is to meet ladies in the park, or at what tavern his friends are expecting him.

8. This laxity of honor would be more tolerable, if it could be restrained to
the playhouse, the ball-room, or the card-table; yet even there it is
sufficiently troublesome, and darkens those moments with expectation, suspense,
uncertainty and resentment, which are set aside for the softer pleasures of
life, and from which we naturally hope for unmingled enjoyment, and total
relaxation. But he that suffers the slightest breach in his morality, can
seldom tell what shall enter it, or how wide it shall be made; when a passage
is opened, the influx of corruption is every moment wearing down opposition,
and by slow degrees deluges the heart.

9. Aliger entered the world a youth of lively imagination, extensive views,
and untainted principles. His curiosity incited him to range from place to
place, and try all the varieties of conversation; his elegance of address and
fertility of ideas gained him friends wherever he appeared; or at least he
found the general kindness of reception always shown to a young man whose birth
and fortune gave him a claim to notice, and who has neither by vice or folly
destroyed his privileges.

10. Aliger was pleased with this general smile of mankind, and being naturally
gentle and flexible, was industrious to preserve it by compliance and
officiousness, but did not suffer his desire of pleasing to vitiate his
integrity. It was his established maxim, that a promise is never to be broken;
nor was it without long reluctance that he once suffered himself to be drawn
away from a festal engagement by the importunity of another company.

11. He spent the evening, as is usual in the rudiments of vice, with
perturbation and imperfect enjoyment, and met his disappointed friends in the
morning with confusion and excuses. His companions, not accustomed to such
scrupulous anxiety, laughed at his uneasiness, compounded the offense for a
bottle, gave him courage to break his word again, and again levied the penalty.

12. He ventured the same experiment upon another society, and found them
equally ready to consider it as a venial fault, always incident to a man of
quickness and gaiety; till by degrees he began to think himself at liberty to
follow ^he last invitation, and was no longer shocked at the turpitude of
falsehood. He made no difficulty to promise his presence at distant places, and
if listlessness happened to creep upon him, would sit at home with great
tranquillity, and has often, while he sunk to sleep in a chair, held ten tables
in continual expectation of his entrance.

13. He found it so pleasant to live in perpetual vacancy, that he soon
dismissed his attention as an useless encumbrance, and resigned himself to
carelessness and dissipation, without any regard to the future or the past, or
any other motive of action than the impulse of a sudden desire, or the
attraction of immediate pleasure. The absent were immediately forgotten, and
the hopes or fears of others had no influence upon his conduct. He was in
speculation completely just, but never kept his promise to a creditor; he was
benevolent, but always deceived those friends whom he undertook to patronize or
assist; he was prudent, but suffered his affairs to be embarrassed for want of
settling his accounts at stated times.

14. He courted a young lady, and when the settlements were drawn, took a
ramble into the country on the day appointed to sign them. He resolved to
travel* and sent his chests on ship board, but delayed to follow them till he
lost his passage. He was summoned as an evidence in a cause of great
importance, and loitered in the way till the trial was past. It is said, that
when he had with great expense formed an interest in a borough, his opponent
contrived by some agents, who knew his temper, to lure him away on the day of
election.

15. His benevolence draws him into the commission of a thousand crimes, which
others, less kind or civil, would escape. His courtesy invites application, his
promises produce dependence; he has his pockets filled with petitions, which he
intends some time to deliver and enforce, and his table covered with letters of
request, with which he purposes to comply; but time slips imperceptibly away,
while he is either idle or busy: his friends lose their opportunities, and
charge upon him their miscarriages and calamities.

This character, however contemptible, is not peculiar to Aliger.

16. They whose activity of imagination is often shifting the scenes of
expectation, are frequently subject to such sallies of caprice as make all
their actions fortuitous, destroy the value of their friendship, obstruct the
efficacy of their virtues, and set them below the meanest of those that persist
in their resolutions, execute what they design, and perform what they have
promised.

Exercise and Temperance the best Preservative of Health.
1. BODILY labor is of two kinds, either that which a man submits to for his
livelihood, or that which he undergoes for his pleasure. The latter of them
generally changes the name of labor for that of exercise, but differs only
from ordinary labor as it rises from another motive.

A country life abounds in both these kinds of labor, and for that reason
gives a man a greater stock of health, and consequently a more perfect
enjoyment of himself, than any other way of life.

2. I consider the body as a system of tubes and glands, or to use a more
rustic phrase, a bundle of pipes and strainers, fitted to one another after so
wonderful a manner, as to make a proper engine for the soul to work with. This
description does not only comprehend the bowels, bones, tendons, veins, nerves,
and arteries, but every muscle and every ligature, which is a composition of
fibers, that are so many imperceptible tubes or pipes interwoven on all sides
with invisible glands or strainers

3. This general idea of a human body, without considering it in its niceties
of anatomy, lets us see how absolutely necessary labor is for the right
preservation of it. There must be frequent motions and agitations, to mix,
digest, and separate the juices contained in it, as well as to clear and
cleanse that infinitude of pipes and strainers of which it is composed, and to
give their solid parts a more firm and lasting tone. Labor or exercise
ferments the humors, casts them into their proper channels, throws off
redundancies, and helps nature in those secret distributions, without which the
body cannot subsist in its vigor, nor the soul act with cheerfulness.

4. I might here mention the effects which this has upon all the faculties of
the mind, by keeping the understanding clear, the imagination untroubled, and
refining those spirits that are necessary for the proper exertion of our
intellectual faculties, during the present laws of union between soul and body.
It is to a neglect in this particular that we must ascribe the spleen, which is
so frequent in men of studious and sedentary tempers, as well as the vapors to
which those of the other sex are so often subject.

5. Had not exercise been absolutely necessary for our well-being, nature would
not have made the body so proper for it, by giving such an activity to the
limbs, and such a pliancy to every part, as necessarily produce those
compressions, extensions, contortions, dilatations, and all other kinds of
motions that are necessary for the preservation of such a system of tubes and
glands as has been beforementioned. And that we might not want inducements to
engage us in such an exercise of the body as is proper for its welfare, it is
so ordered, that nothing valuable can be procured without it. -- Not to mention
riches and honor, even food and raiment are not to be come at without the toil
of the hands and sweat of the brows.

6. Providence furnishes materials, but expects that we should work them up
ourselves. The earth must be labored before it gives his increase, and when it
is forced into its several products, how many hands must they pass through
before they are fit for use? Manufactures, trade, and agriculture, naturally
employ more than nineteen parts of the species in twenty; and as for those who
are not obliged to labor, by the condition in which they are born, they are
more miserable than the rest of mankind, unless they ^lge themselves in that
voluntary labor which goes by the name of exercise.

7. My friend Sir Roger has been an indefatigable man in business of this
kind, and has hung several parts of his house with the trophies of his former
labors. The walls of his great hall are covered with the horns of several
kinds of deer that he has killed in the chase, which he thinks the most
valuable furniture of his house, as they afford him frequent topics of
discourse, and show that he has not been idle.

8. At the lower end of the hall is a large otter's skin stuffed with hay,
which his mother ordered to be hung up in that manner, and the knight looks
upon it with great satisfaction, because it seems he was but nine years old
when his dog killed him. A little room adjoining to the hall is a kind of
arsenal filled with guns of several sizes and inventions, with which the knight
has made great havoc in the woods, and destroyed many thousands of pheasants,
partridges and woodcocks. His stable doors are patched with noses that belonged
to foxes of the knight's own hunting down.

9. Sir Roger showed me one of them that, for distinction sake, has a brass
nail struck through it, which cost him about fifteen hours riding, carried him
through half a dozen counties, killed him a brace of geldings, and lost about
half his dogs. This the knight looks upon as one of the greatest exploits of
his life.

10. The perverse widow, whom I have given some account of was the death of
several foxes; for Sir Roger has told me, that in the course of his amors he
patched the western door of his stable. Whenever the widow was cruel, the foxes
were sure to pay for t. In proportion as his passion for the widow abated and
old age came on, he left off fox-hunting; but a hare is not yet safe that sits
within ten miles of his house.

11. There is no kind of exercise which I would so recommend to my readers of
both sexes as this of riding, as there is none which so much conduces to
health, and is every way accommodated to the body, according to the idea which
I have given of it. Dr. Sydenham is very lavish in its praises; and if the
English reader will see the mechanical effects of it described at length, he
may find them in a book published not many years since, under the title of
Medicina Gymnastica.

12. For my own part when I am in town, for want of these opportunities, I
exercise myself an hour every morning upon a dumb bell that is placed in a
corner of my room, and pleases me the more because it does every thing I
require in the most profound silence. My landlady and her daughters are so well
acquainted with my hours of exercise, that they never come into my room to
disturb me whilst I am ringing.

13. When I was some years younger than I am at present, I used to employ
myself in a more laborious diversion, which I learned from a Latin treatise of
exercise, that is written with great erudition: It is there called the (...),
or the fighting with a man's own shadow, and consists in the brandishing of two
short sticks grasped in each hand, and loaded with plugs of lead at either end.
This opens the chest, exercises the limbs, and gives a man all the pleasure of
boxing, without the blows.

14. I could wish that several learned men would lay out that time which they
employ in controversies and disputes about nothing, in this method of fighting
with their own shadows. It might conduce very much to evaporate the spleen,
which makes them uneasy to the public as well as to themselves.

As I am a compound of soul and body, I consider myself as obliged to a double
scheme of duties; and think I have not fulfilled the business of the day, when
I do not thus employ the one in labor and exercise, as well as the other in
study and contemplation*

15. There is a story in the Arabian Nights Tales, of a king who had long
languished under an ill habit of body, and had taken abundance of remedies to
no purpose. At length, sa^s the fable, a physician cured him by the following
method: he took an hollow ball of wood, and filled it with several drugs; after
which he closed it up so artificially that nothing appeared. He likewise took a
mall, and after having hollowed the handle, and that part which strikes the
ball, enclosed in them several drugs after the same manner as in the ball
itself.

16. He then ordered the sultan who was his patient, to exercise himself early
in the morning with these rightly prepared instruments, till such time as he
should sweat: when, as the story goes, the virtue of the medicaments perspiring
through the wood, had so good an influence on the sultan's constitution, that
they cured him of an indisposition which all the compositions he had taken
inwardly had not been able to remove.

17. This eastern allegory is finely contrived to show us how beneficial bodily
labor is to health, and that exercise is the most effectual physic. I have
described in my hundred and fifteenth paper, from the general structure and
mechanism of an human body, how absolutely necessary exercise is for its
preservation; I shall in this place recommend another great preservative of
health, which in many cases produces the same effects as exercise, and may, in
some measure, supply its place, where opportunities of exercise are wanting.

18. The preservative I am speaking of is temperance, which has those
particular advantages above all other means of health, that it may be practiced
by all ranks and conditions, at any season, or in any place. It is a kind of
regimen into which every man may put himself, without interruption to business,
expense of money, or loss of time. If exercise throws off all superfluities,
temperance prevents them: if exercise clears the vessels, temperance neither
satiates nor over-strains them: if exercise raises proper ferments in the
humors, and promotes the circulation of the blood, temperance gives nature her
full play, and enables her to exert herself in all her force and vigor: if
exercise dissipates a growing distemper, temperance starves it.

19. Physic, for the most part, is nothing else but the substitute of exercise
or temperance. Medicines are indeed absolutely necessary in acute distempers,
that cannot wait the slow operations of these two great instruments of health;
but did men live in an habitual course of exercise and temperance, there would
be but little occasion for them. Accordingly we find that those parts of the
world are the most healthy, where they subsist by the chase; and that men lived
longest when their lives were employed in hunting, and when they had little
food besides what they caught.

20. Blistering, cupping, bleeding, are seldom of use to any but to the idle
and intemperate; as all those inward applications, which are so much in
practice among us, are, for the most part, nothing else but expedients to make
luxury consistent with health. The apothecary is perpetually employed in
countermining the cook and the vintner. It is said of Diogenes, that meeting a
young man who was going to a feast, he took him up in the street, and carried
him home to his friends, as one who was running into imminent danger, had he
not prevented him.

21. What would that philosopher have said, had he been present at the gluttony
of a modern meal? would not he have thought the master of a family mad, and
have begged his servant to tie down his hands, had he seen him devour fowl,
fish, and flesh; swallow oil and vinegar, wines and spices; throw down salads
of twenty different herbs, sauces of an hundred ingredients, confections and
fruits of numberless sweets and flavours? What unnatural motions and
counter-ferments must such a medley of intemperance produce in the body? For my
part, when I behold a fashionable table set out in all its magnificence, I
fancy, that I see gouts and dropsies, fevers and lethargies, with other
innumerable distempers, lying in ambuscade among the dishes.

22. Nature delights in the most plain and simple diet. Every animal, but man,
keeps to one dish. Herbs are the food of this species, fish of that, and flesh
of a third. Man falls upon every thing that comes in his way; not the smallest
fruit or excrescence of the earth, scarce a berry, or a mushroom, can escape
him.

It is impossible to lay down any determinate rule for temperance, because what
is luxury in one may be temperance in another; but there are few that have
lived any time in the world, who are not judges of their own constitutions, so
far as to know what kinds and what proportions of food do best agree with them.

23. Were I to consider my readers as my patients, and to prescribe such a kind
of temperance as is accommodated to all persons, and such as is particularly
suitable to our climate and way of living, I would copy the following rules of
a very eminent physician. Make your whole repast out of one dish. If you
indulge in a second, avoid drinking any thing strong till you have finished
your meal: at the same time abstain from all sauces, or at least such as are
not the most plain and simple.

24. A man could not be well-guilty of gluttony, if he stuck to these few
obvious and easy rules. In the first case, there would be no variety of tastes
to solicit his palate, and occasion excess; nor in the second any artificial
provocatives to relieve satiety, and create a false appetite. Were I to
prescribe a rule for drinking, it should be formed upon a saying quoted by Sir
William Temple; The first glass for myself, the second for my friends, the
third for good humor, and the fourth for my enemies. But because it is
impossible for one who lives in the world to diet himself always in so
philosophical a manner, I think every man should have his days of abstinence,
according as his constitution will permit.

25. These are great reliefs to nature, as they qualify her for struggling with
hunger and thirst, whenever any distemper or duty of life may put her upon such
difficulties; and at the same time give her an opportunity of extricating
herself from her oppressions, and recovering the several tones and springs of
her distended vessels. Besides that, abstinence well-timed often kills a
sickness in embryo, and destroys the first seeds of an indisposition.

26. It is observed by two or three ancient authors, that Socrates,
notwithstanding he lived in Athens during that great plague, which has made so
much noise through all ages, and has been celebrated at different times by such
eminent hands; I say, notwithstanding that he lived in the time of this
devouring pestilence, he never caught the least infection, which those writers
unanimously ascribe to that uninterrupted temperance which he always observed.

27. And here I cannot but mention an observation which I have often made, upon
reading the lives of the philosophers, and comparing them with any series of
kings or great men of the same number. If we consider these ancient sages, a
great part of whose philosophy consisted in a temperate and abstemious course
of life, one would think the life of a philosopher and the life of a man were
of two different dates. For we find, that the generality of these wise men were
nearer a hundred than sixty years of age at the time of their respective deaths.

28. But the most remarkable instance of the efficacy of temperance toward the
procuring of long life, is what we meet with in a little book published by
Lewis Cornaro the Venetian; which I the rather mention, because it is of
undoubted credit, as the late Venetian ambassador, who was of the same family,
attested more than once in conversation, when he resided in England. Cornaro,
who was the author of the little treatise I am mentioning, was of an infirm
constitution, till about forty, when by obstinately persisting in an exact
course of temperance, he recovered a perfect state of health; insomuch that at
fourscore he published his book, which has been translated into English, under
the title of Sure and certain methods of attaining a long and healthy life.

29 He lived to give a third or fourth edition of it, and after having passed
his hundredth year, died without pain or agony, and like one who falls asleep.
The treatise I mention has been taken notice of by several eminent authors, and
is written with such a spirit of cheerfulness, religion and good sense, as are
the natural concomitants of temperance and sobriety. The mixture of the old man
in it is rather a recommendation than a discredit to it.

The Duty of Secrecy.
1. IT is related by Quintus Curtius, that the Persians always conceived a
lasting and invincible contempt of a man who had violated the laws of secrecy:
for they thought, that, however he might be deficient in the qualities
requisite to actual excellence, the negative virtues at least were always in
his power, and though he perhaps could not speak well ^he was to try, it was
still easy for him not to speak.

2. In this opinion of the easiness of secrecy, they seem to have considered it
as opposed, not to treachery, but loquacity, and to have conceived the man,
whom they thus censured, not frighted by menaces to reveal, or bribed by
promises to betray, but incited by the mere pleasure of talking, or some other
motive equally trivial, to lay open his heart without reflection, and to let
whatever he knew slip from him, only for want of power to retain it.

3. Whether, by their settled and avowed scorn of thoughtless talkers, the
Persians were able to diffuse to any great extent, the virtue of taciturnity,
we are hindered by the distances of those times from being able to discover,
there being very few memoirs remaining of the court of Persepolis, nor any
distinct accounts handed down to us of their office-clerks, their ladies of the
bedchamber, their attorneys, their chamber-maids, or their footmen.

4. In these latter ages, though the old animosity against a prattler is still
retained, it appears wholly to have lost its effects upon the conduct of
mankind; for secrets are so seldom kept, that it may with some reason be
doubted, whether the ancients were not mistaken in their first postulate,
whether the quality of retention be so generally bestowed, and whether a secret
has not some subtle volatility, by which it escapes almost imperceptibly at
the smallest vent; or some power of fermentation, by which it expands itself so
as to burst the heart that will not give it way.

5. Those that study either the body or the mind of man, very often find the
most specious and pleasing theory falling under the weight of contrary
experience; and instead of gratifying their vanity by inferring effects from
causes, they are always reduced at last to conjecture causes from effects. That
it is easy to be secret the speculatist can demonstrate in his retreat, and
therefore thinks himself justified in placing confidence; the man of the world
knows, that, whether difficult or not, it is uncommon, and therefore finds
himself rather inclined to search after the reason of this universal failure in
one of the most important duties of society.

6. The vanity of being known to be trusted with a secret is generally one of
the chief motives to disclose it; for however absurd it may be thought to boast
an honor, by an act that shows that it was conferred without merit, yet most
men seem rather inclined to confess the want of virtue than of importance, and
more willingly show their influence and their power though at the expense of
their probity, than glide through life with no other pleasure than the private
consciousness of fidelity: which, while it is preserved must be without praise,
except from the single person who tries and knows it.

7. There are many ways of telling a secret, by which a man exempts himself
from the reproaches of his conscience, and gratifies his pride without
suffering himself to believe that he impairs his virtue. He tells the private
affairs of his patron, or his friend only to those from whom he would not
conceal his own; he tells them to those, who have no temptation to betray their
trust, or with a denunciation of a certain forfeiture of his friendship, if he
discovers that they become public.

8. Secrets are very frequently told in the first ardour of kindness, or of
love, for the sake of proving by so important a sacrifice, the sincerity of
professions, or the warmth of tenderness; but with this motive, though it be
sometimes strong in itself, vanity generally concurs, since every man naturally
desires to be most esteemed by those whom he loves, or with whom he converses,
with whom he passes his hours of pleasure, and to whom he retires from business
and from care.

9. When the discovery of secrets is under consideration, there is always a
distinction carefully to be made between our own and those of another, those of
which we are fully masters as they effect only our own interest, and those
which are reposited with us in trust, and involve the happiness or convenience
of such as we have no right to expose to hazard by experiments upon their
lives, without their consent. To tell our own secrets is generally folly, but
that folly is without guilt; to communicate those with which we are entrusted
is always treachery, and treachery for the most part combined with folly.

10. There have, indeed, been some enthusiastic and irrational zealots for
friendship, who have maintained, and perhaps believed, that one friend has a
right to all that is in possession of another; and that therefore it is a
violation of kindness to exempt any secret from this boundless confidence:
accordingly a late female minister of state has been shameless enough to inform
the world, that she used, when she wanted to extract any thing from her
sovereign, to remind her of Montaigne's reasoning, who has determined, that to
tell a secret to a friend is no breach of fidelity, because the number of
persons trusted is not multiplied, a man and his friend being virtually the
same.

11. That such a fallacy could be imposed upon any human understanding, or that
an author could have been imagined to advance a position so remote from truth
and reason, any otherwise than as a declaimer, to show to what extent he could
stretch his imagination, and with what strength he could press his principle,
would scarcely have been credible, had not this lady kindly shown us how far
weakness may be deluded, or indolence amused.

12. But since it appears, that even this sophistry has been able, with the
help of a strong desire to repose in quiet upon the understanding of another,
to mislead honest intentions, and an understanding not contemptible, it may not
be superfluous to remark, that those things which are common among friends are
only such as either possesses in his own right, and can alienate or destroy
without injury to any other person. Without this limitation, confidence must
run on without end, the second person may tell the secret to the third upon the
same principle as he received it from the first, and the third may hand it
forward to a fourth, till at last it is told in the round of friendship to them
from whom it was the first intention chiefly to conceal it.

13. The confidence which Caius has of the faithfulness of Titius is nothing
more than an opinion which himself cannot know to be true, and which Claudius,
who first tells his secret to Caius, may know, at least may suspect to be
false; and therefore the trust is transferred by Caius, if he reveal what has
been told him, to one from whom the person originally concerned would probably
have withheld it; and whatever may be the event, Caius has hazarded the
happiness of his friend, without necessity and without permission, and has put
that trust in the hand of fortune which was given only to virtue.

14. All the arguments upon which a man who is telling the private affairs of
another may ground his confidence in security, he must upon reflection know to
be uncertain, because he finds them without effect upon himself. When he is
imagining that Titius will be cautious from a regard to his interest, his
reputation, or his duty, he ought to reflect that he is himself at that instant
acting in opposition to all these reasons, and revealing what interest,
reputation and duty direct him to conceal.

15. Every one feels that he should consider the man incapable of trust, who
believed himself at liberty to tell whatever he knew to the first whom he
should conclude deserving of his confidence: therefore Caius, in admitting
Titius to the affairs imparted only to himself, violates his faith, since he
acts contrary to the intention of Claudius, to whom that faith was given. For
promises of friendship are, like all others, useless and vain, unless they are
made in some known sense, adjusted and acknowledged by both parties.

16. I am not ignorant that many questions may be started relating to the duty
of secrecy, where the affairs are of public concern; where subsequent reasons
may arise to alter the appearance and nature of the trust; that the manner in
which the secret was told may change the degree of obligation; and that the
principles upon which a man is chosen for a confident may not always equally
constrain him.

17. But these scruples, if not too intricate, are of too extensive
consideration for my present purpose, nor are they such as generally occur in
common life; and though casuistical knowledge be useful in proper hands, yet it
ought by no means to be carelessly exposed, since most will use it rather to
lull than awaken their own consciences; and the threads of reasoning, on which
truth is suspended, are frequently drawn to such subtilty, that common eyes
cannot perceive, and common sensibility cannot feel them.

18. The whole doctrine as well as practice of secrecy is so perplexing and
dangerous, that, next to him who is compelled to trust, I think him unhappy who
is chosen to be trusted; for he is often involved in scruples without the
liberty of calling in the help of any other understanding; he is frequently
drawn into guilt, under the appearance of friendship and honesty; and sometimes
subjected to suspicion by the treachery of others, who are engaged without his
knowledge in the same schemes; for he that has one confident has generally
more, and when he is at last betrayed, is in doubt on whom he shall fix the
crime.

19. The rules therefore that I shall propose concerning secrecy, and from
which I think it not safe to deviate, without long and exact deliberation, are
-- Never to solicit the knowledge of a secret. Not willingly, nor without many
limitations, to accept such confidence when it is offered. When a secret is
once admitted, to consider the trust as of a very high nature, important to
society, and sacred as truth, and therefore not to be violated for any
incidental convenience, or slight appearance of contrary fitness.

Of Cheerfulness.
1. I Have always preferred cheerfulness to mirth. The latter I consider as an
act, the former as a habit of the mind. Mirth is short and transsient,
cheerfulness fixed and permanent. Those are often raised into the greatest
transports of mirth, who are subject to the greatest depressions of melancholy:
on the contrary, cheerfulness, though it does not give the mind such an
exquisite gladness, prevents us from falling into any depths of sorrow. Mirth
is like a flash of lightning that breaks through a gloom of clouds, and
glitters for a moment; cheerfulness keeps up a kind of daylight in the mind,
and fills it with a study and perpetual serenity.

2. Men of austere principles look upon mirth as too wanton and dissolute for a
state of probation, and as filled with a certain triumph and insolence of heart
that is inconsistent with a life which is every moment obnoxious to the
greatest dangers. Writers of this complexion have observed, that the sacred
person who was the great pattern of perfection, was never seen to laugh.

3. Cheerfulness of mind is not liable to any of these exceptions; it is of a
serious and composed nature; it does not throw the mind into a condition
improper for the present state of humanity, and is very conspicuous in the
characters of those who are looked upon as the greatest philosophers among the
heathens, as well as among those who have been deservedly esteemed as saints
and holy men among Christians.

4. If we consider cheerfulness in three lights, with regard to ourselves, to
those we converse with, and to the great Author of our being, it will not a
little recommend itself on each of these accounts. The man who is possessed of
this excellent frame of mind, is not only easy in his thoughts, but a perfect
master of all the powers and faculties of the soul: his imagination is always
clear, and his judgment undisturbed: his temper is even and unruffled, whether
in action or solitude. He comes with a relish to all those goods which nature
has provided for him, tastes all the pleasures of the creation which are poured
about him, and does not feel the full weight of those accidental evils which
may befall him.

5. If we consider him in relation to the persons whom he converses with, it
naturally produces love and good will toward him* A cheerful mind is not only
disposed to be affable and obliging, but raises the same good humor in those
who come within its influence. A man finds himself pleased, he does not know
why, with the cheerfulness of his companion: it is like a sudden sunshine that
awakens a secret delight in the mind, without her attending to it. The heart
rejoices of its own accord, and naturally flows out into friendship and
benevolence toward the person who has so kindly an effect upon it.

6. When I consider this cheerful state of mind in its third relation, I cannot
but look upon it as a constant habitual gratitude to the great Author of
nature. An inward cheerfulness is an implicit praise and thanksgiving to
Providence under all its dispensations. It is a kind of acquiescence in the
state wherein we are placed, and a secret approbation of the Divine will in his
conduct toward man.

7. There are but two things, which, in my opinion, can reasonably deprive us
of this cheerfulness of heart. The first of these is the sense of guilt. A man
who lives in a state of vice and impenitence can have no title to that evenness
and tranquillity of mind which is the health of the soul, and the natural
effect of virtue and innocence. Cheerfulness in an ill man deserves a harder
name than language can furnish us with, and is many degrees beyond what we
commonly call folly o^ madness.

8. Atheism, by which I mean a disbelief of a Supreme Being, and consequently
of a future state, under whatsoever title it shelters itself, may likewise very
reasonably deprive a man of this cheerfulness of temper. There is something so
particularly gloomy and offensive to human nature in the prospect of
nonexistence, that I cannot but wonder, with many excellent writers, how it is
possible for a man to outlive the expectation of it. For my own part, I think
the being of a God is so little to be doubted, that it is almost the only truth
we are sure of, and such a truth as we meet with in every object, in every
occurrence, and in every thought.

9. If we look into the characters of this tribe of infidels, we generally find
they are made up of pride, spleen, and cavil: it is indeed no wonder, that men,
who are uneasy to themselves, should be so to the rest of the world; and how is
it possible for a man to be otherwise than uneasy in himself, who is in danger
every moment of losing his entire existence, and dropping into nothing?

10. The vicious man and Atheist have therefore no pretense to cheerfulness,
and would act very unreasonably, should they endeavor after it. It is
impossible for any one to live in good humor, and enjoy his present existence,
who is apprehensive either of torment or of annihilation; of being miserable,
or of not being at all.

After having mentioned these two great principles, which are destructive of
cheerfulness in their own nature, as well as in right reason, I cannot think of
any other that ought to banish this happy temper from a virtuous mind. Pain and
sickness, shame and reproach, poverty and old age, nay death itself,
considering the shortness of their duration, and the advantage we may reap from
them, do not deserve the name of evils.

11. A good mind may bear up under them with fortitude, with indolence, and
with cheerfulness of heart. -- The tossing of a tempest does not discompose
him, which he is sure will bring him to a joyful harbor.

A man who uses his best endeavors to live according to the dictates of virtue
and right reason, has two perpetual sources of cheerfulness, in the
consideration of his own nature, and of that Being on whom he has a dependence.

12. If he looks into himself, he cannot but rejoice in that existence, which
is so lately bestowed upon him, and which, after millions of ages, will be
still new, and still in its beginning. How many self-congratulations naturally
arise in the mind, when it reflects on this its entrance into eternity, when it
takes a view of those improveable faculties, which in a few years, and even at
its first setting out, have made so considerable a progress, and which will be
still receiving an increase of perfection, and consequently an increase of
happiness?

13. The consciousness of such a being spreads a perpetual diffusion of joy
through the soul of a virtuous man, and makes him look upon himself every
moment as more happy than he knows how to conceive.

The second source of cheerfulness to a good mind is, its consideration of that
Being on whom we have our dependence, and in whom, though we behold him as yet
but in the first faint discoveries of his perfections, we see every thing that
we can imagine as great, glorious, or amiable. We find ourselves every where
upheld by his goodness, and surrounded by an immensity of love and mercy.

14. In short, we depend upon a Being, whose power qualifies him to make us
happy by an infinity of means, whose goodness and truth engage him to make
those happy who desire it of him, and whose unchangeableness will secure us in
this happiness to all eternity.

Such considerations, which every one should perpetually cherish in his
thoughts, will banish from us all that secret heaviness of heart which
unthinking men are subject to when they lie under no real affliction, all that
anguish which we may feel from any evil that actually oppresses us, to which I
may likewise add those little cracklings of mirth and folly, that are apter to
betray virtue than support it; and establish in us such an even and cheerful
temper, as makes us pleasing to ourselves, to those with whom we converse, and
to him whom we are made to please.

On the Advantages of a cheerful Temper.
[Spect. No. 387.] 1. CHEERFULNESS is, in the first place, the best promoter of
health. Repining and secret murmurs of heart give imperceptible strokes to
those delicate fibers of which the vital parts are composed, and wear out the
machine insensibly; not to mention those violent ferments which they stir up in
the blood, and those irregular disturbed motions, which they raise in the
animal spirits.

2. I scarce remember, in my own observation, to have met with many old men, or
with such, who (to use our English phrase) wear well, that had not at least a
certain indolence in their humor, if not a more than ordinary gaiety and
cheerfulness of heart. The truth of it is, health and cheerfulness mutually
beget each other; with this difference, that we seldom meet with a great degree
of health which is not attended with a certain cheerfulness, but very often see
cheerfulness where there is no great degree of health.

3. Cheerfulness bears the same friendly regard to the mind as to the body: it
banishes all anxious care and discontent, sooths and composes the passions, and
keeps the soul in a perpetual calm. But, having already touched on this last
consideration, I shall here take notice, that the world, in which we are
placed, is filled with innumerable objects that are proper to raise and keep
alive this happy temper of mind.

4. If we consider the world in its subserviency to man, one would think it was
made for our use; but if we consider it in its natural beauty and harmony, one
would be apt to conclude it was made for our pleasure. The sun, which is as the
great soul of the universe, and produces all the necessaries of life, has a
particular influence in chearing the mind of man, and making the heart glad.

5. Those several living creatures which are made for our service or
sustenance, at the same time either fill the woods with their music, furnish us
with game, or raise pleasing ideas in us by the delightfulness of their
appearance. Fountains, lakes, and rivers, are as refreshing to the imagination,
as to the soil through which they pass.

6. There are writers of great distinction, who have made it an argument for
Providence, that the whole earth is covered with green, rather than with any
other color, as being such a right mixture of light and shade, that it
comforts and strengthens the eye instead of weakening or grieving it. For this
reason, several painters have a green cloth hanging near them, to ease the eye
upon, after too great an application to their coloring.

7. A famous modern philosopher accounts for it in the following manner; all
colors that are more luminous, overpower and dissipate the animal spirits
which are employed in sight: on the contrary, those that are more obscure do
not give the animal spirits a sufficient exercise; whereas the rays that
produce in us the idea of green, fall upon the eye in such a due proportion,
that they give the animal spirits their proper play, and, by keeping up the
struggle in a just balance, excite a very pleasing and agreeable sensation. Let
the cause be what it will, the effect is certain; for which reason, the poets
ascribe to this particular color the epithet of cheerful.

8. To consider further this double end in the works of nature, and how they
are, at the same time, both useful and entertaining, we find that the most
important parts in the vegetable world are those which are the most beautiful.
These are the seeds by which the several races of plants are propagated and
continued, and which are always lodged in flowers or blossoms. Nature seems to
hide her principal design, and to be industrious in making the earth gay and
delightful, while she is carrying on her great work, and intent upon her own
preservation. The husbandman, after the same manner, is employed in laying out
the whole country into a kind of garden or landscape, and making every thing
smile about him, whilst, in reality, he thinks of nothing but of the harvest
and increase which is to arise from it.

9. We may further observe how Providence has taken care to keep up this
cheerfulness in the mind of man, by having formed it after such a manner, as to
make it capable of conceiving delight from several objects which seem to have
very little use in them; as from the wildness of rocks and deserts, and the
like grotesque parts of nature. Those who are versed in philosophy may still
carry this consideration higher by observing, that, if matter had appeared to
us endowed only with those real qualities which it actually possesses, it would
have made but a very joyless and uncomfortable figure; and why has Providence
given it a power of producing in us such imaginary qualities, as tastes and
colors, sounds and smells, heat and cold, but that man, while he is conversant
in the lower stations of nature, might have his mind cheared and delighted with
agreeable sensations? In short, the whole universe is a kind of theater filled
with objects that either raise in us pleasure, amusement, or admiration.

10. The reader's own thoughts will suggest to him the vi^issitude of day and
night, the change of seasons, with all that variety of scenes which diversify
the face of nature, and fill the mind with a perpetual succession of beautiful
and pleasing images.

I shall not here mention the several entertainments of art, with the pleasures
of friendship, books, conversation, and other accidental diversions of life,
because I would only take notice of such incitements to a cheerful temper, as
offer themselves to persons of all ranks and conditions, and which may
sufficiently show us, that Providence did not design this world should be
filled with murmurs and repinings, or that the heart of man should be involved
in gloom and melancholy.

11. I the more inculcate this cheerfulness of temper, as it is a virtue in
which our countrymen are observed to be more deficient than any other nation.
Melancholy is a kind of demon that haunts our island, and often conveys herself
to us in an easterly wind. A celebrated French novelist, in opposition to those
who begin their romances with a flowery season of the year, enters on his story
thus: In the gloomy month of November, when the people of England hang and
drown themselves, a disconsolate lover walked out into the fields, etc.

12. Every one ought to fence against the temper of his climate or
constitution, and frequently to indulge in himself those considerations which
may give him a serenity of mind, and enable him to bear up cheerfully against
those little evils and misfortunes which are common to human nature, and which,
by a right improvement of them, will produce a satiety of joy, and an
uninterrupted happiness.

13. At the same time that I would engage my reader to consider the world in
its most agreeable lights, I must own there are many evils which naturally
spring up amidst the entertainments that are provided for us; but these, if
rightly considered, should be far from overcasting the mind with sorrow, or
destroying that cheerfulness of temper which I have been recommending.

14. This interspersion of evil with good, and pain with (...), in the works of
nature, is very truly ascribed by Mr. Lock in his Essay upon Human
Understanding, to a moral reason, in the following words:

Beyond all this, we may find another reason why God has scattered up and down
several degrees of pleasure and pain, in all the things that environ and affect
us, and blended them together, in almost all that our thoughts and senses have
to do with: that we finding imperfection, dissatisfaction, and want of complete
happiness in all the enjoyments which the creatures can afford us, might be led
to seek it in the enjoyment of him, with whom there is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

Discretion.
1. I HAVE often thought if the minds of men were laid open, we should see but
little difference between that of the wise man and that of the fool. There are
infinite reveries, numberless extravagancies, and a perpetual train of
vanities, which pass through both. The great difference is, that the first
knows how to pick and cull his thoughts for conversation, by suppressing some,
and communicating others; whereas the other lets them all indifferently fly out
in words. This sort of discretion, however, has no place in private
conversation between intimate friends. On such occasions the wisest men very
often talk like the weakest; for indeed the talking with a friend is nothing
else but thinking aloud.

2. Tully has therefore very justly exposed a precept delivered by some ancient
writers, that a man should live with his enemy in such a manner, as might leave
him room to become his friend; and with his friend in such a manner, that if he
became his enemy, it should not be in his power to hurt him. The first part of
this rule, which regards our behavior toward an enemy, is indeed very
reasonable, as well as prudential; but the latter part of it, which regards our
behavior toward a friend, savours more of cunning than of discretion, and
would cut a man off from the greatest pleasures of life, which are the ^^eedoms
of conversation with a bosom friend. Besides, that when a friend is turned into
an enemy, and (as the son of Sirach calls him) a betrayer of secrets, the world
is just enough to accuse the perfidiousness of the friend, rather than the
indiscretion of the person who confided in him.

3. Discretion does not only show itself in words, but in all the circumstances
of action; and is like an under-agent of Providence, to guide and direct us in
the ordinary concerns of life.

There are many more shining qualities in the mind of man, but there is none so
useful as discretion; it is this indeed which gives a value to all the rest,
which sets them at work in their proper times and places, and turns them to the
advantage of the person* who is possessed of them. Without it, learning is
pedantry, and wit impertinence; virtue itself looks like weakness; the best
parts only qualify a man to be more sprightly in errors, and active to his own
prejudice.

4. Nor does discretion only make a man the master of his own parts, but of
other men's. The discreet man finds out the talents of those he converses with,
and knows how to apply them to proper uses. Accordingly, if we look into
particular communities and divisions of men, we may observe, that it is the
discreet man, not the witty, nor the learned, nor the brave, who guides the
conversation, and gives measures to the society. A man with great talents, but
void of discretion, is like Polyphemus in the fable, strong and blind, endued
with an irresistible force, which, for want of sight, is of no use to him.

5. Though a man has all other perfections, and wants discretion, he will be of
no great consequence in the world; but if he has this single talent in
perfection, and but a common share of others, he may do what he pleases in his
station of life.

At the same time that I think discretion the most useful talent a man can be
master of, I look upon cunning to be the accomplishment of little, mean,
ungenerous minds. Discretion points out the noblest ends to us, and pursues the
most proper and laudable methods of attaining them: cunning has only private
selfish aims, and sticks at nothing which may make them succeed.

6. Discretion has large and extended views, and, like a well-formed eye,
commands a whole horizon: cunning is a kind of short-sightedness, that
discovers the minutest objects which are near at hand, but is not able to
discern things at a distance. Discretion, the more it is discovered, gives a
greater authority to the person who possesses it: cunning, when it is once
detected, loses its force, and makes a man incapable of bringing about even
those events which he might have done, had he passed only for a plain man.
Discretion is the perfection of reason, and a guide to us in all the duties of
life: cunning is a kind of instinct, that only looks out after our immediate
interest and welfare.

7. Discretion is only found in men of strong sense and good understandings:
cunning is often to be met with in brutes themselves, and in persons who are
but the fewest removes from them. In short, cunning is only the mimic of
discretion, and may pass upon weak men, in the same manner as vivacity is often
mistaken for wit, and gravity for wisdom.

The cast of mind which is natural to a discreet man, makes him look forward
into futurity, and consider what will be his condition millions of ages hence,
as well as what it is at present.

8. He knows, that the misery or happiness which are reserved for him in
another world, lose nothing of their reality by being placed at so great a
distance from him. The objects do not appear little to him because they are
remote. He considers that those pleasures and pains which lie hid in eternity,
approach nearer to him every moment, and will be present with him in their full
weight and measure, as much as those pains and pleasures which he feels at this
very instant. For this reason he is careful to secure to himself that which is
the proper happiness of his nature, and the ultimate design of his being.

9. He carries his thoughts to the end of every action, and considers the most
distant as well as the most immediate effects of it. He supersedes every little
prospect of gain and advantage which offers itself here, if he does not find it
consistent with his views of an hereafter. In a word, his hopes are full of
immortality, his schemes are large and glorious, and his conduct suitable to
one who knows his true interest, and how to pursue it by proper methods.

10. I have, in this essay upon discretion, considered it both as an
accomplishment and as a virtue, and have therefore described it in its full
extent; not only as it is conversant about worldly affairs, but as it regards
our whole existence; not only as it is the guide of a mortal creature, but as
it is in general the director of a reasonable being. It is in this light that
discretion is represented by the wise man, who sometimes mentions it under the
name of discretion, and sometimes under that of wisdom.

11. It is indeed (as described in the latter part of this paper) the greatest
wisdom, but at the same time in the power of every one to attain. Its
advantages are infinite, but its acquisition easy; or, to speak of her in the
words of the apocryphal writer, Wisdom is glorious, and never fades away, yet
she is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her.

12. She preventeth them that desire her, in making herself first known unto
them. He that seeks her early shall have no great travel: for he shall find
her sitting at his doors. To think therefore upon her is perfection of wisdom,
and whosoever watches for her, shall quickly be without care. For she goes about
seeking such as are worthy of her, shows herself favorably unto them in the
ways, and meets them in every thought.

Pride.
1. THERE is no passion which steals into the heart more imperceptibly, and
covers itself under more disguises, than pride. For my own part, I think if
there is any passion or vice which I am wholly a stranger to, it is this;
though at the same time, perhaps this very judgment which I form of myself,
proceeds, in some measure, from this corrupt principle.

2. I have been always wonderfully delighted with that sentence in holy writ,
Pride was not made for man. There is not indeed any single view of human nature
under its present condition, which is not sufficient to extinguish in us all
the secret seeds of pride; and, on the contrary, to sink the soul into the
lowest state of humility, and what the schoolmen call self-annihilation. Pride
was not made for man, as he is, 1. A sinful, 2. An ignorant, 3. A miserable
being.


There is nothing in his understanding, in his will, or in his present
condition, that can tempt any considerate creature to pride or vanity.

3. These three very reasons why he should not be proud, are notwithstanding
the reasons why he is so. Were not he a sinful creature, he would not be
subject to a passion which rises from the depravity of his nature; were he not
an ignorant creature, he would see that he has nothing to be proud of; and were
not the whole species miserable, he would not have those wretched objects
before his eyes, which are the occasions of this passion* and which make one
man value himself more than another.

4. A wise man will be contented that his glory be deferred till such time as
he shall be truly glorified; when his understanding shall be cleared, his will
rectified, and his happiness assured; or in other words, when he shall be
neither sinful, nor ignorant, nor miserable.

5. If there be any thing which makes human nature appear ridiculous to beings
of superior faculties, it must be pride. They know so well the vanity of those
imaginary perfections that swell the heart of man, and of those little
supernumerary advantages, whether in birth, fortune, or title, which one man
enjoys above another, that it must certainly very much astonish, if it does not
very much divert them, when they see a mortal puffed up, and valuing himself
above his neighbors on any of these accounts, at the same time that he is
obnoxious to all the common calamities of the species.

6. To set this thought in its true light, we will fancy, if you please, that
yonder molehill is inhabited by reasonable creatures, and that every pismire
(his shape and way of life only excepted) is endowed with human passions. How
should we smile to hear one give us an account of the pedigrees, distinctions,
and titles that reign among them!

7. Observe how the whole swarm divide and make way for the pismire that passes
through them! You must understand he is an emmet of quality, and has better
blood in his veins than any pismire in the molehill. -- Don't you see how
sensible he is of it, how slow he marches forward, how the whole rabble of ants
keep their distance?

8. Here you may observe one placed upon a little eminence, and looking down on
a long row of laborers. He is the richest insect on this side the hillock, he
has a walk of half a yard in length, and a quarter of an inch in breadth, he
keeps a hundred menial servants, and has at least fifteen barley-corns in his
granary. He is now chiding, and beslaving the emmet that stands before him, and
who, for all that (...) ^an discover, is as good an emmet as himself.

9. (...) here comes an insect of figure! don't you take notice of a little
white straw that he carries in his mouth? That straw, you must understand, he
would not part with for the longest tract about the molehill: did you but know
what he has undergone to purchase it! See how the ants of all qualities and
conditions swarm about him! Should this straw drop out of his mouth, you would
see all this numerous circle of attendants follow the next that took it up, and
leave the discarded insect, or run over his back to come at his successor.

10. If now you have a mind to see all the ladies of the molehill, observe
first the pismire that listens to the emmet on her left hand, at the same time
that she seems to turn away her head from him. He tells this poor insect that
she is a goddess, that her eyes are brighter than the sun, that life and death
are at her disposal. She believes him, and gives herself a thousand little airs
upon it.

11. Mark the vanity of the pismire on your left hand. She can scarce crawl
with age; but you must know she values herself upon her birth; and if you mind,
spurns at every one that comes within her reach. The little nimble coquette
that is running along by the side of her, is a wit. She has broke many a
pismire's heart. Do but observe what a drove of lovers are running after her.

12. We will here finish this imaginary scene; but first of all to draw the
parallel closer, will suppose, if you please, that death comes down upon the
molehill, in the shape of a cock-sparrow, who picks up, without distinction,
the pismire of quality and his flatterers, the pismire of substance and his day
laborers, the white straw officer and his sycophants, with all the goddesses,
wits, and beauties of the molehill.

13. May we not imagine that beings of superior natures and perfections regard
all the instances of pride and vanity, among our own species, in the same kind
of view, when they take a survey of those who inhabit the earth, or, in the
language of an ingenious French poet, of those pismires that people this heap
of dirt, which human vanity has divided into climates and regions.

GUARDIAN, Vol. II. No. 153. Drunkenness.
1. NO vices are so incurable as those which men are apt to glory in. One would
wonder how drunkenness should have the good luck to be of this number.
Anarcharsis, being invited to a match of drinking at Corinth, demanded the
prize very humourously, because he was drunk before any of the rest of the
company; for, says he, when we run a race, he who arrives at the gaol first, is
entitled to the reward:

2. On the contrary, in this thirsty generation, the honor falls upon him who
carries off the greatest quantity of liquor, and knocks down the rest of the
company. I was the other day with honest Will Funnell, the West Saxon, who was
reckoning up how much liquor had past through him in the last twenty years of
his life, which, according to his computation, amounted to twenty-three
hogsheads o^ october, four ton of port, h^ a kilderkin of small-beer, nineteen
barrels of cider, and three glasses of champagne; besides which he had assisted
at four hundred bowls of punch, not to mention sips, drams, and whe^s without
number.

3. I question not but every reader's memory will suggest to him several
ambitious young men, who are as vain in this particular as Will Funnell, and
can boast of a glorious exploits.

Our modern philosophers observe, that there is a general decay of moisture in
the globe of the earth. This they chiefly ascribe to the growth of vegetables,
which incorporate into their own substance many fluid bodies that never return
again to their former nature:

4. But with submission, they ought to throw into their account, those
innumerable rational beings which fetch their nourishment chiefly out of
liquids; especially when we consider that men, compared with their
fellow creatures, drink much more than comes to their share.

5. But however highly this tribe of people may think of themselves, a drunken
man is a greater monster than any that is to be found among all the creatures
which God has made; as indeed there is no character which appears more
despicable and deformed, in the eyes of all reasonable persons, than that of a
drunkard.

6. Bonosus one of our own countrymen, who was addicted to this vice, having
set up for a share in the Roman empire, and being defeated in a great battle,
hanged himself. When he was seen by the army in this melancholy situation,
notwithstanding he had behaved himself very bravely, the common jest was, that
the thing they saw hanging upon the tree before them, was not a man, but a
bottle.

7. This vice has very fatal effects on the mind, the body, and fortune of the
person who is devoted to it.

In regard to the mind, it first of all discovers every flaw in it. The sober
man, by the strength of reason, may keep under and subdue every vice or folly
to which he is most inclined; but wine makes every latent seed sprout up in the
soul, and show itself: it gives fury to the passions, and force to those
objects which are apt to produce them.

8. When a young fellow complained to an old philosopher that his wife was not
handsome, Put less water in your wine, says the philosopher, and you will quickly
make her so. Wine heightens indifference into love, love into jealousy, and
jealousy into madness. It often turns the good-natured man into an idiot, and
the choleric into an assassin. It gives bitterness to resentment, it makes
vanity insupportable, and displays every little spot of the soul in its utmost
deformity.

9. Nor does this vice only betray the hidden fault^ of a man, and show them in
the most odious colors, but often occasions faults to which he is not
naturally subject. There is more of turn than of truth in a saying of Seneca,
that drunkenness does not produce, but discover faults. Common experience
teaches the contrary.

10. Wine throws a man out of himself, and infuses qualities into the mind,
which she is a stranger to in her sober moments. The person you converse with,
after the third bottle, is not the same man who at first sat down at the table
with you. Upon this maxim is founded one of the prettiest sayings I ever met
with, which is inscribed to Publius Syrus, He who jests upon a man that is
drunk, injures the absent.

11. Thus does drunkenness act in direct contradiction to reason, whose
business it is to clear the mind of every vice which is crept into it, and to
guard it against all the approaches of any that endeavor to make its entrance.
But besides these ill effects which this vice produces in the person who is
actually under its dominion, it has also a bad influence on the mind, even in
its sober moments, as it insensibly weakens the understanding, impaires the
memory, and makes those faults habitual which are produced by frequent
excesses: it wastes the estate, banishes reputation, consumes the body, and
renders a man of the brightest parts the common jest of an insignificant clown.

12. A method of spending one's time agreeably is a thing so little studied,
that the common amusement of our young gentlemen (especially of such as are at
a distance from those of the first breeding) is drinking. This way o^
entertainment has custom on its side; but as much as it has prevailed, I
believe there have been very few companies that have been guilty of excess this
way, where there have not happened more accidents which make against, than for
the continuance of it.

13. It is very common that events arise from a debauch, which are fatal, and
always such as are disagreeable. With all a man's reason and good sense about
him, his tongue is apt to utter things out of a mere gaiety of heart, which may
displease his best friends. Who then would trust himself to the power of wine,
without saying more against it, than that it raises the imagination and
depresses the judgment?

14. Were there only this single consideration, that we are less masters of
ourselves when we drink in the least proportion above the exigences of thirst;
I say, were this all that could be objected, it were sufficient to make us
abhor this vice. But we may go on to say, that as he who drinks but a little is
not master of himself, so he who drinks much is a slave to himself.

15. As for my part, I ever esteemed a drunkard of all vicious persons the most
vicious: for if our actions are to be weighed and considered according to the
intention of them, what can we think of him who puts himself into a
circumstance wherein he can have no intention at all, but incapacitates himself
for the duties and offices of life, by a suspension of all his faculties.

16. If a man considers that he cannot, under the oppression of drink, be a
friend, a gentleman, a master, or a subject; that he has so long banished
himself from all that is dear, and given up all that is sacred to him, he would
even then think of a debauch with horror: but when he looks still further, and
acknowledges that he is not only expelled out of all the relations of life, but
also liable to offend against them all, what words can express the terror and
detestation he would have of such a condition? And yet he owns all this of
himself who says he was drunk last night.

17. As I have all along persisted in it, that all the vicious in general are
in a state of death, so I think I may add to the nonexistence of drunkards,
that they died by their own hands. He is certainly as guilty of suicide who
perishes by a slow, as he that is dispatched by an immediate poison.

18. In my last lucubration I proposed the general use of water gruel, and
hinted that it might not be amiss at this very season: but as there are some,
whose cases, in regard to their families, will not admit of delay, I have used
my interest in several wards of the city, that the wholesome restorative
abovementioned may be given in tavern-kitchens to all the mornings draught men
within the walls when they call for wine before noon.

19. For a further restraint and mark upon such persons, I have given orders,
that in all the offices where policies are drawn upon lives, it shall be added
to the article which prohibits that the nominee should cross the sea, the
words, Provided also, That the abovementioned, A. B. shall not drink before
dinner during the term mentioned in this indenture.

20. I am not without hopes that by this method I shall bring some unsizeable
friends of mine into shape and breadth, as well as others who are languid and
consumptive, into health and vigor. Most of the self-murderers whom I yet
hinted at, are such as preserve a certain regularity in taking their poison,
and make it mix pretty well with their food:

21. But the most conspicuous of those who destroy themselves, are such as in
their youth fall into this sort of debauchery, and contract a certain
uneasiness of spirit, which is not to be diverted but by tippling as often as
they can fall into company in the day, and conclude with downright drunkenness
at night. These gentlemen never know the satisfaction of youth, but skip the
years of manhood, and are decrepit soon after they are of age.

22. I was godfather to one of these old fellows. He is now three and thirty,
which is the grand climacteric of a young drunkard. I went to visit the crazy
wretch this morning, with no other purpose, but to rally him, under the pain
and uneasiness of being sober.

But as our faults are double when they affect others besides ourselves, so
this vice is still more odious in a married than a single man.

23. He that is the husband of a woman of honor, and comes home overloaded
with wine, is still more contemptible, in proportion to the regard we have to
the unhappy consort of his bestiality. The imagination cannot shape to itself
any thing more monstrous and unnatural, than the familiarities between
drunkenness and chastity. The wretched Astraea, who is the perfection of beauty
and innocence, has long been thus condemned for life. The romantic tales of
virgins devoted to the jaws of monsters, have nothing in them so terrible, as
the gift of Astraea to that bacchanal.

24. The reflection of such a match as spotless innocence with abandoned
lewdness, is what puts this vice in the worst figure it can bear with regard to
others; but when it is looked upon with respect only to the drunkard himself,
it has deformities enough to make it disagreeable, which may be summed up in a
word, by allowing, that he who resigns his reason, is actually guilty of all
that he is liable to from the want of reason.

TATLER, VOL. IV. No. 241. Gaming.
SIR,
1. AS soon as you have set up your unicorn, there is no question, but the
ladies will make him push very furiously at the men; for which reason, I think
it is good to be beforehand with them, and make the lion roar aloud at female
irregularities. Among these, I wonder how their gaming has so long escaped your
notice.

2. You who converse with the sober family of the Lizards, are perhaps a
stranger to these viragos; but what would you say, should you see the Sparkler
shaking her elbow for a whole night together, and thumping the table with a
dice-box? Or how would you like to hear the good widow lady herself returning
to her house at midnight, and alarming the whole street with a most enormous
rap, after having sat up till that time at crimp or ombre? Sir, I am the
husband of one of these female gamesters, and a great loser by it both in my
rest and my pocket. As my wife reads your papers, one upon this subject might
be of use both to her, and

Your humble Servant.


3. I should ill deserve the name of Guardian, did I not caution all my fair
wards against a practice, which, when it runs to excess, is the most shameful,
but one, that the female world can fall into. The ill consequences of it are
more than can be contained in this paper. However, that I may proceed in
method, I shall consider them. First, as they relate to the mind. Secondly, as
they relate to the body.

4. Could we look into the mind of a female gamester, we should see it full of
nothing but trumps and mattadores. Her slumbers are haunted with kings, queens,
and knaves. The day lies heavy upon her 'till the play-season returns, when for
half a dozen hours together, all her faculties are employed in shuffling,
cutting, dealing and sorting out a pack of cards; and no ideas to be discovered
in a soul which calls itself rational, excepting little square figures of
painted and spotted paper.

5. Was the understanding, that divine part in our composition, given for such
an use? Is it thus that we improve the greatest talent human nature is endued
with? What would a superior being think, were he shown this intellectual
faculty in a female gamester, and at the same time told, that it was by this
she was distinguished from brutes, and allied to angels?

6. When our women thus fill their imaginations with pips and counters, I
cannot wonder at the story I have lately heard of a newborn child that was
marked with the five of clubs.

Their passions suffer no less by this practice than their understandings and
imaginations. What hope and fear, joy and anger, sorrow and discontent, break
out all at once in a fair assembly upon so noble an occasion as that of turning
up a card?

7. Who can consider, without a secret indignation, that all those affections
of the mind which should be consecrated to their children, husbands, and
parents, are thus vilely prostituted and thrown away upon a hand at loo? For my
own part, I cannot but be grieved, when I see a fine woman fretting and
bleeding inwardly from such trivial motives: when I behold the face of an
angel, agitated and discomposed by the heart of a fury.

8. Our minds are of such a make, that they naturally give themselves up to
every diversion which they are much accustomed to, and we always find, that
play, when followed with assiduity, engrosses the whole woman. She quickly
grows uneasy in her own family, takes but little pleasure in all the domestic
innocent endearments of life, and grows more fond of Pam than of her husband.

9. My friend Theophrastus, the best of husbands and of fathers, has often
complained to me, with tears in his eyes, of the late hours he is forced to
keep if he would enjoy his wife's conversation. When she returns to me with joy
in her face, it does not arise, says he, from the sight of he^ husband, but
from the good luck she has had (...) cards.

10. On the contrary, says he, if she has been a loser, I am doubly a sufferer
by it. She comes home out of humor, is angry with every body, displeased with
all I can do or say, and in reality for no other reason but because she has
been throwing away my estate. What charming bed-fellows and companions for life
are men likely to meet with, that choose their wives out of such women of vogue
and fashion? What a race of worthies, what patriots, what heroes must we expect
from mothers of this make?

11. I come in the next place to consider the ill consequences which gaming has
on the bodies of our female adventurers. It is so ordered, that almost every
thing which corrupts the soul decays the body. The beauties of the face and
mind are generally destroyed by the same means. This consideration should have
a particular weight with the female world, who are designed to please the eye
and attract the regards of the other half of the species.

12. Now there is nothing that wears out a fine face like the vigils of the
card table, and those cutting passions which naturally attend them. Hollow
eyes, haggard looks, and pa^e complexions, are the natural indications of a
female gamester. Her morning sleeps are not able to repair her midnight
watchings.

13. I have known a woman carried off half dead from basset^e, and have many a
time grieved, to see a person of quality gliding by me in her chair at two
o'clock in the morning, and looking like a spectre amidst a glare of f^ambeaux:
in short, I never knew a thorough-paced female gamester hold her beauty two
winters together.

14. But there is still another case in which the body is more endangered than
in the former. All play-debts must be paid in specie, or by an equivalent. The
man that plays beyond his income pawns his estate; the woman must find out
something else to mortgage when her pin-money is gone. The husband has his
lands to dispose of, the wife her person. Now when the female body is once
dipped, if the creditor be very importunate, I leave my reader to consider the
consequences.

15. It is needless here to mention the ill-consequences attending this passion
among the men, who are often bubbled out of their money and estates by
sharpers, and to make up their loss, have recourse to means productive of dire
events, instances of which frequently occur; for, strictly speaking, those who
set their minds upon gaming, can hardly be honest: a man's reflections, after
losing, render him desperate, so as to commit violence either upon himself or
some other person, and therefore gaming should be discouraged in all
well-regulated communities.

Whisperers.
SIR,
1. AS the ladies are naturally become the immediate objects of your care, will
you permit a complaint to be inserted in your paper, which is founded upon a
matter of fact? They will pardon me, if by laying before you a particular
instance I was lately witness to of their improper behavior, I endeavor to
expose a reigning evil, which subjects them to many shameful imputations.

2. I received last week a dinner card from a friend, with an intimation that I
should meet some very agreeable ladies. At my arrival, I found that the company
consisted chiefly of females, who indeed did me the honor to ri^e, but quite
disconcerted me in paying my respects, by their whispering each other, and
appearing to stifle a laugh. When I was seated, the ladies grouped themselves
up in a corner, and entered into a private cabal, seemingly to discourse upon
points of great secrecy and importance, but of equal merriment and diversion.

3. The same conduct of keeping close to their ranks was observed at table,
where the ladies seated themselves together. Their conversation was here also
confined wholly to themselves, and seemed like the mysteries of the Bona Dea,
in which men were forbidden to have any share. It was a continued laugh and a
whisper from the beginning to the end of dinner. A whole sentence was scarce
ever spoken aloud.

4. Single words, indeed, now and then broke forth; such as odious, horrible,
detestable, shocking, HUMBUG. This last new-coined expression, which is only to
be found in the nonsensical vocabulary, sounds absurd and disagreeable,
whenever it is pronounced; but from the mouth of a lady it is "shocking,
detestable, horrible and odious."

5. My friend seemed to be in an uneasy situation at his own table; but I was
far more miserable. I was mute, and seldom da^d to lift up my eyes from my
plate, or turn my head ^o call for small beer, lest by some awkward posture I
might draw upon me a whisper or a laugh. Sancho, when he was forbid to eat of a
delicious banquet set before him, could sca^^e appear more melancholy.

6. The rueful length of my face might possibly increase the mirth of my
tormentors: at least their joy seemed to rise in exact proportion with my
misery. At length, however, the time of my delivery approached. Dinner ended,
the ladies made their exit in pairs, and went off hand in hand whispering like
the two kings of Brentford.

7. Modest men, Mr. Town, are deeply wounded, when they imagine themselves the
objects of ridicule or contempt: and the pain is the greater, when it is given
by those whom they admire, and from whom they are ambitious of receiving any
marks of countenance and favor. Yet we must allow, that affronts are
pardonable from ladies, as they are often prognostics of future kindness.

8. If a lady strikes our cheek, we can very willingly follow the precept of
the Gospel, and turn the other cheek to be smitten: even a blow from a fair
hand conveys pleasure. But this battery of whispers is against all legal rights
of war; poisoned arrows, and stabs in the dark, are not more repugnant to the
general laws of humanity.

9. Modern writers of comedy often introduce a pert witling into their pieces,
who is very severe upon the rest of the company; but all his waggery is spoken
aside. -- These gigglers and whisperers seem to be acting the same part in
company, that this arch rogue does in the play. Every word or motion produces a
train of whispers; the dropping of a snuff box, or spilling the tea, is sure to
be accompanied with a titter; and upon the entrance of any one with something
particular in his person or manner, I have seen a whole room in a buzz like a
bee-hive.

10. This practice of whispering, if it is any where allowable, may perhaps be
indulged the fair sex at church, where the conversation can only be carried on
by the secret symbols of a curtsy, an ogle, or a nod. A whisper in this place
is very often of great use, as it serves to convey the most secret
intelligence, which a lady would be ready to burst with* if she could not find
vent for it by this kind of auricular confession. A piece of scandal transpires
in this manner from one pew to the other, then presently whizzes along the
channel, from whence it crawls up to the galleries, till at last the whole
church hums with it.

11. It were also to be wished, that the ladies would be pleased to confine
themselves to whispering, in their tete-a-tete conferences at an opera or the
playhouse; which would be a proper deference to the rest of the audience. In
France, we are told, it is common for the parterre to join with the performers
in any favorite air: but we seem to have carried this custom still further, as
the company in our boxes, without concerning themselves in the least with the
play, are even louder than the players.

12. The wit and humor of a Vanbrugh, or a Congr^ve, is frequently interrupted
by a brilliant dialogue between two persons of fashion; and a love scene in the
side-box has often been more attended to, than that on the stage. As to their
loud bursts of laughter at the theater, they may very well be excused, when
they are excited by any lively strokes in a comedy: but I have seen our ladies
titter at the most distressful scenes in Romeo and Juliet, grin over the
anguish of a Monimia or Belvidera, and fairly laugh king Lear off the stage.

13. Thus the whole behavior of these ladies is in direct contradiction to
good-manners. They laugh when they should cry, are loud when they should be
silent, and are silent when their conversation is desirable. If a man in a
select company was thus to laugh or whisper me out of countenance, I should be
apt to construe it as an affront, and demand an explanation.

14. As to the ladies, I would desire them to reflect how much they would
suffer, if their own weapons were turned against them, and the gentlemen should
attack them with the same arts of laughing and whispering. But, however free
they may be from our resentment, they are still open to ill-natured suspicions.
They do not consider, what strange constructions may be put on these laughs and
whispers.

15. It were, indeed, of little consequence, if we only imagined, that they
were taking the reputation of their acquaintance to pieces, or abusing the
company round; but when they indulge themselves in this behavior, some perhaps
may be led to conclude, that they are discoursing upon topics, which they are
ashamed to speak of in a less private manner.

16. If the misconduct, which I have described, had been only to be found, Mr.
Town, at my friend's table, I should not have troubled you with this letter:
but the same kind of ill breeding prevails too often, and in too many places.
The gigglers and the whisperers are innumerable; they beset us wherever we go;
and it is observable, that after a short murmur of whispers, out comes the
burst of laughter: like a gunpowder serpent, which, after hissing about for
some time, goes off in a bounce.

17. Some excuse may perhaps be framed for this ^ll-timed merriment in the fair
sex. Venus, the goddess of beauty, is frequently called the laughter-loving
dame; and by laughing, our modern ladies may possibly imagine, that they render
themselves like Venus. I have indeed remarked, that the ladies commonly adjust
their laugh to their persons, and are merry in proportion as it sets off their
particular charms.

18. One lady is never further moved than to a smile or a simper, because
nothing else shows her dimples to so much advantage; another, who has a very
fine set of teeth, runs into a broad grin; while a third, who is admired for a
well turned neck and graceful chest, calls up all her beauties to view by
breaking into violent and repeated peals of laughter.

19. I would not be understood to impose gravity or too great a reserve on the
fair sex. Let them laugh at a feather; but let them declare openly, that it is
a feather which occasions their mirth. I must confess, that laughter becomes
the young, the gay, and the handsome: but a whisper is unbecoming at all ages,
and in both sexes; nor ought it ever to be practiced, except in the round
gallery at St. Paul's, or in the famous whispering place in Gloucester
cathedral, where two whisperers hear each other at the distance of
five-and-twenty yards.

I am, Sir, Your humble Servant.

Beauty.
1. THOUGH the danger of disappointment is always in proportion to the height
of expectation, yet I this day claim the attention of the ladies, and profess
to teach an art by which all may obtain what has hitherto been deemed the
prerogative of a few: an art by which their predominant passion may be
gratified, and their conquests not only extended, but secured; "The art of
being PRETTY."

2. But though my subject may interest the ladies, it may, perhaps, offend
those profound moralists, who have long since determined, that beauty ought
rather to be despised than desired; that, like strength, it is a mere natural
excellence, the effect of causes wholly out of our power, and not intended
either as the pledge of happiness or the distinction of merit.

3. To these gentlemen I shall remark, that beauty is among those qualities,
which no effort of human wit could ever bring into contempt: it is therefore to
be wished at least, that beauty was in some degree dependent upon sentiment and
manners, that so high a privilege might not be possessed by the unworthy, and
that human reason might no longer suffer the mortification of those who are
compelled to adore an idol, which differs from a stone or a log only by the
skill of the artificer: and if they cannot themselves behold beauty with
indifference, they must, surely, approve an attempt to show that it merits
their regard.

4. I shall, however, principally consider that species of beauty which is
expressed in the countenance; for this alone is peculiar to human beings, and
is not less complicated than their nature. In the countenance there are but two
requisites to perfect beauty, which are wholly produced by external causes,
color and proportion: and it will appear, that even in common estimation these
are not the chief; but that though there may be beauty without them, yet there
cannot be beauty without something more.

5. The finest features, ranged in the most exact symmetry, and heightened by
the most blooming complexion, must be animated before they can strike; and when
they are animated, will generally excite the same passions which they express.
If they are fixed in the dead calm of insensibility, they will be examined
without emotion; and if they do not express kindness, they will be beheld
without love.

6. Looks of contempt, disdain, or malevolence, will be reflected, as from a
mirror, by every countenance on which they are turned; and if a wanton aspect
excites desire, it is but like that of a savage for his prey, which cannot be
gratified without the destruction of its object.

7. Among particular graces the dimple has always been allowed the
pre-eminence, and the reason is evident; dimples are produced by a smile, and a
smile is an expression of complacency: so the contraction of the brows into a
frown, as it is an indication of a contrary temper, has always been deemed a
capital defect.

8. The lover is generally at a loss to define the beauty, by which his passion
was suddenly and irresistibly determined to a particular object; but this could
never happen, if it depended upon any known rule of proportion, upon the shape
or disposition of the features, or the color of the skin: he tells you that it
is something which he cannot fully express, something not fixed in any part,
but disfused over the whole; he calls it a sweetness, a softness, a placid
sensibility, or gives it some other appeliation which connects beauty with
sentiment, and expresses a charm which is not peculiar to any set o^ features,
but is perhaps possible to all.

9. This beauty, however, does not always consist in smiles, but varies as
expressio^s of meekness and kindness vary with their objects: it is extremely
forcible in the silent complaint of patient sufferance, the tender solicitude
of friendship, and the glow of filial obedience; and in tears, whether of joy,
of pity, or of grief, it is almost irresistible.

10. This is the charm which captivates without the aid of nature, and without
which her utmost bounty is ineffectual. But it cannot be assumed as a mask to
conceal insensibility or malevolence; it must be the genuine effect of
corresponding sentiments, or it will impress upon the countenance a new and
more disgusting deformity, affectation: it will produce the grin, the simper,
the stare, the languish, the pout, and innumerable other grimaces, that render
folly ridiculous, and change pity to contempt.

11. By some, indeed, this species of hypocrisy has been practiced with such
skill as to deceive superficial observers, though it can deceive even these but
for a moment. Looks which do not correspond with the heart, cannot be assumed
without labor, nor continued without pain; the motive to relinquish them must,
therefore, soon preponderate, and the aspect and apparel of the visit will be
laid by together; the smiles and languishments of art will vanish, and the
fierceness of rage, or the gloom of discontent will either obscure or destroy
all the elegance of symmetry and complexion.

12. The artificial aspect is, indeed, as wretched a substitute for the
expression of sentiment, as the smear of paint for the blushes of health: it is
not only equally transient, and equally liable to detection; but as paint
leaves the countenance yet more withered and ghastly, the passions burst out
with more violence after restraint, the features become more distorted, and
excite more determined aversion.

13. Beauty, therefore, depends principally upon the mind, and consequently may
be influenced by education. It has been remarked, that the predominant passion
may generally be discovered in the countenance; because the muscles by which it
is expressed, being almost perpetually contracted, lose their tone, and never
totally relax; so that the expression remains when the passion is suspended:
thus an angry, a disdainful, a subtle, and a suspicious temper, is displayed in
characters that are almost universally understood.

14. It is equally true of the pleasing and the softer passions, that they
leave their signatures upon the countenance when they cease to act: the
prevalence of these passions therefore produces a mechanical effect upon the
aspect, and gives a turn and cast to the features which makes a more favorable
and forcible impression upon the mind of others, than any charm produced by
mere external causes.

15. Neither does the beauty which depends upon temper and sentiment, equally
endanger the possessor; "It is," to use an eastern metaphor, like the towers of
a city, not only an ornament but a defense: if it excites desire, it at once
controuls and refines it; it represses with awe, it softens with delicacy, and
it wins to imitation. The love of reason and virtue is mingled with the love of
beauty; because this beauty is little more than the emanation of intellectual
excellence, which is not an object of corporeal appetite.

16. As it excites a purer passion, it also more sorcibly engages to fidelity:
every man finds himself more powerfully restrained from giving pain to goodness
than to bea^ty; and every look of a countenance in which they are blended* in
which beauty is the expression of goodness, is a silent reproach of the first
irregular wish: and the purpose immediately appears to be disi^gen^ous and
cruel, by which the tender hope of ineffable affection would be disappointed,
the placid confidence of unsuspected simplicity abused, and the peace even of
virtue endangered by the most sordid infidelity, and the breach of the
strongest obligations.

17. But the hope of the hypocrite must perish. When the fictitious beauty has
laid by her smiles, when the luster of her eyes and the bloom of her cheeks
have lost their influence with their novelty; what remains but a tyrant
divested of power, who will never be seen without a mixture of indignation and
disdain? The only desire which this object could gratify, will be transferred
to another, not only without reluctance, but with triumph.

18. As resentment will succeed to disappointment, a desire to mortify will
succeed to a desire to please: and the husband may be urged to solicit a
mistress, merely by a remembrance of the beauty of his wife, which lasted only
till she was known.

Let it, therefore, be remembered, that none can be disciples of the Graces, but
in the school of Virtue; and that those who wish to be lovely must learn early
to be good.

19. A Friend of mine has two daughters, whom I will call Laetitia and Daphn^.
The former is one of the greatest beauties of the age in which she lives, the
latter no way remarkable for any charms in her person. Upon this one
circumstance of their outward form, the good and ill of their life seem to
turn. Laetitia has not from her very childhood heard any thing else but
commendations of her features and complexion, by which means she is no other
than nature made her, a very beautiful outside.

20. The consciousness of her charms has rendered her insupportably vain and
insolent, toward all who have to do with her. Daphne, who was almost twenty
before one civil thing had ever been said to her, found herself obliged to
acquire some accomplishments to make up for the want of those attractions which
she saw in her sister.

21. Poor Daphne was seldom submitted to in a debate wherein she was concerned;
her discourse had nothing to recommend it but the good sense of it, and she was
always under a necessity to have very well considered what she was to say
before she uttered it; while Laetitia was listened to with partiality, and
approbation sat in the countenances of those she conversed with, before she
communicated what she had to say.

22. These causes have produced suitable effects, and Laetitia is as insipid a
companion, as Daphne is an agreeable one. Laetitia, confident of favor, has
studied no arts to please; Daphne, despairing of any inclination toward her
person, has depended only on her merit. Laetitia has always something in her
air that is sullen, grave, and disconsolate.

23. Daphne has a countenance that appears cheerful, open and unconcerned. A
young gentleman saw Laetitia this winter at a play, and became her captive. His
fortune was such, that he wanted very little introduction to speak his
sentiments to her father. The lover was admitted with the utmost freedom into
the family, where a constrained behavior, severe looks, and distant
civilities, were the highest favors he could obtain of Laetitia; while Daphne
used him with the good humor, familiarity, and innocence of ^ter:

24. Insomuch that he would often say to her, Dear Daphne, were thou but as
handsome as Laetitia! -- She received such language with that ingenuous and
pleasing mirth, which is natural to a woman without design. He still sighed in
vain for Laetitia, but found certain relief in the agreeable conversation of
Daphne. At length, heartily tired with the haughty impertinence of Laetitia,
and charmed with repeated instances of good humor he had observed in Daphne,
he one day told the latter, that he had something to say to her he hoped she
would be pleased with.

25. -- Faith, Daphne, continued he, I am in love with thee, and despise thy
sister sincerely. The manner of his declaring himself gave his mistress
occasion for a very hearty laughter. -- Nay, says he, I knew you would laugh at
me, but I Will ask your father. He did so; the father received his intelligence
with no less joy than surprise, and was very glad he had now no care left but
for his beauty, which he thought he would carry to market at his leisure.

26. I do not know any thing that has pleased me so much a great while, as this
conquest of my friend Daphne's. All her acquaintance congratulate her upon her
chance medley, and laugh at that premeditating murderer, her sister. As it is
an argument of a light mind, to think the worse of ourselves for the
imperfections of our persons, it is equally below us to value ourselves upon
the advantages of them.

27. The female world seem to be almost incorrigibly gone astray in this
particular; for which reason, I shall recommend the following extract out of a
friend's letter to the professed beauties, who are a people almost as
insufferable as the professed wits.

Monsieur St. Evremont has concluded one of his essays with affirming, that the
last sighs of a handsome woman are not so much for the loss of her life, as her
beauty.

28. Perhaps this raillery is pursued too far, yet it is turned upon a very
obvious remark, that woman's strongest passion is for her own beauty, and that
she values it as her favorite distinction. From hence it is that all hearts,
which pretend to improve or preserve it, meet with so general a reception among
the sex.

29. To say nothing of many false helps, and contraband wares of beauty, which
are daily vended in this great mart, there is not a maiden gentlewoman, of a
good family in any county of South Britain, who has not heard of the virtues of
Maydew, or is unfurnished with some receipt or other in favor of her
complexion; and I have known a physician of learning and sense, after eight
years study in the university, and a course of travels into most countries of
Europe, owe the first raising of his fortune to a cosmetic wash.

30. This has given me occasion to consider how so universal a disposition in
womankind, which springs from a laudable motive, the desire of pleasing, and
proceeds upon an opinion, not altogether groundless, that nature may be helped
by art, may be turned to their advantage. And, methinks, it would be an
acceptable service to take them out of the hands of quacks and pretenders, and
to prevent their imposing upon themselves, by discovering to them the true
secret and art of improving beauty.

31. In order to this, before I touch upon it directly, it will be necessary to
lay down a few preliminary maxims, viz.

That no woman can be handsome by the force of features alone, any more than
she can be witty only by the help of speech.

That pride destroys all symmetry and grace, and affectation is a more terrible
enemy to fine faces than the smallpox.

That no woman is capable of being beautiful, who is not incapable of being
false.

And, That what would be odious in a friend, is deformity in a mistress.

32. From these few principles thus laid down, it will be easy to prove, that
the true art of assisting beauty consists in embellishing the whole person by
the proper ornaments of virtuous and commendable qualities. By this help alone
it is, that those who are the favorite work of nature, or, as Mr. Drydea
expresses it, the porcelain clay of human kind, become animated, and are in a
capacity of exerting their charms: and those who seem to have been neglected by
her, like models wrought in haste, are capable, in a great measure, of
finishing what she has left imperfect.

33. It is, methinks, a low and degrading idea of that sex, which was created
to refine the joys, and soften the cares of humanity, by the most agreeable
participation, to consider them merely as objects of sight. -- This is
abridging them of their natural extent of power, to put them upon a level with
their pictures at the pantheon. How much nobler is the contemplation of beauty
heightened by virtue, and commanding our esteem and love, while it draws our
observation?

34. How faint and spiritless are the charms of a coquette; when compared with
the real loveliness of Sophronia's innocence, piety, good humor, and truth;
virtues which add a new softness to her sex, and even beautify her beauty! That
agreeableness, which must otherwise have appeared no longer in the modest
virgin, is now preserved in the tender mother, the prudent friend, and faithful
wife.

35. Colors artfully spread upon canvas may entertain the eye, but not affect
the heart; and she, who takes no care to add to the natural graces of her
person, any excelling qualities, may be allowed still to amuse as a picture,
but not to triumph as a beauty.

When Adam is introduced by Milton describing Eve in paradise, and relating to
the angel the impressions he felt upon seeing her at her first creation he does
not represent her like a Grecian Venus, by her shape or features, but by the
luster of her mind which shone in them, and gave them their power of charming.

36. Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye,
In all her gestures dignity and love:


Without this irradiating power, the proudest fair one ought to know, whatever
her glass may tell her to the contrary, that her most perfect features are
uninformed and dead.

I cannot better close this moral, than by a short epitaph, written by Ben
Johnson, with a spirit which nothing could inspire, but such an object as I
have been describing.

Underneath this stone does lie,
As much virtue as could die;
Which when alive did vigor give
To as much beauty as could live.
I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, R. B.


SPECTATOR, Vol. I. No. 33. Honor.
1. EVERY principle that is a motive to good actions, ought to be encouraged,
since men are of so different a make, that the same principle does not work
equally upon all minds. What some men are prompted to by conscience, duty, or
religion, which are only different names for the same thing, others are
prompted to by Honor.

2. The sense of honor is of so fine and delicate a nature, that it is only to
be met with in minds which are naturally noble, or in such as have been
cultivated by great examples, or a refined education. This paper therefore is
chiefly designed for those who, by means of any of these advantages, are, or
ought to be, actuated by this glorious principle.

3. But as nothing is more pernicious than a principle of action, when it is
misunderstood, I shall consider honor with respect to three sorts of men.
First of all, with regard to those who have a right notion of it. Secondly,
with regard to those who have a mistaken notion of it. And thirdly, with regard
to those who treat it as chimerical, and turn it into ridicule.

4. In the first place, true honor, though it be a different principle from
religion, is that which produces the same effects. The lines of action, though
drawn from different parts, terminate in the same point. Religion embraces
virtue, as it is enjoined by the laws of God; Honor, as it is graceful and
ornamental to human nature.

5. The religious man a fears, the man of honor scorns to do an ill action.
The former considers vice as something that is beneath him, the other as
something that is offensive to the Divine Being. The one as what is unbecoming,
the other as what is forbidden. Thus Seneca speaks in the natural and genuine
language of a man of honor, when he declares that were there no God to see or
punish vice, he would not commit it, because it is of so mean, so base, and so
vile a nature.

6. I shall conclude this head with the description of honor in the part of
young Juba.

Honor's a sacred tie, the law of kings,
The noble mind's distinguishing perfection,
That aids and strengthens virtue where it meets her,
And imitates her actions where she is not.
It ought not to be sported with. -- CATO.
7. In the second place we are to consider those who have mistaken notions of
honor, and these are such as establish any thing to themselves for a point of
honor which is contrary either to the laws of God, or of their country; who
think it more honorable to revenge than to forgive an injury; who make no
scruple of telling a lie, but would put any man to death who accuses them of
it; who are more careful to guard their reputation by their courage than by
their virtue.

8. True fortitude is indeed so becoming in human nature, That he who wants it
scarce deserves the name of a man; but we find several who so much abuse this
notion, that they place the whole idea of honor in a kind of brutal courage;
by which means we have had many among us who have called themselves men of
honor, that would have been a disgrace to a gibbet.

9. In a word, the man who sacrifices any duty of a reasonable creature to a
prevailing mode of fashion, who looks upon any thing as honorable that is
displeasing to his Maker, or distructive to society, who thinks himself obliged
by this principle to the practice of some virtues and not of others, is by no
means to be reckoned among true men of honor.

10. Timogenes was a lively instance of one actuated by false honor. Timogenes
would smile at a man's jest who ridiculed his Maker, and at the same time run a
man through the body that spoke ill of his friend. Timogenes would have scorned
to have betrayed a secret, that was entrusted with him, though the fate of his
country depended upon the discovery of it.

11. Timogenes took away the life of a young fellow in a duel, for having
spoken ill of Belinda, a lady whom he himself had seduced in her youth, and
betrayed into want and ignominy. To close his character, Timogenes, after
having ruined several poor tradesmen's families, who had trusted him, sold his
estate to satisfy his creditors; but like a man of honor disposed of all the
money he could make of it, in paying off his play-debts, or to speak in his own
language, his debts of honor.

12. In the third place, we are to consider those persons, who treat this
principle as chimerical, and turn it into ridicule. Men who are professedly of
no honor, are of a more profligate and abandoned nature, than even those who
are actuated by false notions of it, as there is more hope of a heretic than of
an atheist, These sons of infamy consider honor with old Syphax, in the play
before mentioned, as a fine imaginary notion, that leads astray young
unexperienced men, and draws them into real mischiefs, while they are engaged
in the pursuits of a shadow*

13. These are generally persons, who, in Shakespeare's phrase, are worn and
huckney'd in the ways of men: whose imaginations are grown callous, and have
lost all those delicate sentiments which are natural to minds that are innocent
and undepraved. Such old battered miscreants ridicule every thing as romantic,
that comes in competition with their present interest, and treat those persons
as visionaries who dare stand up in a corrupt age, for what has not its
immediate reward joined to it.

14. The talents, interest, or experience of such men, make them very often
useful in all parties, and at all times. But whatever wealth and dignities they
may arrive at, they ought to consider, that every one stands as a blot in the
annals of his country, who arrives at the temple of honor by any other way
than through that of virtue.

GUARDIAN, Vol. II. No. 161. Human Nature.
Mr. SPECTATOR,
1 I HAVE always been a very great lover of your speculations, as well in
regard to the subject, as to your manner of treating it. Human nature I always
thought the most useful object of human reason, and to make the consideration
of it pleasant and entertaining, I always thought the best employment of human
wit: other parts of philosophy may perhaps make us wiser, but this not only
answers that end, but makes us better too.

2. Hence it was that the oracle pronounced Socrates the wisest of all men
living, because he judiciously made choice of human nature for the object of
his thoughts; an enquiry into which as much exceeds all other learning, as it
is of more consequence to adjust the true nature and measures of right and
wrong, than to settle the distance of the planets, and compute the times of
their circumvolutions.

3. One good effect that will immediately arise from a near observation of
human nature, is, that we shall cease to wonder at those actions which men are
used to reckon wholly unaccountable; for as nothing is produced without a
cause, so by observing the nature and course of the passions, we shall be able
to trace every action from its first conception to its death.

4. We shall no more admire at the proceedings of Catiline and Tiberius, when
we know the one was actuated by a cruel jealousy, the other by a furious
ambition; for the actions of men follow their passions as naturally as light
does heat, or as any other effect flows from its cause; reason must be employed
in adjusting the passions, but they must ever remain the principles of action.

5. The strange and absurd variety that is so apparent in men's actions, shows
plainly they can never proceed immediately from reason; so pure a fountain
emits no such troubled waters: they must necessarily arise from the passions,
which are to the mind as the winds to a ship; they only can move it, and they
too often destroy it; if fair and gentle, they guide it into the harbor; if
contrary and furious, they overset it in the waves.

6. In the same manner is the mind assisted or endangered by the passions;
reason must then take the place of pilot, and can never fail of securing her
charge if she be not wanting to herself; the strength of the passions will
never be accepted as an excuse for complying with them: they were designed for
subjection; and if a man suffers them to get the upper hand, he then betrays
the liberty of his own soul.

7. As nature has framed the several species of beings as it were in a chain,
so man seems to be placed as the middle link between angels and brutes: hence
he participates both of flesh and spirit by an admirable tie, which in him
occasions perpetual war of passions; and as a man inclines to the angelic or
brute part of his constitution, he is then denominated good or bad, virtuous or
wicked: if love, mercy, and goodnature prevail, they speak him of the angel;
if hatred, cruelty, and envy predominate, they declare his kindred to the brute.

8. Hence it was that some ancients imagined, that as men in this life inclined
more to the angel or the brute, so after their death they should transmigrate
into the one or the other: and it would be no unpleasant notion to consider the
several species of brutes, into which we may imagine that tyrants, misers, the
proud, malicious, and ill-natured, might be changed.

9. As a consequence of this original, all passions are in all men, but appear
not in all: constitution, education, custom of the country, reason, and the
like causes may improve or abate the strength of them, but still the seeds
remain, which are ever ready to sprout forth upon the least encouragement.

10. I have heard a story of a good religious man, who having been bred with
the milk of a goat, was very modest in public, by a careful reflection he made
on his actions, but he frequently had an hour in secret, wherein he had his
frisks and capers: and if we had an opportunity of examining the retirement of
the strictest philosophers, no doubt but we should find perpetual returns of
those passions they so artfully conceal from the public.

11. I remember Machiavel observes, that every state should entertain a
perpetual jealousy of its neighbors, that so it should never be unprovided
when an emergency happens; in like manner should reason be perpetually on its
guard against the passions, and never suffer them to carry on any design that
may be destructive of its security; yet at the same time it must be careful,
that it don't so far break their strength as to render them contemptible, and
consequently itself unguarded.

12. The understanding being of itself too slow and lazy to exert itself into
action, it is necessary it should be put in motion by the gentle gales of
passions, which may preserve it from stagnating and corruption; for they are
necessary to the health of the mind, as the circulation of the animal spirits
is to the health of the body; they keep it in life, and strength, and vigor;
nor is it possible for the mind to perform its offices without their
assistance; these motions are given us with our being; they are little spirits,
that are born and die with us; to some they are mild, easy and gentle; to
others wayward and unruly; yet never too strong for the reins of reason, and
the guidance of judgment.

13. We may generally observe a pretty nice proportion between the strength of
reason and passion; the greatest geniuses have commonly the strongest
affections, as, on the other hand, the weaker understandings have generally the
weaker passions: and it is fit the fury of the coursers should not be too great
for the strength of the charioteer.

14. Young men, whose passions are not a little unruly, give small hopes of
their ever being considerable; the fire of youth will of course abate, and is a
fault, if it be a fault, that mends every day; but surely, unless a man has
fire in youth, he can hardly have warmth in old age.

15. We must therefore be very cautious, lest while we think to regulate the
passions, we should quite extinguish them; which is putting out the light of
the soul; for to be without passion, or to be hurried away with it, makes a man
equally blind. The extraordinary severity used in most of our schools has this
fatal effect; it breaks the spring of the mind, and most certainly destroys
more good geniuses than it can possibly improve.

16. And surely it is a mighty mistake that the passions should be so entirely
subdued; for little irregularities are sometimes not only to be bore with, but
to be cultivated too, since they are frequently attended with the greatest
perfections. All great geniuses have faults mixed with their virtues, and
resemble the flaming bush which has thorns amongst lights.

17. Since therefore the passions are the principles of human actions, we must
endeavor to manage them so as to retain their vigor, yet keep them under
strict command; we must govern them rather like free subjects than slaves,
left, while we intend to make them obedient, they become abject, and unfit for
those great purposes to which they were designed.

18. For my part, I must confess, I could never have any regard to that sect of
philosophers, who so much insisted upon an absolute indifference and vacancy
from all passion; for it seems to me a thing very inconsistent for a man to
divest himself of humanity, in order to acquire tranquillity of mind, and to
eradicate the very principles of action, because it is possible they may
produce ill effects.

I am, SIR, Your affectionate admirer, T. B.

SPECTATOR, Vol. IV. No. 408.
The Advantages of representing HUMAN NATURE in its proper Dignity.
TATLER, No. 108. IT is not to be imagined, how great an effect well-disposed
lights, with proper forms and orders in assemblies, have upon some tempers. I
am sure I feel it in so extraordinary a manner, that I cannot in a day or two
get out of my imagination any very beautiful or disagreeable impression which I
receive on such occasions. For this reason I frequently look in at the
playhouse, in order to enlarge my thoughts, and warm my mind with some new
ideas, that may be serviceable to me in my lucubrations.

1. In this disposition I entered the theater the other day, and placed myself
in a corner of it, very convenient for seeing, without being myself observed. I
found the audience hushed in a very deep attention, and did not question but
some noble tragedy was just then in its crisis, or that an incident was to be
unravelled which would determine the fate of an hero. While I was in this
suspense, expecting every moment to see my old friend Mr. Betterton appear in
all the majesty of distress, to my unspeakable amazement, there came up a
monster with a face between his feet; and as I was looking on, he raised
himself on one leg in such a perpendicular posture, that the other grew in a
direct line above his head.

2. It afterward twisted itself into the motions and wreathings of several
different animals, and after great variety of shapes and transformations went
off the stage in the figure of an human creature. The admiration, the applause,
the satisfaction of the audience, during this strange entertainment, is not to
be expressed. I was very much out of countenance for my dear countrymen, and
looked about with some apprehension, for fear any foreigner should be present.

3. Is it possible (thought I) that human nature can rejoice in its disgrace,
and take pleasure in seeing its own figure turned to ridicule, and distorted
into forms that raise horror and aversion? There is something disingenuous and
immoral in the being able to bear such a sight. Men of elegant and noble minds
are shocked at the seeing characters of persons who deserve esteem for their
virtue, knowledge, or services to their country, placed in wrong lights, and by
misrepresentation made the subject of buffoonery.

4. Such a nice abhorrence is not indeed to be found among the vulgar; but
methinks it is wonderful, that those, who have nothing but the outward figure
to distinguish them as men, should delight in seeing it abused, vilified and
disgraced.

I must confess, there is nothing that more pleases me, in all that I read in
books, or see among mankind, than such passages as represent human nature in
its proper dignity.

5. As man is a creature made up of different extremes, he has something in him
very great and very mean: a skilful artist may draw an excellent picture of him
in either of these views. The finest authors of antiquity have taken him on the
more advantageous side. They cultivate the natural grandeur of the soul, raise
in her a generous ambition, feed her with hopes of immortality and perfection,
and do all they can to widen the partition between the virtuous and the
vicious, by making the difference betwixt them as great as between gods and
brutes.

6. In short, it is impossible to read a page in Plato, Tully, and a thousand
other ancient moralists, without being a greater and a better man for it. On
the contrary, I could never read any of our modish French authors, or those of
our own country, who are the imitators and admirers of that trifling nation,
without being for some time out of humor with myself, and at every thing about
me.

7. Their business is, to depreciate human nature, and consider it under its
worst appearances. They give mean interpretations and base motives to the
worthiest actions: they resolve virtue and vice into constitution. In short,
they endeavor to make no distinction between man and man, or between the
species of men and that of brutes. As an instance of this kind of authors,
among many others; let any one examine the celebrated Rochefoucault, who is the
great philosopher for administering of consolation to the idle, the envious,
and worthless part of mankind.

8. I remember a young gentleman of moderate understanding, but great vivacity,
who, by dipping into many authors of this nature, had got a little smattering
of knowledge, just enough to make an atheist or a free-thinker, but not a
philosopher or a man of sense. With these accomplishments, he went to visit his
father in the country, who was a plain, rough, honest man, and wise though not
learned. The son, who took all opportunities to show his learning, began to
establish a new religion in the family, and to enlarge the narrowness of their
country notions; in which he succeeded so well, that he had seduced the butler
by his table-talk, and staggered his eldest sister.

9. The old gentleman began to be alarmed at the schisms that arose among his
children, but did not yet believe his son's doctrine to be so pernicious as it
real^y was, till one day talking of his setting-dog, the son said, he did not
question but Trey was as immortal as any one of the family; and in the heat of
the argument told his father, that for his own part he expected to die like a
dog. Upon which, the old man starting up in a very great passion, cried out,
Then, sirrah, you shall live like one; and taking his cane in his hand,
cudgelled him out of his system. This had so good an effect upon him, that he
took up from that day, fell to reading good books, and is now a bencher in the
Middle Temple.

10. I do not mention this cudgelling part of the story with a design to engage
the secular arm in matters of this nature; but certainly, if it ever exerts
itself in affairs of opinion and speculation, it ought to do it on such shallow
and despicable pretenders to knowledge, who endeavor to give man dark and
uncomfortable prospects of his being, and destroy those principles which are
the support, happiness and glory of all public societies, as well as private
persons.

11. I think it is one of Pythagoras's golden sayings, that a man should take
care above all things to have a due respect for himself: and it is certain,
that this licentious sort of authors, who are for depreciating mankind,
endeavor to disappoint and undo what the most refined spirits have been
laboring to advance since the beginning of the world. The very design of
dress, good breeding, outward ornaments and ceremony, were to lift up human
nature, and set it off to advantage. Architecture, painting and statuary, were
invented with the same design; as indeed every art and science that contributes
to the embellishment of life, and to the wearing off and throwing into shades
the mean and low parts of our nature.

12. Poetry carries on this great end more than all the rest, as may be seen in
the following passages taken out of Sir Francis Bacon's advancement of
learning, which gives a true and better account of this art than all the
volumes that were ever written upon it.

Poetry, especially heroical, seems to be raised altogether from a noble
foundation, which makes much for the di^nity of man's nature. For seeing this
sensible world is in dignity inferior to the soul of man, poesy seems to endow
human nature with that which history denies; and to give satisfaction to the
mind, with at least the shadow of things, where the substance cannot be had.

13. For if the matter be thoroughly considered, a strong argument may be drawn
from poesy, that a more stately greatness of things, a more perfect order and a
more beautiful variety, delights the soul of man than any way can be found in
nature since the fall. Wherefore seeing the acts and events, which are the
subjects of true history, are not of that amplitude as to content the mind of
man, poesy is ready at hand to feign acts more heroical.

14. Because true history reports the successes of business not proportionable
to the merit of virtues and vices, poesy corrects it, and presents events and
fortunes according to desert, and according to the law of Providence: because
true history, through the frequent satiety and similitude of things, works a
distaste and misprison in the mind of man; poesy cheareth and refreshes the
soul, chanting things rare and various, and full of vicissitudes.

15. So as poesy serves and conferreth to delectation, magnanimity and
morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly to have some participation of
divineness, because it does raise the mind, and exalt the spirit with high
raptures, proportioning the shows of things to the desires of the mind, and not
submitting the mind to things as reason and history do. And by these
allurements and congruities, whereby it cherishes the soul of man, joined also
with consort of music, whereby it may more sweetly insinuate itself; it has
won such access, that it has been in estimation even in rude times, and
barbarous nations, when our learning stood excluded

16. But there is nothing which favors and falls in with this natural
greatness and dignity of human nature so much as religion, which does not only
promise the entire refinement of the mind, but the glorifying of the body, and
the immortality of both.

Custom a second Nature.
1. THERE is not a common saying which has a better turn of sense in it than
what we often hear in the mouths of the vulgar, that Custom is a second Nature.
It is indeed able to form the man anew, and give him inclinations and
capacities altogether different from those he was born with.

2. Dr. Plot, in his history of Staffordshire, tells of an idiot, that chancing
to live within the sound of a clock, and always amusing himself with counting
the hour of the day whenever the clock struck; the clock being spoiled by some
accident, the idiot continued to strike and count the hour without the help of
it, in the same manner as he had done when it was entire.

3. Though I dare not vouch for the truth of this story, it is very certain
that custom has a mechanical effect upon the body, at the same time that it has
a very extraordinary influence upon the mind.

4. I shall in this paper consider one very remarkable effect which custom has
upon human nature; and which, if rightly observed, may lead us into very useful
rules of life. What I shall here take notice of in custom, is its wonderful
efficacy in making every thing pleasant to us.

5. A person who is addicted to play or gaming, though he took but little
delight in it at first, by degrees contracts so strong an inclination toward
it, and gives himself up so entirely to it, that it seems the only end of his
being. The love of a retired or busy life will grow upon a man insensibly, as
he is conversant in the one or the other, till he is utterly unqualified for
relishing that to which he has been for some time disused.

6. Nay, a man may smoke or drink, or take snuff, till he is unable to pass
away his time without it; not to mention how our delight in any particular
study, art, or science, rises and improves in proportion to the application
which we bestow upon it. Thus what was at first an exercise, becomes at length
an entertainment. Our employments are changed into diversions. The mind grows
fond of those actions it is accustomed to, and is drawn with reluctance from
those paths in which it has been used to walk.

7. Not only such actions as were at first indifferent to us, but even such as
were painful, will by custom and practice become pleasant.

8. Sir Francis Bacon observes in his natural philosophy, that our taste is
never better pleased than with those things which at first created a disgust in
it. He gives particular instances of claret, coffee, and other liquors, which
the palate seldom approves upon the first taste; but when it has once got a
relish of them, generally retains it for life. The mind is constituted after
the same manner, and after having habituated itself to any particular exercise
or employment, not only loses its first aversion toward it, but conceives a
certain fondness and affection for it.

9. I have heard one of the greatest geniuses this age has produced, who had
been trained up in all the polite studies of antiquity, assure me, upon his
being obliged to search into several rolls and records, that notwithstanding
such an employment was at first very dry and irksome to him, he at last took an
incredible pleasure in it, and preferred it even to the reading of Virgil or
Cicero.

10. The reader will observe, that I have not here considered custom as it
makes things easy, but as it renders them delightful; and though others have
often made the same reflection, it is possible they may not have drawn those
uses from it, with which I intend to fill the remaining part of this paper.

11. If we consider attentively this property of human nature, it may instruct
us in very fine moralities. In the first place, I would have no man discouraged
with that kind of life or series of actions, in which the choice of others, or
his own necessities may have engaged him. It may perhaps be very disagreeable
to him at first; but use and application will certainly render it not only less
painful, but pleasing and satisfactory.

12. In the second place, I would recommend to every one the admirable precept
which Pythagoras is said to have given to his disciples, and which that
philosopher must have drawn from the observation I have enlarged upon: Optimum
vitae genus eligito, nam consuetudo faciet jucundissimum, pitch upon that
course of life which is the most excellent, and custom will render it the most
delightful.

13. Men, whose circumstances will permit them to choose their own way of life,
are inexcusable if they do not pursue that which their judgment tells them is
the most laudable. The voice of reason is more to be regarded than the bent of
any present inclination, since by the rule abovementioned, inclination will at
length come over to reason, though we can never force reason to comply with
inclination.

14. In the third place, this observation may teach the most sensual and
irreligious man to overlook those hardships and difficulties, which are apt to
discourage him from the prosecution of a virtuous life. The Gods, said Hesiod,
have placed labor before virtue; the way to her is at first rough and
difficult, but grows more smooth and easy the farther you advance in it. The
man who proceeds in it, with steadiness and resolution, will in a little time
find that her ways are ways of pleasantness, and that all her paths are peace.

15. To enforce this consideration, we may further observe, that the practice
of religion will not only be attended with that pleasure, which naturally
accompanies those actions to which we are habituated, but with those
supernumerary joys of heart, that rise from the consciousness of such a
pleasure, from the satisfaction of acting up to the dictates of reason, and
from the prospect of an happy immortality.

16. In the fourth place, we may learn from this observation which we have made
on the mind of man, to take particular care, when we are once settled in a
regular course of life, how we too frequently indulge ourselves in any of the
most innocent diversions and entertainments, since the mind may insensibly fall
off from the relish of virtuous actions, and, by degrees, exchange that
pleasure which it takes in the performance of its duty, for delights of a much
more inferior and unprofitable nature.

17. The last use which I shall make of this remarkable property in human
nature, of being delighted with those actions to which it is accustomed, is to
show how absolutely necessary it is for us to gain habits of virtue in this
life, if we would enjoy the pleasures of the next.

18. The state of bliss we call heaven, will not be capable of affecting those
minds, which are not thus qualified for it; we must in this world gain a relish
of truth and virtue, if we would be able to taste that knowledge and perfection
which are to make us happy in the next. The seeds of those spiritual joys and
raptures, which are to ri^e up and flourish in the soul to all eternity, must
be planted in it, during this its present state of probation. In short, heaven
is not to be looked upon only as the reward, but as the natural effect of a
religious life.

19. On the other hand, those evil spirits, who, by long custom, have
contracted in the body, habits of lust, sensuality, malice and revenge, an
aversion to every thing that is good, just, or laudable, are naturally seasoned
and prepared for pain and misery. Their torments have already taken root in
them; they cannot be happy when divested of the body, unless we may suppose,
that Providence will in a manner create them anew, and work a miracle in the
rectification of their faculties.

20. They may, indeed, taste a kind of malignant pleasure in those actions to
which they are accustomed whilst in this life; but when they are removed from
all those objects which are here apt to gratify them, they will naturally
become their own ^ormentors, and cherish in themselves those painful habits of
mind which are called in scripture phrase, the worm which never dies.

21. This notion of heaven and hell is so very conformable to the light of
nature, that it was discovered by several of the most exalted heathens. It has
been finely improved by many eminent divines of the last age, as in particular
by Archbishop Tillotson and Dr. Sherlock; but there is none who has raised such
noble speculations upon it as Dr. Scott, in the first book of his Christian
Life, which is one of the finest and most rational schemes of divinity, that is
written in our tongue, or any other. That excellent author has shown how every
particular custom and habit of virtue will, in its own nature, produce the
heaven, or a state of happiness, in him who shall hereafter practice it: as on
the contrary, how every custom or habit of vice will be the natural hell of him
in whom it subsists.

On Cleanliness.
[SPECTATOR, No. 631. 1. I HAD occasion to go a few miles out of town, some
days since, in a stage-coach, where I had for my fellow travelers a dirty
beau, and a pretty young Quaker woman. Having no inclination to talk much at
that time, I placed myself backward, with a design to survey them, and pick a
speculation out of my two companions. Their different figures were sufficient
of themselves to draw my attention.

2. The gentleman was dressed in a suit, the ground whereof had been black, as
I perceived from some few spaces that had escaped the powder, which was
incorporated with the greatest part of his coat: his perriwig, which cost no
small sum, was after so slovenly a manner cast over his shoulders, that it
seemed not to have been combed since the year 1712; his linen, which was not
much concealed, was daubed with plain Spanish from the chin to the lowest
button, and the diamond upon his finger (which naturally dreaded the water) put
me in mind how it sparkled amidst the rubbish of the mine, where it was first
discovered.

3. On the other hand, the pretty Quaker appeared in all the elegance of
cleanliness. Not a speck was to be found on her. A clear clean oval face, just
edged about with little thin plaits of the purest cambrick, received great
advantages from the shade of her black hood; as did the whiteness of her arms
from that sober colored stuff, in which she had clothed herself. The
plainness of her dress was very well suited to the simplicity of her phrases,
all which put together, though they could not give me a great opinion of her
religion, they did of her innocence.

4. This adventure occasioned my throwing together a few hints upon
cleanliness, which I shall consider as one of the half virtues, as Aristotle
calls them, and shall recommend it under the three following heads: As it is a
mark of politeness: as it produces love; and as it bears analogy to purity of
mind.

5. First, it is a mark of politeness. It is universally agreed upon, that no
one, unadorned with this virtue, can go into company without giving a manifest
offense. The easier or higher any one's fortune is, this duty rises
proportionably. The different nations of the world are as much distinguished by
their cleanliness, as by their arts and sciences. The more any country is
civilized, the more they consult this part of politeness. We need but compare
our ideas of a female Hottentot with an English beauty to be satisfied of the
truth of what has been advanced.

6. In the next place, cleanliness may be said to be the foster-mother of love.
Beauty indeed most commonly produces that passion in the mind, but cleanliness
preserves it. An indifferent face and person, kept in perpetual neatness, has
won many a heart from a pretty slattern. Age itself is not unamiable, while it
is preserved clean and unsullied: like a piece of metal constantly kept smooth
and bright, we look on it with more pleasure than on a new vessel that is
cankered with rust.

7. I might observe further, that as cleanliness renders us agreeable to
others, so it makes us easy to ourselves; that it is an excellent preservative
of health: and that several vices, destructive both to mind and body, are
inconsistent with the habit of it. But these reflections I shall leave to the
leisure of my readers, and shall observe in the third place, that it bears a
great analogy with purity of mind, and naturally inspires refined sentiments
and passions.

8. We find, from experience, that through the prevalence of custom, the most
vicious actions lose their horror, by being made familiar to us. On the
contrary, those who live in the neighborhood of good examples, fly from the
first appearances of what is shocking. It fares with us much after the same
manner as our ideas. Our senses, which are the inlets to all the images
conveyed to the mind, can only transmit the impression of such things as
usually surround them. So that pure and unsullied thoughts are naturally
suggested to the mind, by those objects that perpetually encompass us, when
they are beautiful and elegant in their kind.

9. In the East, where the warmth of the climate makes cleanliness more
immediately necessary than in colder countries, it is made one part of their
religion: the Jewish law (and the Mohammedan, which in some things copies after
it) is filled with bathings, purifications and other rites of the like nature.
Though there is the abovenamed convenient reason to be assigned for these
ceremonies, the chief intention undoubtedly was to typify inward purity and
cleanliness of heart by those outward washings.

10. We read several injunctions of this kind in the book of Deuteronomy, which
confirm this truth; and which are but ill accounted for by saying as some do,
that they were only instituted for convenience in the desert, which otherways
could not have been habitable for so many years.

11. I shall conclude this essay, with a story which I have somewhere read in
an account of Mohammedan superstition. A Dervise of great sanctity one morning
had the misfortune as he took up a crystal cup, which was consecrated to the
prophet, to let it fall upon the ground and dash it in pieces. His son coming
in some time after, he stretched out his hand to bless him, as his manner was
every morning; but the youth going out stumbled over the threshold and broke
his arm. As the old man wondered at these events, a caravan passed by in its
way from Mecca. The Dervise approached it to beg a blessing; but as he stroked
one of the holy camels, he received a kick from the beast, that sorely bruised
him. His sorrow and amazement increased upon him, till he recollected that
through hurry and inadvertency he had that morning come abroad without washing
his hands.

The Advantages of a good Education.
1. I Consider a human soul without education like marble in the quarry, which
shows none of its inherent beauties, until the skill of the polisher fetches
out the colors, makes the surface shine, and discovers every ornamental cloud,
spot, and vein, that runs through the body of it. Education, after the same
manner, when it works upon a noble mind, draws out to view every latent virtue
and perfection, which, without such helps, are never able to make their
appearance.

2. If my reader will give me leave to change the allusion so soon upon him, I
shall make use of the same instance to illustrate the force of education, which
Aristotle has brought to explain his doctrine of substantial forms, when he
tells us that a statue lies hid in a block of marble; and that the art of the
statuary only clears away the superfluous matter, and removes the rubbish. The
figure is in the stone, the sculptor only finds it. What sculpture is to a
block of marble, education is to an human soul.

3. The philosopher, the saint, or the hero, the wise, the good, or the great
man, very often lie hid and concealed in a plebeian, which a proper education
might have disinterred, and have brought to light. I am therefore much
delighted with reading the accounts of savage nations, and with contemplating
those virtues which are wild and uncultivated; to see courage exerting itself
in fierceness, resolution in obstinacy, wisdom in cunning, patience in
sullenness and despair.

4. Men's passions operate variously, and appear in different kinds of actions,
according as they are more or less rectified and swayed by reason. When one
hears of negroes, who upon the death of their masters, or upon changing their
service, hang themselves upon the next tree, as it frequently happens in our
American plantations, who can forbear admiring their fidelity, though it
expresses itself in so dreadful a manner?

5. What might not that savage greatness of soul which appears in these poor
wretches on many occasions, be raised to, were it rightly cultivated? and what
color of excuse can there be for the contempt with which we treat this part of
our species? that we should not put them upon the common foot of humanity; that
we should only set an insignificant fine upon the man who murders them; nay,
that we should, as much as in us lies, cut them off from the prospects of
happiness in another world, as well as in this, and deny them that which we
look upon as the proper means for attaining it.

6. It is therefore an unspeakable blessing to be born in those parts of the
world where wisdom and knowledge flourish; though it must be confessed there
are, even in these parts, several poor uninstructed persons, who are but little
above the inhabitants of those nations of which I have been here speaking; as
those who have had the advantages of a more liberal education, rise above one
another by several different degrees of perfection.

7. For to return to our statue in the block of marble, we see it sometimes
only begun to be chipped, sometimes rough-hewn, and but just sketched into an
human figure; sometimes we see the man appearing distinctly in all his limbs
and features, sometimes we find the figure wrought up to a great elegancy, but
seldom meet with any to which the hand of a Phidias or Praxiteles could not
give several nice touches and finishings.

Learning a necessary Accomplishment in a Woman of Quality or Fortune.
GUARDIAN, No. 155. 1. I HAVE often wondered that learning is not thought a
proper ingredient in the education of a woman of quality or fortune. Since they
have the same improveable minds as the male part of the species, why should
they not be cultivated by the same method? why should reason be left to itself
in one of the sexes, and be disciplined with so much care in the other?

2. There are some reasons why learning seems more adapted to the female world
than to the male. As in the first place, because they have more spare time upon
their hands, and lead a more sedentary life. Their employments are of a
domestic nature, and not like those of the other sex, which are often
inconsistent with study and contemplation.

3. The excellent lady, the lady Lizard, in the space of one summer furnished a
gallery with chairs and couches of her own and her daughters working; and at
the same time heard all Dr. Tillotson's sermons twice over. It is always the
custom for one of the young ladies to read, while the others are at work; so
that the learning of the family is not at all prejudicial to its manufacturers.

4. I was mightily pleased the other day to find them all busy in preserving
several fruits of the season, with the Sparkler in the midst of them, reading
over 'The plurality of worlds.' It was very entertaining to me to see them
dividing their speculations between jellies and stars, and making a sudden
transition from the sun to an apricot, or from the Copernican system to the
figure of a cheese cake.

5. A second reason why women should apply themselves to useful knowledge
rather than men, is because they have that natural gift of speech in greater
perfection. Since they have so excellent a talent, such a Copia Verborum, or
plenty of words, it is pity they should not put it to some use. If the female
tongue will be in motion, why should it not be set to go right? Could they
discourse about the spots in the sun, it might divert them from publishing the
faults of their neighbors: could they talk of the different aspects and
conjunctions of the planets, they need not be at the pains to comment upon
oglings and clandestine marriages. In short, were they furnished with matters
of fact, out of arts and sciences, it would now and then be of great ease to
their invention.

6. There is another reason why those, especially who are women of quality,
should apply themselves to letters, namely, because their husbands are
generally strangers to them. It is great pity there should be no knowledge in a
family. For my own part, I am concerned when I go into a great house, where
perhaps there is not a single person that can spell, unless it be by chance the
butler, or one of the footmen. What a figure is the young heir likely to make,
who is a dunce both by father and mother's side?

7. If we look into the histories of famous women, we find many eminent
philosophers of this sex. Nay, we find that several females have distinguished
themselves in those sects of philosophy which seem almost repugnant to their
natures. There have been famous female Pythagoreans, notwithstanding most of
that philosophy consisted in keeping a secret, and that the disciple was to
hold her tongue five years together.

8. Learning and knowledge are perfections in us, not as we are men, but as we
are reasonable creatures, in which order of beings the female world is upon the
same level with the male. We ought to consider in this particular, not what is
the sex, but what is the species to which they belong. At least, I believe
every one will allow me, that a female philosopher is not so absurd a character
and so opposite to the sex, as a female gamester; and that it is more
irrational for a woman to pass away half a dozen hours at cards or dice, than
in getting up stores of useful learning.

9. This therefore is another reason why I would recommend the studies of
knowledge to the female world, that they may not be at a loss how to employ
those hours that lie upon their hands.

10. I might also add this motive to my fair readers, that several of their
sex, who have improved their minds by books and literature, have raised
themselves to the highest posts of honor and fortune. A neighboring nation
may at this time furnish us with a very remarkable instance of this kind; but I
shall conclude this head with the history of Athenais, which is a very signal
example to my present purpose.

11. The emperor Theodosius being about the age of one and twenty, and
designing to take a wise, desired his sister Pulcheria and his friend Paulinus
to search his whole empire for a woman of the most exquisite beauty and highest
accomplishments. In the midst of this search, Athenais, a Grecian virgin,
accidentally offered herself. Her father, who was an eminent philosopher of
Athens, and had bred her up in all the learning of that place, at his death
left her but a very small portion, in which also she suffered great hardships
from the injustice of her two brothers.

12. This forced her upon a journey to Constantinople, where she had a relation
who represented her case to Pulcheria, in order to obtain some redress from the
emperor. By this means that religious princess became acquainted with Athenais,
whom she found the most beautiful woman of her age, and educated under a long
course of philosophy in the strictest virtue, and most unspotted innocence.

13. Pulcheria was charmed with her conversation, and immediately made her
report to the emperor her brother Theodosius. The character she gave made such
an impression on him, that he desired his sister to bring her away immediately
to the lodgings of his friend Paulinus, where he found her beauty and her
conversation beyond the highest idea he had framed of them.

14. His friend Paulinus converted her to Christianity, and gave her the name
of Eudosia; after which the emperor publicly espoused her, and enjoyed all the
happiness in his marriage which he promised himself from such a virtuous and
learned bride. She not only forgave the injuries which her two brothers had
done her, but raised them to great honors; and by several works of learning,
as well as by an exemplary life, made herself so dear to the whole empire, that
she had many statues erected to her memory, and is celebrated by the fathers of
the church as an ornament of her sex.

On the Absurdity of Omens.
SPECTATOR, No. 1. GOING yesterday to dine with an old acquaintance, I had the
misfortune to find the whole family very much dejected. Upon asking him the
occasion of it, he told me that his wife had dreamt a very strange dream the
night before, which they were afraid portended some misfortune to themselves or
to their children. At her coming into the room, I observed a settled melancholy
in her countenance, which I should have been troubled for, had I not heard from
whence it proceeded.

2. We were no sooner sat down, but, after having looked upon me a little
while, 'My dear,' says she, turning to her husband, 'you may now see the
stranger that was in the candle last night.' Soon after this, as they began to
talk of family affairs, a little boy at the lower end of the table told her,
that he was to go into joining hand on Thursday: 'Thursday!' says she, 'no
child, if it please God, you shall not begin upon Childermas day: tell your
writing-master that Friday will be soon enough.'

3. I was reflecting with myself on the oddness of her fancy, and wondering
that any body would establish it as a (...) to lose a day in every week. In the
midst of these my musings, she desired me to reach her a little salt upon the
point of my knife, which I did in such a trepidation and hurry of obedience,
that I let it drop by the way; at which she immediately startled, and said it
fell toward her. Upon this I looked very blank; and, observing the concern of
the whole table, began to consider myself, with some confusion, a^ person that
had brought a disaster upon the family.

4. The lady, however, recovering herself, after a little space said to her
husband with a sigh, 'My dear, misfortunes never come single.' My friend, I
found, acted but an under part at his table, and being a man of more good
nature than understanding, thinks himself obliged to fall in with all the
passions and humors of his yoke fellow: 'Do you remember, child,' says she,
'that the pigeon-house fell the very afternoon that our careless wench spilt
the salt upon the table? Yes, says he, my dear, and the next post brought us an
account of the battle of Almanza.'

5. The reader may guess at the figure I made, after having done all this
mischief. I dispatched my dinner, as soon as I could, with my usual
taciturnity: when, to my utter confusion, the lady seeing me quitting my knife
and fork, and lying across one another upon my plate, desired me that I would
humor her so far as to take them out of that figure, and place them side by
side.

6. What the absurdity was which I had committed I did not know, but I suppose
there was some traditionary superstition in it; and therefore in obedience to
the lady of the house, I disposed of my knife and fork in two parallel lines,
which is a figure I shall always lay them in for the future, though I do not
know any reason for it.

7. It is not difficult to a man to see that a person has conceived an aversion
to him. For my own part, I quickly found, by the lady's looks, that she
regarded me as a very odd kind of fellow, with an unfortunate aspect: for which
reason I took my leave immediately after dinner, and withdrew to my own
lodgings.

8. Upon my return home, I fell into a profound contemplation on the evils that
attend these superstitious follies of mankind; how they subject us to imaginary
afflictions, and ^itional sorrows, that do not properly come within our lot.
(...) if the natural calamities of life were not sufficient for it, we turn the
most indifferent circumstances into misfortunes, and suffer as much from
trifling accidents, as from real evils.

9. I have known the shooting of a star spoil a night's rest; and have seen a
man in love grow pale and lose his appetite, upon the plucking of a merry
thought. A screech owl at midnight has alarmed a family more than a band of
robbers; nay, the voice of a cricket has struck more terror than the roaring
of a lion

10. There is nothing so inconsiderable, which may not appear dreadful to an
imagination that is filled with on^ens and prognosties. A rusty nail, or
crooked pin, shoot up into prodigies.

11. I remember I was once in a mixed assembly, that was full of noise and
mirth, when on a sudden an old woman unluckily observed there were thirteen of
us in company. This remark struck a pani^ terror into several who were present,
insomuch that one or two of the ladies were going to leave the room; but a
friend of mine taking ^otice that one of our female companions was big with
child, affirmed there were fourteen in the room, and that, instead of
portending one of the company should die, it plainly fore^old one of them
should be born. Had not my friend found out this expedient to break the omen, I
question not but half the women in the company would have fallen sick that very
night.

12. An old maid, that is troubled with the vapors, produces infinite
disturbances of this kind among her friends and neighbors. I know a maiden
aunt, of a great family, who is one of these antiquated Sibyl^, that forbodes
and prophesies from one end of the year to the other. She is always seeing
apparitions, and hearing death-watches; and was the other day almost frighted
out of her wits by the great house dog, that howled in the stable at a time
when she lay ill of the toothache.

13. Such an extravagant cast of mind engages multitudes of people not only in
impertinent terrors, but in supernumerary duties of life; and arises from that
fear and ignorance which are natural to the soul of man.

14. The horror with which we entertain the thoughts of death (or indeed of any
future evil) and the uncertainty of its approach, fill a melancholy mind with
innumerable apprehensions and suspicions, and consequently dispose it to the
observation of such groundless prodigies and predictions. For as it is the
chief concern of wise men, to retrench the evils of life by the reasonings of
philosophy; it is the employment of fools to multiply them by the sentiments of
superstition.

15. For my own part, I should be very much troubled were I endowed with this
divining quality, though it should inform me truly of every thing that can
befall me. I would not anticipate the relish of any happiness, nor feel the
weight of any misery, before it actually arrives.

16. I know but one way of fortifying my soul against these gloomy presages and
terrors of mind; and that is, by securing to myself the friendship and
protection of that Being, who disposes of events and governs futurity. He sees,
at one view, the whole thread of my existence, not only that part of it which I
have already passed through, but that which runs forward into all the depths of
eternity.

17. When I lay me down to sleep, I recommend myself to his care; when I awake,
I give myself up to his direction. Amidst all the evils that threaten me, I
will look up to him for help, and question not but he will either avert them,
or turn them to my advantage. Though I know neither the time nor the manner of
the death I am to die, I am not at all solicitous about it; because I am sure
that he knows them both, and that he will not fail to comfort and support me
under them.

A good Conscience the best Security against Calumny and Reproach.
GUARDIAN, No. 135. 1. A GOOD conscience is to the soul what health is to the
body; it preserves a constant ease and serenity within us, and more than
countervails all the calamities and afflictions which can possibly befall us. I
know nothing so hard for a generous mind to get over as calumny and reproach,
and cannot find any method of quieting the soul under them, besides this single
one, of our being conscious to ourselves that we do not deserve them.

2. I have been always mightily pleased with that passage in Don Quixote, where
the fantastical knight is represented as loading a gentleman of good sense with
praises and elogiums. Upon which the gentleman makes this reflection to
himself: how grateful is praise to human nature!

3. I cannot forbear being secretly pleased with the commendations I receive,
though I am sensible it is a madman that bestows them on me. In the same
manner, though we are often sure that the censures which are passed upon us are
uttered by those who know nothing of us, and have neither means nor abilities
to form a right judgment of us, we cannot forbear being grieved at what they
say.

4. In order to heal this infirmity, which is so natural to the best and wisest
of men, I have taken a particular pleasure in observing the conduct of the old
philosophers, how they bore themselves up against the malice and detraction of
their enemies.

5. The way to silence calumny, says Bias, is to be always exercised in such
things as are praiseworthy. Socrates, after having received sentence, told his
friends that he had always accustomed himself to regard truth and not censure,
and that he was not troubled at his condemnation, because he knew himself free
from guilt. It was in the same spirit that he heard the accusations of his two
great adversaries, who had uttered against him the most virulent reproaches.

6. Anytus and Melitus, says he, may procure sentence against me, but they
cannot hurt me. This divine philosopher was so well fortified in his own
innocence, that he neglected all the impotence of evil tongues which were
engaged in his destruction. This was properly the support of a good conscience,
that contradicted the reports which had been raised against him, and cleared
him to himself.

7. Others of the philosophers rather chose to retort the injury of a smart
reply, than thus to disarm it with respect to themselves. They show that it
stung them, though at the same time they had the address to make their
aggressors suffer with them. Of this kind is Aristotle's reply to one who
pursued him with long and bitter invectives. You, says he, who are used to
suffer reproaches, utter them with delight; I who have not been used to utter
them, take no pleasure in hearing them.

8. Diogenes was still more severe on one who spoke ill of him: no body will
believe you when you speak ill of me, any more than they would believe me
should I speak well of you.

In these and many other instances I could produce, the bitterness of the
answer sufficiently testifies the uneasiness of mind the person was under who
made it.

9. I would rather advise my reader, if he has not in this case the secret
consolation, that he deserves no such reproaches as are cast upon him, to
follow the advice of Epictetus: If any one speaks ill of thee, consider whether
he has truth on his side; and if so, reform thyself, that his censures may not
affect thee.

10. When Anaximander was told that the very boys laughed at his singing: Ay,
says he, then I must learn to sing better. But of all the sayings of
philosophers which I have gathered together for my own use on this occasion,
there are none which carry in them more candor and good sense than the two
following ones of Plato.

11. Being told that he had many enemies who spoke ill of him: it is no matter,
said he, I will live so that none shall believe them. Hearing at another time,
that an intimate friend of his had spoken detractingly of him: I am sure he
would not do it, says he, if he had not some reason for it.

12. This is the surest as well as the noblest way of drawing the sting out of
a reproach, and a true method of preparing a man for that great and only relief
against the pains of calumny, 'a good conscience.'

13. I designed, in this essay, to show, that there is no happiness wanting to
him who is possessed of this excellent frame of mind, and that no person can be
miserable who is in the enjoyment of it; but I find this subject so well
treated in one of Dr. South's sermons, that I shall fill this Saturday's paper
with a passage of it, which cannot but make the man's heart burn within him,
who reads it with due attention.

14. That admirable author, having shown the virtue of a good conscience, in
supporting a man under the greatest trials and difficulties of life, concludes
with representing its force and efficacy in the hour of death.

15. The third and last instance, in which above all others this confidence
toward God does most eminently show and exert itself, is at the time of death;
which surely gives the grand opportunity of trying both the strength and worth
of every principle.

16. When a man shall be just about to quit the stage of this world, to put off
his mortality, and to deliver up his last accounts to God; at which sad time
his memory shall serve him for little else, but to terrify him with a frightful
review of his past life, and his former extravagancies stripped of all their
pleasure, but retaining their guilt: what is it then that can promise him a
fair passage into the other world, or a comfortable appearance before his
dreadful judge when he is there?

17. Not all the friends and interests, all the riches and honors under heaven
can speak so much as a word for him, or one word of comfort to him in that
condition; they may possibly reproach, but they cannot relieve him.

18. No, at this disconsolate time, when the busy tempter shall be more than
usually apt to vex and trouble him, and the pains of a dying body to hinder and
discompose him, and the settlement of worldly affairs to disturb and confound
him; and in a word, all things conspire to make his sickbed grievous and
uneasy: nothing can then stand up against all these ruins, and speak life in
the midst of death, but a clear conscience.

19. And the testimony of that shall make the comforts of heaven descend upon
his weary head, like a refreshing dew, or shower upon a parched ground. It
shall give him some lively earnests, and secret anticipations of his
approaching joy. It shall bid his soul go out of the body undauntedly, and lift
up his head with confidence before saints and angels. Surely the comfort, which
it conveys at this season, is something bigger than the capacities of
mortality, mighty and unspeakable, and not to be understood until it comes to
be felt.

20. And now who would not quit all the pleasures, and trash, and trifles,
which are apt to captivate the heart of man, and pursue the great rigours of
piety, and austerities of a good life, to purchase to himself such a
conscience, as at the hour of death, when all the friendship in the world shall
bid him adieu, and the whole creation turns its back upon him, shall dismiss
the soul and close his eyes with that blessed sentence, 'Well done thou good
and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.'

On Contentment.
SPECTATOR, No. 574. 1. I Was once engaged in discourse with a Rosicrucian
about the great secret. As this kind of men (I mean those of them who are not
professed cheats) are overrun with enthusiasm and philosophy, it was very
amusing to hear this religious adept descanting on his pretended discovery. He
talked of the secret as of a spirit which lived within an emerald, and
converted every thing that was near it to the highest perfection it is capable
of.

2. It gives a luster, says he, to the sun, and water to the diamond. It
irradiates every metal, and enriches lead with all the properties of gold. It
heightens smoke into flame, flame into light, and light into glory. He further
added, that a single ray of it dissipates pain, and care, and melancholy, from
the person on whom it falls. In short, says he, its presence naturally changes
every place into a kind of heaven.

3. After he had gone on for some time in this unintelligible cant, I found
that he jumbled natural and moral ideas together in the same discourse, and
that his great secret was nothing else but content.

4. This virtue does indeed produce, in some measure, all those effects which
the alchymist usually ascribes to what he calls the philosopher's stone; and if
it does not bring riches, it does the same thing, by banishing the desire of
them. If it cannot remove the disquietudes arising out of a man's mind, body,
or fortune, it makes him easy under them. It has indeed a kindly influence on
the soul of man, in respect of every being to whom he stands related. It
extinguishes all murmur, repining and ingratitude toward that Being who has
allotted him his part to act in this world. It destroys all inordinate
ambition, and every tendency to corruption, with regard to the community
wherein he is placed. It gives sweetness to his conversation, and a perpetual
serenity to all his thoughts.

5. Among the many methods which might be made use of for the acquiring of this
virtue, I shall only mention the two following. First of all, a man should
always consider how much he has more than he wants: and secondly, how much more
unhappy he might be than he really is.

6. First of all, a man should always consider how much more he has than he
wan^. I am wonderfully pleased with the reply which Aristippus made to one who
condoled him upon the loss of a farm: 'Why, said he, I have three farms still,
and you have but one; so that I ought rather to be afflicted for you than you
for me.' On the contrary, foolish men are more apt to consider what they have
lost than what they possess; and to fix their eyes upon those who are richer
than themselves, rather than on those who are under greater difficulties.

7. All the real pleasures and conveniences of life lie in a narrow compass;
but it is the humor of mankind to be always looking forward, and straining
after one who has got the start of them in wealth and honor. For this reason,
as there are none can be properly called rich, who have not more than they
want: there are few rich men in any of the politer nations but among the middle
sort of people, who keep their wishes within their fortunes, and have more
wealth than they know how to enjoy.

8. Persons of a higher rank live in a kind of splendid poverty, and are
perpetually wanting, because, instead of acquiescing in the solid pleasures of
life, they endeavor to outvy one another in shadows and appearances. Men of
sense have at all times beheld with a great deal of mirth this silly game that
is playing over their heads, and by contracting their desires enjoy all that
secret satisfaction which others are always in quest of.

9. The truth is, this ridiculous chase after imaginary pleasures cannot be
sufficiently exposed, as it is the great source of those evils which generally
undo a nation. Let a man's estate be what it will, he is a poor man, if he does
not live within it, and naturally sets himself to sale to any one that can give
him his price.

10. When Pitticus, after the death of his brother, who had left him a good
estate, was offered a greater sum of money by the king of Lydia, he thanked him
for his kindness, but told him he had already more by half than he knew what to
do with. In short, content is equivalent to wealth, and luxury to poverty; or
to give the thought a more agreeable turn, 'Content is natural wealth,' says
Socrates; to which I shall add, 'Luxury is artificial poverty.'

11. I shall therefore recommend to the consideration of those who are always
aiming after superfluous and imaginary enjoyments, and will not be at the
trouble of contracting their desires, an excellent saying of Bion the
philosopher; namely, 'That no man has so much care, as he who endeavors after
the most happiness.'

12. In the second place, every one ought to reflect how much more unhappy he
might be than he really is. The former consideration took in all those who are
sufficiently provided with the means to make themselves easy; this regards such
as actually lie under some pressure or misfortune.

13. These may receive a great alleviation from such a comparison as the
unhappy person may make between himself and others, or between the misfortunes
which he suffers, and greater misfortunes which might have befallen him.

14. I like the story of the honest Dutchman, who, upon breaking his leg by a
fall from the mainmast, told the standers-by, it was a great mercy that it was
not his neck. To which, since I am got into quotations, give me leave to add
the saying of an old philosopher, who, after having invited some of his friends
to dine with him, was ruffled b^ his wife that came into the room in a passion,
and threw down the table that stood before them; 'Every one, says he, has his
calamity, and he is a happy man that has no greater than this.'

15. We find an instance to the same purpose in the life of Doctor Hammond,
written by Bishop Fell. As this good man was troubled with a com^cation of
distempers, when he had the gout upon (...), he used to thank God that it was
not the stone; and when he had the stone, that he had not both these distempers
on him at the same time.

16. I cannot conclude this essay without observing, that there was never any
system besides that of Christianity, which could effectually produce in the
mind of man the virtue I have been hitherto speaking of. In order to make us
content with our present condition, many of the present philosophers tell us
that our discontent only hurts ourselves, without being able to make an
alteration in our circumstances; others, that whatever evil befalls us is
derived to us by a fatal necessity, to which the Gods themselves are subject;
while others very gravely tell the man who is miserable, that it is necessary
he should be so to keep up the harmony of the universe, and that the scheme of
Providence would be troubled and perverted were he otherwise.

17. These, and the like considerations, rather silence than satisfy a man.
They may show him that his discontent is unreasonable, but are by no means
sufficient to relieve it. They rather give despair than consolation. In a word,
a man might reply to one of these comforters, as Augustus did to his friend who
advised him not to grieve for the death of a person whom he loved, because his
grief could not fetch him again: 'It is for that very reason, said the emperor,
that I grieve.'

18. On the contrary, religion bears a more tender regard to human nature. It
prescribes to a very miserable man the means of bettering his condition; nay,
it shows him that the bearing of his afflictions as he ought to do, will
naturally end in the removal of them: it makes him easy here, because it can
make him happy hereafter.

19. Upon the whole, a contented mind is the greatest blessing a man can enjoy
in this world; and if in the present life his happiness arises from the
subduing his desires, it will arise in the next from the gratification of them.

Human Miseries, chiefly imaginary.
1. IT is a celebrated thought of Socrates, that if all the misfortunes of
mankind were cast into a public stock, in order to be equally distributed among
the whole species, those who now think themselves the most unhappy, would
prefer the share they are already possessed of, before that which would fall to
them by such a division. Horace has carried this thought a great deal further,
who says, that the hardships or misfortunes we lie under, are more easy to us
than those of any other person wou^^ be, in case we should change conditions
with him.

2. As I was ruminating on these two remarks, and seated in my elbow chair, I
insensibly fell asleep; when, on a sudden, methought there was a proclamation
made by Jupiter, that every mortal should bring in his griefs and calamities,
and throw them together in a heap. There was a large plain appointed for this
purpose. I took my stand in the center of it, and saw with a great deal of
pleasure, the whole human species marching one after another, and throwing down
their several loads, which immediately grew up into a prodigious mountain, that
seemed to rise above the clouds.

3. There was a certain lady, of a thin airy shape, who was very active in this
solemnity. She carried a magnifying-glass in one of her hands, and was clothed
in a loose flowing robe, embroidered with several figures of fiends and
specter, that discovered themselves in a thousand chimerical shapes, as her
garment hovered in the wind. There was something wild and distracted in her
looks.

4. Her name was Fancy. She led up every mortal to the appointed place, after
having very officiously assisted him in making up his pack, and laying it upon
his shoulders. My heart melted within me to see my fellow creatures groaning
under their respective burdens, and to consider that prodigious bulk of human
calamities which lay before me.

5. There were however several persons who gave me great diversion upon this
occasion. I observed one bringing in a fardel very carefully concealed under an
old embroidered cloak, which, upon his throwing it into the heap, I discovered
to be poverty. Another, after a great deal of puffing, threw down his luggage;
which, upon examining, I found to be his wife.

6. There were multitudes of lovers saddled with very whimsical burdens,
composed of darts and flames; but what was very odd, though they sighed as if
their hearts would break under these bundles of calamities, they could not
persuade themselves to cast them into the heap, when they came up to it; but,
after a few faint efforts, shook their heads and marched away, as heavy laden
as they came.

7. I saw multitudes of old women throw down their wrinkles, and several young
ones who stripped themselves of a tawny skin. There were very great heaps of
red noses, large lips, and rusty teeth. The truth of it is, I was surprised to
see the greatest part of the mountain made up of bodily deformities. Observing
one advancing toward the heap with a larger cargo than ordinary upon his back,
I found upon his near approach, that it was only a natural hump, which he
disposed of with great joy of heart, among this collection of human miseries.

8. There were likewise distempers of all sorts, though I could not but
observe, that there were many more imaginary than real. One little packet I
could not but take notice of, which was a complication of the diseases incident
to human nature, and was in the hands of a great many fine people: this was
called the spleen. But what most of all surprised me, was a remark I made, that
there was not a single vice or folly thrown into the whole heap: at which I was
very much astonished, having concluded within myself, that every one would take
this opportunity of getting rid of his passions, prejudices and frailties.

9. I took notice in particular of a very profligate fellow, who I did not
question came laden with his crimes, but upon searching into his bundle, I
found, that instead of throwing his guilt from him, he had only laid down his
memory. He was followed by another worthless rogue, who slung away his modesty
instead of his ignorance.

10. When the whole race of mankind had thus cast their burdens, the phantom
which had been so busy on this occasion, seeing me an idle spectator of what
passed, approached toward me. I grew uneasy at her presence, when on a sudden
she laid her magnifying glass full before my eyes. I no sooner saw my face in
it but was startled at the shortness of it, which now appeared to me in its
utmost aggravation.

11. The immoderate breadth of my features made me very much out of humor with
my own countenance, upon which I threw it from me like a mask. It happened very
luckily, that one who stood by me had just before thrown down his visage,
which, it seems, was too long for him. It was indeed extended to a most
shameful length; I believe the very chin was modestly speaking, as long as my
whole face.

12. We had both of us an opportunity of mending ourselves, and all the
contributions being now brought in, every man was at liberty to exchange his
misfortune for those of another person. But as there arose many new incidents
in the sequel of my vision, I shall pursue this subject further, as the moral
which may be drawn from it is applicable to persons of all degrees and stations
in life.

13. I Gave my reader a sight of that mountain of miseries, which was made up
of those several calamities that afflict the minds of men. I saw with
unspeakable pleasure, the whole species th^s delivered from its sorrows:
though, at the same time, as we stood round the heap, and surveyed the several
materials of which it was composed, there was scarce a mortal, in this vast
multitude, who did not discover what he thought pleasures and blessings of
life; and wondered how the owners of them ever came to look upon them as
burdens and grievances.

14. As we were regarding very attentively this confusion of miseries, this
chaos of calamity, Jupiter issued out a second proclamation, that every one was
now at liberty to exchange his affliction, and to return to his habitation with
any such other bundle as should be delivered to him.

15. Upon this, ^ancy began a^in to bestir herself, and parcelling out the
whole heap, with incredible activity, recommended to every one his particular
packet. The hurry and confusion (...) this time was not to be expressed. Some
observations, which I made upon the occasion, I shall communicate to the
reader. A venerable grey-headed man, who had laid down the colic, and who I
found wanted an heir to his estate, snatched up an undutiful son, that had been
thrown into the heap by his angry father.

16. The graceless youth, in less than a quarter of an hour, pulled the old
gentleman by the beard, and had like to have knocked his brains out; so that
meeting the true father, who came toward him in a fit of the gripes, he begged
him to take his son again, and give him back his colic; but they were incapable
either of them to recede from the choice they had made.

17. A poor galley-slave, who had thrown down his chains, took up the gout in
their stead, but made such wry faces, that one might easily perceive he was no
great gainer by the bargain. It was pleasant enough to see the several
exchanges that were made, for sickness against poverty, hunger against want of
appetite, and care against pain.

18. The female world were very busy among themselves in bartering for
features; one was trucking a lock of gray hairs for (...) carbuncle, another
was making over a short waist for a pair of round shoulders, and a third
cheapening a bad face for a lost reputation: but on all these occasions, there
was not one of them who did not think the new blemish, as soon as she had got
it into her possession, much more disagreeable than the old one.

19. I made the same observation on every other misfortune or calamity, which
every one in the assembly brought upon himself, in lieu of what he had parted
with; whether it be that all the evils which befall us are in some measure
suited and proportioned to our strength, or that every evil b^omes more
supportable by our being accustomed to it, I shall not determine.

20. I could ^ot, for my heart, forbear pitying the poor hump-backed gentleman
mentioned in the former paper, who went off a very well-shaped person with a
stone in his bladder; nor the fine gentleman who had struck up this bargain
with him, that limped through a whole assembly of ladies who used to admire
him, with a pair shoulders peeping over his head.

21. I must not omit my own paticular adventure. My friend with the long visage
had no sooner taken upon him my short face, but he made such a grotesque figure
in it, that, as I looked upon him, I could not forbear laughing at my self,
insomuch that I put my own face out of countenance. The poor gentleman was so
sensible of the ridicule, that I found he was ashamed of what he had done: on
the other side I found that I myself had no great reason to triumph, for as I
went to touch my forehead, I missed the place, and clapped my finger upon my
upper lip.

22. Besides, as my nose was exceeding prominent, I gave it two or three
unlucky knocks as I was playing my hand about my face, and aiming at some other
part of it. I saw two other gentlemen by me, who were in the same ridiculous
circumstances: these had made a foolish swap between a couple of thick bandy
legs, and two long trapsticks that had no calves to them.

23. One of these looked like a man walking upon stilts, and was so lifted up
into the air above his ordinary height, that his head turned round with it,
while the other made such awkward circles, as he attempted to walk, that he
scarce knew how to move forward upon his new supporters: observing him to be a
pleasant kind of fellow, I stuck my cane in the ground, and told him I would
lay him a bottle of wine, that he did not march up to it on a line that I drew
for him, in a quarter of an hour.

24. The heap was at last distributed among the two sexes, who made a most
pitious sight, as they wandered up and down under the pressure of their several
burdens. The whole plain was filled with murmurs and complaints, groans and
lamentations. Jupiter at length, taking compassion on the poor mortals, ordered
them a second time to lay down their loads, with a design to give every one his
own again.

25. They discharged themselves with a great deal of pleasure, after which, the
phantom, who had led them into such gross delusions, was commanded to
disappear. There was sent in her stead a goddess of ^ quite different figure;
her motions were steady and composed, and her aspect serious, but cheerful. She
every now and then cast her eyes toward heaven, and fixed them upon Jupiter.

26. Her name was Patience. She had no sooner placed herself by the mount of
sorrow, but what I thought very remarkable, the whole heap sunk to such a
degree, that it did not appear a third part so big as it was before. She
afterward returned every man his own proper calamity, and teaching him how to
bear it in the most commodious manner, he marched off with it contentedly,
being very well pleased that he had not been left to his own choice, as to the
kind of evils which fell to his lot.

27. Besides the several pieces of morality to be drawn out of this vision, I
learnt from it, never to repine at my own misfortunes, or to envy the happiness
of another, since it is impossible for any man to form a right judgment of his
neighbor's sufferings; for which reason also I have determined never to think
too lightly of another's complaints, but to regard the sorrows of my
fellow creatures with sentiments of humanity and compassion.

A Life of Virtue preferable to a Life of Pleasure, exemplified in the Choice
of Hercules.
TATLER, No. 97. 1. WHEN Hercules, says the divine Prodicus, was in that part
of his youth, in which it was natural for him to consider what course of life
he ought to pursue, he one day retired into a desert, where the silence and
solitude of the place very much favored his meditations.

2. As he was musing on his present condition, and very much perplexed in
himself on the state of life he should choose, he saw two women of a larger
stature than ordinary approaching toward him. One of them had a very noble air
and graceful deportment; her beauty was natural and easy; her person clean and
unspotted; her eyes cast toward the ground, with an agreeable reserve; her
motion and behavior full of modesty; and her raiment as white as snow.

3. The other had a great deal of health and floridness in her countenance,
which she had helped with an artificial white and red, and endeavored to
appear more graceful than ordinary in her mein, by a mixture of affectation in
all her gestures. She had a wonderful confidence and assurance in her looks,
and all the variety of colors in her dress that she thought were the most
proper to show her complexion to an advantage. She cast her eyes upon herself,
then turned them on those that were present to see how they liked her, and
often looked on the figure she made in her own shadow.

4. Upon her nearer approach to Hercules, she stepped before the other lady,
who came forward with a regular composed carriage, and running up to him,
accosted him after the following manner.

5. My dear Hercules, says she, I find you are very much divided in your own
thoughts upon the way of life that you ought to choose: be my friend, and follow
me; I will lead you into the possession of pleasure and out of the reach of
pain, and remove you from all the noise and disquietude of business. The
affairs of either war or peace shall have no power to disturb you. Your whole
employment shall be to make your life easy, and to entertain every sense with
its proper gratifications. Sumptuous tables, beds of roses, clouds of perfumes,
concerts of music, crowds of beauties, are all in readiness to receive you.
Come along with me into this region of delights, this world of pleasure, and
bid farewell for ever to care, to pain, and to business.

6. Hercules, hearing the lady talk after this manner, desired to know her
name; to which she answered, my friends, and those who are well acquainted with
me, call me Happiness; but my enemies, and those who would injure my
reputation, have given me the name of Pleasure.

7. By this time the other lady was come up, who addressed herself to the young
hero in a very different manner.

Hercules, says she, I offer myself to you, because I know you are descended
from the Gods, and give proofs of that descent by your love to virtue, and
application to the studies proper to your age. This makes me hope you will gain
both for yourself and me an immortal reputation. But before I invite you into
my society and friendship, I will be open and sincere with you, and must lay
down this as an established truth, that there is nothing truly valuable which
can be purchased without pains and labor.

8. The Gods have set a price upon every real and noble pleasure. If you would
gain the favor of the Deity, you must be at the pains of worshipping him; if
the friendship of good men, you must study to oblige them; if you would be
honored by your country, you must take care to serve it. In short, if you
would be eminent in war or peace, you must become master of all the
qualifications that can make you so. These are the only terms and conditions
upon which I can propose happiness. The goddess of Pleasure here broke in upon
her discourse:

9. You see, said she, Hercules, by her own confession, the way to her pleasure
is long and difficult, whereas that which I propose is short and easy. Alas!
said the other lady, whose visage glowed with a passion made up of scorn and
pity, what are the pleasures you propose? To eat before you are hungry, drink
before you are thirsty, sleep before you are tired, to gratify appetites before
they are raised, and raise such appetites as nature never planted.

10. You never heard the most delicious music, which is the praise of one's
self; nor saw the most beautiful object, which is the work of one's own hands.
Your votaries pass away their youth in a dream of mistaken pleasures, while
they are hoarding up anguish, torment, and remorse, for old age.

11. As for me, I am a friend of the gods and o^ good men, an agreeable
companion to the artisan, a household guardian to the fathers of families, a
patron and protector of servants, an associate in all true and generous
friendships. The banquets of my votaries are never costly, but always
delicious; for none eat or drink at them who are not invited by hunger and
thirst. Their slumbers are sound, and their waking^ cheerful.

12. My young men have the pleasure of hearing themselves praised by those who
are in years, and those who are in years, of being honored by those who are
young. In a word, my followers are favored by the gods, beloved by their
acquaintance, esteemed by their country, and, after the close of their labors,
honored by posterity.

13. We know by the life of this memorable hero, to which of these two ladies
he gave up his heart; and I believe, every one who reads this, will do him the
justice to approve his choice.

14. I very much admire the speeches of these ladies, as containing in them the
chief arguments for a life of virtue, or a life of pleasure, that could enter
into the thoughts of an heathen: but am particularly pleased with the different
figures he gives the two goddesses. Our modern authors have represented
pleasure or vice with an alluring face, but ending in snakes and monsters: here
she appears in all the charms of beauty, though they are all false and
borrowed; and by that means composes a vision entirely natural and pleasing.

15. I have translated this allegory for the benefit of the youth in general;
and particularly of those who are still in the deplorable state of
nonexistence, and whom I most earnestly entreat to come into the world. Let my
embryos show the least inclination to any single virtue, and I shall allow it
to be a struggling toward birth.

16. I do not expect of them that, like the hero in the foregoing story, they
should go about as soon as they are born, with a club in their hands, and a
lion's skin on their shoulders, to root out monsters and destroy tyrants; but
as the finest author of all antiquity has said upon this very occasion, though
a man has not the abilities to distinguish himself in the most shining parts of
a great character, he has certainly the capacity of being just, faithful,
modest, and temperate.

Virtue rewarded; the History of Amanda.
SPECTATOR, No. 375. 1. I HAVE more than once had occasion to mention a noble
saying of Seneca the philosopher, that a virtuous person struggling with
misfortunes, and rising above them, is an object on which the gods themselves
may look down with delight. I shall therefore set before my reader a scene of
this kind of distress in private life, for the speculation of this day.

2. An eminent citizen, who had lived in good fashion and credit, was by a
train of accidents, and by an unavoidable perplexity in his affairs, reduced to
a low condition. There is a modesty usually attending faultless poverty, which
made him rather choose to reduce his manner of living to his present
circumstances, than solicit his friends, in order to support the show of an
estate, when the substance was gone.

3. His wife, who was a woman of sense and virtue, behaved herself on this
occasion with uncommon decency, and never appeared so amiable in his eyes as
now. Instead of upbraiding him with the ample fortune she had brought, or the
many great offers she had refused for his sake, she redoubled all the instances
of her affection, while her husband was continually pouring out his heart to
her in complaints, that he had ruined the best woman in the world,

4. He sometimes came home at a time when she did not expect him, and surprised
her in tears; which she endeavored to conceal, and always put on an air of
cheerfulness to receive him. To lessen their expense, their eldest daughter
(whom I shall call Amanda) was sent into the country, to the house of an honest
farmer, who had married a servant of the family: This young woman was
apprehensive of the ruin which was approaching, and had privately engaged a
friend in the neighborhood to give her an account of what passed from time to
time in her father's affairs.

5. Amanda was in the bloom of her youth and beauty, when the lord of the
manor, who often called in at the farmer's house as he followed his country
sports, fell passionately in love with her. He was a man of great generosity,
but from a loose education had contracted a hearty aversion to marriage. He
therefore entertained a design upon Amanda's virtue, which at present he
thought fit to keep private (...) he innocent creature, who never suspected his
i^^entions, was pleased with his person; and, having observed his growing
passion for her, hoped, by so advantageous a match, she might quickly be in a
capacity of supporting her impoverished relations.

6. One day as he called to see her, he found her in tears over a letter she
had just received from her friend, which gave an account that her father had
been lately stripped of every thing by an execution. The lover, who with some
difficulty ^ound out the cause of her grief, took this occasion to make her a
proposal. It is impossible to express Amanda's confusion when she found his
pretensions were not honorable.

7. She was now deserted of all hopes, and had no power to speak; but rushing
from him in the utmost disturbance, locked herself up in her chamber. He
immediately dispatched a messenger to her father with the following letter.

8. SIR,
I Have heard of your misfortune, and have offered your daughter, if she will
live with me, to settle on her four hundred pounds a year, and to lay down the
sum for which you are now distressed. I will be so ingenuous, as to tell you
that I do not intend marriage: but if you are wise, you will use your authority
with her not to be too nice, when she has an opportunity of saving you and your
family, and of making herself happy.

I am, etc.




9. This letter came to the hands of Amanda's mother: she opened and read it
with great surprise and concern. She did not think it proper to explain herself
to the messenger; but desiring him to call again the next morning, she wrote to
her daughter as follows.

10. Dearest Child,
YOUR father and I have just now received a letter from a gentleman who
pretends love to you, with a proposal that insults our misfortunes, and would
throw us to a lower degree of misery than any thing which is come upon us. How
could this barbarous man think that the tenderest of parents would be tempted
to supply their wants, by giving up the best of children to infamy and ruin? It
is a mean and cruel artifice to make this proposal at a time when he thinks our
necessities must compel us to any thing; but we will not eat the bread of
shame; and therefore we charge thee not to think of us, but to avoid the snare
which is laid for thy virtue. Beware of pitying us: it is not so bad as you
have perhaps been told. All things will yet be well, and I shall write my child
better news.

I have been interrupted. I know not how I was moved to say things would mend.
As I was going on, I was startled by the noise of one that knocked at the door,
and had brought us an unexpected supply of a debt which had long been owing.
Oh! I will now tell thee all. It is some days I have lived almost without
support, having conveyed what little money I could raise to your poor father.
Thou will weep to think where he is, yet be assured he will soon be at liberty.
That cruel letter would have broke his heart, but I have concealed it from him.
I have no companion at present besides little Fanny, who stands watching my
looks as I write, and is crying for her sister; she says she is sure you are
not well, having discovered that my present trouble is about you. But do not
think I would thus repeat my sorrows to grieve thee. No, it is to entreat thee
not to make them insupportable, by adding what would be worse than all. Let us
bear cheerfully an affliction, which we have not brought on ourselves, and
remember there is a power who can better deliver us out of it, than by the loss
of thy innocence. -- Heaven preserve my dear child.

Thy affectionate mother --.




11. The messenger, notwithstanding he promised to deliver this letter to
Amanda, carried it first to his master, who he imagined would be glad to have
an opportunity of giving it into her hands himself. His master was impatient to
know the success of his proposal, and therefore broke open the letter
privately, to see the contents.

12. He was not a little moved at so true a picture of virtue in distress: but
at the same time was infinitely surprised to find his offers rejected. However,
he resolved not to suppress the letter, but carefully sealed it up again, and
carried it to Amanda. All his endeavors to see her were in vain, till she was
assured he brought a letter from her mother. He would not part with it but upon
condition that she should read it without leaving the room.

13. While she was perusing it, he fixed his eyes on her face with the deepest
attention; her concern gave a new softness to her beauty, and when she burst
into tears, he could no longer refrain from bearing a part in her sorrow, and
telling her, that he too had read the letter, and was resolved to make
reparation for having been the occasion of it. My reader will not be displeased
to see the second epistle which he now wrote to Amanda's mother.

MADAM,
I Am full of shame, and will never forgive myself, if I have not your pardon
for what I lately wrote. It was far from my intention to add trouble to the
afflicted: nor could any thing but my being a stranger to you, have betrayed me
into a fault, for which, if I live, I shall endeavor to make you amends, as a
son. You cannot be unhappy while Amanda is your daughter: nor shall be, if any
thing can prevent it, which is in the power of,

MADAM, Your obedient humble Servant --.


14. This letter he sent by his steward, and soon after went up to town himself
to complete the generous act he had now resolved on. By his friendship and
assistance, Amanda's father was quickly in a condition of retrieving his
perplexed affairs. To conclude, he married Amanda, and enjoyed the double
satisfaction of having restored a worthy family to their former prosperity, and
of making himself happy by an alliance to their virtues.

The Story of Abdallah and Balsora.
GUARDIAN, No. 167. 1. THE following story is lately translated out of an
Arabian manuscript, which I think has very much the turn of an oriental tale;
and as it has never before been printed, I question not but it will be highly
acceptable to my reader.

2. The name of Helim is still famous through all the eastern parts of the
world. He is called among the Persians, even to this day, Helim, the great
physician. He was acquainted with all the powers of simples, understood all the
influences of the stars, and knew the secrets that were engraved on the seal of
Solomon the son of David. Helim was also governor of the Black Palace, and
chief of the physicians to Alnareschin the great king of Persia.

3. Alnareschin was the most dreadful tyrant that ever reigned in this country.
He was of a fearful, suspicious, and cruel nature, having put to death upon
very slight jealousies and surmises five and thirty of his queens, and above
twenty sons whom he suspected to have conspired against his life. Being at
length wearied with the exercise of so many cruelties in his own family, and
fearing lest the whole race of Caliphs should be entirely lost, he one day sent
for Helim, and spoke to him after this manner.

4. 'Helim,' said he, 'I have long admired thy great wisdom, and retired way of
living. I shall now show thee the entire confidence which I place in thee. I
have only two sons remaining, who are as yet but infants. It is my design that
thou take them home with thee, and educate them as thy own. Train them up in
the humble unambitious pursuits of knowledge. By this means shall the line of
Caliphs be preserved, and my children succeed after me, without aspiring to my
throne whilst I am yet alive.'

5. The words of my lord the king shall be obeyed, said Helim. After which he
bowed, and went out of the king's presence. He then received the children into
his own house, and from that time bred them up with him in the studies of
knowledge and virtue. The young princes loved and respected Helim as their
father, and made such improvements under him, that by the age of one and twenty
they were instructed in all the learning of the east.

6. The name of the eldest was Ibrahim, and of the youngest Abdallah. They
lived together in such a perfect friendship, that to this day it is said of
intimate friends that they live together like Ibrahim and Abdallah. Helim had
an only child, who was a girl of a fine soul, and a most beautiful person. Her
father omitted nothing in her education, that might make her the most
accomplished woman of her age.

7. As the young princes were in a manner excluded from the rest of the world,
they frequently conversed with this lovely virgin, who had been brought up by
her father in the same course of knowledge and of virtue.

8. Abdallah, whose mind was of a softer turn than that of his brother, grew by
degrees so enamoured of her conversation, that he did not think he lived, when
he was not in company with his beloved Balsora, for that was the name of the
maid. The fame of her beauty was so great, that at length it came to the ears
of the king, who, pretending to visit the young princes his sons, demanded of
Helim the sight of Balsora his fair daughter.

9. The king was so inflamed with her beauty and behavior, that he sent for
Helim the next morning, and told him it was now his design to recompense him
for all his faithful services; and that in order to it, he intended to make his
daughter queen of Persia.

10. Helim, who knew very well the fate of all those unhappy women who had been
thus advanced, and could not but be privy to the secret love which Abdallah
bore his daughter, 'Far be it,' says he, 'from the king of Persia to
contaminate the blood of the Caliphs, and join himself in marriage with the
daughter of his physician.'

11. The king, however, was so impatient for such a bride, that without hearing
any excuses, he immediately ordered Balsora to be sent for into his presence,
keeping the father with him in order to make her sensible of the honor which
he designed. Balsora, who was too modest and humble to think her beauty had
made such an impression on the king, was a few moments after brought into his
presence as he had commanded.

12. She appeared in the king's eye as one of the virgins of Paradise. But upon
hearing the honor which he intended her, she fainted away, and fell down as
dead at his feet. Helim wept, and after having recovered her out of the trance
into which she was fallen, represented to the king, that so unexpected an
honor was too great to have been communicated to her all at once; but that, if
he pleased, he would himself prepare her for it. The king bid him take his own
way, and dismissed him.

13. Balsora was conveyed again to her father's house, where the thoughts of
Abdallah renewed her affliction every moment; insomuch that at length she fell
into a raging fever. The king was informed of her condition by those that saw
her. Helim finding no other means of extricating her from the difficulties she
was in, after having composed her mind, and made her acquainted with his
intentions, gave her a certain potion, which he knew would lay her asleep for
many hours; and afterward, in all the seeming distress of a disconsolate
father, informed the king she was dead.

14. The king, who never let any sentiments of humanity come too near his
heart, did not much trouble himself about the matter; however, for his own
reputation, he told the father, that since it was known through the empire that
Balsora died at a time when he designed her for his bride, it was his intention
that she should be honored as such after her death, that her body should be
laid in the black palace, among those of his deceased queens.

15. In the mean time Abdallah, who had heard of the king's design, was not
less afflicted than his beloved Balsora. As for the several circumstances of
his distress, as also how the king was informed of an irrecoverable distemper
into which he was fallen, they are to be found at length in the History of
Helim.

16. It shall suffice to acquaint the reader, that Helim, some days after the
supposed death of his daughter, gave the prince a potion of the same nature
with which he had laid asleep Belsora.

17. It is the custom among the Persians, to convey in a private manner the
bodies of all the royal family a little after their death, into the black
palace; which is the repository of all who are descended from the Caliphs, or
any way allied to them. The chief physician is always governor of the black
palace; it being his office to embalm and preserve the holy family after they
are dead, as well as to take care of them while they are yet living.

18. The black palace is so called from the color of the building, which is
all of the finest polished black marble. There are always burning in it five
thousand everlasting lamps. It has also a hundred folding doors of ebony, which
are each of them watched day and night by a hundred negroes, who are to take
care that nobody enters besides the governor.

19. Helim, after having conveyed the body of his daughter into this
repository, and at the appointed time received her out of the sleep into which
she was fallen, took care some time after to bring that of Abdallah into the
same place. Balsora watched over him till such time as the doze he had taken
lost its effect. Abdallah was not acquainted with Helim's design when he gave
him this sleepy potion.

20. It is impossible to describe the surprise, the joy, the transport he was
in at his first awaking. He fancied himself in the retirement of the blessed, and
that the spirit of his dear Balsora, who he thought was just gone before him,
was the first who came to congratulate his arrival. She soon informed him of
the place he was in, which, notwithstanding all its horrors, appeared to him
more sweet than the bower of Mahomet, in the company of his Balsora.

21 Helim, who was supposed to be taken up in the e^balming of the bodies,
visited the place very frequently. His greatest perplexity was how to get the
lovers out of it, the gates being watched in such a manner as I have before
related. This consideration did not a little disturb the two interred lovers.

22. At length Helim bethought himself, that the first day of the full moon of
the month Tizpa was near at hand. Now it is a received tradition among the
Persians, that the souls of those of the Royal family, who are in a state of
bliss, do, on the first full moon after their decease, pass through the eastern
gate of the black palace, which is therefore called the gate of Paradise, in
order to take their flight for that happy place.

23. Helim, therefore, having made due preparation for this night, dressed each
of the lovers in a robe of azure silk, wrought in the finest looms of Persia,
with a long train of linen whiter than snow, that floated on the ground behind
them. Upon Abdallah's head he fixed a wreath of the greenest myrtle, and on
Balsora's a garland of the freshest roses. Their garments were scented with the
richest perfumes of Arabia.

24. Having thus prepared every thing, the full moon was no sooner up, and
shining in all its brightness, but he privately opened the gate of Paradise,
and shut it after the same manner, as soon as they had passed through it.

25. The band of negroes who were posted at a little distance from the gate,
seeing two such beautiful apparitions, that showed themselves to advantage by
the light of the full moon, and being ravished with the odor that flowed from
their garments, immediately concluded them to be the ghosts of the two persons
lately deceased.

26. They fell upon their faces as they passed through the midst of them, and
continued prostrate on the earth until such time as they were out of sight.
They reported the next day what they had seen* but this was looked upon by the
king himself, an^ most others, as the compliment that was usually paid to any
of the deceased of his family.

27. Helim had placed two of his own mules at about a mile's distance from the
black temple, on the spot which they had agreed upon for their rendezvous. Here
he met them, and conducted them to one of his own houses, which was situated on
mount Khacan.

28. The air of this mountain was so very healthful, that Helim had formerly
transported the king thither, in order to recover him out of a long fit of
sickness, which succeeded so well, that the king made him a present of the
whole mountain, with a beautiful house and garden that were on the top of it.

29. In this retirement lived Abdallah and Balsora. They were both so fraught
with all kinds of knowledge, and possessed with so constant and mutual a passion
for each other, that their solitude never lay heavy on them.

30. Abdallah applied himself to those arts which were agreeable to his manner
of living, and the situation of the place; insomuch that in a few years he
converted the whole mountain into a kind of garden, and covered every part of
it with plantations or spots of flowers. Helim was too good a father to let him
want any thing that might conduce to make his retirement pleasant.

31. In about ten years after their abode in this place, the old king died, and
was succeeded by his son Ibrahim, who, upon the supposed death of his brother,
had been called to court, and entertained there as heir to the Persian empire.
Though he was some years inconsolable for the death of his brother, Helim durst
not trust him with the secret, which he knew would have fatal consequences,
should it by any means come to the knowledge of the old king.

32. Ibrahim was no sooner mounted to the throne, but Helim sought after a
proper opportunity of making a discovery to him, which he knew would be very
agreeable to so good natured and generous a prince. It so happened, that before
Helim found such an opportunity as he desired, the new king Ibrahim, having
been separated from his company in a chase, and almost fainting with heat and
thirst, saw himself at the foot of mount Khacan. He immediately ascended the
hill, and coming to Helim's house, demanded some refreshments.

33. Helim was very luckily there at that time; and after having set before the
king the choicest of wines and fruits, finding him wonderfully pleased with so
seasonable a treat, told him that the best part of his entertainment was to
come. Upon which he opened to him the whole history of what had passed. The
king was at once astonished and transported at so strange a relation, and
seeing his brother enter the room with Balsora in his hand, he leaped off from
the sofa on which he sat, and cried out, 'It is he! it is my Abdallah!' Having
said this, he fell upon his neck, and wept.

34. The whole company, for some time, remained silent, and shedding tears of
joy. The king at length having kindly reproached Helim for depriving him so
long of such a brother, embraced Balsora with the greatest tenderness, and told
her that she should now be a queen indeed, for that he would immediately make
his brother king of all the conquered nations on the other side the Tigris.

35. He easily discovered in the eyes of our two lovers, that instead of being
transported with the offer, they preferred their present retirement to empire.
At their request, therefore, he changed his intentions, and made them a present
of all the open country as far as they could see from the top of mount Khacan.

36. Abdallah continuing to extend his former improvements, beautified this
whole prospect with groves and fountains, gardens and seats of pleasure, until
it became the most delicious spot of ground with^^ the empire, and is therefore
called the Garden of Persia.

37. This Caliph, Ibrahim, after a long and happy reign, died without children,
and was succeeded by Abdallah, a son of Abdallah and Balsora. This was that
king Abdallah, who afterward fixed the Imperial residence upon mount Khacan,
which continues at this time to be the favorite palace of the Persian empire.

On Rashness and Cowardice.
RAMBLER, No. 25. 1. THERE are some vices and errors which, though often fatal
to those in whom they are found, have yet, by the universal consent of mankind,
been considered as entitled to some degree of respect, or have, at least, been
exempted from contemptuous infamy, and condemned by the severest moralists with
pity rather than detestation.

2. A constant and invariable example of this general partiality will be found
in the different regard which has always been shown to rashness and cowardice;
two vices, of which, though they may be conceived equally distant from the
middle point, where true fortitude is placed, and may equally injure any public
or private interest, yet the one is never mentioned without some kind of
veneration, and the other always considered as a topic of unlimited and
licentious censure, on which all the virulence of reproach may be lawfully
exerted.

3. The same distinction is made, by the common suffrage, between profusion and
avarice, and perhaps between many other opposite vices; and, as I have found
reason to pay great regard to the voice of the people, in cases where knowledge
has been forced upon them by experience, without long deductions or deep
researches, I am inclined to believe that this distribution of respect is not
without some agreement with the nature of things; and that in the faults, which
are thus invested with extraordinary privileges, there are generally some
latent principles of merit, some possibilities of future virtue, which may, by
degrees, break from obstruction, and by time and opportunity be brought into
act.

4. It may be laid down as an a^iom, that it is more easy to take away
superfluities than to supply defects; and therefore, he that is culpable,
because he has passed the middle point of virtue, is always accounted a fairer
object of hope, than he who fails by falling short. The one has all that
perfection requires, and more, but the excess may be easily retrenched; the
other wants the qualities requisite to excellence, and who can tell how he
shall obtain them?

5. We are certain that the horse may be taught to keep pace with his fellows,
whose fault is that he leaves them behind. We know that a few strokes of the
axe will lop a cedar; but what arts of cultivation can elevate a shrub?

6. To walk with circumspection and steadiness in the right path, at an equal
distance between the extremes of error, ought to be the constant endeavor of
every reasonable being; nor can I think those teachers of moral wisdom much to
be honored as benefactors to mankind, who are always enlarging upon the
difficulty of our duties, and providing rather excuses for vice, than
incentives to virtue.

7. But, since to most it will happen often, and to all sometimes, that there
will be a deviation toward one side or the other, we ought always to employ
our vigilance, with most attention, on that enemy, from which there is the
greatest danger, and to stray, if we must stray, toward those parts from
whence we may quickly and easily return.

8. Among other opposite qualities of the mind, which may become dangerous,
though in different degrees, I have often had occasion to consider the contrary
effects of presumption and despondency; of heady confidence, which promises a
victory without contest, and heartless pusillanimity, which shrinks back from
the thought of great undertakings, confounds difficulty with impossibility, and
considers all advancement toward any new attainment as irreversibly prohibited.

9. Presumption will be easily corrected. Every experiment will teach caution,
and miscarriages will hourly show, that attempts are not always rewarded with
success. The most precipitate ardour will, in time, be taught the necessity of
methodical gradation, and preparatory measures; and the most daring confidence
be convinced that neither merit, nor abilities can command events.

10. It is the advantage of vehemence and activity, that they are always
hastening to their own reformation; because they incite us to try whether our
expectations are well grounded; and therefore detect the deceits which they are
apt to occasion. But timidity is a disease of the mind more obstinate and
fatal; for a man once persuaded, that any impediment is insuperable, has given
it, with respect to himself, that strength and weight which it had not before.

11. He can scarcely strive with vigor and perseverance, when he has no hope
of gaining the victory; and since he will never try his strength, can never
discover the unreasonableness of his fears.

12. There is often to be found in men devoted to literature, a kind of
intellectual cowardice, which whoever converses much among them, may observe
frequently to depress the alacrity of enterprise, and, by consequence, to
retard the improvement of science.

13. They have annexed to every species of knowledge, some chimerical character
of terror and inhibition, which they transmit, without much reflection, from
one to another; they first fright themselves, and then propagate the panic to
their scholars and acquaintance.

14. One study is inconsistent with a lively imagination, another with a solid
judgment; one is improper in the early parts of life, another requires so much
time, that it is not to be attempted at an advanced age; one is dry and
contracts the sentiments, another is diffuse and over-burdens the memory; one
is insufferable to taste and delicacy, and another wears out life in the study
of words, and is useless to a wise man, who desires only the knowledge of
things.

15. But of all the bugbears by which the infant^s barbati, boys both young and
old, have been hitherto frighted from degres^ing into new tracts of learning,
none has been more mischievously efficacious than an opinion that every kind of
knowledge requires a peculiar genius, or mental constitution, framed for the
reception of some ideas and the exclusion of others; and that to him whose
genius is not adapted to the study which he prosecutes, all labor shall be
vain and fruitless, vain as an endeavor to mingle oil and water, or, in the
language of chimestry, to amalgamate bodies of heterogeneous principles.

16. This opinion we may reasonably suspect to have been propagated, by vanity,
beyond the truth. It is natural for those who have raised a reputation by any
science, to exalt themselves as endowed by heaven with peculiar powers, or
marked out by an extraordinary designation for their profession: and to fright
competitors away by representing the difficulties with which they must contend,
and the necessity of qualities which are supposed to be not generally
conferred, and which no man can know, but by experience, whether he enjoys.

17. To this discouragement it may be possibly answered, that since a genius,
whatever it be, is like fire in the flint, only to be produced by collision
with a proper subject, it is the business of every man to try whether his
faculties may not happily cooperate with his desires; and since they whose
proficiency he admires, knew their own force only by the event, he needs but
engage in the same undertaking, with equal spirit, and may reasonably hope for
equal success.

18. There is another species of false intelligence, given by those who profess
to show the way to the summit of knowledge, of equal tendency to depress the
mind with false distrust of itself, and weaken it by needless solicitude and
dejection. When a scholar whom they desire to animate, consults them at his
entrance on some new study. It is common to make flattering representations of
its pleasantness and facility.

19. Thus they generally attain one of the two ends almost equally desirable;
they either incite his industry by elevating his hopes, or produce a high
opinion of their own abilities, since they are supposed to relate only what
they have found, and to have proceeded with no less ease than they have
promised to their followers.

20. The student, inflamed by this encouragement, sets forward in the new path,
and proceeds a few steps with great alacrity; but he soon finds asperities and
intricacies of which he has not been forewarned, and imagining that none ever
were so entangled or fatigued before him, sinks suddenly into despair, and
desists as from an expedition in which fate opposes him. Thus his terrors are
multiplied by his hopes, and he is defeated without resistance, because he had
no expectation of an enemy.

21. Of these treacherous instructors, the one destroys industry, by declaring
that industry is vain, the other by representing it as needless; the one cuts
away the root of hope, the other raises it only to be blasted. The one confines
his pupil to the shore, by telling him that his wreck is certain; the other
sends him to sea, without preparing him for tempests.

22. False hopes and false terrors are equally to be avoided. Every man who
proposes to grow eminent by learning, should carry in his mind, at once, the
difficulty of excellence, and the force of industry; and remember that fame is
not conferred but as the recompense of labor, and that labor, vigorously
continued, has not often failed of its reward.

Fortitude founded upon the Fear of God.
GUARDIAN, No. 177. 1. LOOKING over the late edition of Monsieur Boileau's
works, I was very much pleased with the article which he has added to his notes
on the translation of Longinus. He there tells us, that the sublime in writing
rises either from the nobleness of the thought, the magnificence of the words,
or the harmonious and lively turn of the phrase, and that the perfect sublime
rises from all these three in conjunction together. He produces an instance of
this perfect sublime in four verses from the Athalia of Monsieur Racine.

2. When Abner, one of the chief officers of the court, represents to Joad the
high priest, that the queen was incensed against him, the high priest, not in
the least terrified at the news, returns this answer: Celui qui met un frein a
la fureur des flo^s,
Scait aussi des mechans arreter les complots:
S^umis avec respect a sa volonte saint,
Je crains Dieu, cher Abner, and n'ai point d'autre crainte.


3. 'He who rules the raging of the sea, knows also how to check the designs
of the ungodly. I submit myself with reverence to his holy will. O Abner! I
fear my God, and I fear none but him.' Such a thought gives no less a solemnity
to human nature, than it does to good writing.

4. This religious fear, when it is produced by just apprehensions of a divine
power, naturally overlooks all human greatness that stands in competition with
it, and extinguishes every other terror that can settle itself in the heart of
a man; it lessens and contracts the figure of the most exalted person: it
disarms the tyrant and executioner, and represents to our minds the most
enraged and the most powerful as altogether harmless and impotent.

5. There is no true fortitude which is not founded upon this fear, as there is
no other principle of so settled and fixed a nature. Courage that grows from
constitution very often forsakes a man when he has occasion for it; and when it
is only a kind of instinct in the soul, breaks out on all occasions without
judgment or discretion. That courage which proceeds from the sense of our duty,
and from the fear of offending him that made us, acts always in an uniform
manner, and according to the dictates of right reason.

6. What can the man fear, who takes care in all his actions to please a Being
that is omnipotent? A Being who is able to crush all his adversaries? A Being
that can divert any misfortune from befalling him, or turn any such misfortune
to his advantage? The person who lives with this constant and habitual regard
to the great superintendant of the world, is indeed sure that no real evil can
come into his lot.

7. Blessings may appear under the shape of pains, losses, and disappointments,
but let him have patience, and he will see them in their proper figures.
Dangers may threaten him, but he may rest satisfied that they will either not
reach him, or that, if they do, they will be the instruments of good to him. In
short, he may look upon all crosses and accidents, sufferings and afflictions,
as means which are made use of to bring him to happiness.

8. This is even the worst of that man's condition whose mind is possessed with
the habitual fear of which I am now speaking. But it very often happens, that
those which appear evils in our own eyes, appear also as such to him who has
human nature under his care, in which case they are certainly averted from the
person who has made himself, by this virtue, an object of divine favor.

9. Histories are full of instances of this nature, where men of virtue have
had extraordinary escapes out of such dangers as have enclosed them, and which
have seemed inevitable.

10. There is no example of this kind in pagan history which more pleases me
than that which is recorded in the life of Timoleon. This extraordinary man was
famous for referring all his successes to Providence. Cornelius Nepos acquaints
us that he had in his house a private chapel in which he used to pay his
devotions to the goddess who represented Providence among the heathens. I think
no man was ever more distinguished by the Deity, whom he blindly worshipped,
than the great person I am speaking of, in several occurrences of his life, but
particularly in the following one, which I shall relate out of Plutarch.

11. Three persons had entered into a conspiracy to assassinate Timoleon as he
was offering up his devotions in a certain temple. In order to it they took
their several stands in the most convenient places for their purpose. As they
were waiting for an opportunity to put their design in execution, a stranger
having observed one of the conspirators, fell upon him and slew him. Upon which
the other two, thinking their plot had been discovered, threw themselves at
Timoleon's feet, and confessed the whole matter.

12. This stranger, upon examination, was found to have understood nothing of
the intended assassination, but having several years before had a brother
killed by the conspirator, whom he here put to death, and having till now
sought in vain for an opportunity of revenge, he chanced to meet the murderer
in the temple, who had planted himself there for the abovementioned purpose.

13. Plutarch cannot forbear, on this occasion, speaking with a kind of rapture
on the schemes of Providence, which, in this particular, had so contrived it,
that the stranger should, for so great space of time, be debarred the means of
doing justice to his brother, till, by the same blow that revenged the death of
one innocent man, he preserved the life of another.

14. For my own part, I cannot wonder that a man of Timoleon's religion should
have this intrepidity and firmness of mind, or that he should be distinguished
by such a deliverance as I have here related.

The Folly of youthful Extravagance.
RAMBLER, No. 26. 1. IT is usual for men, engaged in the same pursuits, to be
inquisitive after the conduct and fortune of each other; and, therefore, I
suppose it will not be unpleasing to you, to read an account of the various
changes which have appeared in part of a life devoted to literature. My
narrative will not exhibit any great variety of events, or extraordinary
revolutions; but may perhaps be not less useful, because I shall relate nothing
which is not likely to happen to a thousand others.

2. I was born heir to a very small fortune, and left by my father, whom I
cannot remember, to the care of an uncle. He having no children, always treated
me as his son, and finding in me those qualities which old men easily discover
in sprightly children when they happen to love them, declared that a genius
like mine should never be lost for want of cultivation.

3. He therefore placed me for the usual time at a great school, and then sent
me to the university, with a larger allowance than my own patrimony would have
afforded, that I might not keep mean company, but learn to become my dignity
when I should be made Lord Chancellor, which he often lamented that the
increase of his infirmities was very likely to preclude him from seeing.

4. This exuberance of money displayed itself in gaiety of appearance, and
wantonness of expense, and introduced me to the acquaintance of those whom the
same superfluity of fortune betrayed to the same license and ostentation: young
heirs, who pleased themselves with a remark very frequently in their mouths,
that though they were sent by their fathers to the university, they were not
under the necessity of living by their learning.

5. Among men of this class I easily obtained the reputation of a great genius,
and was persuaded that, with such liveliness of imagination, and delicacy of
sentiment, I should never be able to submit to the drudgery of the law.

6. I therefore gave myself wholly to the more airy and elegant parts of
learning, and was often so much elated with my superiority to the youths with
whom I conversed, that I began to listen, with great attention, to those who
recommended to me a wider and more conspicuous theater; and was particularly
touched with an observation made by one of my friends, that it was not by
lingering in the university that Prior became ambassador, or Addison secretary
of state.

7. This desire was hourly increased by the solicitation of my companions, who,
removing one by one to London, as the caprice of their relations allowed them,
or the legal dismission from the hands of their guardians put it in their
power, never failed to send an account of the beauty and felicity of the new
world, and to remonstrate how much was lost by every hour's continuance in a
place of retirement and constraint.

8. My uncle in the mean time frequently harrassed me with monitory letters,
which I sometimes neglected to open for a week after I received them, and
generally read in a tavern with such comments as might show how much I was
superior to instruction or advice. I could not but wonder, how a man confined
to the country, and unacquainted with the present system of things, should
imagine himself qualified to instruct a rising genius, born to give laws to the
age, refine its taste, and multiply its pleasures.

9. The postman, however, still continued to bring me new remonstrances; for my
uncle was very little depressed by the ridicule and reproach which he never
heard. But men of parts have quick resentments; it was impossible to bear his
usurpations for ever; and I resolved, once for all, to make him an example to
those who imagine themselves wise because they are old, and to teach young men,
who are too tame under representation, in what manner grey-bearded insolence
ought to be treated.

10. I therefore one evening took my pen in hand, and after having animated
myself with a catch, wrote a general answer to all his precepts, with such
vivacity of turn, such elegance of irony, and such asperity of sarcasm, that I
convulsed a large company with universal laughter, disturbed the neighborhood
with vociferations of applause, and five days afterward was answered, that I
must be content to live upon my own estate.

11. This contraction of my income gave me no disturbance* for a genius like
mine was out of the reach of ^^^t. I had friends that would be proud to open
the^^ purses at my call, and prospects of such advanc^ ^t as would soon
reconcile my uncle, whom, (...) mature deliberation, I resolved to receive i^^^
favor, without insisting on any acknowledgment of his offense, when the
splendour of my condition should induce him to wish for my countenance.

12. I therefore went up to London, before I had shown the alteration of my
condition, by any abatement of my way of living, and was received by all my
academical acquaintance with triumph and congratulation. I was immediately
introduced among the wits and men of spirit; and, in a short time, had divested
myself of all my scholar's gravity, and obtained the reputation of a pretty
fellow.

13. You will easily believe that I had no great knowledge of the world; yet I
had been hindered, by the general disinclination every man feels to confess
poverty, from telling to any one the resolution of my uncle, and some time
subsisted upon the stock of money which I had brought with me, and contributed
my share as before to all our entertainments. But my pocket was soon emptied,
and I was obliged to ask my friends for a small sum.

14. This was a favor, which we had often reciprocally received from one
another; they supposed my wants only accidental, and therefore willingly
supplied them. In a short time, I found a necessity of asking again, and was
again treated with the same civility; but the third time they began to wonder
what that old rogue my uncle could mean by sending a gentleman to town without
money; and when they gave me what I asked for, advised me to stipulate for more
regular remittances.

15. This somewhat disturbed my dream of constant affluence, but I was three
days after completely awaked; for entering the tavern, where we met every
evening, I found the waiters remitted their complaisance, and instead of
contending to light me up stairs, suffered me to wait for some minutes by the
bar.

16. When I came to my company, I found them unusually grave and formal, and
one of them took a hint to turn the conversation upon the misconduct of young
men, and enlarged upon the folly of frequenting the company of men of fortune,
without being able to support the expense; an observation which the rest
contributed either to enforce by repetition, or to illustrate by examples. Only
one of them tried to divert the discourse, and endeavored to direct my
attention to remote questions, and common topics.

17. A man guilty of poverty easily believes himself suspected. I went,
however, next morning to breakfast with him who appeared ignorant of the drift
of the conversation, and by a series of enquiries, drawing still nearer to the
point, prevailed on him, not, perhaps, much against his will, to inform me,
that Mr. Dash, whose father was a wealthy attorney near my native place, had
the morning before received an account of my uncle's resentment, and
communicated his intelligence with the utmost industry of grovelling insolence.

18. It was now no longer practicable to consort with my former friends, unless
I would be content to be used as an inferior guest, who was to pay for his wine
by mirth and flattery; a character, which, if I could not escape it, I resolved
to endure only among those who had never known me in the pride of plenty.

19. I changed my lodgings, and frequented the coffee-houses in a different
region of the town; where I was very quickly distinguished by several young
gentlemen of high birth, and large estates, and began again to amuse my
imagination with hopes of preferment, though not quite so confidently as when I
had less experience.

20. The first great conquest which this new scene enabled me to gain over
myself was, when I submitted to confess to a party, who invited me to an
expensive diversion, that my revenues were not equal to such golden pleasures;
they would not suffer me, however, to stay behind, and with great reluctance I
yielded to be treated. I took that opportunity of recommending myself to some
office, or employment, which they unanimously promised to procure me by their
joint interest.

21. I had now entered into a state of dependence, and had hopes, or fears,
from almost every man I saw. If it be unhappy to have one patron, what is his
misery who has so many? I was obliged to comply with a thousand caprices, to
concur in a thousand follies, and to countenance a thousand errors. I endured
innumerable mortifications, if not from cruelty, at least from negligence,
which will creep in upon the kindest and most delicate minds, when they
converse without the mutual awe of equal condition.

22. I found the spirit and vigor of liberty every moment sinking in me, and a
servile fear of displeasing, stealing by degrees upon all my behavior, till no
word, or look, or action, was my own. As the solicitude to please increased,
the power of pleasing grew less, and I was always clouded with diffidence where
it was most my interest and wish to shine.

23. My patrons, considering me as belonging to the community, and, therefore,
not the charge of any particular person, made no scruple of neglecting any
opportunity of promoting me, which every one thought more properly the business
of another. An account of my expectations and disappointments, and the
succeeding vicissitudes of my life, I shall give you in my following letter,
which will be, I hope, of use to show how ill he forms his schemes, who expects
happiness without freedom.

I am, etc.

The Misery of depending upon the Great.
RAMBLER, No. 27. 1. AS it is natural for every man to think himself of
importance, your knowledge of the world will incline you to forgive me, if I
imagine your curiosity so much excited by the former part of my narration, as
to make you desire that I should proceed without any unnecessary arts of
connection. I shall, therefore, not keep you longer in such suspense, as
perhaps my performance may not compensate.

2. In the gay company with which I was now united, I found those allurements
and delights, which the friendship of young men always affords; there was that
openness which naturally produced confidence, that affability which, in some
measure, softened dependence, and that ardour of profession which incited hope.

3. When our hearts were dilated with merriment, promises were poured out with
unlimited profusion, and life and fortune were but a scanty sacrifice to
friendship; but when the hour came, at which any effort was to be made, I had
generally the vexation to find that my interest weighed nothing against the
slightest amusement, and that every petty avocation was found a sufficient plea
for continuing me in uncertainty and want.

4. Their kindness was indeed sincere, when they promised they had no intention
to deceive; but the same juvenile warmth which kindled their benevolence, gave
force in the same proportion to every other passion, and I was forgotten as
soon as any new pleasure seized on their attention.

5. Vagrio told me one evening, that all my perplexities should be soon at an
end, and desired me from that instant to throw upon him all care of my fortune,
for a post of considerable value was that day become vacant, and he knew his
interest sufficient to procure it in the morning. He desired me to call on him
early, that he might be dressed soon enough to wait on the minister before any
other application should be made.

6. I came as he appointed, with all the flame of gratitude, and was told by
his servant, that having found at his lodgings, when he came home, an
acquaintance who was going to travel, he had been persuaded to accompany him to
Dover, and that they had taken post horses two hours before day.

7. I was once very near to preferment, by the kindness of Charinus, who, at my
request, went to beg a place, which he thought me likely to fill with great
reputation, and in which I should have many opportunities of promoting his
interest in return; and he pleased himself with imagining the mutual benefits
that we should confer, and the advances that we should make by our united
strength.

8. Away, therefore, he went, equally warm with friendship and ambition, and
left me to prepare acknowledgments against his return. At length he came back,
and told me that he had met in his way a party going to breakfast in the
country, that the ladies importuned him too much to be refused, and that having
passed the morning with them, he was come back to dress himself for a ball, to
which he was invited for the evening.

9. I have suffered several disappointments from tailors and perriwig-makers,
who, by neglecting to perform their work, withh^ld my patrons from court; and
once failed of an establishment for life by the delay of a servant, sent to a
neighboring shop to replenish a snuff box.

10. At last I thought my solitude at an end, for an office fell into the gift
of Hippodamus's father, who being then in the country, could not very speedily
fill it, and whose fondness would not have suffered him to refuse his son a
less reasonable request. Hippodamus therefore set forward with great
expedition, and I expected every hour an account of his success.

11. A long time I waited without any intelligence, but at last received a
letter from Newmarket, by which I was informed, that the races were begun, and
I knew the vehemence of his passions too well to imagine that he could refuse
himself his favorite amusement.

12. You will not wonder that I was at last weary of the patronage of young
men, especially as I found them not generally to promise much greater fidelity
as they advanced in life; for I observed that what they gained in steadiness
they lost in benevolence, and grew colder to my interest as they became more
diligent to promote their own.

13. I was convinced that their liberality was only profuseness, that, as
chance directed, they were equally generous to vice and virtue, that they were
warm, but because they were thoughtless, and counted the support of a friend
only amongst other gratifications of passion.

14. My resolution was now to ingratiate myself with men whose reputation was
established, whose high stations enabled them to prefer me, and whose age
exempted them from sudden changes of inclination. I was considered as a man of
parts, and therefore easily found admission to the table of Hilarious, the
celebrated orator, renowned equally for the extent of his knowledge, the
elegance of his diction, and the acuteness of his wit.

15. Hilarious received me with an appearance of great satisfaction, produced to
me all his friends, and directed to me that part of his discourse in which he
most endeavored to display his imagination. I had now learned my own interest
enough to supply him with opportunities for smart remarks and gay sallies,
which I never failed to echo and applaud.

16. Thus I was gaining every hour on his affections, till unfortunately, when
the assembly was more splendid than usual, his desire of admiration prompted
him to turn his raillery upon me. I bore it for some time with great
submission, and success encouraged him to redouble his attacks; at last my
vanity prevailed over my prudence; I retorted his irony with such spirit, that
Hilarious, unaccustomed to resistance, was disconcerted, and soon found means of
convincing me, that his purpose was not to encourage a rival, but to foster a
parasite.

17. I was then taken into the familiarity of Argutio, a nobleman eminent for
judgment and criticism. He had contributed to my reputation, by the praises
which he had often bestowed upon my writings, in which he owned that there were
proofs of a genius that might rise to high degrees of excellence, when time, or
information, had reduced its exuberance.

18. He therefore required me to consult him before the publication of any new
performance, and commonly proposed innumerable alterations, without sufficient
attention to the general design, or regard to my form of style, and mode of
imagination.

19. But these corrections he never failed to press as indispensably necessary,
and thought the least delay of compliance an act of rebellion. The pride of an
author made this treatment insufferable, and I thought any tyranny easier to be
borne than that which took from me the use of my understanding.

20. My next patron was Eutyches the statesman, who was wholly engaged in
public affairs, and seemed to have no ambition but to be powerful and rich. I
found his favor more permanent than that of the others, for there was a
certain price at which it might be bought; he allowed nothing to humor or to
affection, but was always ready to pay liberally for the service he required.

21. His demands were, indeed, very often such as virtue could not easily
consent to gratify; but virtue is not to be consulted when men are to raise
their fortunes by the favor of the great. His measures were censured; I wrote
in his defense, and was recompensed with a place, of which the profits were
never received by me without the pangs of remembering that they were the reward
of wickedness; a reward which nothing but that necessity, which the consumption
of my little estate in these wild pursuits had brought upon me, hindered me
from throwing back in the face of my corruptor.

22. At this time my uncle died without a will, and I became heir to a small
fortune. I had resolution to throw off the splendour which reproached me to
myself, and retire to an humbler state, in which I am now endeavoring to
recover the dignity of virtue, and hope to make some reparation for my crimes
and follies, by informing others, who may be led after the same pageants, that
they are about to engage in a course of life, in which they are to purchase, by
a thousand miseries, the privilege of repentance.

I am, etc. EUBULUS.

What it is to see the World; the Story of Melissa.
RAMBLER, No. 75. 1. THE diligence with which you endeavor to cultivate the
knowledge of nature, manners, and life, will perhaps incline you to pay some
regard to the observations of one who has been taught to know mankind by
unwelcome information, and whose opinions are the result, not of solitary
conjectures, but of practice and experience.

2. I was born to a large fortune, and bred to the knowledge of those arts
which are supposed to accomplish the mind, and adorn the person of a woman. To
these seize, which custom and education almost forced upon me, I added
some voluntary acquisitions by the use of books, and the conversation of that
species of men whom the ladies generally mention with terror and aversion under
the name of scholars, but whom I have found a harmless and inoffensive order of
beings, not so much wiser than ourselves, but that they may receive as well as
communicate knowledge, and more inclined to degrade their own character by
cowardly submission, than to overbear or oppress us with their learning or
their wit.

3. From these men, however, if they are by kind treatment encouraged to talk,
something may be gained, which embellished with elegancy, and softened by
modesty, will always add dignity and value to female conversation; and from my
acquaintance with the bookish part of the world, I derived many principles of
judgment and maxims of prudence, by which I was enabled to draw upon myself the
general regard in every place of concourse or pleasure.

4. My opinion was the great rule of approbation, my remarks were remembered by
those who desired the second degree of fame, my mein was studied, my dress was
imitated, my letters were handed from one family to another, and read by those
who copied them as sent to themselves, my visits were solicited as honors,
and multitudes boasted of an intimacy with Melissa, who had only seen me by
accident, whose familiarity had never proceeded beyond the exchange of a
compliment, or return of a courtesy.

5. I shall make no scruple of confessing that I was pleased with this
universal veneration, because I always considered it as paid to my intrinsic
qualities and inseparable merit, and very easy persuaded myself, that fortune
had no part in my superiority.

6. When I looked upon my glass I saw youth and beauty, with health that might
give me reason to hope their continuance: when I examined my mind, I found some
strength of judgment, and fertility of fancy; and was told that every action
was grace, and that every accent was persuasion.

7. In this manner my life passed like a continual triumph amidst acclamations,
and envy, and courtship, and caresses: to please Melissa was the general
ambition, and every stratagem of artful flattery was practiced upon me. To be
flattered is grateful, even when we know that our praises are not believed by
those who pronounce them; for they prove, at least, our power, and show that
our favor is valued since it is purchased by the meanness of falsehood.

8. But, perhaps, the flatterer is not often detected, for an honest mind is
not apt to suspect, and no one exerts the powers of discernment with much
vigor when self love favors the deceit.

9. The number of adorers, and the perpetual distraction of my thoughts by new
schemes of pleasures, prevented me from listening to any of those who crowd in
multitudes to give girls advice, and kept me unmarried and unengaged to my
twenty-seventh year, when as I was towering in all the pride of uncontested
excellency, with a face yet little impaired, and a mind hourly improving, the
failure of a fund, in which my money was placed, reduced me to a frugal
competency, which allowed a little beyond neatness and independence.

10. I bore the diminution of my riches without any outrages of sorrow, or
pusillanimity of dejection. Indeed I did not know how much I had lost, for
having always heard and thought more of my wit and beauty, than of my fortune,
it did not suddenly enter my imagination, that Melissa could sink beneath her
established rank, while her form and her mind continued the same; that she
should cease to raise admiration but by ceasing to deserve it, or feel any
stroke but from the hand of time.

11. It was in my power to have concealed the loss, and to have married, by
continuing the same appearance, with all the credit of my original fortune; but
I was not so far sunk in my esteem, as to submit to the baseness of fraud, or
to desire any other recommendation than sense and virtue.

12. I therefore dismissed my equipage, sold those ornaments which were become
unsuitable to my new condition, and appeared among those with whom I used to
converse with less glitter, but with equal spirit.

13. I found myself received at every visit, with sorrow beyond what is
naturally felt for calamities in which we have no part, and was entertained
with condolence and consolation, so frequently repeated, that my friends
plainly consulted rather their own gratification, than my relief.

14. Some from that time refused my acquaintance, and forebore, without any
provocation, to repay my visits; some visited me, but after a longer interval
than usual, and every return was still with more delay; nor did any of my
female acquaintances fail to introduce the mention of my misfortunes, to
compare my present and former condition, to tell me how much it must trouble me
to want the splendour which I became so well; to look at pleasures, which I had
formerly enjoyed, and to sink to a level with those by whom I had been
considered as moving in a higher sphere, and who had hitherto approached me
with reverence and submission, which I was now no longer to expect.

15. Observations like these are commonly nothing better than covert insults,
which serve to give vent to the flatulence of pride, but they are now and then
imprudently uttered by honesty and benevolence, and inflict pain where kindness
is intended; I will, therefore, so far maintain my antiquated claim to
politeness, as to venture the establishment of this rule, that no one ought to
remind another of misfortunes of which the sufferer does not complain, and
which there are no means proposed of alleviating.

16. You have no right to excite thoughts which necessarily give pain whenever
they return, and which perhaps might not have revived but by absurd and
unseasonable compassion.

17. My endless train of lovers immediately withdrew, without raising any
emotions. The greater part had indeed always professed to court, as it is
termed, upon the square, had enquired my fortune, and offered settlements;
these undoubtedly had a right to retire without censure, since they had openly
treated for money, as necessary to their happiness, and who can tell how little
they wanted any other portion?

18. I have always thought the clamours of women unreasonable, who imagine
themselves injured because the men who followed them upon the supposition of a
greater fortune, reject them when they are discovered to have less. I have
never known any lady, who did not think wealth a title to some stipulations in
her favor; and surely what is claimed by the possession of money, is justly
forfeited by its loss.

19. She that has once demanded a settlement has allowed the importance of
fortune; and when she cannot show pecuniary merit, why should she think her
cheapner obliged to purchase?

20. My lovers were not all contented with silent desertion. Some of them
revenged the neglect which they had formerly endured by wanton and superfluous
insults, and endeavored to mortify me by paying in my presence those
civilities to other ladies, which were once devoted only to me.

21. But as it had been my rule to treat men according to the rank of their
intellect, I had never suffered any one to waste is life in suspense who could
have employed it to better purpose, and had therefore no enemies but coxcombs,
whose resentment and respect were equally below my consideration.

22. The only pain which I have felt from degradation, is the loss of that
influence which I have always exerted on the side of virtue, in the defense of
innocence, and the assertion of truth. I now find my opinions slighted, my
sentiments criticized, and my arguments opposed by those that used to listen to
me without reply, and struggle to be first in expressing their conviction.

23. The female disputants have wholly thrown off my authority, and if I
endeavor to enforce my reasons by an appeal to the scholars that happen to be
present, the wretches are certain to pay their court by sacrificing me and my
system to a finer gown, and I am every hour insulted with contradiction by
cowards, who could never find till lately that Melissa was liable to error.

24. There are two persons only whom I cannot charge with having changed their
conduct with my change of fortune. One is an old curate, that has passed his
life in the duties of his profession, with great reputation for his knowledge
and piety: the other is a lieutenant of dragoons. The parson made no difficulty
in the height of my elevation to check me when I was pert, and instruct me
when I blundered; and if there is any alteration, he is now more timorous, lest
his freedom should be thought rudeness.

25. The soldier never paid me any particular addresses, but very rigidly
observed all the rules of politeness, which he is now so far from relaxing,
that whenever he serves the tea, he obstinately carries me the first dish, in
defiance of the frowns and whispers of the table.

26. This, Mr. Rambler, is to see the world. It is impossible for those that
have only known affluence and prosperity, to judge rightly of themselves or
others. The rich and the powerful live in a perpetual masquerade, in which all
about them wear borrowed characters; and we only discover in what estimation we
are held, when we can no longer give hopes or fears. -- I am, etc.

MELISSA.

On the Omniscience and Omnipresence of the Deity, together with the Immensity
of his Works.
1. I WAS yesterday about sunset walking in the open fields, till the night
insensibly fell upon me. I at first amused myself with all the richness and
variety of colors, which appeared in the western parts of heaven: in
proportion as they faded away and went out, several stars and planets appeared
one after another, till the whole firmament was in a glow. The blueness of the
ether was exceedingly heightened and enlivened by the season of the year, and
by the rays of all those luminaries that passed through it.

2. The Galaxy appeared in its most beautiful white. To complete the scene, the
full moon rose at length in that clouded majesty, which Milton takes notice of,
and opened to the eye a new picture of nature, which was more finely shaded,
and disposed among softer lights, than that which the sun had before discovered
to us.

3. As I was surveying the moon walking in her brightness, and taking her
progress among the constellations, a thought rose in me which I believe very
often perplexes and disturbs men of serious and contemplative natures. David
himself fell into it in that reflection, When I consider the heavens, the work
of thy fingers, the moon and stars which thou have ordained; what is man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou regardest him!

4. In the same manner when I considered that infinite host of stars, or, to
speak more philosophically, of suns, who were then shining upon me, with those
innumerable sets of planets or worlds, which were moving round their respective
suns; when I still enlarged the idea, and supposed another heaven of suns and
worlds rising still above this which he had discovered, and these still
enlightened by a superior firmament of luminaries, which are planted at so
great a distance, that they may appear to the inhabitants of the former as the
stars do to us; in short, while I pursued this thought, I could not but reflect
on that little insignificant figure which I myself bore amidst the immensity of
God's works.

5. Were the sun, which enlightens this part of the creation, with all the host
of planetary worlds that move about him, utterly extinguished and annihilated,
they would not be missed, more than a grain of sand upon the seashore. The
space they possess is so exceedingly little in comparison of the whole, that it
would scarce make a blank in the creation. The chasm would be imperceptible to
an eye, that could take in the whole compass of nature, and pass from one end
of the creation to the other; as it is possible there may be such a sense in
ourselves hereafter, or in creatures which are at present more exalted than
ourselves.

6. We see many stars by the help of glasses, which we do not discover with our
naked eyes; and the finer our telescopes are, the more still are our
discoveries. Huygenius carries his thought so far, that he does not think it
impossible there may be stars whose light is not yet traveled down to us,
since their first creation. There is no question but the universe has certain
bounds set to it; but when we consider that it is the work of infinite power,
prompted by infinite goodness, with an infinite space to exert itself in, how
can our imagination set any bounds to it?

7. To return, therefore, to my first thought, I could not but look upon myself
with secret horror, as a being that was not worth the smallest regard of one
who had so great a work under his care and superintendency. I was afraid of
being overlooked amidst the immensity of nature, and lost among that infinite
variety of creatures, which in all probability swarm through all these
immeasurable regions of matter.

In order to recover myself from this mortifying thought, I considered that it
took its rise from those narrow conceptions, which we are apt to maintain of
the divine nature. We our selves cannot attend to many different objects at the
same time. If we are careful to inspect some things, we must of course neglect
others.

8. This imperfection which we observe in ourselves is an imperfection that
cleaves in some degree to creatures of the highest capacities, as they are
creatures, that is, beings of finite and limited natures. The presence of every
created being is confined to a certain measure of space, and consequently his
observation is stinted to a certain number of objects. The sphere in which we
move, and act, and understand, is of a wider circumference to one creature than
another, according as we rise one above another in the scale of existence.

9. But the widest of these our spheres has its circumference. When therefore
we reflect on the divine nature, we are so used and accustomed to this
imperfection in ourselves, that we cannot forbear in some measure ascribing it
to him in whom there is no shadow of imperfection. -- Our reason indeed assures
that his attributes are infinite, but the poorness of our conceptions is such
that it cannot forbear setting bounds to every thing it contemplates, till our
reason comes again to our succor, and throws down all those little prejudices
which rise in us unawares, and are natural to the mind of man.

10. We shall therefore utterly extinguish this melancholy thought, of our
being overlooked by our Maker in the multiplicity of his works, and the
infinity of those objects among which he seems to be incessantly employed, if
we consider, in the first place, that he is omnipresent; and in the second,
that he is omniscient.

If we consider him in his omnipresence: his being passes through, actuates and
supports the whole frame of nature. His creation and every part of it, is full
of him.

11. There is nothing he has made, that is either so distant, so little, or so
inconsiderable, which he does not essentially inhabit. His substance is within
the substance of every being, whether material or immaterial, and as intimately
present to it, as that being is to itself* It would be an imperfection in him,
were he able to remove o^t of one place into another, or to withdraw himself
from any thing he has created, or from any part of that space which is diffused
and spread abroad to infinity. In short, to speak of him in the language of the
old philosophers, he is a being whose center is everywhere, and his
circumference nowhere.

12. In the second place, he is omniscient as well as omnipresent. His
omniscience indeed necessarily and naturally flows from his omnipresence. He
cannot but be conscious of every motion that arises in the whole material
world, which he thus essentially pervades; and of every thought that is
stirring in the intellectual world, to every part of which he is thus
intimately united. Several moralists have considered the creation as the temple
of God, which he has built with his own hands, and which is filled with his
presence.

13. Others have considered infinite space as the receptacle, or rather the
habitation of the Almighty: but the noblest and most exalted way of considering
this infinite space is that of Sir Isaac Newton, who calls it the sensorium of
the Godhead. Brutes and men have their sensoriola, or little sensoriums, by
which they apprehend the presence and perceive the actions of a few objects
that lie contiguous to them. Their knowledge and apprehension turn within a
very narrow circle. But as God Almighty cannot but perceive and know every
thing in which he resides, infinite space gives room to infinite knowledge, and
is, as it were, an organ to omniscience.

14. Were the soul separate from the body, and with one glance of thought
should start beyond the bounds of the creation; should it for millions of years
continue its progress through infinite space with the same activity, it would
still find itself within the embraces of its Creator, and encompassed round
with the immensity of the Godhead. While we are in the body he is not less
present with us, because he is concealed from us. Oh that I knew where I might
find him! says Job. Behold I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but
I cannot perceive him: on the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot
behold him: he hides himself on the right hand that I cannot see him. In
short, reason as well as revelation assures us, that he cannot be absent from
us, notwithstanding he is undiscovered by us.

15. In this consideration of God Almighty's omnipresence and omniscience,
every uncomfortable thought vanishes. He cannot but regard every thing that has
being, especially such of his creatures who fear they are not regarded by him.
He is privy to all their thoughts, and to that anxiety of heart in particular,
which is apt to trouble them on this occasion; for, as it is impossible he
should overlook any of his creatures, so we may be confident that he regards,
with an eye of mercy, those who endeavor to recommend themselves to his
notice, and in unfeigned humility of heart think themselves unworthy that he
should be mindful of them.

Motives to Piety and Virtue, drawn from the Omniscience and Omnipresence of
the Deity.
SPECTATOR, No. 571. 1. IN your paper of Friday the 9th instant, you had
occasion to consider the ubiquity of the Godhead, and at the same time to show,
that as he is present to every thing, he cannot but be attentive to every
thing, and privy to all the modes and parts of its existence; or, in other
words, that his omniscience and omnipresence are coexistent, and run together
through the whole infinitude of space.

2. This consideration might furnish us with many incentive^ to devotion, and
motives to morality; but as this subject has been handled by several excellent
writers I shall consider it in a light wherein I have not seen it placed by
others.

First, How disconsolate is the condition of an intellectual being who is thus
present with his Maker, but at the same time receives no extraordinary benefit
or advantage from this his presence!

3. Secondly, How deplorable is the condition of an intellectual being, who
feels no other effects from this his presence, but such as proceed from divine
wrath and indignation!

Thirdly, How happy is the condition of that intellectual being, who is
sensible of his Maker's presence from the secret effects of his mercy and
loving kindness!

4. First, How disconsolate is the condition of an intellectual being, who is
thus present with his Maker, but at the same time receives no extraordinary
benefit or advantage from this his presence! Every particle of matter is
actuated by this Almighty Being which passes through it. The heavens and the
earth, the stars and planets, move and gravitate by virtue of this great
principle within them. All the dead parts of nature are invigorated by the
presence of their Creator, and made capable of exerting their respective
qualities.

5. The several instincts in the brute creation do likewise operate and work
toward the several ends which are agreeable to them, by this divine energy.
Man only, who does not cooperate with his holy spirit, and is unattentive to
his presence, receives none of these advantages from it, which are perfective
of his nature, and necessary to his well-being. The divinity is with him, and
in him, and every where about him, but of no advantage to him.

6. It is the same thing to a man without religion, as if there were no God in
the world. It is indeed impossible for an infinite Being to remove himself from
any of his creatures; but though he cannot withdraw his essence from us, which
would argue an imperfection in him, he can withdraw from us all the joys and
consolations of it. His presence may perhaps be necessary to support us in our
existence; but he may leave this our existence to itself, with regard to our
happiness or misery.

7. For, in this sense, he may cast us away from his presence, and take his
holy spirit from us. This single consideration one would think sufficient to
make us open our hearts to all those infusions of joy and gladness which are so
near at hand, and ready to be poured in upon us; especially when we consider,
secondly, the deplorable condition of an intellectual being who feels no other
effects from his Maker's presence, but such as proceed from divine wrath and
(...)!

8. We may assure ourselves, that the great Author of Nature will not always be
as one, who is indifferent to any of his creatures. Those who will not feel him
in his love will be sure at length to feel him in his displeasure. And how
dreadful is the condition of that creature, who is only sensible of the being
of his Creator by what he suffers from him! He is as essentially present in
hell as in heaven; but the inhabitants of those accursed places behold him only
in his wrath, and shrink within the flames to conceal themselves from him. It
is not in the power of imagination to conceive the fearful effects of
Omnipotence incensed.

9. But I shall only consider the wretchedness of an intellectual being, who,
in this life, lies under the displeasure of him, that at all times, and in all
places, is intimately united with him. He is able to disquiet the soul, and vex
it in all its faculties. He can hinder any of the greatest comforts of life
from refreshing us, and give an edge to every one of its slightest calamities.

10. Who then can bear the thought of being an outcast from his presence, that
is, from the comforts of it, or of feeling it only in its terrors? how pathetic
is that expostulation of Job, when for the real trial of his patience, he was
made to look upon himself in this deplorable condition! Why have thou set me as
a mark against thee, so that I am become a burden to myself? But thirdly, how
happy is the condition of that intellectual being, who is sensible of his
Maker's presence from the secret effects of his mercy and loving kindness!

11. The blessed in heaven behold him face to face, that is, are as sensible of
his presence as we are of the presence of any person whom we look upon with our
eyes. There is doubtless a faculty in spirits, by which they apprehend one
another, as our senses do material objects; and there is no question but our
souls, when they are disembodied, or placed in glorified bodies, will by this
faculty, in what ever space they reside, be always sensible of the divine
presence.

12. We who have this veil of flesh standing between us and the world of
spirits, must be content to know the spirit of God is present with us, by the
effects which he produces in us. Our outward senses are too gross to apprehend
him; we may however taste and see how gracious he is, by his influence upon our
minds, by those virtuous thoughts which he awakens in us, by those secret
comforts and refreshments which he conveys into our souls, and by those
ravishing joys and inward satisfactions which are perpetually springing up, and
diffusing themselves among all the thoughts of good men.

13. He is lodged in our very essence, and is as a soul within the soul to
irradiate its understanding, rectify its will, purify its passions, and enliven
all the powers of man. How happy therefore is an intellectual being, who by
prayer and meditation, by virtue and good works, opens this communication
between God and his own soul! Though the whole creation frowns upon him, and
all nature looks black about him, he has his light and support within him, that
are able to cheer his mind, and bear him up in the midst of all those horrors
which encompass him.

14. He knows that his helper is at hand, and is always nearer to him than any
thing else can be, which is capable of annoying or terrifying him. In the midst
of calumny or contempt, he attends to that Being who whispers better things
within his soul, and whom he looks upon as his defender, his glory, and the
lifter up of his head. In his deepest solitude and retirement, he knows that he
is in company with the greatest of beings; and perceives within himself such
real sensations of his presence, as are more delightful than any thing that can
be met with in the conversations of his creatures.

15. Even in the hour of death, he considers the pains of his dissolution to be
nothing else but the breaking down of that partition, which stands betwixt his
soul and the sight of that Being who is always present with him, and is about
to manifest itself to him in fullness of joy.

16. If we would be thus happy and thus sensible of our Maker's presence, from
the secret effects of his mercy and goodness, we must keep such a watch over
all our thoughts, that, in the language of the scripture, his soul may have
pleasure in us. We must take care not to grieve his holy spirit, and endeavor
to make the meditations of our hearts always acceptable in his sight, that he
may delight thus to reside and dwell in us.

17. The light of nature could direct Seneca to this doctrine, in a very
remarkable passage among his epistles; Sacer inest in nobis spiritus, bonorum
malorumque custos et observator; et quemadmodum nos illum tractamus, ita et
ille nos. There is a holy spirit residing in us, who watches and observes both
good and evil men, and will treat us after the same manner that we treat him.
But I shall conclude this discourse with those more emphatical words in divine
revelation. If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love
him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

Reflections on the Third Heaven.
SPECTATOR, No. 580. 1. I Considered in my two last letters, that awful and
tremendous subject, the ubiquity or omnipresence of the Divine Being. I have
shown that he is equally present in all places throughout the whole extent of
infinite space. This doctrine is so agreeable to reason, that we meet with it
in the writings of the enlightened heathens, as I might show at large, were it
not already done by other hands. But though the Deity be thus essentially
present through all the immensity of space, there is one part of it in which he
discovers himself in a most transcendent and visible glory.

2. This is that place which is marked out in scripture under the different
appellations of Paradise, the third heaven, the throne of God and the
habitation of his glory. It is here where the glorified body of our Savior
resides, and where all the celestial hierarchies, and the innumerable hosts of
angels, are represented as perpetually surrounding the seat of God with
hallelujahs and hymns of praise. This is that presence of God which some of the
divines call his glorious, and others his majestic presence.

3. He is indeed as essentially present in all other places as in this; but it
is here where he resides in a sensible magnificence, and in the midst of all
those splendors which can affect the imagination of created beings.

It is very remarkable that this opinion of God Almighty's presence in heaven,
whether discovered by the light of nature, or by a general tradition from our
first parents, prevails among all the nations of the world, whatsoever
different notions they entertain of the Godhead.

4. If you look into Homer, that is, the most ancient of the Greek writers, you
see the supreme power seated in the heavens, and encompassed with inferior
deities, among whom the muses are represented as singing incessantly about his
throne. Who does not here see the main strokes and outlines of this great truth
we are speaking of?

5. The same doctrine is shadowed out in many other heathen authors, though at
the same time, like several other revealed truths, dashed and adulterated with
a mixture of fables and human inventions. But to pass over the notions of the
Greeks and Romans, those more enlightened parts of the pagan world, we find
there is scarce a people among the late discovered nations who are not trained
up in an opinion that heaven is the habitation of the divinity whom they
worship.

6. As in Solomon's temple there was the Sanctum Sanctorum, in which a visible
glory appeared among the figures of the cherubims, and into which none but the
high priest himself was permitted to enter, after having made an atonement for
the sins of the people; so if we consider this whole creation as one great
temple, there is in it the Holy of Holies, into which the high priest of our
salvation entered, and took his place among angels and archangels, after having
made a propitiation for the sins of mankind.

7. With how much skill must the throne of God be erected? With what glorious
designs is that habitation beautified, which is contrived and built by him who
inspired Hiram with wisdom? How great must be the majesty of that place, where
the whole art of creation has been employed, and where God has chosen to show
himself in the most magnificent manner? What must be the architecture of
infinite power under the direction of divine wisdom? A spirit cannot but be
transported after an ineffable manner with the sight of those objects, which
were made to affect him by that Being who knows the inward frame of a soul, and
how to please and ravish it in all its most secret powers and faculties.

8. It is to this majestic presence of God, we may apply those beautiful
expressions in holy writ: Behold even to the moon, and it shines not; yea the
stars are not pure in his sight. The light of the sun, and all the glories of
the world in which we live, are but as weak and sickly glimmerings, or rather
darkness itself, in comparison of those splendors which encompass the throne of
God.

9. As the glory of this place is transcendent beyond imagination, so probably
is the extent of it. There is light behind light, and glory within glory. How
far that space may reach, in which God thus appears in perfect majesty, we
cannot possibly conceive. Though it is not infinite, it may be indefinite; and
though not immeasurable in itself, it may be so with regard to any created eye
or imagination. If he has made these lower regions of matter so inconceivably
wide and magnificent for the habitation of mortal and perishable beings, how
great may we suppose the courts of his house to be, where he makes his
residence in a more especial manner, and displays himself in the fullness of his
glory, among an innumerable company of angels, and spirits of just men made
perfect!

10. This is certain that our imaginations cannot be raised too high, when we
think on a place where omnipotence and omniscience have so signally exerted
themselves, because that they are able to produce a scene infinitely more great
and glorious than what we are able to imagine.

11. It is not impossible but at the consummation of all things, these outward
apartments of nature, which are now suited to those beings who inhabit them,
may be taken in and added to that glorious place of which I am here speaking;
and by that means made a proper habitation for beings who are exempt from
mortality, and cleared of their imperfections: for so the scripture seems to
intimate when it speaks of new heavens and of a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness.

12. I have only considered this glorious place with regard to the sight and
imagination, though it is highly probable that our other senses may here
likewise enjoy their highest gratifications. There is nothing which more
ravishes and transports the soul, than harmony; and we have great reason to
believe, from the description of this place in holy scripture, that this is one
of the entertainments of it.

13. And if the soul of man can be so wonderfully affected with those strains
of music, which human art is capable of producing, how much more will it be
raised and elevated by those, in which is exerted the whole power of harmony!
The senses are faculties of the human soul, though they cannot be employed,
during this our vital union, without proper instruments in the body.

14. Why therefore should we exclude the satisfaction of these faculties, which
we find by experience are inlets of great pleasure to the soul, from among
those entertainments which are to make our happiness hereafter? Why should we
suppose that our hearing and seeing will not be gratified by those objects
which are most agreeable to them, and which they cannot meet with in these
lower regions of nature; objects, which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive!

15. I knew a man in Christ (says St. Paul, speaking of himself) above fourteen
years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I
cannot tell: God knows) such a one caught up to the third heaven. And I knew
such a man (whether in the body or out of the body, I cannot tell: God knows)
how that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it
is not possible for a man to utter.

16. By this is meant that what he heard was so infinitely different from any
thing which he had heard in this world, that it was impossible to express it in
such words as might convey a notion of it to his hearers.

It is very natural for us to take delight in inquiries concerning any foreign
country, where we are some time or other to make our abode; and as we all hope
to be admitted into this glorious place, it is both laudable and useful
curiosity, to get what information we can of it, while we make use of
revelation for our guide.

17. When these everlasting doors shall be opened to us, we may be sure that
the pleasures and beauties of this place will infinitely transcend our present
hopes and expectations, and that the glorious appearance of the throne of God
will rise infinitely beyond whatever we are able to conceive of it. We might
here entertain ourselves with many other speculations on this subject, from
those several hints which we find of it in the holy scriptures; as whether they
may not be different mansions and apartments of glory, to beings of different
natures; whether, as there excel one another in perfection, they are not
admitted nearer to the throne of the Almighty, and enjoy greater manifestations
of his presence.

18. Whether there are not solemn times and occasions, when all the multitude
of heaven celebrate the presence of their Maker, in more extraordinary forms of
praise and adoration; as Adam, though he had continued in a state of innocence,
would, in the opinion of our divines, have kept holy the Sabbath Day, in a more
particular manner than any other of the seven. These, and the like
speculations, we may very innocently indulge, so long as we make use of them to
inspire us with a desire of becoming inhabitants of this delightful place.

19. I have in this, and in two foregoing letters, treated on the most serious
subject that can employ the mind of man, the omnipresence of the Deity; a
subject which, if possible, should never depart from our meditations. We have
considered the Divine Being, as he inhabits infinitude, as he dwells among his
works, as he is present to the mind of man, and as he discovers himself in a
more glorious manner among the regions of the blessed. Such a consideration
should be kept awake in us at all times, and in all places, and possess our
minds with a perpetual awe and reverence.

20. It should be interwoven with all our thoughts and perceptions, and become
one with the consciousness of our own being. It is not to be reflected on in
the coldness of philosophy, but ought to sink us into the lowest prostration
before him, who is so astonishingly great, wonderful, and holy.

The present Life to be cansidered only as it may conduce to the happiness of a
future one.
SPECTATOR, No. 575. 1. A Lewd young fellow seeing an aged hermit go by him
barefoot, Father, says he, you are in a very miserable condition, if there is
not another world. True, son, said the hermit; but what is thy condition if
there is? Man is a creature designed for two different states of being, or
rather, for two different lives. His first life is short and transient; his
second permanent and lasting.

2. The question we are all concerned in is this, in which of these two lives
is our chief interest to make ourselves happy? or in other words, whether we
should endeavor to secure to ourselves the pleasures and gratifications of a
life which is uncertain and precarious, and at its utmost length of a very
inconsiderable duration; or to secure to ourselves the pleasures of a life that
is fixed and settled, and will never end? Every man, upon the first hearing of
this question, knows very well which side of it he ought to close with.

3. But however right we are in theory, it is plain that in practice we adhere
to the wrong side of the question. We make provisions for this life as though
it were never to have an end, and for the other life as though it were never to
have a beginning.

Should a spirit of superior rank, who is a stranger to human nature,
accidentally alight upon the earth, and take a survey of its inhabitants, what
would his notions of us be?

4. Would not he think that we were a species of beings made for quite
different ends and purposes than what we really are? Must not he imagine that
we were placed in this world to get riches and honors? Would not he think that
it was our duty to toil after wealth, and station, and title? Nay, would not he
believe we were forbidden poverty, by threats of eternal punishment, and
enjoined to pursue our pleasures under pain of damnation? He would certainly
imagine that we were influenced by a scheme of duties quite opposite to those
which are indeed prescribed to us.

5. And truly, according to such an imagination, he must conclude that we are a
species of the most obedient creatures in the universe; that we are constant to
our duty; and that we keep a steady eye on the end for which we were sent
hither.

But how great would be his astonishment, when he learnt that we were beings
not designed to exist in this world above threescore and ten years; and that
the greatest part of this busy species fall short even of that age?

6. How would he be lost in horror and admiration, when he should know that
this set of creatures, who lay out all their endeavors for this life, which
scarce deserves the name of existence, when I say, he should know that this set
of creatures are to exist to all eternity in another life, for which they make
no preparations?

7. Nothing can be a greater disgrace to reason than that men, who are
persuaded of these two different states of being, should be perpetually
employed in providing for a life of threescore and ten years, and neglecting to
make provision for that, which, after many myriads of years, will be still new,
and still beginning; especially when we consider that our endeavors for making
ourselves great, or rich, or honorable, or whatever else we place our
happiness in, may, after all, prove unsuccessful; whereas, if we constantly and
sincerely endeavor to make ourselves happy in the other life, we are sure that
our endeavors will succeed, and that we shall not be disappointed of our hope.

8. The following question is started by one of the schoolmen. Supposing the
whole body of the earth were a great ball or mass of the finest sand, and that
a single grain or particle of this sand should be annihilated every thousand
years. Supposing then that you had it in your choice to be happy all the while
this prodigious mass of sand was consuming by this slow method till there was
not a grain of it left, on condition you were to be miserable for ever after;
or supposing that you might be happy for ever after, on condition you would be
miserable till the whole mass of sand were thus annihilated at the rate of one
sand in a thousand years: which of these two cases would you make your choice?

9. It must be confessed in this case, so many thousands of years are to the
imagination as a kind of eternity, though in reality they do not bear so great
a proportion to that duration which is to follow them, as an unit does to the
greatest number which you can put together in figures, or as one of those sands
to the supposed heap. Reason therefore tells us, without any manner of
hesitation, which would be the better part in this choice.

10. However, as I have before intimated, our reason might in such a case be so
overset by the imagination, as to dispose some persons to sink under the
consideration of the great length of the first part of this duration, and of
the great distance of that second duration, which is to succeed it. The mind, I
say, might give itself up to that happiness which is at hand, considering that
it is so very near and that it would last so very long.

11. But when the choice we actually have before us, is this, whether we will
choose to be happy for the space of only threescore and ten, nay, perhaps of
only twenty or ten years; I might say of only a day or an hour, and miserable
to all eternity; or, on the contrary, miserable for this short term of years,
and happy for a whole eternity; what words are sufficient to express that folly
and want of consideration which in such a case makes a wrong choice?

12. I hear put the case even at the worst, by supposing (what seldom happens)
that a course of virtue makes us miserable in this life: but if we suppose (as
it generally happens) that virtue will make us more happy even in this life
than a contrary course of vice; how can we sufficiently admire the stupidity or
madness of those persons who are capable of making so absurd a choice?

13. Every wise man, therefore, will consider this life only as it may conduce
to the happiness of the other, and cheerfully sacrifice the pleasures of a few
years to those of an eternity.

On the Immortality of the Soul.
SPECTATOR, No. 111. 1. I WAS yesterday walking alone in one of my friend's
woods, and lost myself in it very agreeably, as I was running over in my mind
the several arguments that establish this great point, which is the basis of
morality, and the source of all the pleasing hopes and secret joys that can
arise in the heart of a reasonable creature.

2. I considered those several proofs drawn, First, from the nature of the soul
itself, and particularly its immateriality; which, though not absolutely
necessary to the eternity of its duration, has, I think, been evinced to almost
a demonstration.

Secondly, from its passions and sentiments, as particularly from its love of
existence, its horror of annihilation, and its hopes of immortality, with that
secret satisfaction which it finds in the practice of virtue, and that
uneasiness which follows in it upon the commission of vice.

3. Thirdly, from the nature of the Supreme Being, whose justice, goodness,
wisdom and veracity, are all concerned in this point.

But among these and other excellent arguments for the immortality of the soul,
there is one drawn from the perpetual progress of the soul to its perfection,
without a possibility of ever arriving at it; which is a hint that I do not
remember to have seen opened and improved by others who have written on this
subject, though it seems to me to carry a very great weight with it.

4. How can it enter into the thoughts of man, that the soul which is capable
of such immense perfections, and of receiving new improvements to all eternity,
shall fall away into nothing almost as soon as it is created? are such
abilities made for no purpose? A brute arrives at a point of perfection that he
can never pass: in a few years he has all the endowments he is capable of; and
were he to live ten thousand more, would be the same thing he is at present.

5. Were a human soul thus at a stand in her accomplishments, were her
faculties to be full blown, and incapable of farther enlargements, I could
imagine it might fall away insensibly, and drop at once into a state of
annihilation.

6. But can we believe a thinking being that is in a perpetual progress of
improvements, and traveling on from perfection to perfection, after having
just looked abroad into the works of its Creator, and made a few discoveries of
his infinite goodness, wisdom, and power, must perish at her first setting out,
and in the very beginning of her enquiries?

A man considered in his present state seems only sent into the world to
propagate his kind. He provides himself with a successor, and immediately quits
his post to make room for him.

-- Haeres
Haeredem alterius, velut unda supervenit undam.
HOR. Ep. 2. l. 2. v. 175. -- Heir crowds heir, as in a rolling flood
Wave urges wave.
CREECH. 7. He does not seem born to enjoy life, but to deliver it down to
others. This is not surprising to consider in animals, which are formed for our
use, and can finish their business in a short life. The silkworm, after having
spun her task, lays her eggs, and dies. But a man can never have taken in his
full measure of knowledge, has not time to subdue his passions, establish his
soul in virtue, and come up to the perfection of his nature, before he is
hurried off the stage.

8. Would an infinitely wise Being make such glorious creatures for so mean a
purpose? can he delight in the production of such abortive intelligences, such
short-lived reasonable beings? would he give us talents that are not to be
exerted? capacities that are never to be gratified? How can we find that wisdom
which shines through all his works, in the formation of man, without looking on
this world as only a nursery for the next, and believing that the several
generations of rational creatures, which rise up and disappear in such quick
successions, ar^ only to receive their first rudiments of existence here, and
afterward to be transplanted into a more friendly climate, where they may
spread and flourish to all eternity?

9. There is not, in my opinion, a more pleasing and triumphant consideration
in religion than this of the perpetual progress which the soul makes toward
the perfection of its nature, without ever arriving at a period in it. To look
upon the soul as going on from strength to strength, to consider that she is to
shine forever with new accessions of glory, and brighten to all eternity; that
she will be still adding virtue to virtue, and knowledge to knowledge; carries
in it something wonderfully agreeable to that ambition which is natural to the
mind of man. Nay, it must be a prospect pleasing to God himself, to see his
creation forever beautifying his eyes, and drawing nearer to him, by greater
degrees of resemblance.

10. Methinks this single consideration, of the progress of a finite spirit to
perfection, will be sufficient to extinguish all envy in inferior natures, and
all contempt in superior. That cherubim, which now appears as a God to a human
soul, knows very well that the period will come about in eternity, when the
human soul shall be as perfect as he himself now is: nay, when she shall look
down upon that degree of perfection as much as she now falls short of it. It is
true, the higher nature still advances, and by that means preserves his
distance and superiority in the scale of being; but he knows that, how high
soever the station is of which he stands possessed at present, the inferior
nature will at length mount up to it, and shine forth in the same degree of
glory.

11. With what astonishment and veneration may we look into our own soul, where
there are such hidden stores of virtue and knowledge, such inexhausted sources
of perfection! We know not yet what we shall be, nor will it ever enter into
the heart of man to conceive the glory that will be always in reserve for him.
The soul considered with its Creator, is like one of those mathematical lines
that may draw nearer to another for all eternity, without a possibility of
touching it: and can there be a thought so transporting, as to consider
ourselves in these perpetual approaches to him, who is not only the standard of
perfection, but of happiness!

On the Animal World, and the Scale of Beings.
SPECTATOR, No. 519. 1. THOUGH there is a great deal of pleasure in
contemplating the material world, by which I mean that system of bodies into
which nature has so curiously wrought the mass of dead matter, with the several
relations which those bodies bear to one another; there is still, methinks,
something more wonderful and surprising in contemplations on the world of life,
by which I mean all those animals with which every part of the universe is
furnished. The material world is only the shell of the universe: the world of
life are its inhabitants.

2. If we consider those parts of the material world which lie the nearest to
us, and are therefore subject to our observations and enquiries, it is amazing
to consider the infinity of animals with which it is stocked. Every part of
matter is peopled: every green leaf swarms with inhabitants. There is scarce a
single humor in the body of a man, or of any other animal, in which our
glasses do not discover myriads of living creatures.

3. The surface of animals is also covered with other animals, which are in the
same manner the basis of other animals that live upon it; nay, we find in the
most solid bodies, as in marble itself, innumerable cells and cavities, that
are crowded with such imperceptible inhabitants, as are too little for the
naked eye to discover. On the other hand, if we look into the more bulky parts
of nature, we see the seas, lakes, and rivers, teeming with numberless kinds of
living creatures; we find every mountain and marsh, wilderness and wood,
plentifully stocked with birds and beasts, and every part of matter affording
proper necessaries and conveniences for the livelihood of multitudes which
inhabit it.

4. The author of the Plurality of Worlds draws a very good argument from this
consideration, for the peopling of every planet; as indeed it seems very
probable from the analogy of reason, that if no part of matter, which we are
acquainted with, lies waste and useless, those great bodies, which are at such
a distance from us, should not be desert and unpeopled, but rather that they
should be furnished with beings adapted to their respective situation.

5. Existence is a blessing to those beings only which are endowed with
perception, and is in a manner thrown away upon dead matter, any farther than
as it is subservient to beings which are conscious of their existence.
Accordingly we find, from the bodies which lie under our observation, that
matter is only made as the basis and support of animals, and that there is no
more of the one, than what is necessary for the existence of the other.

6. Infinite goodness is of so communicative a nature, that it seems to delight
in the conferring of existence upon every degree of perceptive being. As this
is a speculation, which I have often pursued with great pleasure to myself, I
shall enlarge further upon it, by considering that part of the scale of beings
which comes within our knowledge.

7. There are some living creatures which are raised but just above dead
matter. To mention only that species of shellfish, which are formed in the
fashion of a cone, that grow to the surface of several rocks, and immediately
die upon their being severed from the place where they grow; there are many
other creatures but one remove from these, which have no other sense besides
that of feeling and taste. Others have still an additional one of hearing;
others of smell; and others of sight.

8. It is wonderful to observe, by what a gradual progress the world of life
advances through a prodigious variety of species, before a creature is formed
that is complete in all its senses; and even among these there is such a
different degree of perfection in the sense which one animal enjoys beyond what
appears in another, though the sense in different animals be distinguished by
the same common denomination, it seems almost of a different nature.

9. If after this we look into the several perfections of cunning and sagacity,
or what we generally call instinct, we find them rising after the same manner
imperceptibly one above another, and receiving additional improvements,
according to the species in which they are implanted. This progress in nature
is so very gradual, that the most perfect of an inferior species comes very
near to the most imperfect of that which is immediately above it.

10. The exuberant and overflowing goodness of the Supreme Being, whose mercy
extends to all his works, is plainly seen, as I have before hinted, from his
having made so very little matter, at least what falls within our knowledge,
that does not swarm with life: nor is his goodness less seen in the diversity,
than in the multitude of living creatures. Had he only made one species of
animals, none of the rest would have enjoyed the happiness of existence; he has
therefore specified in his creation every degree of life, every capacity of
being.

11. The whole chasm of nature, from a plant to a man, is filled up with diverse
kinds of creatures, rising one over another, by such a gentle and easy ascent,
that the little transitions and deviations from one species to another are
almost insensible. This intermediate space is so well husbanded and managed,
that there is scarce a degree of perception which does not appear in some one
part of the world of life. Is the goodness, or wisdom of the Divine Being, more
manifested in this his proceeding?

12. There is a consequence, besides those I have already mentioned, which se^
very naturally deducible from the foregoing ^iderations. If the scale of being
rises by such a ^^gular progress, so high as man, we may by a parity of reason
suppose that it still proceeds gradually through those beings which are of a
superior nature to him; since there is an infinitely greater space and room for
different degrees of perfection between the Supreme Being and man, than between
man and the most despicable insect.

13. The consequence of so great a variety of beings which are superior to us,
from that variety which is inferior to us, is made by Mr. Lock, in a passage
which I shall here set down, after having premised that notwithstanding there
is such infinite room between man and his Maker for the creative power to exert
itself in, it is impossible that it should ever be filled up, since there will
be still an infinite gap or distance between the highest created being, and the
power which produced him.

14. That there should be more species of intelligent creatures above us, than
there are of sensible and material below u^, is probable to me from hence; that
in all the visible corporeal world, we see no chasms, or no gaps. All quite
down from us, the descent is by easy steps, and a continued series of things,
that in each remove differ very little one from the other. There are fishes
that have wings, and are not strangers to the airy region: and there are some
birds, that are inhabitants of the water; whose blood is cold as fishes, and
their flesh so like in just, that the scrupulous are allowed them on fish days.

15. There are animals so near of kin both to birds and beasts, that they are
in the middle between both; amphibious animals link the terrestrial and
acquatic together; seals live at land and at sea, and porpoises have the warm
blood and entrails of a hog; not to mention what is confidently reported of
mermaids or seamen. There are some brutes, that seem to have as much knowledge
and reason, as some that are called men; and the animal and vegetable kingdoms
are so nearly joined, that if you will take the lowest of one, and the highest
of the other, there will s^arce be perceived any great difference between them:
and so on till we come to the lowest and the most inorganical parts of matter,
we shall find every where that the several species are linked together, and
differ but in almost insensible degrees.

16. And when we consider the infinite power and wisdom of the Maker, we have
reason to think that it is suitable to the magnificent harmony of the universe,
and the great design and infinite goodness of the architect, that the species
of creatures should also, by gentle degrees, ascend upward from us toward his
infinite perfection, as we see they gradually descend from us downward: which
if it be probable, we have reason then to be persuaded, that there are far more
species of creatures above us, than there are beneath; we being in degrees of
perfection much more remote from the infinite Being of God, than we are from
the lowest state of being, and that which approaches nearest to nothing. And
yet of all those distinct species, we have no clear distinct ideas.

17. In this system of being, there is no creature so wonderful in its nature,
and which so much deserves our particular attention, as man, who fills up the
middle space between the animal and intellectual nature, the visible and
invisible world, and is that link in the chain of beings which has been often
termed the Nexus utriusque mundi. So that he who in one respect is associated
with angels and archangels, may look upon a Being of infinite perfection as his
father, and the highest order of spirits as his brethren; may in another
respect say to corruption, thou art my father, and to the worm, thou art my
mother and my sister.

Providence proved from Animal Instinct.
SPECTATOR, No. 120. 1. I MUST confess I am infinitely delighted with those
speculations of nature which are to be made in a country-life; and as my
reading has very much lain among books of natural history, I cannot forbear
recollecting, upon this occasion, the several remarks which I have met with in
authors, and comparing them with what falls under my own observation; the
arguments for Providence drawn from the natural history of animals being, in my
opinion, demonstrative.

2. The make of every kind of animal is different from that of every other
kind; and there is not the least turn in the muscles or twist in the fibers of
any one, which does not render them more proper for that particular animal's
way of life than any other cast or texture of them would have been.

The most violent appetites in all creatures are lust and hunger: the first is
a perpetual call upon them to propagate their kind; the latter to preserve
themselves.

3. It is astonishing to consider the different degrees of care that descend
from the parent to the young, so far as is absolutely necessary for the leaving
a posterity. Some creatures cast their eggs as chance directs them, and think
of them no farther, as insects and several kinds of fish; others, of a nicer
frame, find out proper beds to deposit them in, and there leave them; as the
serpent, the crocodile, and ostrich; others hatch their eggs and tend the
birth, till it is able to shift for itself.

What can we call the principle which directs every different kind of bird to
observe a particular plan in the structure of its nest, and directs all of the
same species to work after the same model? It cannot be imitation; for though
you hatch a crow under a hen, and never let it see any of the works of its own
kind, the nest it makes shall be the same, to the laying of a stick, with all
the other nests of the same species. It cannot be reason; for were animals
endued with it to as great a degree as man, their buildings would be as
different as ours, according to the different conveniences that they would
propose to themselves.

5. Is it not remarkable, that the same temper of weather, which raises this
general warmth in animals, should cover the trees with leaves, and the fields
with grass, for their security and concealment, and produce such infinite
swarms of insects for the support and sustenance of their respective broods?

Is it not wonderful that the love of the parent should be so violent while it
lasts, and that it should last no longer than is necessary for the preservation
of the young?

6. With what caution does the hen provide herself a nest in places
unfrequented, and free from noise and disturbance? When she has laid her eggs
in such a manner that she can cover them, what care does she take in turning
them frequently, that all parts may partake of the vital warmth? When she
leaves them, to provide for her necessary sustenance, how punctually does she
return before they have time to cool, and become incapable of producing an
animal? In the summer, you see her giving herself greater freedoms, and
quitting her care for above two hours together; but in winter, when the rigor
of the season would chill the principles of life, and destroy the young one,
she grows more assiduous in her attendance, and stays away but half the time.

7. When the birth approaches, with how much nicety and attention does she help
the chick to break its prison? Not to take notice of her covering it from the
injuries of the weather, providing it proper nourishment, and teaching it to
help itself; nor to mention her forsaking the nest, if after the usual time of
reckoning the young one does not make its appearance. A chemical operation
could not be followed with greater art or diligence, than is seen in the
hatching of a chick; though there are many other birds that show an infinitely
greater sagacity in all the forementioned particulars.

8. But at the same time the hen, that has all this seeming ingenuity (which is
indeed absolutely necessary for the propagation of the species) considered in
other respects, is without the least glimmerings of thought or common sense.
She mistakes a piece of chalk for an egg, and sits upon it in the same manner:
she is insensible of any increase or diminution in the number of those she
lays: she does not distinguish between her own and those of another species;
and when the birth appears of ever so different a bird, will cherish it for her
own. In all these circumstances, which do not carry an immediate regard to the
subsistence of herself or her species, she is a very idiot.

9. There is not, in my opinion, any thing more mysterious in nature than this
instinct in animals, which thus rises above reason, and falls infinitely short
of it. It cannot be accounted for by any properties in matter, and at the same
time works after so odd a manner, that one cannot think it the faculty of an
intellectual being. For my own part, I look upon it as upon the principle of
gravitation in bodies, which is not to be explained by any known qualities
inherent in the bodies themselves, nor from any laws of mechanism; but,
according to the best notions of the greatest philosophers, is an immediate
impression from the first mover, and the divine energy acting in the creature.

Good Breeding.
1. COmplaisance renders a superior amiable, an equal agreeable, and an
inferior acceptable. It smooths distinction, sweetens conversation, and makes
every one in the company pleased with himself. It produces good nature and
mutual benevolence, encourages the timorous, soothes the turbulent, humanizes
the fierce, and distinguishes a society of civilized persons from a confusion
of savages. In a word, complaisance is a virtue that blends all orders of men
together in a friendly intercourse of words and actions, and is suited to that
equality in human nature which every one ought to consider, so far as is
consistent with the order and economy of the world.

2. If we could look into the secret anguish and affliction of every man's
heart, we should often find, that more of it arises from little imaginary
distresses, such as checks, frowns, contradictions, expressions of contempt,
and (what Shakespeare reckons among other evils under the sun) " -- The poor
man's contumely.
"The insolence of office, and the spurns
"That patient merit of the unworthy takes,"
than from the more real pains and calamities of life. The only method to
remove these imaginary distresses as much as possible out of human life, would
be the universal practice of such an ingenious complaisance as I have been here
describing, which, as it is a virtue, may be defined to be a constant endeavor
to please those whom we converse with, so far as we may do it innocently.

3. Good-breeding necessarily implies civility; but civility does not
reciprocally imply good-breeding. The former has its intrinsic weight and
value, which the latter always adorns, and often doubles by its workmanship.

To sacrifice one's own self-love to other people's, is a short, but I believe,
a true definition of civility: to do it with ease, propriety and grace, is
good-breeding. The one is the result of goodnature; the other of good sense,
joined to experience, observation, and attention.

4. A ploughman will be civil, if he is good natured, but cannot be well bred.
A courtier will be well-bred, though perhaps without goodnature, if he has but
good sense. Flattery is the disgrace of good-breeding, as brutality often is of
truth and sincerity. Good-breeding is the middle point between those two odious
extremes. Ceremony is the superstition of good-breeding, as well as of
religion: but yet, being an out-work to both, should not be absolutely
demolished. It is always, to a certain degree, to be complied with, though
despised by those who think, because admired and respected by those who do not.

5. The most perfect degree of good-breeding, as I have already hinted, is only
to be acquired by great knowledge of the world, and keeping the best company.
It is not the object of mere speculation, and cannot be exactly defined, as it
consists in a fitness, a propriety of words, actions, and even looks, adapted
to the infinite variety and combinations of persons, places, and things. It is
a mode, not a substance; for what is good-breeding at St. James's would pass
for foppery or banter in a remote village; and the homespun civility of that
village would be considered as brutality at court.

6. A cloistered pedant may form true notions of civility; but if amidst the
cobwebs of his cell he pretends to spin a speculative system of good-breeding,
he will not be less absurd than his predecessor, who judiciously undertook to
instruct Hannibal in the art of war. The most ridiculous and most awkward of
men are, therefore, the speculatively well-bred monks of all religions and all
professions.

7. Good-breeding, like charity, not only covers a multitude of faults, but, to
a certain degree, supplies the want of some virtues. In the common intercourse
of life, it acts goodnature, and often does what goodnature will not always
do; it keeps both wits and fools within those bounds of decency, which the
former are too apt to transgress, and which the latter never know. Courts are
unquestionably the seats of good-breeding, and must necessarily be so;
otherwise they would be the seats of violence and desolation. There all the
passions are in their highest state of fermentation.

8. All pursue what but few can obtain, and many seek what but one can enjoy.
Good-breeding alone restrains their excesses. There, if enemies did not embrace
they would stab. There, smiles are often put on to conceal tears. There, mutual
services are professed, while mutual injuries are intended; and there, the
guile of the serpent simulates the gentleness of the dove: all this, it is
true, at the expense of sincerity; but upon the whole, to the advantage of
social intercourse in general.

9. I would not be misapprehended, and supposed to recommend good-breeding,
thus profaned and prostituted to the purposes of guilt and perfidy; but I
think I may justly infer from it, to what a degree the accomplishment of
good-breeding must adorn and enforce virtue and truth, when it can thus soften
the outrages and deformity of vice and falsehood. I am sorry to be obliged to
confess, that my native country is not perhaps the seat of the most perfect
good-breeding, though I really believe, that it yields to none in hearty and
sincere civility, as far as civility is (and to a certain degree it is) an
inferior moral duty of doing as one would be done by.

10. If France exceeds us in that particular, the incomparable author of L'
Esprit des Loix accounts for it very impartially, and I believe very truly. If
my countrymen, says he, are the best bred people in the world, it is only
because they are the vainest. It is certain that their good-breeding and
attention, by flattering the vanity and self-love of others, repay their own
with interest. It is a general commerce, usefully carried on by a barter of
attentions, and often without one grain of solid merit, by way of medium, to
make up the balance.

11. It were to be wished that good-breeding were in general thought a more
essential part of the education of our youth, especially of distinction, than
at present it seems to be. It might even be substituted in the room of some
academical studies, that take up a great deal of time to very little purpose;
or, at least, it might usefully share some of those many hours, that are so
frequently employed upon a coach-box, or in stables. Surely those, who by their
rank and fortune are called to adorn courts, ought at least not to disgrace
them by their manners.

12. But I observe with concern, that it is the fashion for our youth of both
sexes to brand good-breeding with the name of ceremony and formality. As such,
they ridicule and explode it, and adopt i^ its stead, an offensive carelessness
and inattention, to the diminution, I will venture to say, even of their own
pleasures, if they know what true pleasures are. Love and friendship
necessarily produce* and justly authorize familiarity; but then good-breeding
must mark out its bounds, and say, thus far shall thou go, and no farther: for
I have known many a passion and many a friendship, degraded, weakened, and at
last (if I may use the expression) wholly flattened away, by an unguarded and
illiberal familiarity.

13. Nor is good-breeding less the ornament and cement of common social life:
it connects, it endears, and at the same time that it indulges the just
liberty, restrains that indecent licentiousness of conversation, which
alienates and provokes. Great talents make a man famous, great merit makes him
respected, and great learning makes him esteemed; but good-breeding alone can
make him beloved.

14. I recommend it in a more particular manner to my country-women, as the
greatest ornament to such of them as have beauty, and the safest refuge for
those who have not. It facilitates the victories, decorates the triumphs, and
secures the conquests of beauty; or in some degree atones for the want of it.
It almost deifies a fine woman, and procures respect at least to those who have
not charms enough to be admired. Upon the whole, though good-breeding cannot,
strictly speaking, be called a virtue, yet it is productive of so many good
effects, that in my opinion it may be justly reckoned more than a mere
accomplishment.

WORLD, No. 143. Further Remarks, taken from Lord Chesterfield's Letters to his
Son.
15. GOOD-Breeding has been very justly defined to be the result of much good
sense, some goodnature, and a little self-denial for the sake of others, and
with a view to obtain the same indulgence from them.

Good-breeding alone can prepossess people in our favor at first sight; more
time being necessary to discover greater talents. Good-breeding, however, does
not consist in low bows, and formal ceremony; but in an easy, civil, and
respectful behavior.

16. Indeed, good-sense, in many cases, must determine good-breeding; for what
would be civil at one time, and to one person, would be rude at another time,
and to another person: there are, however, some general rules of good-breeding.
As for example: to answer only yes, or no, to any person, without adding sir,
my lord, or madam, (as it may happen) is always extremely rude; and it is
equally so not to give proper attention and a civil answer, when spoken to:
such behavior convinces the person who is speaking to us, that we despise him,
and do not think him worthy of our attention, or answer.

17. A well-bred person will take care to answer with complaisance when he is
spoken to; will place himself at the lower end of the table, unless bid to go
higher; will first drink to the lady of the house, and then to the master; he
will not eat aukwardly or dirtily, nor sit when others stand; and he will do
all this with an air of complaisance, and not with a grave ill-natured look, as
if he did it all unwillingly.

18. There is nothing more difficult to attain, or so necessary to possess, as
perfect good-breeding; which is equally inconsistent with a stiff formality, an
impertinent forwardness, and an awkward bashfulness. A little ceremony is
sometime^ necessary; a certain degree of firmness is absolutely so; and an
outward modesty is extremely becoming.

19. Virtue and learning, like gold, have their intrinsic value; but, if they
are not polished, they certainly lose a great deal of their luster: and even
polished brass will pass upon more people than rough gold. What a number of
sins does the cheerful, easy, good-breeding of the French frequently cover!

My Lord Bacon says, that a pleasing figure is a perpetual letter of
recommendation. It is certainly an agreeable forerunner of merit, and smooths
the way for it.

20. A man of good-breeding should be acquainted with the forms and particular
customs of courts. At Vienna, men always make courtesies, instead of bows, to
the Emperor; in France, nobody bows to the King, or kisses his hand; but in
Spain and England, bows are made, and hands are kissed. Thus every court has
some peculiarity, which those who visit them ought previously to inform
themselves of, to avoid blunders and aukwardnesses.

21. Very few, scarcely any, are wanting in the respect which they should show
to those whom they acknowledge to be infinitely their superiors. The man of
fashion, and of the world, expresses it in its fullest extent; but naturally,
easily, and without concern: whereas a man, who is not used to keep good
company, expresses it aukwardly; one sees that he is not used to it, and that
it costs him a great deal: but I never saw the worst-bred man living, guilty of
lolling, whistling, scratching his head, and such like indecencies, in company
that he respected. In such companies, therefore, the only point to be attended
to is, to show that respect, which every body means to show, in an easy,
unembarrassed, and graceful manner.

22. In mixed companies, whoever is admitted to make part of them, is, for the
time at least, supposed to be upon a footing of equality with the rest; and
consequently, every one claims, and very justly, every mark of civility and
good-breeding. Ease is allowed, but carelessness and negligence are strictly
forbidden. If a man accosts you, and talks to you ever so dully or frivolously;
it is worse than rudeness, it is brutality, to show him, by a manifest
inattention to what he says, that you think him a fool or a blockhead, and not
worth hearing.

23. It is much more so with regard to women; who, of whatever rank they are,
are entitled, in consideration of their sex, not only to an attentive, but an
officious good-breeding from men. Their little wants, likings, dislikes,
preferences, antipathies, fancies, whims, and even impertinences, must be
officiously attended to, flattered, and, if possible, guessed at and
anticipated, by a well-bred man. You must never usurp to yourself those
conveniences and agremens which are of common right; such as the best places,
the best dishes, etc. but, on the contrary, always decline them yourself, and
offer them to others; who, in their turns, will offer them to you: so that,
upon the whole, you will, in your turn, enjoy your share of common right.

24. The third sort of good-breeding is local, and is variously modified, in
not only different countries, but in different towns of the same country. But
it must be sounded upon the two former sorts; they are the matter; to which, in
this case, fashion and custom only give the different shapes and impressions.
Whoever has the two first sorts, will easily acquire this third sort of
good-breeding, which depends singly upon attention and observation. It is
properly the polish, the luster, the last finishing strokes of good-breeding. A
man of sense, therefore, carefully attends to the local manners of the
respective places where he is, and takes for his models those persons whom he
observes to be at the head of the fashion and good-breeding.

25. He watches how they address themselves to their superiors, how they accost
their equals, and how they treat their inferiors; and lets none of those little
niceties escape him; which are to good-breeding, what the last delicate and
masterly touches are to a good picture; and which the vulgar have no notion of,
but by which good judges distinguish the master. He attends even to their airs,
dress, and motions, and imitates them liberally, and not servilely; he copies,
but does not mimic. These personal graces are of very great consequence. They
anticipate the sentiments, before merit can engage the understanding; they
captivate the heart, and give rise, I believe, to the extravagant notions of
charms and philtres. Their effects were so surprising, that they were reckoned
supernatural.

26. In short, as it is necessary to possess learning, honor, and virtue, to
gain the esteem and admiration of mankind, so politeness and good-breeding are
equally necessary to render us agreeable in conversation and common life. Great
talents are above the generality of the world; who neither possess them
themselves, no^ are competent judges of them in others: but all are judges of
the lesser talents, such as civility, affability, and an agreeable address and
manner; because they feel the good effects of them, as making society easy and
agreeable.

To conclude: be assured that the profoundest learning, without good-breeding,
is unwelcome and tiresome pedantry; that a man who is not perfectly well-bred,
is unfit for company, and unwelcome in it; and that a man, who is not
well-bred, is full as unfit for business as for company.

Make, then, good-breeding the great object of your thoughts and actions.
Observe carefully the behavior and manners of those who are distinguished by
their good-breeding; imitate, nay, endeavor to excel, that you may at least
reach them; and be convinced that good-breeding is to all worldly
qualifications, what charity is to all christian virtues. Observe how it adorns
merit, and how often it covers the want of it.

Genteel Carriage.
1. NEXT to good-breeding is a genteel manner and carriage, wholly free from
those ill habits and awkward actions, which many very worthy persons are
addicted to.

2. A genteel manner of behavior, how trifling soever it may seem, is of the
utmost consequence in private life. Men of very inferior parts have been
esteemed, merely for their genteel carriage and good-breeding, while sensible
men have given disgust for want of it. There is something or other that
prepossesses us at first sight in favor of a well bred man, and makes us wish
to like him.

3. When an awkward fellow first comes into a room, he attempts to bow, and his
sword, if he wears one, gets between his legs, and nearly throws him down.
Confused and ashamed, he stumbles to the upper end of the room and seats
himself in the very chair he should not. He there begins playing with his hat,
which he presently drops; and recovering his hat, he lets fall his cane; and in
picking up his cane, down goes hat again: thus it is a considerable time before
he is adjusted.

4. When his tea or coffee is handed to him, he spreads his handkerchief upon
his knee, scalds his mouth, drops either the cup or the saucer, and spills the
tea or coffee in his lap. At dinner he is more uncommonly awkward: there he
tucks his napkin through a button-hole, which tickles his chin, and occasions
him to make a variety of wry faces; he seats himself upon the edge of the
chair, at so great a distance from the table, that he frequently drops his meat
between his plate and his mouth; he holds his knife, fork and spoon different
from other people; eats with his knife, to the manifest danger of his mouth;
picks his teeth with his fork, rakes his mouth with his finger, and puts his
spoon which has been in his throat a dozen times into the dish again.

5. If he is to carve he cannot hit the joint, but in laboring to cut through
the bone, splashes the sauce over every body's clothes. He generally daubs
himself all over, his elbows are in the next person's plate, and he is up to
the knuckles in soup and grease. If he drinks, it is with his mouth full,
interrupting the whole company with "to your good health, Sir," and "my service
to you;" perhaps coughs in his glass, and besprinkles the whole table. Further,
he has perhaps a number of disagreeable tricks, he snuffs up his nose, picks it
with his fingers, blows it, and looks in his handkerchief, crams his hands
first in his bosom, and next in his breeches.

6. In short, he neither dresses nor acts like any other person, but is
particularly awkward in every thing he does. All this, I own, has nothing in it
criminal; but it is such an offense to good manners and good-breeding, that it
is universally despised; it makes a man ridiculous in every company, and, of
course, ought carefully to be avoided by every one who would wish to please.

7. From this picture of the ill-bred man, you will easily discover that of the
well-bred; for you may readily judge what you ought to do, when you are told
what you ought not to do; a little attention to the manners of those who have
seen the world, will make a proper behavior habitual and familiar to you.

8. Actions, that would otherwise be pleasing, frequently become ridiculous by
your manner of doing them. If a lady drops her fan in company, the worst bred
man would immediately pick it up, and give it to her; the best-bred man can do
no more; but then he does it in a graceful manner, which is sure to please,
whereas the other would do it so aukwardly as to be laughed at.

9. You may also know a well-bred person by his manner of sitting. Ashamed and
confused, the awkward man sits in his chair stiff and bolt upright, whereas the
man of fashion is easy in every position; instead of lolling or lounging as he
sits, he leans with elegance, and by varying his attitudes, shows that he has
been used to good company. Let it be one part of your study, then, to learn to
set gente^lly in different companies, to loll gracefully, where you are
authorized to take that liberty, and to sit up respectfully, where that freedom
is not allowable.

10. In short, you cannot conceive how advantageous a graceful carriage and a
pleasing address are, upon all occasions; they ensnare the affections, steal a
prepossession in our favor, and play about the heart till they engage it.

Now to acquire a graceful air, you must attend to your dancing; no one can
either sit, stand, or walk well unless he dances well. And in learning to dance
be particularly attentive to the motion of your arms, for a stiffness in the
wrist will make any man look awkward. If a man walks well, presents himself
well in company, wears his hat well, moves his head properly and his arms
gracefully, it is almost all that is necessary.

11. There is also an aukwardness in speech, that naturally falls under this
head, and ought to, and may be guarded against; such as forgetting names, and
mistaking one name for another; to speak of Mr. What-d'ye-call him, or
You-know-who, Mrs. Thingum, What's-her-name, or How-d'ye-call her, is
exceedingly awkward and vulgar. It Is the same to address people by improper
titles, as sir for my lord; to begin a story without being able to finish it,
and break off in the middle, with I have forgot the rest.

12. Our voice and manner of speaking, too, should likewise be attended to.
Some will mumble over their words, so as not to be intelligible, and others
will speak so fast as not to be understood, and in doing this, will sputter and
spit in your face; some will bawl as if they were speaking to the deaf: others
will speak so low as scarcely to be heard; and many will put their face so
close to yours as to offend you with their breath.

13. All these habits are horrid and disgustful, but may easily be got the
better of with care. They are the vulgar characteristics of a low-bred man, or
are proofs that very little pains have been bestowed in his education. In
short, an attention to these little matters is of greater importance than you
are aware of; many a sensible man having lost ground for want of these little
graces, and many a one, possessed of these perfections alone, having made his
way through life, that otherwise would not have been noticed.

Cleanliness of Person.
14. BUT, as no one can please in company, however graceful his air, unless he
be clean and neat in his person, this qualification comes next to be considered.

15. Negligence of one's person not only implies an unsufferable indolence, but
an indifference whether we please or not. In others, it betrays an insolence
and affectation, arising from a presumption that they are sure of pleasing,
without having recourse to those means which many are obliged to use.

16. He who is not thoroughly clean in his person, will be offensive to all he
converses with. A particular regard to the cleanness of your mouth, teeth,
hands and nails, is but common decency. A foul mouth and unclean hands are
certain marks of vulgarity; the first is the cause of an offensive breath,
which nobody can bear, and the last is declaratory of dirty work; one may
always know a gentleman by the state of his hands and nails. The flesh at the
roots should be kept back, so as to show the semicircles at the bottom of the
nails; the edges of the nails should never be cut down below the ends of the
fingers; nor should they be suffered to grow longer than the fingers.

17. When the nails are cut down to the quick, it is a shrewd sign that the man
is a mechanic, to whom long nails would be troublesome, or that he gets his
bread by fiddling; and if they are longer than his finger's ends, and encircled
with a black rim, it foretells he has been laboriously and meanly employed, and
too fatigued to clean himself: a good apology for want of cleanliness in a
mechanic, but the greatest disgrace that can attend a gentleman.

18. These things may appear too insigificant to be mentioned; but when it is
considered that a thousand little nameless things, which every one feels but no
one can describe, conspire to form that whole of pleasing, I hope you will not
call them trifling. Besides a clean shirt and a clean person are as necessary
to health, as not to offend other people. It is a maxim with me, which I have
lived to see verified, that he who is negligent at twenty years of age, will be
a sloven at forty, and intolerable at fifty.

Dress.
19. NEATNESS of person, I observed, was as necessary as cleanliness; of course
some attention must be paid to your dress.

Such is the absurdity of the times, that to pass well with the world, we must
adopt some of its customs, be they ridiculous or not.

20. In the first place, to neglect one's dress is to affront all the female
part of our acquaintance. The women in particular pay an attention to their
dress; to neglect therefore yours will displease them, as it would be tacitly
taxing them with vanity, and declaring that you thought them not worth that
respect which every body else does. And, as I have mentioned before, as it is
the women who stamp a young man's credit in the fashionable world, if you do
not make yourself agreeable to the women, you will assuredly lose ground among
the men.

21. Dress, as trifling* as it may appear to a man of understanding,
prepossesses on the first appearance, which is frequently decisive. And indeed
we may form some opinion of a man's sense and character from his dress. Any
exceeding of the fashion, or any affectation in dress whatever, argues a
weakness of understanding, and nine times out of ten it will be found so.

22. There are few young fellows but what display some character or other in
this shape. Some would be thought fearless and brave: these wear a black
cravat, a short coat and waistcoat, an uncommon long sword hanging to their
knees, a large hat fiercely cocked, and are flash all over. -- Others affect to
be country squires: these will go about in buck-skin breeches, brown frocks,
and great oaken cudgels in their hands, slouched hats, with their hair
undressed and tucked up behind them to an enormous size, and imitate grooms and
country boobies so well externally, that there is not the least doubt of their
resembling them as well internally.

23. Others, again, paint and powder themselves so much, and dress so
finically, as leads us to suppose they are only women in boys clothes. Now a
sensible man carefully avoids all this, or any other affectation. He dresses as
fashionable and well as persons of the best families and best sense: if he
exceeds them he is a coxcomb; if he dresses worse he is unpardonable.

24. Dress yourself fine, then, if possible, or plain, agreeable to the company
you are in; that is, conform to the dress of others, and avoid the appearance
of being tumbled. Imitate those reasonable people of your own age, whose dress
is neither remarked as too neglected or too much studied. Take care to have
your clothes well made, in the fashion, and to fit you, or you will, after all,
appear awkward. When once dressed, think no more of it; show no fear of
discomposing your dress, but let all your motions be as easy and unembarrassed,
as if you was at home in your dishabille.

Elegance of Expression.
25. HAVING mentioned elegance of person, I will proceed to elegance of
expression.

It is not one or two qualifications alone that will complete the gentleman: it
must be an union of many; and graceful speaking is as essential as gracefulness
of person. Every man cannot be an harmonious speaker; a roughness or coa^seness
of voice may prevent it; but if there are no natural imperfections, if a man
does not stammer or lisp, or has not lost his teeth, he may speak gracefully;
nor will all these defects, if he has a mind to it, prevent him from speaking
correctly.

26. Nobody can attend with pleasure to a bad speaker. One who tells his story
ill, be it ever so important, will tire even the most patient. If you have been
present at the performance of a good tragedy, you have doubtless been sensible
of the good effects of a speech well ^vered; how much it has interested and
affected you; and on the contrary, how much an ill-spoken one has disgusted you.

27. It Is the same in common conversation; he who speaks deliberately,
distinctly and correctly; he who makes use of the best words to express
himself, and varies his voice according to the nature of the subject, will
always please, while the thick or hasty speak^^, he who mumbles out a set of
ill chosen words, utters them ungrammatically, or with a dull monotony, will
tire and disgust. Be assured then, the air, the gesture, the looks of a
speaker, a proper accent, a just emphasis, and tuneful cadence, are full as
necessary to please and to be attended to, as the subject matter itself.

28. People may talk what they will of solid reasoning and sound sense; without
the graces and ornaments of language, they will neither please nor persuade. In
common discourse, even trifles elegantly expressed will be better received than
the best of arguments, homespun and unadorned.

29. A good way to acquire a graceful utterance, is to read aloud to some
friend every day, and beg of him to set you right, in case you read too fast,
do not observe the proper ^tops, lay wrong emphasis, or utter your words
indistinctly. You may even read aloud to yourself, where such a friend is not
at hand, and you will find your own ear a good corrector. Take care to open
your teeth when you read or speak, and articulate every word distinctly; which
last cannot be done but by sounding the final letter. But above all endeavor
to vary your voice, according to the matter, and avoid a monotony. By a daily
attention to this, it will in a little time become easy and habitual to you.

30. Pay an attention also to your looks and your gesture, when talking even on
the most trifling subjects: things appear very different according as they are
expressed, looked and delivered.

Now, if it is necessary to attend so particularly to our manner of speaking,
it is much more so with respect to the matter. Fine turns of expression, a
genteel and correct style, are ornaments as requisite to common sense, as
polite behavior and an elegant address are to common good-manners; they are
great assistants in the point of pleasing. A gentleman, it is true, may be known
in the meanest garb, but it admits not of a doubt, that he would be better
received into good company genteelly and fashionably dressed, than was he to
appear in dirt and tatters.

31. Be careful then of your style upon all occasions; whether you write or
speak, study for the best words and best expressions, even in common
conversation or the most familiar letters. This will prevent your speaking in a
hurry, than which nothing is more vulgar; though you may be a little
embarrassed at first, time and use will render it easy. It is no such difficult
thing to express ourselves well on subjects we are thoroughly acquainted with,
if we think before we speak; and no one should presume to do otherwise.

32. When you have said a thing, if you did not reflect before, be sure to do
it afterward; consider with yourself whether you could not have expressed
yourself better; and if you are in doubt of the propriety or elegancy of any
word, search for it in some dictionary, or some good author, while you remember
it; never be sparing of your trouble while you wish to improve, and my word for
it, a very little time will make this matter habitual.

33. In order to speak grammatically, and to express yourself pleasingly, I
would recommend it to you to translate often any language you are acquainted
with into English, and to correct such translation till the words, their order,
and the periods, are agreeable to your own ear.

Vulgarism in language is another distinguishing mark of bad company and
education. Expressions may be correct in themselves and yet be vulgar, owing to
their not being fashionable; for language as manners are both established for
the usage of people of fashion.

34. The conversation of a low-bred man is filled up with proverbs and
hackneyed sayings. Instead of observing that tastes are different, and that
most men have one peculiar to themselves, he will give you, "What is one man's
meat is another man's poison:" or, "Every one to their liking, as the old woman
said, when she kissed her cow." He has over some favorite word, which he lugs
in upon all occasions, right or wrong; such as vastly angry, vastly kind;
devilish ugly, devilish handsome; immensely great, immensely little.

35. Even his pronunciation carries the mark of vulgarity along with it; he
calls the earth earth* finan^ces, fin^nances; he goes toward and no^ toward
such a place. He affects to use hard words, to give him the appearance of a man
of learning, but frequently mistakes their meaning, and seldom, if ever,
pronounces them properly.

All this must be avoided, if you would not be supposed to have kept company
with footmen and housemaids. Never have recourse to proverbial or vulgar
sayings; use neither favorite nor hard words, but seek for the most elegant;
be careful in the management of them, and depend on it your labor will not be
lost; for nothing is more engaging than a fashionable and polite address.

Small-Talk.
36. IN all good company, we meet with a certain manner phraseology and general
conversation, that distinguishes the man of fashion. This can only be acquired
by frequenting good company, and being particularly attentive to all that
passes there.

37. When invited to dine or sup at the house of any well-bred man, observe how
he does the honors of his table, and mark his manner of treating his company.

Attend to the compliments of congratulation or condolence that he pays: and
take notice of his address to his superiors, his equals, and his inferiors:
nay, his very looks and tone of voice are worth your attention, for we cannot
please without an union of them all.

38. There is a certain distinguishing diction that marks the man of fashion, a
certain language of conversation that every gentleman should be master of.
Saying to a man just married, "I wish you joy," or to one who has lost his
wife, "I am sorry for your loss," and both perhaps with an unmeaning
countenance, may be civil, but it is nevertheless vulgar. A man of fashion will
express the same thing more elegantly, and with a look of sincerity, that shall
attract the esteem of the person he speaks to. He will advance to the one, with
warmth and cheerfulness, and perhaps squeezing him by the hand, will say,
"Believe me, my dear sir, I have scarce words to express the joy I feel, upon
your happy alliance with such or such a family, etc." To the other in
affliction he will advance flower, and with a peculiar composure of voice and
countenance, begin his compliments of condolence with, "I hope, sir, you will
do me the justice to be persuaded, that I am not insensible of your
unhappiness, that I take part in your distress, and shall ever be affected
where you are so."

39. Your first address to, and indeed all your conversation with, your
superiors, should be open, cheerful, and respectful; with your equals, warm and
animated; with your inferiors, hearty, free, and unreserved.

40. There is a fashionable kind of small-talk, which, however trifling it may
be thought, has its use in mixed companies; of course you should endeavor to
acquire it. By small-talk, I mean a good deal to say on unimportant matters:
for example, foods, the flavor and growth of wines, and the chit-chat of the
day. Such conversation will serve to keep off serious subjects, that might
sometimes create disputes. This chit-chat is c^iefly to be learned by
frequenting the company of the ladies.

Observation.
1. AS the art of pleasing is to be learnt only by frequenting the best
companies, we must endeavor to pick it up in such companies, by observation;
for, it is not sense and knowledge alone that will acquire esteem; these
certainly are the first and necessary foundations for pleasing, but they will
by no means do, unless attended with manners and attention.

There have been people who have frequented the first companies all their
lifetime, and yet have never got rid of their natural stiffness and
aukwardness; but have continued as vulgar as if they were never out of a
servant's hall: this has been owing to carelessness, and a want of attention to
the manners and behavior of others.

2. There are a great many people likewise who busy themselves the whole day,
and who in fact do nothing. They have possibly taken up a book for two or three
hours, but from a certain inattention that grows upon them the more it is
indulged, know no more of the contents than if they had not looked into it;
nay, it is impossible for any one to retain what he reads, unless he reflects
and reasons upon it as he goes on. When they have thus lounged away an hour or
two, they will saunter into company, without attending to any thing that passes
there; but, if they think at all, are thinking of some trifling matter that
ought not to occupy their attention; thence perhaps they go to the play, where
they stare at the company and the lights, without attending to the piece, the
very thing they went to see.

3. In this manner they wear away their hours, that might otherwise be employed
to their improvement and advantage. This silly suspension of thought they would
have pass for absence of mind -- Ridiculous! -- Wherever you are, let me
recommend it to you to pay an attention to all that passes; observe the
characters of the persons you are with, and the subjects of their conversation;
listen to every thing that is said, see every thing that is done, and
(according to the vulgar saying) have your eyes and your ears about you.

4. A continual inattention to matters that occur is the characteristic of a
weak mind; the man who gives way to it is little else than a trider, a blank in
society, which every sensible person overlooks; surely what is worth doing is
worth doing well, and nothing can be well done if not properly attended to.
When I hear a man say, on being asked about any thing that was said or done in
his presence, "that truly he did not mind it," I am ready to knock the fool
down. Why did he not mind it? -- What had he else to do? -- A man of sense and
fashion never makes use of this paltry plea; he never complains of a
treacherous memory, but attends to and remembers every thing that is either
said or done.

5. Whenever, then, you go into good company, that is, the company of people of
fashion, observe carefully their behavior, their address, and their manner;
imitate it as far as in your power. Your attention, if possible, should be so
ready as to observe every person in the room at once, their motions, their
looks, and their turns of expression, and that without staring or seeming to be
an observer. This kind of observation may be acquired by care and practice, and
will be found of the utmost advantage to you, in the course of life.

Absence of Mind.
1. HAVING mentioned absence of mind, let me be more particular concerning it.

What the world calls an absent man is generally either a very affected one or
a very weak one; but whether weak or affected, he is, in company, a very
disagreeable man. Lost in thought, or possibly in no thought at all, he is a
stranger to every one present, and to every thing that passes; he knows not his
best friends, is deficient in every act of good manners, unobservant of the
actions of the company, and insensible to his own.

2. His answers are quite the reverse of what they ought to be; talk to him of
one thing, he replies, as of another. He forgets what he said last, leaves his
hat in one room, his cane in another, and his sword in a third; nay, if it was
not for his buckles, he would even leave his shoes behind him. Neither his arms
nor his legs seem to be a part of his body, and his head is never in a right
position. He joins not in the general conversation, except it be by fits and
starts, as if awaking from a dream: I attribute this either to weakness or
affectation.

3. His shallow mind is possibly not able to attend to more than one thing at a
time; or he would be supposed wrapped up in the investigation of some very
important matter. Such men as Sir Isaac Newton or Mr. Lock might occasionally
have some excuse for absence of mind; it might proceed from that intenseness of
thought that was necessary at all times for the scientific subjects they were
studying; but, for a young man, and a man of the world, who has no such plea to
make, absence of mind is a rudeness to the company, and deserves the severest
censure.

4. However insignificant a company may be; however trifling their
conversation; while you are with them, do not show them by any inattention that
you think them trifling: that can never be the way to please, but rather fall
in with their weakness than otherwise, for to mortify, or show the least
contempt to those we are in company with, is the greatest rudeness we can be
guilty of, and what few can forgive.

5. I never yet found a man inattentive to the person he feared, or the woman
he loved; which convinces me, that absence of mind is to be got the better of,
if we think proper to make the trial; and believe me, it is always worth the
attempt.

Absence of mind is a tacit declaration that those we are in company with are
not worth attending to; and what can be a greater affront? -- Besides, can an
absent man improve by what is said or done in his presence? -- No; he may
frequent the best companies for years together, and all to no purpose. In
short, a man is neither fit for business nor conversation, unless he can attend
to the object before him, be that object what it will.

Knowledge of the World.
1. A Knowledge of the world, by our own experience and observation, is so
necessary, that without it, we shall act very absurdly, and frequently give
offense, when we do not mean it. All the learning and parts in the world will
not secure us from it. Without an acquaintance with life, a man may say very
good things, but time them so ill, and address them so improperly, that he had
much better be silent. Full of himself and his own business, and inattentive to
the circumstances and situations of those he converses with, he vents it
without the least discretion, says things that he ought not to say, confuses
some, shocks others, and puts the whole company in pain, lest what he utters
next should prove worse than the last. The best direction I can give you in
this matter, is rather to fall in with the conversation of others, than start a
subject of your own: rather strive to put them more in conceit with themselves,
than to draw their attention to you.

2. A novice in life, he who knows little of mankind, but what he collects from
books, lays it down as a maxim, that most men love flattery; in order therefore
to please, he will flatter: but, how? Without regard either to circumstances or
occasion. Instead of those delicate touches, those soft tints, that serve to
heighten the piece, he lays on his colors with a heavy hand, and daubs where
he means to adorn; in other words, he will flatter so unseasonably, and, at the
same time, so grossly, that while he wishes to please, he puts out of
countenance and is sure to offend. On the contrary, a man of the world, one who
has made life his study, knows the power of flattery as well as he; but, then,
he knows how to apply it; he watches the opportunity, and does it indirectly,
by inference, comparison and hint.

3. Man is made up of such a variety of matter, that, to search him thoroughly,
requires time and attention; for, though we are all made of the same materials,
and have all the same passions, yet, from a difference in their proportion and
combination, we vary in our dispositions; what is agreeable to one is
disagreeable to another, and what one shall approve, another shall condemn.
Reason is given us to control these passions, but seldom does it. Application
therefore to the reason of any man will frequently prove ineffectual, unless we
endeavor at the same time to gain his heart.

4. Wherever then you are, search into the characters of men; find out, if
possible, their foible, their governing passion, or their particular merit;
take them on their weak side, and you will generally succeed; their prevailing
vanity you may readily discover, by observing their favorite topic of
conversation, for every one talks most of what he would be thought most to
excel in.

5. The time should also be judiciously made choice of. Every man has his
particular times when he may be applied to with success, the mollia tempora
fandi: but these times are not all the day long; they must be found out,
watched, and taken advantage of. You could not hope for success in applying to
a man about one business, when he was taken up with another, or when his mind
was affected with excess of grief, anger, or the like.

6. You cannot judge of other men's minds better than by studying your own;
for, though some men have one foible, and another ^as another, yet men, in
general, are very much alike Whatever pleases or offends you, will, in similar
circumstances, please or offend others; if you find yourself hurt when another
makes you feel his superiority, you will certainly, upon the common rule of
right, do as you would be done by, take care not to let another feel your
superiority, if you have it; especially if you wish to gain his interest or
esteem.

7. If disagreeable insinuations, open contradictions, or oblique sneers vex
and anger you, would you use them where you ^ished to please? Certainly not.
Observe then, with care, the operations of your own mind, and you may, in a
great measure, read all mankind.

I will allow that one b^ed up in a cloister or college, may reason well on the
structure of the human mind; he may investigate the nature of man, and give a
tolerable account of his head, his heart, his passions, and his sentiments: but
at the same time he may know nothing of him; he has not lived with him, and of
course can know but little how those sentiments or those passions will work; he
must be ignorant of the various prejudices, propensities and antipathies that
always bias him and frequently determine him.

8. His knowledge is acquired only from theory, which differs widely from
practice; and if he forms his judgment from that alone, he must be often
deceived; whereas a man of the world, one who collects his knowledge from his
own experience and observation, is seldom wrong; he is well acquainted with the
operations of the human mind, prys into the heart of man; reads his words,
before they are uttered; sees his actions, before they are performed; knows
what will please and what will displease, and foresees the event of most things.

9. Labor then to acquire this intuitive knowledge; attend carefully to the
address, the arts and manners of those acquainted with life, and endeavor to
imitate them. Observe the means they take, to gain the favor and conciliate
the affections of those they associate with; pursue those means, and you will
soon gain the esteem of all that know you.

How often have we seen men governed by persons very much their inferiors in
point of understanding, and even without their knowing it? A proof that some
men have more worldly dexterity than others: they find out the weak and
unguarded part, make their attack the^e, and the man surrenders.

10. Now from a knowledge of mank^^d we shall learn the advantage of two
things, the command of our temper and our countenance: a trifling, disagreeable
incident shall perhaps anger one unacquainted with life, or confound him with
shame; shall make him rave like a madman, or look like a fool: but a man of the
world will never understand what he cannot or ought not to resent. If he should
chance to make a slip himself, he will stifle his confusion, and turn it off
with a jest; recovering it with coolness.

11. Many people have sense enough to keep their own secrets; but from being
unused to a variety of company, have unfortunately such a tell-tale
countenance, as involuntarily declares what they would wish to conceal. This is
a great unhappiness, and should, as soon as possible, be got the better of.

That coolness of mind and evenness of countenance, which prevents a discovery
of our sentiments, by our words, our actions, or our looks, is too necessary to
pass unnoticed.

12. A man who cannot hear displeasing things, without visible marks of anger
or uneasiness; or pleasing ones, without a sudden burst of joy, a cheerful eye,
or an expanded face, is at the mercy of every knave; for either they will
designedly please or provoke you themselves, to catch your unguarded looks; or
they will seize the opportunity thus to read your very heart, when any other
shall do it. You may possibly tell me, that this coolness must be natural, for
if not, you can never acquire it.

13. I will admit the force of constitution, but people are very apt to blame
that for many things they might readily avoid. Care, with a little reflection,
will soon give you this mastery of your temper and your countenance. If you
find yourself subject to sudden starts of passion, determine with yourself not
to utter a single word till your reason has recovered itself; and resolve to
keep your countenance as unmoved as possible.

14. As a man who at a card-table can preserve a serenity in his looks, under
good or bad luck, has considerably the advantage of one who appears elated with
success, or cast down with ill fortune, from our being able to read his cards
in his face; so the man of the world, having to deal with one of these babbling
countenances, will take care to profit by the circumstance, let the
consequence, to him with whom he deals, be as injurious as it may.

15. In the course of life, we shall find it necessary very often to put on a
pleasing countenance when we are exceedingly displeased; we must frequently
seem friendly when we are quite otherwise. I am sensible it is difficult to
accost a man with smiles whom we know to be our enemy; but what is to be done?
On receiving an affront, if you cannot be justified in knocking the offender
down, you must not notice the offense; for, in the eye of the wo^^^, taking an
offront calmly is considered as coward^^^.

16. If fools should attempt at any time to be witty upon you, the best way is
not to know their witticisms are levelled at you, but to conceal (...)
uneasiness it may give you: but, should they be ^ plain that you cannot be
thought ignorant of t^e^ meaning, I would recommend, rather than quarrel w^ the
company, joining even in the laugh against yourself: allow the jest to be a
good one, and take it in seeming good humor. Never attempt to retaliate the
same way, as that would imply you were hurt. Should what is said wound your
honor or your moral character, there is but one proper reply, which I hope you
will never be obliged to have recourse to.

17. Remember there are but two alternatives for a gentleman; extreme
politeness, or the sword. If a man openly and designedly affronts you, call him
out; but, if it does not amount to an open insult, be outwardly civil; if this
does not make him ashamed of his behavior, it will prejudice every by-stander
in your favor, and instead of being disgraced, you will come off with honor.
Politeness to those we do not respect, is no more a breach of faith than your
humble servant at the bottom of a challenge; they are universally understood to
be things of course.

18. Wrangling and quarreling are characteristic of a weak mind: leave that to
the women, be you always above it. Enter into no sharp contest, and pride
yourself in showing, if possible, more civi^ity to your antagonist than to any
other in the company; this will infallibly bring over all the laughter to your
side, and the person you are contending with will be very likely to confess you
have behaved very handsomely throughout the whole affair.

19. Experience will teach us that though all men consist principally of the
same materials, as I before took notice, yet from a difference in their
proportion, no two men are uniformly the same: we differ from one another, and
we often differ from ourselves, that is, we sometimes do things utterly
inconsistent with the general tenor of our characters. The wisest man will
occasionally do a weak thing; the most honest man, a wrong thing; the proudest
man, a mean thing; and the worst of men will sometimes do a good thing.

20. On this account, our study of mankind should not be general; we should
take a frequent view of individuals, and though we may upon the whole form a
judgment of the man from his prevailing passion or his general character, yet
it will be prudent not to determine, till we have waited to see the operation^
of his subordinate appetites and humors.

21. For example; a man's general character may be that of strictly honest; I
would not dispute it, because I would not be thought envious or malevolent; but
I would not rely upon this general character, so as to entrust him with my
fortune or my life. Should this honest man, as is not uncommon, be my rival in
power, interest, or love, he may possibly do things that in other circumstances
he would abhor; and power, interest, and love, let me tell you, will often put
honesty to the severest trial, and frequently overpower it. I would then
ransack this honest man to the bottom, if I wished to trust him, and as I found
him, would place my confidence accordingly.

22. One of the great compositions in our nature is vanity, to which, all men,
more or less, give way. Women have an intolerable share of it. No flattery, no
adulation is too gross for them; those who flatter them most please them best,
and they are most in love with him who pretends to be most in love with them:
and the least slight or contempt of them is never forgotten. It is in some
measure the same with men; they will sooner pardon an injury than an insult,
and are more hurt by contempt than by ill-usage. Though all men do not boast of
superior talents, though they pretend not to the abilities of a Pope, a Newton,
or a Bolingbroke, every one pretends to have common sense, and to discharge his
office in life with common decency; to arraign therefore, in any shape, his
abilities or integrity in the department he holds, is an insult he will not
readily forgive.

23. As I would not have you trust too implicitly to a man, because the world
gives him a good character; so I must particularly caution you against those
who speak well of themselves. In general, suspect those who boast of or affect
to have any one virtue above all others, for they are commonly impostors. There
are exceptions, however, to this rule, for we hear of prudes that have been
chaste, bullies that have been brave, and saints that have been religious.
Confide only where your own observation shall direct you; observe not only what
is said, but how it is said, and if you have penetration, you may find out the
truth better by your eyes than your ears; in short, never take a character upon
common report, but enquire into it yourself; for common report, though it is
right in general, may be wrong in particulars.

24. Beware of those who, on a slight acquaintance, make a tender of their
friendship, and seem to place a confidence in you; it is ten to one but they
deceive and betray you; however do not rudely reject them upon such a
supposition; you may be civil to them, though you do not entrust them. Silly
men are apt to solicit your friendship, and unbosom themselves upon the first
acquaintance; such friends cannot be worth hearing, their friendship being as
slender as their understanding; and if they proffer their friendship with a
design to make a property of you, they are dangerous acquaintance indeed.

25. Not but the little friendships of the weak may be of some use to you, if
you do not return the compliment; and it may not be amiss to seem to accept
those of designing men, keeping them, as it were, in play, that they may not be
openly your enemies; for their enmity is the next dangerous thing to their
friendship. We may certainly hold their vices in abhorrence, without being
marked out as their personal enemy. The general rule is to have a real reserve
with almost every one, and a seeming reserve with almost no one; for it is very
disgusting to seem reserved, and very dangerous not to be so. Few observe the
true medium. Many are ridiculously mysterious upon trifles, and many
indiscreetly communicative of all they know.

26. There is a kind of short-lived friendship that takes place among young
men, from a connection in their pleasures only; a friendship too often attended
with bad consequences. This companion of your pleasures, young and
unexperienced, will probably, in the heat of convivial mirth, vow a perpetual
friendship, and unfold himself to you without the least reserve; but new
associations, change of fortune, or change of place, may soon break this ill
timed connection, and an improper use may be made of it.

27. Be one, if you will, in young companies, and bear your part like others in
the social festivity of youth; nay, trust them with your innocent frolics, but
keep your serious matters to yourself; and if you must at any time make them
known, let it be to some tried friend of great experience; and that nothing may
tempt him to become your rival, let that friend be in a different walk of life
from yourself.

Were I to hear a man making strong protestations, and swearing to the truth of
a thing, that is in itself probable and very likely to be, I should doubt his
veracity; for when he takes such pains to make me believe it, it cannot be with
a good design.

28. There is a certain easiness or false modesty in most young people, that
either makes them unwilling, or ashamed to refuse any thing that is asked of
them. There is also an unguarded openness about them that makes them the ready
prey of the artful and designing. They are easily led away by the feigned
friendships of a knave or a fool, and too rashly place a confidence in them,
that terminates in their loss, and frequently in their ruin. Beware, therefore,
as I said before, of these proffered friendships; repay them with compliments,
but not with confidence. Never let your vanity make you suppose that people
become your friends upon a slight acquaintance: for good offices must be shown
on both sides to create a friendship: it will not thrive, unless its love be
mutual; and it requires time to ripen it.

29. There is still among young people another kind of friendship merely
nominal, warm indeed for the time, but fortunately of no ^ong continuance. This
friendship takes its rise from their pursuing the same course of riot and
debauchery; their purses are open to each other, they tell one another all they
know, they embark in the same quarrels, and stand by each other on all
occasions. I should rather call this a confederacy against good morals and good
manners, and think it deserves the severest lash of the law; but they have the
impudence to call it friendship. However, it is often as suddenly dissolved as
it is hastily contracted; some accident disperses them, and they presently
forget each other, except it is to betray and laugh at their own egregious
folly.

In short, the sum of the whole is, to make a wide difference between
companions and friends; for a very agreeable companion has often proved a very
dangerous friend.

Choice of Company.
1. THE next thing to the choice of friends is the choice of your company.

Endeavor as much as you ca^ to keep good company, and the company of your
superiors: for you will be held in estimation according to the company you
keep* By superiors, I do not mean so much with regard to birth, as merit, and
the light in which they are considered by the world.

2. There are two sorts of good company; the one consists of persons of birth,
rank, and fashion; the other of those who are distinguished by some peculiar
merit, in any liberal art of science; as men of letters, etc. and a mixture of
these is what I would have understood by good company; for it is not what
particular sets of people shall call themselves, but what the people in general
acknowledge to be so, and are the accredited good company of the place.

3. Now and then, persons without either birth, rank, or character, will creep
into good company, under the protection of some considerable pe^^onage; but, in
general, none are admitted of mean degree, or infamous moral character.

In this fashionable good company alone, can you learn the best manners and the
best language: for, as there is no legal standard to form them by, it is here
they are established.

It may possibly be questioned, whether a man has it always in his power to get
into good company: undoubtedly, by deserving it, he has; provided he is in
circumstances which enable him to live and appear in the style of a gentleman.
Knowledge, modesty, and good breeding, will endear him to all that see him; for
without politeness, the scholar is no better than a pedant, the philosopher
than a cynic, the soldier than a brute, nor any man than a clown.

4. Though the company of men of learning and genius is highly to be valued,
and occasionally cove^ed, I would by no means have you always found in such
company. As they do not live in the world, they cannot have that easy manner
and address which I would wish you to acquire If you can bear a part in such
company, it is certainly advisable to be in it sometimes, and you will be the
more esteemed in other company by being so; but let it not engross you, lest
you be considered as one of the literati, which, however respectable in name,
is not the way to rise or shine in the fashionable world.

5. But the company which, of all others, you should carefully avoid, is that,
which, in every sense of the word, may be called low; low in birth, low in
rank, low in parts, and low in manners; that company, who, insignificant and
contemptible in themselves, think it an honor to be seen with you, and who
will flatter your follies, nay, your very vices, to ^eep you with them.

6. Though you may think such a caution unnecessary, I do not; for many a young
gentleman of sense and rank has been led by his vanity to keep such company,
till he has been degraded, villified and undone.

The vanity I mean, is that of being the first of the company. This pride,
though too common, is idle to the last degree. Nothing in the world lets a man
down so much. For the sake of dictating, being applauded and admired by this
low company, he is disgraced and disqualified for better. Depend upon it, in
the estimation of mankind, you will sink or rise to the level of the company
you keep.

7. Be it then your ambition to get into the best company; and, when there,
imitate their virtues, but not their vices. You have, no doubt, often heard of
genteel and fashionable vices. These are whoring, drinking, and gaming. It has
happened that some men, even with these vices, have been admired and esteemed.
Understand this matter rightly: it is not their vices for which they are
admired; but for some accomplishments they at the same time possess; for their
parts, their learning, or their good-breeding. Be assured, were they free from
their vices, they would be much more esteemed. In these mixed characters, the
bad part is overlooked, for the sake of the good.

8. Should you be unfortunate enough to have any vices of your own, add not to
their number by adopting the vices of others. Vices of adoption are of all
others the most unpardonable, for they have not inadvertency to plead. If
people had no vices but their own, few would have so many as they have.

Imitate, then, only the imperfections you meet with; copy the politeness, the
address, the easy manners of well-bred people* and remember, let them shine
ever so bright, if they have any vices, they are so many blemishes, which it
would be as ridiculous to imitate, as it would to make an artificial wart upon
one's face, because some very handsome man had the misfortune to have a natural
one upon his.

Laughter.
1. LET us now descend to minuter matters, which though not so important as those
we have mentioned, are still far from inconsiderable. Of these laughter is one.

Frequent and loud laughter is a sure sign of a weak mind, and no less
characteristic of a low education. It is the manner in which low-bred men
express their silly joy, at silly things, and they call it being merry.

2. I do not recommend upon all occasions a solemn countenance. A man may
smile; but if he would be thought a gentleman and a man of sense, he should by
no means laugh. True wit never yet made a man of fashion laugh* he is above it.
It may create a smile, but as loud laughter shows, that a man has not the
command of himself, every one who would wish to appear sensible, must abhor it.

A man's going to sit down, on a supposition that he has a chair behind him,
and fa^^ing for want of one, occasions a general laugh, when the best piece of
wit would not do it* a sufficient proof how low and unbecoming laughter is.

3. Besides, could the immoderate laugher hear his own noise, or ^^e the ^ace^
he makes, he would despi^e himself for his folly. Laughter being generally
supposed to be the effect of ga^ety, its absurdity is not properly attended to*
but a little reflection will easily restrain it, and when you are told, it is a
mark of low-breeding, I persuade myself you will endeavor to avoid it.

4. Some people have a silly trick of laughing, whenever they speak; so that
they are always on the gri^, and their faces are ever distorted. This and a
thousand other tricks, such as scratching their heads, twirling their hats,
f^^bling with their button, playing with their fingers, etc. are acquired from
a false modesty at their first outset in life. Being shame-faced in company,
they try a variety of ways to keep themselves in countenance; thus, they fall
into those awkward habits I have mentioned, which grow upon them, and in time
become habitual.

Nothing is more repugnant likewise to good-breeding than horse-play of any
sort, romping, throwing things at one another's heads, and so on. They may pass
well enough with the mob, but they lessen, and degrade the gentleman.

Sundry little Accomplishments.
1. I HAVE had reason to observe before, that various little matters,
apparently trifling in themselves, conspire to form the whole of pleasing, as
in a well-finished portrait, a variety of colors combine to complete the
piece. It not being necessary to dwell much upon them, I shall content myself
with just mentioning them as they occur.

2. To do the honors of a table gracefully, is one of the outlines of a
well-bred man; and to carve well, is an article, little as it may seem, that is
useful twice every day, and the doing of which ill is not only troublesome to
one's self, but renders us disagreeable and ridiculous to others. We are always
in pain for a man, who, instead of cutting up a fowl genteelly, is hacking for
half an hour across the bone, greasing himself, and bespattering the company
with the sauce. Use, with a little attention, is all that is requisite to
acquit yourself well in this particular.

3. To be well received, you must also pay some attention to your behavior at
table, where it is exceedingly rude to scratch any part of your body, to spit,
or blow your nose, if you can possibly avoid it, to eat greedily, to lean your
elbows on the table, to pick your teeth before the dishes are removed, or to
leave the table before grace is said.

4. Drinking of healths is now growing out of fashion, and is very unpolite in
good company. Custom once had made it universal, but the improved manners of
the age now render it vulgar. What can be more rude or ridiculous than to
interrupt persons at their meals, with an unnecessary compliment? Abstain then
from this silly custom, where you find it out of use; and use it only at those
tables where it continues general.

5. A polite manner of refusing to comply with the solicitations of a company,
is also very necessary to be learnt; for a young man who seems to have no will
of his own, but does every thing that is asked of him, may be a very good
natured fellow, but he is a very silly one. If you are invited to drink, at any
man's house, more than you think is wholesome, you may say, "you wish you
could, but that so little makes you both drunk and sick, that you shall only be
bad company by doing it: of course, beg to be excused."

6. If desired to play at cards deeper than you would, refuse it ludicrously;
tell them, If you were sure to lose, you might possibly sit down; but that as
fortune may be favorable, you dread the thought of having too much money, ever
since you found what an encumbrance it was to poor Harlequin, and therefore you
are resolved never to put yourself in the way of winning more than such and
such a sum a day. This light way of declining invitations to vice and folly, is
more becoming a young man than philosophical or sententious refusals, which
would only be laughed at.

7. Now I am on the subject of cards, must not omit mentioning the necessity of
playing them well and genteelly, if you would be thought to have kept good
company. I would by no means recommend playing at cards, as a part of your
study, lest you should grow too fond of it, and the consequences prove bad. It
were better not to know a diamond from a club, than to become a gambler; but,
as custom has introduced innocent card-playing at most friendly meetings, it
marks the gentleman to handle them genteelly, and play them well; and as I hope
you will play only for small sums, should you lose your money, pray lose it
with temper; or win, receive your winnings without either elation or greediness.

8. To write well and correct, and in a pleasing style, is another part of
polite education. Every man who has the use of his eyes and his right hand, can
write whatever hand he pleases. Nothing is so illiberal as a school-boy's
scrawl. I would not have you learn a stiff formal handwriting, like that of a
schoolmaster, but a genteel, legible, and liberal hand, and to be able to
write quick. As to the correctness and elegancy of your writing, attention to
grammar does the one, and to the best authors, the other. Epistolary
correspondence should not be carried on in a studied or affected style, but the
language should flow from the pen, as naturally and as easily as it would from
the mouth. In short, a letter should be penned in the same style as you would
talk to your friend, if he was present.

9. If writing well shows the gentleman, much more so does spelling well. It is
so essentially necessary for a gentleman, or a man of letters, that one false
spelling may fix a ridicule on him for the remainder of his life. Words in
books are generally well spelled, according to the orthography of the age;
reading therefore with attention will teach every one to spell right. It
sometimes happens that words shall be spelled differently by different authors;
but, if you spell them upon the authority of one in estimation of the public,
you will escape ridicule. Where there is but one way of spelling a word, by
your spelling it wrong, you will be sure to be laughed at. For a woman of a
tolerable education would laugh at and despise her lover, if he wrote to her,
and the words were ill spelled. Be particularly attentive then to your spelling.

10. There is nothing that a man at his first appearance in life ought more to
dread than having any ridicule fixed on him. In the estimation even of the most
rational men, it will lessen him, but ruin him with all the rest. Many a man
has been undone by a ridiculous nickname. The causes of nicknames among
well-bred men, are generally the little defects in manner, air, or address. To
have the appellation of ill-bred, awkward, muttering, left-legged, or any other
tacked always to your name, would injure you more than you are aware of; avoid
then these little defects (and they are easily avoided) and you need never fear
a nickname.

11. Some young men are apt to think, that they cannot be complete gentlemen,
without becoming men of pleasure. A rake is made up of the meanest and most
disgraceful vices. They all combine to degrade his character, and ruin his
health and fortune. A man of pleasure will refine upon the enjoyments of the
age, attend them with decency, and partake of them becomingly.

12. Indeed, he is too often less scrupulous than he should be, and frequently
has cause to repent it. A man of pleasure, at best, is but a dissipated being,
and what the rational part of mankind must abhor; I mention it, however, lest,
in taking up the man of pleasure, you should fall into the rake; for of two
evils, always choose the least. A dissolute, flagitious footman may make as good
a rake as a man of the first quality. Few men can be men of pleasure; every man
may be a rake.

13. There is a certain dignity that should be preserved in all our pleasures;
in love, a man may lose his heart, without losing his nose; at table, a man may
have a distinguished palate, without being a glutton; he may love wine, without
being a drunkard; he may game without being a gambler, and so on.

14. Every virtue has its kindred vice, and every pleasure its neighboring
disgrace. Temperance and moderation mark the gentleman; but excess, the
blackguard. Attend carefully, then, to the line that divides them; and
remember, stop rather a yard short, then step an inch beyond it. Weigh the
present enjoyment of your pleasures against the necessary consequences of them,
and I will leave you to your own determiation.

15. A gentleman has ever some regard also to the choice, of his amusements. If
at cards, he will not be seen at cribbage, all-fours, or putt; or, in sports of
exercise, at skittles, football, leap-frog, cricket, driving of coaches, etc.
but will preserve a propriety in every part of his conduct; knowing that any
imitation of the manners of the mob, will unavoidably stamp him with vulgarity.
There is another amusement too, which I cannot help calling illiberal, that is,
playing upon any musical instrument.

16. Music is commonly reckoned one of the liberal arts, and undoubtedly is so:
but to be piping or fiddling at a concert is degrading to a man of fashion. If
you love music, hear it; pay fiddlers to play to you, but never fiddle
yourself. It makes a gentleman appear frivolous and contemptible, leads him
frequently into bad company, and wastes that time which might otherwise be well
employed.

17. Secrecy is another characteristic of good-breeding. Be careful not to tell
in one company what you see or hear in another; much less to divert the present
company at the expense of the last. Things apparently indifferent may, when
often repeated and told abroad, have much more serious consequences than
imagined. In conversation there is generally a tacit reliance, that what is
said will not be repeated; and a man, though not enjoined to secrecy, will be
excluded company, if found to be a tatler; besides, he will draw himself into a
thousand scrapes, and every one will be afraid to speak before him.

18. Pulling out your watch in company unasked, either at home or abroad, is a
mark of ill-breeding; if at home, it appears as if you were tired of your
company, and wished them to be gone; if abroad, as if the hours drag heavily,
and you wished to be gone yourself. If you want to know the time, withdraw;
besides, as the taking what is called a French leave was introduced, that on
one person's leaving the company the rest might not be disturbed, looking at
your watch does what that piece of politeness was designed to prevent; it is a
kind of dictating to all present, and telling them it is time, or almost time,
to break up.

19. Among other things, let me caution you against ever being in a hurry; a
man of sense may be in haste, but he is never in a hurry; convinced that hurry
is the surest way to make him do, what he undertakes, ill. To be in a hurry, is
a proof that the business we embark in is too great for us; of course, it is
the mark of little minds, that are puzzled and perplexed, when they should be
cool and deliberate; they wish to do every thing at once, and are thus able to
do nothing. Be steady then in all your engagements; look round you before you
begin; and remember that you had better do half of them well, and leave the
rest undone, than to do the whole indifferently.

20. From a kind of false modesty, most young men are apt to consider
familiarity as unbecoming. Forwardness I allow is so; but there is a decent
familiarity that is necessary in the course of life. Mere formal visits, upon
formal invitations, are not the thing; they create no connection, nor will they
prove of service to you; it is the careless and easy ingress and egress, at all
hours, that secures an acquaintance to our interest, and this is acquired by a
respectful familiarity entered into, without forfeiting your consequence.

21. In acquiring new acquaintance, be careful not to neglect your old, for a
slight of this kind is seldom forgiven. If you cannot be with your former
acquaintance so often as you used to be, while you had no others, take care not
to give them cause to think you neglect them; call upon them frequently, though
you cannot stay long with them; tell them you are sorry to leave them so soon,
and nothing should take you away but certain engagements which good-manners
oblige you to attend to; for it will be your interest to make all the friends
you can, and as few enemies as possible.

22. By friends, I would not be understood to mean confidential ones; but
persons who speak of you respectfully, and who, consistent with their own
interest would wish to be of service to you, and would rather do you good than
harm.

Another thing I must recommend to you, as characteristic of a polite
education, and of having kept good company, is a graceful manner of conferring
favors. The most obliging things may be done so aukwardly as to offend, while
the most disagreeable things may be done so agreeably as to please.

23. A few more articles of general advice, and I have done; the first is on
the subject of vanity. It is the common failing of youth, and as such ought to
be carefully guarded against. The vanity I mean, is that which, if given way
to, stamps a man a coxcomb, a character he will find a difficulty to get rid
of, perhaps as long he lives. Now this vanity shows itself in a variety of
shapes; one man shall pride himself in taking the lead in all conversations,
and peremptorily deciding upon every subject; another, desirous of appearing
successful among the women, shall insinuate the encouragement he has met with,
the conquests he makes, and perhaps boasts of favors he never received; if he
speaks the truth, he is ungenerous; if false, he is a villain; but whether true
or false, he defeats his own purposes, overthrows the reputation he wishes to
erect, and draws upon himself contempt in the room of respect.

24. Some men are vain enough to think ^hey acquire consequence by alliance, or
by an acquaintance with persons of distinguished character or abilities: hence
they are eternally talking of their grandfather, Lord such-a-one; their
kinsman, Sir William such-a-one; or their intimate friend, Dr. such-a-one, with
whom, perhaps, they are scarce acquainted. If they are ever found out (and that
they are sure to be, one time or other) they become ridiculous and
contemptible; but even admitting what they say to be true, what then? A man's
intrinsic merit does not rise from an ennobled alliance, or a reputable
acquaintance.

25. A rich man never borrows. When angling for praise, modesty is the surest
bait. If we would wish to shine in any particular character, we must never
affect that character. An affectation of courage will make a man pass for a
bully; an affectation of wit for a coxcomb; and an affectation of sense, for a
fool. Not that I would recommend bashfulness or timidity; no; I would have
every one know his own value, yet not discover that he knows it, but leave his
merit to be found out by others.

26. Another thing worth your attention is, if in company with an inferior, not
to let him feel his inferiority; if he discovers it himself without your
endeavors, the fault is not yours, and he will not blame you; but if you take
pains to mortify him, or to make him feel himself inferior to you in abilities,
fortune, or rank, it is an insult that will not readily be forgiven. In point
of abilities, it would be unjust, as they are out of his power; in point of
rank or fortune, it is ill-natured and ill-bred.

27. This rule is never more necessary than at table, where there cannot be a
greater insult than to help an inferior to a part he dislikes, or a part that
may be worse than ordinary, and to take the best to yourself. If you at any
time invite an inferior to your table, you put him, during the time he is
there, upon an equality with you, and it is an act of the highest rudeness to
treat him in any respect slightingly. I would rather double my attention to
such a person, and treat him with additional respect, lest he should even
suppose himself neglected.

28. There cannot be a greater savageness, or cruelty, or any thing more
degrading to a man of fashion, than to put upon or take unbecoming liberties
with him, whose modesty, humility, or respect, will not suffer him to
retaliate. True politeness consists in making every body happy about you; and
as to mortify is to render unhappy, it can be nothing but the worst of
breeding. Make it a rule, rather to flatter a person's vanity than otherwise;
make him, if possible, more in love with himself, and you will be certain to
gain his esteem; never tell him any thing he may not like to hear, nor say
things that will put him out of countenance, but let it be your study on all
occasions to please: this will be making friends instead of enemies, and be a
means of serving yourself in the end.

29. Never be witty at the expense of any one present, nor gratify that idle
inclination which is too strong in most young men, I mean, laughing at, or
ridiculing the weaknesses or infirmities of others, by way of diverting the
company, or displaying your own superiority. Most people have their weaknesses,
their peculiar likings and aversions. Some cannot bear the sight of a cat;
others the smell of cheese, and so on; was you to laugh at these men for their
antipathies, or by design or inattention to bring them in their way, you could
not insult them more.

30. You may possibly thus gain the laugh on your side for the present, but it
will make the person, perhaps, at whose expense you are merry, your enemy for
ever after; and even those who laugh with you, will, on a little reflection,
fear you, and probably despise you: whereas to procure what one likes, and to
remove what the other hates, would show them that they were objects of your
attention, and possibly make them more your friends than much greater services
would have done.

31. If you have wit, use it to please, but not to hurt. You may shine, but
take care not to scorch. In short, never seem to see the faults of others.
Though among the mass of men there are, doubtless, numbers of fools and knaves,
yet were we to tell every one of these we meet with, that we know them to be
so, we should be in perpetual war. I would detest the knave and pity the fool,
wherever I found him, but I would let neither of them know unnecessarily that I
did so; as I would not be industrious to make myself enemies. As one must
please others then, in order to be pleased one's-self; consider what is
agreeable to you must be agreeable to them, and conduct yourself accordingly.

32. Whispering in company is another act of ill-breeding; it seems to
insinuate either that the persons whom we would not wish should hear, are
unworthy of our confidence, or it may lead them to suppose we are speaking
improperly of them; on both accounts, therefore, abstain from it.

So pulling out one letter after another, and reading them in company, or
cutting or paring one's nails, is unpolite and rude. It seems to say, we are
weary of the conversation, and are in want of some amusement to pass away the
time.

33. Humming a tune to ourselves, drumming with our fingers on the table,
making a noise with our feet, and such like, are all breaches of good manners,
and indications of our contempt for the persons present; therefore they should
not be indulged.

Walking fast in the streets is a mark of vulgarity, implying hurry of
business; it may appear well in a mechanic or tradesman, but suits ill with the
character of a gentleman or a man of fashion.

Staring any person you meet, full in the face, is an act also of ill-breeding;
it looks as if you saw something wonderful in his appearance, and is therefore
a tacit reprehension.

34. Eating quick, or very slow, at meals, is characteristic of the vulgar; the
first infers poverty, that you have not had a good meal for some time; the
last, if abroad, that you dislike your entertainment: if at home, that you are
rude enough to set before your friends what you cannot eat yourself. So again,
eating your soups with your nose in the plate is vulgar; it has the appearance
of being used to hard work, and of course an unsteady hand.

Dignity of Manners.
1. A Certain dignity of manners is absolutely necessary, to make even the most
valuable character either respected or respectable in the world.

Horse-play, romping, frequent and loud fits of laughter, jokes, waggery, and
indiscriminate familiarity, will sink both merit and knowledge into a degree of
contempt. They compose at most a merry fellow, and a merry fellow was never yet
a respectable man. Indiscriminate familiarity either offends your superiors, or
else dubs you their dependent and led captain. It gives your inferiors just,
but troublesome and improper, claims of equality. A joker is near akin to a
buffoon; and neither of them is the least related to wit.

2. Mimicry, the favorite amusement of little minds, has been ever the
contempt of great ones. Never give way to it yourself, nor ever encourage it in
others; it is the most illiberal of all buffoonery; it is an insult on the
person you mimic; and insults, I have often told you, are seldom forgiven.

As to a mimic or a wag, he is little else than a buffoon, who will distort his
mouth and his eyes to make people laugh. Be assured, no one person ever
demeaned himself to please the rest, unless he wished to be thought the
Merry-Andrew of the company, and whether this character is respectable, I will
leave you to judge.

3. If a man's company is coveted on any other account than his knowledge, his
good sense, or his manners, he is seldom respected by those who invite him, but
made use of only to entertain. "Let Us have such a one, for he sings a good
song, or he is always joking or laughing;" or, "let us fend for such a one, for
he is a good bottle companion:" these are degrading distinctions, that preclude
all respect and esteem. Whoever is had (as the phrase is) for the sake of any
qualification, singly, is merely that thing he is had for, is never considered
in any other light, and, of course, never properly respected, let his intrinsic
merits be what they will.

4. You may possibly suppose this dignity of manners to border upon pride; but
it differs as much from pride, as true courage from blustering.

To flatter a person right or wrong, is abject flattery, and to consent readily
to every thing proposed by a company, be it silly or criminal, is full as
degrading, as to dispute warmly upon every subject, and to contradict upon all
occasions. To preserve dignity, we should modestly assert our own sentiments,
though we politely acquiesce in those of others.

So again, to support dignity of character, we should neither be frivolously
curious about trifles, nor be laboriously intent on little objects that deserve
not a moment's attention; for this implies an incapacity in matters of greater
importance.

A great deal likewise depends upon our air, address, and expressions; an
awkward address and vulgar expressions infer either a low turn of mind, or a
low education.

5. Insolent contempt, or low envy, is incompatible also with dignity of
manners. Low-bred persons, fortunately lifted in the world, in fine clothes and
fine equipages, will insolently look down on all those who cannot afford to
make as good an appearance; and they openly envy those who perhaps make a
better. They also dread the being slighted; of course are suspicious, and
captious; are uneasy themselves, and make every body else so about them.

6. A certain degree of outward seriousness in looks and actions gives dignity,
while a constant smirk upon the face (with that insipid silly smile, fools have
when they would be civil) and whiffling motions, are strong marks of futility.

But above all, a dignity of character is to be acquired best by a certain
firmness in all our actions. A mean, timid, and passive complaisance, lets a
man down more than he is aware of: but still his firmness or resolution should
not extend to brutality, but be accompanied with a peculiar and engaging
softness, or mildness.

7. If you discover any hastiness in your temper, and find it apt to break out
into rough and unguarded expressions, watch it narrowly, and endeavor to curb
it; but let no complaisance, no weak desire of pleasing, no wheedling, urge you
to do that which discretion forbids; but persist and persevere in all that is
right. In your connections and friendships, you will find this rule of use to
you. Invite and preserve attachments, by your firmness; but labor to keep
clear of enemies, by a mildness of behavior. Disarm those enemies you may
unfortunately have, (and few are without them) by a gentleness of manner, but
make them feel the steadiness of your just resentment; for there is a wide
difference between bearing malice and a determined self-defence; the one is
imperious, but the other is prudent and justifiable.

8. In directing your servants, or any person you have a right to command; if
you deliver your orders mildly, and in that engaging manner which every
gentleman should study to do, you will be cheerfully, and consequently, well
obeyed: but if tyrannically, you would be very unwillingly served, if served at
all. A cool, steady determination should show that you will be obeyed, but a
gentleness in the manner of enforcing that obedience should make service a
cheerful one. Thus will you be loved without being despised, and feared without
being hated.

9. I hope I need not mention vices. A man who has patiently been kicked out of
company, may have as good a pretense to courage, as one rendered infamous by
his vices, may to dignity of any kind; however, of such consequence are
appearances, that an outward decency, and an affected dignity of manners, will
even keep such a man the longer from sinking. If therefore you should
unfortunately have no intrinsic merit of your own, keep up, if possible, the
appearance of it; and the world will possibly give you credit for the rest. A
versatility of manner is as necessary in social life, as a versatility of parts
in political. This is no way blameable, if not used with an ill design. We
must, like the cameleon, then, put on the hue of the persons we wish to be well
with; and it surely can never be blameable, to endeavor to gain the good will
or affection of any one, if, when obtained, we do not mean to abuse it.

Rules for Conversation.
1. JACK LIZARD was about fifteen when he was first entered in the university,
and being a youth of a great deal of fire, and a more than ordinary application
to his studies, it gave his conversation a very particular turn. He had too
much spirit to hold his tongue in company; but at the same time so little
acquaintance with the world, that he did not know how to talk like other people.

2. After a year and a half's stay at the university, he came down among us to
pass away a month or two in the country. The first night after his arrival, as
we were at supper, we were all of us very much improved by Jack's table-talk.
He told us, upon the appearance of a dish of wild-fowl, that according to the
opinion of some natural philosophers, they might be lately come from the moon.

3. Upon which the Sparkler bursting out into a laugh, he insulted her with
several questions, relating to the bigness and distance of the moon and stars;
and after every interrogatory would be winking upon me, and smiling at his
sister's ignorance. Jack gained his point; for the mother was pleased, and all
the servants stared at the learning of their young master. Jack was so
encouraged at this success, that for the first week he dealt wholly in
paradoxes. It was a common jest with him to pinch one of his sister's lap-dogs,
and afterward prove he could not feel it.

4. When the girls were sorting a set of knots, he would demonstrate to them
that all the ribbons were of the same color; or rather, says Jack, of no
color at all. My Lady Lizard herself, though she was not a little pleased with
her son's improvements, was one day almost angry with him; for having
accidentally burnt her fingers as she was lighting her lamp for her tea-pot, in
the midst of her anguish, Jack laid hold of the opportunity to instruct her
that there was no such thing as heat in fire. In short, no day passed over our
heads, in which Jack did not imagine he made the whole family wiser than they
were before.

5. That part of his conversation which gave me the most pain, was what passed
among those country gentlemen that came to visit us. On such occasions Jack
usually took upon him to be the mouth of the company; and thinking himself
obliged to be very merry, would entertain us with a great many odd sayings and
absurdities of their college cook. I found this fellow had made a very strong
impression upon Jack's imagination which he never considered was not the case
of the rest of the company, till after many repeated trials he found that his
stories seldom made any body laugh but himself.

6. I all this while looked upon Jack as a young tree shooting out into
blossoms before its time; the redundancy of which, though it was a little
unseasonable, seemed to foretell an uncommon fruitfulness.

In order to wear out the vein of pedantry which ran through his conversation,
I took him out with me one evening, and first of all insinuated to him this
rule, which I had myself learned from a very great author, To think with the
wise, but talk with the vulgar. Jack's good sense soon made him reflect that he
had exposed himself to the laughter of the ignorant by a contrary behavior;
upon which he told me, that he would take care for the future to keep his
notions to himself, and converse in the common received sentiments of mankind.

7. He at the same time desired me to give him any other rules of conversation,
which I thought might be for his improvement. I told him I would think of it;
and accordingly, as I have a particular affection for the young man, I gave him
the next morning the following rules in writing, which may, perhaps, have
contributed to make him the agreeable man he now is*

8. The faculty of interchanging our thoughts with one another, or what we
express by the word conversation, has always been represented by moral writers,
as one of the noblest privileges of reason, and which more particularly sets
mankind above the brute part of the creation

Though nothing so much gains upon the affections (...) this extempore
eloquence, which we have constantly occasion for, and are obliged to practice
every day, we very rarely meet with any who excel in it.

9. The conversation of most men is disagreeable, not so much for want of wit
and learning, as of good-breeding and discretion.

It is not in every man's power, perhaps, to have fine parts, say witty things,
or tell a story agreeably; but every man may be polite if he pleases, at least
to a certain degree. Politeness has infinitely more power to make us esteemed,
and our company sought after, than the most extraordinary parts or seize
we can be master of. These seldom fail to create envy, and envy has always some
ill will in it.

10. If you resolve to please, never speak to gratify any particular vanity or
passion of your own, but always with a design either to divert or inform the
company. A man who only aims at one of these, is always easy in his discourse.
He is never out of humor at being interrupted, because he considers that those
who hear him are the best judges whether what he was saying could either divert
or inform them.

A modest person seldom fails to gain the good will of those he converses with,
because nobody envies a a man who does not appear to be pleased with himself.

11. We should talk extremely little of ourselves. Indeed what can we say? It
would be as imprudent to discover faults, as ridiculous to count over our
fancied virtues. Our private and domestic affairs are no less improper to be
introduced in conversation. What does it concern the company how many horses
you keep in your stables? or whether your servant is most knave or fool?

12. A man may equally affront the company he is in, by engrossing all the
talk, or observing a contemptuous silence.

Conform yourself to the taste, character, and present humors of the persons
you converse with; not but a person must follow his talent in conversation. Do
not force nature; no one ever did it with success.

If you have not a talent for humor, or raillery, or story-telling, never
attempt them.

13. Contain yourself also within the bounds of what you know; and never talk
upon things you are ignorant of, unless it be with a view to inform yourself. A
person cannot fail in the observance of this rule, without making himself
ridiculous; and yet how often do we see it transgressed! Some, who on war or
politics could talk very well, will be perpetually haranguing on works of
genius, and the belles-lettres; others who are capable of reasoning, and would
make a figure in grave discourse, will yet constantly aim at humor and
pleasantry, though with the worst grace imaginable. Hence it is, that we see a
man of merit sometimes appear like a coxcomb, and hear a man of genius talk
like a fool.

14. Before you tell a story, it may be generally not amiss to draw a short
character, and give the company a true idea of the principal persons concerned
in it; the beauty of most things consisting not so much in their being said or
done, as in their being said or done by such a particular person, or on such a
particular occasion.

15. Notwithstanding all the advantages of youth, few young people please in
conversation; the reason is, that want of experience makes them positive, and
what they say, is rather with a design to please themselves, than any one else.

It is certain that age itself shall make many things pass well enough, which
would have been laughed at in the mouth of one much younger.

16. Nothing, however, is more insupportable to men of sense, than an empty
formal man who speaks in proverbs, and decides all controversies with a short
sentence. This piece of stupidity is the more insufferable, as it puts on the
air of wisdom.

Great talents for conversation requires to be accompanied with great
politeness. He who eclipses others, owes them great civilities; and whatever a
mistaken vanity may tell us, it is better to please in conversation, than to
shine in it.

17. A prudent man will avoid talking much of any particular science, for which
he is remarkably famous. There is not, methinks, an handsomer thing said of Mr.
Cowley in his whole life, than, that none but his intimate friends ever
discovered he was a great poet by his discourse. Besides the decency of this
rule, it is certainly founded in good policy. A man who talks of any thing he
is already famous for, has little to get, but a great deal to lose.

18. I might add, that he who is sometimes silent on a subject where every one
is satisfied he would speak well, will often be thought no less knowing in any
other matters, where, perhaps, he is wholly ignorant.

Women are frightened at the name of argument, and are sooner convinced by an
happy turn, or witty expression, than by demonstration.

19. Whenever you commend, add your reasons for so doing; it is this which
distinguishes the approbation of a man of sense, from the flattery of
sycophants, and admiration of fools.

Raillery is no longer agreeable than while the whole company is pleased with
it. I would least of all be understood to except the person raillied.

20. Though good humor, sense, and discretion can seldom fail to make a man
agreeable, it may be no ill-policy sometimes to prepare yourself in a
particular manner for conversation, by looking a little farther than your
neighbors into whatever is become a reigning subject. If our armies are
besieging a place of importance abroad, or our House of Commons debating a bill
of consequence at home, you can hardly fail of being heard with pleasure, if
you have nicely informed yourself of the stength, situation, and history of the
first, or of the reasons for and against the latter.

21. It will have the same effect if when any single person begins to make a
noise in the world, you can ^arn some of the smallest accidents in his life or
conversation, which, though they are too fine for the observation of the
vulgar, give more satisfaction to men of sense, (as they are the best openings
to a real character) than the recital of his most glaring actions. I know but
one ill consequence to be feared from this method, namely, that coming full
charged into company, you should resolve to unload, whether an handsome
opportunity offers itself or no.

22. The liberal arts, though they may possibly have less effect on our
external mien and behavior, make so deep an impression on the mind, as is very
apt to bend it wholly one way.

The mathematician will take little less than demonstration in the most common
discourse, and the schoolman is as great a friend to definitions and
syllogisms. The physician and divine are often heard to dictate in private
companies with the same authority which they exercise over their patients and
disciples; while the lawyer is putting cases, and raising matter for
disputation, out of every thing that occurs.

23. Though the asking of questions may plead for itself the specious name of
modesty, and a desire of information, it affords little pleasure to the rest of
the company, who are not troubled with the same doubts; besides which, he who
asks a question would do well to consider that he lies wholly at the mercy of
another before he receives an answer.

24. Nothing is more silly than the pleasure some people take in what they call
speaking their minds. A man of this make will say a rude thing for the mere
pleasure of saying it, when an opposite behavior, full as innocent, might have
preserved his friend, or made his fortune.

It is not impossible for a man to form to himself as exquisite a pleasure in
complying with the humor and sentiments of others, as of bringing others over
to his own; since it is the certain sign of a superior genius, that can take and
become whatever dress it pleases.

25. Avoid disputes as much as possible, in order to appear easy and well-bred
in conversation. You may assure yourself, that it requires more wit, as well as
more good humor, to improve than to contradict the notions of another; but if
you are (...) any time obliged to enter on an argument, give your reasons with
the utmost coolness and modesty, two things which scarce ever fail of making an
impression on the hearers. Besides, if you are neither dogmatical, nor show
either by your actions or words, that you are full of yourself, all will the
more heartily rejoice at your victory; nay, should you be pinched in your
argument, you may make your retreat with a very good grace: you were never
positive, and are now glad to be better informed.

26. This has made some approve the Socratical way of reasoning, where, while
you scarce affirm any thing, you can hardly be caught in an absurdity; and
though possibly you are endeavoring to bring over another to your opinion,
which is firmly fixed, you seem only to desire information from him.

27. In order to keep that temper, which is so difficult, and yet so necessary
to preserve, you may please to consider, that nothing can be more unjust or
ridiculous, than to be angry with another because he is not of your opinion.
The interests, education, and means by which men attain their knowledge, are so
very different, that it is impossible they should all think alike; and he has
at least as much reason to be angry with you, as you with him.

28. Sometimes to keep yourself cool, it may be of service to ask yourself
fairly, what might have been your opinion, had you all the biasses of education
and interest your adversary may possibly have? But if you contend for the
honor of victory alone, you may lay down this as an infallible maxim, That you
cannot make a more false step, or give your antagonists a greater advantage
over you, than by falling into a passion.

29. When an argument is over, how many weighty reasons does a man recollect,
which his heat and violence made him utterly forget?

It is yet more absurd to be angry with a man, because he does not apprehend
the force of your reasons, or give weak ones of his own. If you argue for
reputation; this makes your victory the easier; he is certainly in all respects
an object of your pity, rather than anger; and if he cannot comprehend what you
do, you ought to thank nature for her favors, who has given you so much the
clearer understanding.

30. You may please to add this consideration, That among your equals no one
values your anger, which only preys upon its master; and perhaps you may find
it not very consistent either with prudence or your ease, to punish yourself
whenever you meet with a fool or a knave.

31. Lastly, if you propose to yourself the true end of argument, which is
information, it may be a seasonable check to your passion; for if you search
purely after truth, it will be almost indifferent to you where you find it. I
cannot in this place omit an observation which I have often made, namely, that
nothing procures a man more esteem and less envy from the whole company, than
if he chooses the part of moderator, without engaging directly on either side
in a dispute.

32. This gives him the character of impartial, furnishes him an opportunity of
sitting things to the bottom, showing his judgment, and of sometimes making
handsome compliments to each of the contending parties.

When you have gained a victory, do not push it too far; it is sufficient to
let the company and your adversary see it is in your power, but that you are
too generous to make use of it.

33. I shall only add, that besides what I have here said, there is something
which can never be learnt but in the company of the polite. The virtues of men
are catching as well as their vices, and your own observations added to these,
will soon discover what it is that commands attention in one man, and makes you
tired and displeased with the discourse of another.

Further Remarks taken from Lord Chesterfield's Letters to his Son.
34. HAVING now given you full and sufficient instructions for making you
well-received in the best of companies; nothing remains but that I lay before
you some few rules for your conduct in such company. Many things on this
subject I have mentioned before; but some few matters remain to be mentioned
now.

Talk, then, frequently, but not long together, lest you tire the persons you
are speaking to; for few persons talk so well upon a subject, as to keep up the
attention of their hearers for any length of time.

35. Avoid telling stories in company, unless they are very short indeed, and
very applicable to the subject you are upon; in this case relate them in as few
words as possible, without the least digression, and with some apology: as that
you hate the telling of stories, but the shortness of it induced you. And, if
your story has any wit in it, be particularly careful not to laugh at it
yourself. Nothing is more tiresome and disagreeable than a long tedious
narrative; it betrays a gossiping disposition, and great want of imagination;
and nothing is more ridiculous than to express an approbation of your own story
by a laugh.

36. In relating any thing, keep clear of repetitions, or very hackneyed
expressions, such as, says he, or says she. Some people will use these so
often, as to take off the hearers attention from the story; as, in an organ out
of tune, one pipe shall perhaps sound the whole time we are playing, and
confuse the piece, so as not to be understood.

37. Digressions, likewise, should be guarded against. A story is always more
agreeable without them. Of this kind are, " the gentleman I am telling you of,
is the son of Sir Thomas --, who lives in Harley-street; -- you must know him
-- his brother had a horse that won the sweepstakes at the last Newmarket
meeting. -- Zounds! if you don't know him, you know nothing." Or, " He was an
upright tall old gentleman, who wore his own long hair; don't you recollect
him?" -- All this is unnecessary; is very tiresome and provoking, and would be
an excuse for a man's behavior, if he was to leave us in the midst of our
narrative.

38. Some people have a trick of holding the persons they are speaking to by
the button, or the hand, in order to be heard out: conscious, I suppose, that
their tale is tiresome. Pray, never do this; If the person you speak to is not
as willing to hear your story, as you are to tell it, you had much better break
off in the middle: for if you tire them once they will be afraid to listen to
you a second time.

39. Others have a way of punching the person they are talking to, in the si^e,
and at the end of every sentence, asking him some questions as the following:
"Was Not I right in that?" -- "You know, I told you so? -- What Is your opinion?"
and the like; or perhaps, they will be thrusting him, or jogging him with their
elbow. For mercy's sake, never give way to this: it will make your company
dreaded.

40. Long talkers are frequently apt to single out some unfortunate man
present; generally the most silent one of the company, or probably him who sits
next them. To this man, in a kind of half-whisper, will they run on, for half
an hour together. Nothing can be more ill-bred. But, if one of these unmerciful
talkers should attack you, if you wish to oblige him, I would recommend the
hearing with patience: seem to do so at least, for you could not hurt him more
than to leave him in the middle of his story, or discover any impatience in the
course of it.

41. Incessant talkers are very disagreeable companions. Nothing can be more
rude than to engross the conversation to yourself, or to take the words, as it
were, out of another man's mouth. Every man in company has an equal claim to
bear his part in the conversation, and to deprive him of it, is not only
unjust, but a tacit declaration that he cannot speak so well upon the subject
as yourself; you will therefore take it up. And, what can be more rude? I would
as soon forgive a man that should stop my mouth when I was gaping, as take my
words from me while I was speaking them. Now, if this be unpardonable, it
cannot be less so.

42. To help out or forestall the slow speaker, as if you alone were rich in
expressions and he were poor. You may take it for granted, every one is vain
enough to think he can talk well, though he may modestly deny it; helping a
person out therefore in his expressions, is a correction that will stamp the
corrector with impudence and ill-manners.

43. Those who contradict others upon all occasions, and make every assertion a
matter of dispute, betray by this behavior an unacquaintance with
good-breeding. He therefore who wishes to appear amiable, with those he
converses with, will be cautious of such expressions as these, "That cannot be
true, sir." "The affair is as I say." "That must be false, sir." "If what you
say is true, etc." You may as well tell a man he lies at once, as thus
indirectly impeach his veracity. It is equally as rude to be proving every
trifling assertion with a bet or a wager. "I Will bet you fifty of it, and so
on." Make it then a constant rule, in matters of no great importance,
complaisantly to submit your opinion to that of others; for a victory of this
kind often costs a man the loss of a friend.

44. Giving advice unasked is another piece of rudeness; it is, in effect,
declaring ourselves wiser than those to whom we give it; reproaching them with
ignorance and inexperience. It is a freedom that ought not to be taken with any
common acquaintance, and yet there are those who will be offended, if their
advice is not taken. "Such-a-one," say they, "is above being advised." He
scorns to listen to my advice; as if it were not a mark of greater arrogance to
expect every one to submit to their opinion than for a man sometimes to follow
his own.

45. There is nothing so unpardonably rude, as a seeming inattention to the
person who is speaking to you; though you may meet with it in others, by all
means, avoid it yourself. Some ill-bred people, while others are speaking to
them, will, instead of looking at or attending to them, perhaps fix their eyes
on the cieling, or some picture in the room, look out of the window, play with
a dog, their watch chain, or their cane, or probably pick their nails or their
noses. Nothing betrays a more trifling mind than this; nor can any thing be a
greater affront to the person speaking; it being a tacit declaration, that what
he is saying is not worth your attention. Consider with yourself how you would
like such treatment, and, I am persuaded, you will never show it to others.

46. Surliness or moroseness is incompatible also with politeness. Such as,
should any one say he was desired to present Mr. Such-a-one's respects to you,
to reply, What the devil have I to do with his respects? -- My Lord enquired
after you "lately, and asked how you did," to answer, if he wishes to know, let
him come and feel my pulse, and the like. A good deal of this often is
affected; but whether affected or natural, it is always offensive. A man of
this stamp will occasionally be laughed at as an oddity; but in the end, will
be despised.

47. I should suppose it unnecessary to advise you to adapt your conversation
to the company you are in. You would not surely start the same subject, and
discourse of it in the same manner, with the old and with the young, with an
officer, a clergyman, a philosopher, and a woman? no; your good sense will
undoubtedly teach you to be serious with the serious, gay with the gay, and to
trifle with the triflers.

48. There are certain expressions which are exceedingly rude, and yet there
are people of liberal education that sometimes use them; as you don't
understand me sir. "It is not so." You mistake. "You know nothing of the
matter, etc." Is it not better to say? I believe I do not express myself so as
to be understood. Let us consider it again, whether we take it right or not. It
is much more polite and amiable to make some excuse for another, even in cases
where he might justly be blamed, and to represent the mistake as common to
both, rather than charge him with insensibility or incomprehension.

49. If any one should have promised you any thing and not have fulfilled that
promise, it would be very unpolite to tell him, he has forfeited his word; or
if the same person should have disappointed you, upon any occasion, would it
not be better to say, you were probably so much engaged, that you forgot my
affair, or "perhaps it slipped your memory;" rather than, "you thought no more
about it," or "you pay very little regard to your word." For, expressions of
this kind leave a sting behind them. They are a kind of provocation and
affront, and very often bring on lasting quarrels.

50. Be careful not to appear dark and mysterious, lest you should be thought
suspicious; than which there cannot be a more unamiable character. If you
appear mysterious and reserved, others will be truly so with you; and in this
case, there is an end to improvement, for you will gather no information. Be
reserved, but never seem so.

51. There is a fault extremely common with some people, which I would have you
avoid. When their opinion is asked upon any subject, they will give it with so
apparent a diffidence and timidity, that one cannot, without the utmost pain,
listen to them; especially if they are known to be men of universal knowledge.
"Your lordship will pardon me," says one of this stamp, if I should not be able
to speak to the case in hand, so well as it might be wished. -- I Will venture to
speak of this matter, to the best of my poor abilities and dullness of
apprehension. -- I fear I shall expose myself, but in obedience to your
lordship's commands -- and while they are making these apologies, they
interrupt the business and tire the company.

52. Always look people in the face, when you speak to them, otherwise you will
be thought conscious of some guilt; besides, you lose the opportunity of
reading their countenances; from which you will much better learn the
impression your discourse makes upon them, than you can possibly do from their
words; for words are at the will of every one, but the countenance is
frequently involuntary.

53. If in speaking to a person, you are not heard, and should be desired to
repeat what you said, do not raise your voice in the repetition, lest you
should be thought angry, on being obliged to repeat what you had said before;
it was probably owing to the hearer's inattention.

54. One word only, as to swearing. Those who addict themselves to it, and
interlard their discourse with oaths, can never be considered as gentlemen;
they are generally people of low education, and are unwelcome in what is called
good company. It is a vice that has no temptation to plead, but is, in every
respect, as vulgar as it is wicked.

55. Never accustom yourself to scandal, nor listen to it; for though it may
gratify the malevolence of some people, nine times out of ten it is attended
with great disadvantages. The very person you tell it to will, on reflection,
entertain a mean opinion of you, and it will often bring you into a very
disagreeable situation. And as there would be no evil speakers, if there were
no evil hearers, it is in scandal a^ in robbery; the receiver is as bad as the
thief. Besides, it will lead people to shun your company, supposing that you
will speak ill of them to the next acquaintance you meet.

56. Carefully avoid talking either of your own or other people's domestic
concerns. By doing the one, you will be thought vain; by entering into the
other, you will be considered as officious. Talking of yourself is an
impertinence to the company; your affairs are nothing to them; besides, they
cannot be kept too secret. And as to the affairs of others, what are they to
you? In talking of matters that no way concern you, you are liable to commit
blunders, and should you touch any one in a sore part, you may possibly lose
his esteem. Let your conversation then in mixed companies always be general.

57. Jokes, bon-mots, or the little pleasantries of one company, will not often
bear to be told in another; they are frequently local, and take their rise from
certain circumstances; a second company may not be acquainted with these
circumstances, and of course your story may not be understood, or want
explaining; and if after you have prefaced it with, "I will tell you a good
thing," the sting should not be immediately perceived, you will appear
exceedingly ridiculous, and wish you had not told it. Never then repeat in one
place, what you hear in another.

58. In most debates, take up the favorable side of the question; however, let
me caution you against being clamorous, that is, never maintain an argument
with heat, though you know yourself right; but offer your sentiments modestly
and coolly, and if this does not prevail, give it up, and try to change the
subject by saying something to this effect; I find we shall hardly convince one
another, neither is there any necessity to attempt it; so let us talk of
something else.

59. Not that I would have you give up your opinion always; no, assert your own
sentiments, and oppose those of others when wrong, but let your manner and
voice be gentle and engaging, and yet no ways affected. If you contradict, do
it with, I may be wrong, but -- I will not be positive, but I really think -- I
should rather suppose -- if I may be permitted to say -- and close your dispute
with good humor, to show you are neither displeased yourself, nor meant to
displease the person you dispute with.

60. Acquaint yourself with the character and situations of the company you go
into, before you give a loose to your tongue; for should you enlarge on some
virtue, which any one present may notoriously want; or should you condemn some
vice, which any of the company may be particularly addicted to, they will be
apt to think your reflections pointed and personal, and you will be sure to
give offense. This consideration will naturally lead you, not to suppose things
said in general, to be levelled at you.

61. Low-bred people, when they happen occasionally to be in good company,
imagine themselves to be the subject of every separate conversation. If any
part of the company whispers, it is about them; if they laugh, it is at them;
and if any thing is said which they do not comprehend, they immediately suppose
it is meant of them. This mistake is admirably ridiculed in o^ ^f our
celebrated comedies. " I am sure, says Scrub, they were talking of me, for they
laughed consumedly."

62. Now, a well-bred person never thinks himself disesteemed by the company,
or laughed at, unless their reflections are so gross, that he cannot be
supposed to mistake them, and his honor obliges him to resent it in a proper
manner; however, be assured, gentlemen never laugh at or ridicule one another,
unless they are in joke, or on a footing of the greatest intimacy. If such a
thing should happen once in an age, from some pert coxcomb, or some flippant
woman, it is better not to seem to know it, than make the least reply.

63. It is a piece of politeness not to interrupt a person in a story, whether
you have heard it before or not. Nay, if a well-bred man is asked whether he
has heard it, he will answer no, and let the person go on, though he knows it
already. Some are fond of telling a story, because they think they tell it
well, others pride themselves in being the first teller of it, and others are
pleased at being thought entrusted with it. Now, all these persons you would
disappoint by answering yes: and, as I have told you before, as the greatest
proof of politeness is to make every body happy about you, I would never
deprive a person of any secret satisfaction of this sort, when I could gratify
him by a minute's attention.

64. Be not ashamed of asking questions, if such questions lead to information;
always accompany them with some excuse, and you never will be reckoned
impertinent. But, abrupt questions, without some apology, by all means avoid,
as they imply design. There is a way of fishing for facts, which, if done
judiciously, will answer every purpose, such as taking things you wish to know
for granted; this will perhaps lead some officious person to set you right. So
again, by saying, you have heard so and so, and sometimes seeming to know more
than you do, you will often get at information, which you would lose by direct
questions, as these would put people upon their guard, and frequently defeat
the very end you aim at.

65. Make it a rule never to reflect on any body of people, for by this means
you will create a number of enemies. There are good and bad of all professions,
lawyers, soldiers, parsons or citizens. They are all men, subject to the same
passions, differing only in their manner, according to the way they have been
bred up in. For this reason, it is unjust as well as indiscreet to attack them
as a corpse collectively. Many a young man has thought himself extremely clever
in abusing the clergy. What are the clergy more than other men? Can you suppose
a black gown can make any alteration in his nature? Fie, fie; think seriously,
and I am convinced you will never do it.

66. But above all, let no example, no fashion, no witticism, no foolish desire
of arising above what knaves call prejudices, tempt you to excuse, extenuate or
ridicule the least breach of morality, but upon every occasion show the
greatest abhorrence of such proceedings, and hold virtue and religion in the
highest veneration.

It is a great piece of ill-manners to interrupt any one while speaking, by
speaking yourself, or calling off the attention of the company to any foreign
matter. But this every child knows.

67. The last thing I shall mention is that of concealing your learning, except
on particular occasions. Reserve this for learned men, and let them rather
extort it from you, than you be too willing to display it. Hence you will be
thought modest, and to have more knowledge than you really have. Never seem
wise or more learned than the company you are in. He who affects to show his
learning will be frequently questioned; and if found superficial, will be
sneered at; if otherwise, he will be deemed a pedant. Real merit will always
show itself, and nothing can lessen it in the opinion of the world, but a man's
exhibiting it himself.

For God's sake, revolve all these things seriously in your mind, before you go
abroad into life. Recollect the observations you have yourself occasionally
made upon men and things, compare them with my instructions, and act wisely and
consequentially, as they shall teach you.

The Vision of Mirza, exhibiting a Picture of Human Life.
[SPECTATOR, No. 159. ON the fifth day of the moon, which, according to the
custom of my forefathers, I always keep holy, after having washed myself, and
offered up my morning devotions, I ascended the high hills of Bagdat, in order
to pass the rest of the day in meditation and prayer. As I was here airing
myself on the tops of the mountains, I fell into a profound contemplation on
the vanity of human life; and passing from one thought to another, Surely, said
I, man is but a shadow, and life a dream.

2. Whilst I was thus musing, I cast my eyes toward the summit of a rock that
was not far from me, where I discovered one in the habit of a shepherd, with a
little musical instrument in his hand. As I looked upon him he applied it to
his lips, and began to play upon it. The sound of it was exceeding sweet, and
wrought into a variety of tunes that were inexpressibly melodious, and
altogether different from any thing I had ever heard: they put me in mind of
those heavenly airs that are played to the departed souls of good men upon
their first arrival in Paradise, to wear out the impressions of the last
agonies, and qualify them for the pleasures of that happy place. My heart
melted away in secret raptures.

3. I had been often told that the rock before me was the haunt of a genius;
and that several had been entertained with that music, who had passed by it,
but never heard that the musician had before made himself visible. When he had
raised my thoughts by those transporting airs which he played, to taste the
pleasures of his conversation, as I looked upon him like one astonished, he
beckoned to me, and by the waving of his hand directed me to approach the place
where he sat.

4. I drew near with that reverence which is due to a superior nature; and as
my heart was entirely subdued by the captivating strains I had heard, I fell
down at his feet and wept. The genius smiled upon me with a look of compassion
and affability that familiarized him to my imagination, and at once dispelled
all the fears and apprehensions with which I approached him. He lifted me from
the ground, and taking me by the hand, Mirza, said he, I have heard thee in thy
soliloquies: follow me.

5. He then led me to the highest pinnacle of the rock, and placing me on the
top of it, cast thy eyes eastward, said he, and tell me what thou see. I see,
said I, a huge valley, and a prodigious tide of water rolling through it. The
valley that thou see, said he, is the vale of misery, and the tide of water
that thou see is part of the great tide of eternity.

6. What is the reason, said I, that the tide I see rises out of a thick mist
at one end, and again loses itself in a thick mist at the other? What thou
see, said he, is that portion of eternity which is called time, measured out
by the sun, and reaching from the beginning of the world to its consummation.
Examine now, said he, this sea that is bounded with darkness at both ends, and
tell me what thou discoverest in it. I see a bridge, said I, standing in the
midst of the tide. The bridge thou see, said he, is human life; consider it
attentively.

7. Upon a more leisurely survey of it, I found that it consisted of threescore
and ten entire arches, with several broken arches, which, added to those that
were entire, made up the number about an hundred. As I was counting the arches,
the genius told me that this bridge consisted at first of a thousand arches;
but that a great flood swept away the test, and left the bridge in the ruinous
condition I now beheld it: but tell me further, said he, what thou discoverest
on it. I see multitudes of people passing over it, said I, and a black cloud
hanging on each end of it.

8. As I looked more attentively, I saw several of the passengers dropping
through the bridge, into the great tide that flowed underneath it; and upon
further examination, perceived there were innumerable trap-doors that lay
concealed in the bridge, which the passengers no sooner trod upon, but they
fell through them into the tide, and immediately disappeared. These hidden
pit-falls were set very thick at the entrance of the bridge, so that throngs of
people no sooner broke through the cloud, but many of them fell into them. They
grew thinner, toward the middle, but multiplied and lay closer together
toward the end of the arches that were entire.

9. There were indeed some persons, but their number was very small, that
continued a kind of hobbling march on the broken arches, but fell through one
after another, being quite tired and spent with so long a walk.

10. I passed some time in the contemplation of this wonderful structure, and
the great variety of objects which it presented. My heart was filled with a
deep melancholy to see several dropping unexpectedly in the midst of mirth and
jollity, and catching at every thing that stood by them to save themselves.
Some were looking up toward the heavens in a thoughtful posture, and in the
midst of a speculation stumbled and fell out of sight. Multitudes were very
busy in the pursuit of bubbles, that glittered in their eyes and danced before
them; but often when they thought themselves within the reach of them, their
footing failed and down they sunk.

11. In this confusion of objects, I observed some with scimitars in their
hands, and others with urinals, who ran to and fro upon the bridge, thrusting
several persons on trap-doors which did not seem to lie in their way, and which
they might have escaped had they not been thus forced upon them.

12. The genius seeing me indulge myself in this melancholy prospect, told me I
had dwelt long enough upon it: take thine eyes off the bridge, says he, and
tell me if thou see any thing thou do not comprehend. Upon looking up, what
mean, said I, those great flights of birds that are perpetually hovering about
the bridge, and settling upon it from time to time? I see vultures, harpies,
ravens, cormorants, and among many other feathered creatures several little
winged boys, that perch in great numbers upon the middle arches. These, said
the genius, are envy, avarice, superstition, despair, love, with the like cares
and passions that infest human life.

13. I here fetched a deep sigh: Alas, said I, man was made in vain! how is he
given away to misery and mortality! tortured in life, and swallowed up in
death! The genius being moved with compassion toward me, bid me quit so
uncomfortable a prospect. Look no more, said he, on man in the first stage of
his existence, in his setting out for eternity; but cast thine eye on that
thick mist into which the tide bears the several generations of mortals that
fall into it.

14. I directed my sight as I was ordered, and (whether or no the good genius
strengthened it with any supernatural force, or dissipated part of the mist
that was before too thick for the eye to penetrate) I saw the valley opening at
the farther end, and spreading forth into an immense ocean, that had a huge
rock of adamant running through the midst of it, and dividing it into two equal
parts. The clouds still rested on one half of it, insomuch that I could
discover nothing in it; but the other appeared to me a vast ocean planted with
innumerable islands, that were covered with fruits and flowers, and interwoven
with a thousand little shining seas that ran among them.

15. I could see persons dressed in glorious habits with garlands upon their
heads, passing among the trees, lying down by the sides of fountains, or
resting on beds of flowers: and could hear a confused harmony of singing birds,
falling waters, human voices, and musical instruments. Gladness grew in me at
the discovery of so delightful a scene. I wished for the wings of an eagle,
that I might fly away to those happy seats; but the genius told me, there was
no passage to them, except through the gates of death that I saw opening every
moment upon the bridge.

16. The islands, said he, that lie so fresh and green before thee, and with
which the whole face of the ocean appears spotted as far as thou can see, are
more in number than the sand on the sea shore; there are myriads of islands
behind those which thou here discoverest, reaching further than thine eye, or
even thine imagination can extend itself. These are the mansions of good men
after death, who, according to the degree and kinds of virtue in which they
excelled, are distributed among these several islands, which abound with
pleasures of different kinds, and degrees, suitable to the relishes and
perfections of those who are settled in them; every island is a paradise
accommodated to its respective inhabitants.

17. Are not these, O Mirza, habitations worth contending for? Does life appear
miserable, that gives thee opportunities of earning such a reward? Is death to
be feared that will convey thee to so happy an existence? Think not man was
made in vain, who has such an eternity reserved for him. I gazed with
inexpressible pleasure on these happy islands. At length, said I, show me now,
I beseech thee, the secrets that lie hid under those dark clouds, which cover
the ocean on the other side of the rock of adamant.

18. The genius making me no answer, I turned about to address myself to him a
second time, but I found that he had left me; I then turned again to the vision
which I had been so long contemplating: but instead of the rolling tide, the
arched bridge, and the happy islands, I saw nothing but the long hollow valley
of Bagdat, with oxen, sheep and camels grazing upon the sides of it.

Riches not productive of Happiness; the Story of Ortogrul of Basra.
[IDLER, No. 99. 1. AS Ortogrul of Basra was one day wandering along the
streets of Bagdat, musing on the varieties of merchandise which the shops
offered to his view, and observing the different occupations which busied the
multitudes on every side, he was awakened from the tranquillity of meditation by
a crowd that obstructed his passage. He raised his eyes and saw the chief
Vizier, who, having returned from the Divan, was entering his palace.

2. Ortogrul mingled with the attendants, and being supposed to have some
petition for the Vizier, was permitted to enter. He surveyed the spaciousness
of the apartments, admired the walls hung with golden tapestry, and the floors
covered with silken carpets, and despised the simple neatness of his own little
habitation.

3. Surely, said he to himself, this palace is the seat of happiness, where
pleasure succeeds to pleasure, and discontent and sorrow can have no admission.
Whatever nature has provided for the delight of sense, is here spread forth to
be enjoyed. What can mortals hope or imagine which the master of this palace
has not obtained? The dishes of luxury cover his table, the voice of harmony
lulls him in his bowers; he breathes the fragrance of the groves of Java, and
sleeps upon the down of the cygnets of Ganges. He speaks and his mandate is
obeyed; he wishes, and his wish is gratified! all whom he sees obey him, and
all whom he hears flatter him.

4. How different, Ortogrul, is thy condition, who art doomed to the perpetual
torments of unsatisfied desire, and who have no amusement in thy power that can
withhold thee from thy own reflections! They tell thee that thou art wise, but
what does wisdom avail with poverty? None will flatter the poor, and the wise
have very little power of flattering themselves. That man is surely the most
wretched of the sons of wretchedness who lives with his own faults and follies
always before him, and who has none to reconcile him to himself by praise and
veneration. I have long sought content and have not found it; I will from this
moment endeavor to be rich.

5. Full of his new resolution, he shut himself in his chamber for six months,
to deliberate how he should grow rich; he sometimes proposed to offer himself
as a counselor to one of the kings of India, and sometimes resolved ^o dig for
diamonds in the mines of Golconda. One day, after some hours passed in violent
fluctuation of opinion, sleep insensibly seized him in his chair; he dreamed
that he was ranging a desert country in search of some one that might teach him
to grow rich; and as he stood on the top of a hill shaded with sypress, in
doubt whither to direct his steps, his father appeared on a sudden standing
before him.

6. Ortogrul, said the old man, I know thy perplexity; listen to thy father;
turn thine eye on the opposite mountain. Ortogrul looked, and saw a torrent
tumbling down the rocks, roaring with the noise of thunder, and scattering its
foam on the impending woods. Now, said his father, behold the valley that lies
between the hills.

7. Ortogrul looked and espied a little well, out of which issued a small
rivulet. Tell me now, said his father, do thou wish for sudden affluence,
that may pour upon thee like the mountain torrent, or for a slow and gradual
increase, resembling the rill gliding from the well? Let me be quickly rich,
said Ortogrul; let the golden stream be quick and violent.

8. Look round thee, said his father, once again. Ortogrul looked, and
perceived the channel of the torrent dry and dusty; but following the rivulet
from the well, he traced it to a wide lake, which the supply, slow and
constant, kept always full. He waked, and determined to grow rich by silent
profit and persevering industry.

9. Having sold his patrimony, he engaged in merchandise, and in twenty years
purchased lands on which he raised a house, equal in sumptuousness to that of
the Vizier, to which he invited all the ministers of pleasure, expecting to
enjoy all the felicity which he had imagined riches able to afford. Leisure
soon made him weary of himself, and he longed to be persuaded that he was great
and happy. He was courteous and liberal; he gave all that approached him hopes
of pleasing him, and all who should please him hopes of being rewarded. Every
art of praise was tried, and every source of adulatory fiction was exhausted.

10. Ortogrul heard his flatterers without delight, because he found himself
unable to believe them. His own heart told him its frailties, his own
understanding reproached him with his faults. How long, said he, with a deep
sigh, have I been laboring in vain to amass wealth which at last is useless!
Let no man hereafter wish to be rich, who is already too wise to be flattered.

APPENDIX.
ROMULUS the founder of Rome, after building the city, resolved to submit the
form of its government to the choice of the people; and therefore, calling the
citizens together, he harangued them thus.

IF all the strength of cities lay in the height of their ramparts, or the
depth of their ditches, we should have great reason to be in fear for that
which we have now built. Are there in reality any walls too high to be scaled
by a valiant enemy? And of what use are ramparts in intestine divisions? They
may serve for a defense against sudden incursions from abroad: But it is by
courage and prudence chiefly, that the invasions of foreign enemies are
repelled; and by unanimity, sobriety, and justice, that domestic seditions are
prevented. Cities fortified by the strongest bulwarks, have been often seen to
yield to force from without, or to tumults from within. An exact military
discipline, and a steady observance of civil polity, are the surest barriers
against these evils. But there is still another point of great importance to be
considered. The prosperity of some rising colonies, and the speedy ruin of
others, have in a great measure been owing to their form of government. Was
there but one manner of ruling states and cities that could make you happy, the
choice would not be difficult; but I have learnt, that of the various forms of
government among the Greeks and Barbarians, there are three which are highly
extolled by those who have experienced them; and yet, that no one of those is
in all respects perfect; but each of them has some innate and incurable defect.
Choose you then in what manner this city shall be governed. Shall it be by one
man? Shall it be by a select number of the wisest among us? or shall the
legislative power be in the people? As for me, I shall submit to whatever form
of administration you shall please to establish. As I think myself not unworthy
to command, so neither am I unwilling to obey. Your having chosen me to be the
leader of this colony, and your calling the city after my name, are honors
sufficient to content me; honors of which, living or dead, I can never be
deprived.

While Quinctius Capitolinus and Agrippa Furius were Consuls at Rome, the
differences betwixt the Senate and people ran so high, that the Aequi and
Volsci, taking advantage of their intestine disorders, ravaged the country to
the very gates of Rome, and the Tribunes of the people forbad the necessary
levies of troops to oppose them. Quinctius, a Senator of great reputation, well
beloved, and now in his fourth consulate, got the better of this opposition by
the following speech.

THOUGH I am not conscious, O Romans, of any crime by me committed, it is yet
with the utmost shame and confusion that I appear in your assembly. You have
seen it -- Posterity will know it. In the fourth consulship of Titus Quinctius,
the Aequi and Volsci (scarce a match for the Hernici alone) came in arms to the
very gates of Rome, and went away unchastised! The course of our manners
indeed, and the state of our affairs, have long been such, that I had no reason
to presage much good: But could I have imagined, that so great an ignominy
wo^ld have befallen me this year, I would by death or banishment (if all the
other means had failed) have avoided the station I am now in* What! might Rome
then have been taken, if those men who were at our gates had not wanted courage
for the attempt! -- Rome taken while I was consul. -- Of honors I had
sufficient, -- of life enough, -- more than enough. -- I should have died in my
third consulate. But who are they that our dastardly enemies thus despise! The
consuls, or you, Romans? If we are in the fault, depose us, or punish us yet
more severely. If you are to blame, may neither God nor man punish your faults!
only may you repent. No, Romans, the confidence of our enemies is not owing to
their courage, or to their belief of your cowardice. They have been too often
vanquished, not to know both themselves and you. Discord, discord is the ruin
of this city. The eternal disputes between the senate and the people, are the
sole cause of our misfortunes. While we set no bounds to our dominion, nor you
to your liberty: While you impatiently endure patrician magistrates, and we
plebeian, our enemies take heart, grow elated and presumptuous. In the name of
the immortal gods, what is it, Romans, you would have? You desired tribunes;
for the sake of peace we granted them. You were eager to have decemvirs, we
consented to their creation. You grew weary of these decemvirs, we obliged them
to abdicate. Your hatred pursued them when reduced to private men; and we
suffered you to put to death, or banish, patricians of the first rank in the
republic. You insisted upon the restoration of the tribuneship, we yielded; we
quietly saw consuls of your faction elected. You have the protection of your
tribunes, and the privilege of appeal; the patricians are subjected to the
decrees of the commons. Under pretense of equal and impartial laws, you have
invaded our rights, and we have suffered it, and we still suffer it. When shall
we see an end of discord! When shall we have one interest and one common
country? Victorious and triumphant, you show less temper than we under defeat.
When you are to contend with us, you seize the Aventine hill, you can possess
yourselves of the Mons Sacer.

The enemy is at our gates, the Aesquiline is near being taken, and nobody
stirs to hinder it. But against us you are valiant, against us you can arm with
diligence. Come on, then, besi^ge the senate house, make a camp of the forum,
fill the jails with our nobles, and when you have achieved these glorious
exploits, then at last sally out at the Aesquiline gate, with the same fierce
spirits against the enemy. Does your resolution fail you for this? go then, and
behold from your walls, your lands ravaged, your houses plundered and in
flames, the whole country laid waste with fire and sword. Have you any thing
here to repair these damages? Will the tribunes make up your losses to you?
They Will give you as many words as you please: Bring impeachments in abundance
against the prime men of the state: Heap laws upon laws; assemblies you shall
have without end. But will any of you return the richer from these assemblies?
Extinguish, O Romans, those fatal divisions; generously break this cursed
enchantment, which keeps you buried in a scandalous inaction. Open your eyes,
and consider the management of these ambitious men, who, to make themselves
powerful in their party, study nothing but how they may foment divisions in the
commonwealth.

If you can but summon up your former courage, if you will now march out of
Rome with your consuls, there is no punishment you can inflict, which I will
not submit to, if I do not in a few days drive these pillagers out of our
territory. This terror of war (with which you seem so grievously struck) shall
quickly be removed from Rome to their own cities.

CAIUS MARIUS TO THE ROMANS.
IT is but too common, my countrymen, to observe a material difference, between
the behavior of those, who stand candidates for places of power and trust,
before, and after their obtaining them. They solicit them, in one manner; and
execute them, in another. They set out, with a great appearance of activity,
humility, and moderation; and they, quickly, fall into sloth, pride, and
avarice. -- It is, undoubtedly, no easy matter, to discharge, to the general
satisfaction, the duty of a supreme commander in troublesome times. I am, I
hope, duly sensible of the importance of the office I propose to take upon me,
for the service of my country. To carry on, with effect, an expensive war, and
yet be frugal of the public money; to oblige those to serve, whom it may be
delicate to offend; to conduct, at the same time, a complicated variety of
operations; to concert measures at home, answerable to the state of things
abroad; and to gain every valuable end, in spite of opposition from the
envious, the factious, and the disaffected; to do all this, my countrymen, is
more difficult, than is generally thought.

But, besides the disadvantages, which are common to me, with all others in
eminent stations, my case is, in this respect, peculiarly hard; that, whereas a
commander of Patrician rank, if he is guilty of a neglect, or breach of duty,
has his great connections, the antiquity of his family, the important services
of his ancestors, and the multitudes he has, by power, engaged in his interest,
to screen him from condign punishment; my whole safety depends upon myself:
which renders it the more indispensibly necessary for me, to take care that my
conduct be clear and unexceptionable. Besides, I am well aware, my countrymen,
that the eye of the public is upon me; and that, though the impartial, who
prefer the real advantage of the commonwealth to all other considerations,
favor my pretensions, the Patricians want nothing so much, as an occasion
against me. It is, therefore, my fixed resolution, to use my best endeavors,
that you be not disappointed in me, and that their indirect designs against me
may be defeated.

I have from my youth, been familiar with toils, and with dangers. I was
faithful to your interests, my countrymen, when I served you for no reward, but
that of honor. It is not my design to betray you, now that you have conferred
upon me a place of profit. You have committed to my conduct, the war against
Jugurtha. The Patricians are offended at this. But, where would be the wisdom
of giving such a command to one of their honorable body? a person of
illustrious birth, of ancient family, of innumerable statues, but -- of no
experience! What service would his long line of dead ancestors, or his
multitude of motionless statues, do his country in the day of battle? What
could such a general do, but, in his trepidation and inexperience, have
recourse to some inferior commander, for direction in difficulties to which he
was not himself equal? Thus, your Patrician general would, in fact, have a
general over him; so that, the acting commander would still be a Plebeian. So
true is this, my countrymen, that I have, myself, known those, who have been
chosen consuls, begin, then, to read the history of their own country, of
which, till that time, they were totally ignorant: that is, they first obtained
the employment, and then bethought themselves of the qualifications necessary
for the proper discharge of it.

I submit to your judgment, Romans, on which side the advantage lies, when a
comparison is made between Patrician haughtiness, and Plebeian experience. The
very actions, which they have only read, I have partly seen, and partly myself
achieved. What they know by reading, I know by action. They are pleased to
slight my mean birth: I despise their mean characters. Want of birth and
fortune, is the objection against me: want of personal worth, against them. But
are not all men of the same species? What can make a difference between one man
and another, but the endowments of the mind? For my part, I shall always look
upon the bravest man as the noblest man. Suppose it were enquired of the
fathers of such Patricians as Albinus and Bestia, whether, if they had their
choice, they would desire sons of their character, or of mine* what would they
answer, but that they should wish the worthiest to be their sons? If the
Patricians have reason to despise me, let them, likewise, despise their
ancestors, whose nobility was the fruit of their virtue. Do they envy the
honors bestowed upon me? Let them envy, likewise, my labors, my abstinence,
and the dangers I have undergone for my country, by which I have acquired them.
But those worthless men, lead such a life of inactivity, as if they despised
any honors you can bestow; whilst they aspire to honors, as if they had
deserved them by the most industrious virtue. They lay claim to the rewards of
activity, for their having enjoyed the pleasures of luxury. Yet none can be
more lavish tha^ they are, in praise of their ancestors. And they imagine they
honor themselves, by celebrating their forefathers. Whereas, they do the very
contrary. For, as much as their ancestors were distinguished for their virtues,
so much are they disgraced by their vices.

Observe, now, my countrymen, the injustice of the Patricians. They arrogate to
themselves, honors, on account of the exploits done by their forefathers;
whilst they will not allow me the due praise, for performing the very same sort
of actions, in my own person. He has no statues, they cry, of his family. He
can trace no venerable line of ancestors. What the^! Is it matter of more
praise to disgrace one's illustrious ancestors, than to become illustrious by
one's own good behavior? What if I can show no statues of my family? I can
show the standards, the armor, and the trappings, which I have myself taken
from the vanquished: I can show the scars of those wounds, which I have
received by facing the enemies of my country. These are my statues. These are
the honors I boast of. Not left me by inheritance, as theirs: but earned by
toil, by abstinence, by valor; amidst clouds of dust, and seas of blood:
scenes of action, where those effeminate Patricians, who endeavor by indirect
means to depreciate me in your esteem, have never dared to show their faces.

DEMOSTHENES TO THE ATHENIANS.
WHEN I compare, Athenians, the speeches of some amongst us, with their
actions, I am at a loss to reconcile what I see, with what I hear. Their
protestations are full of zeal against the public enemy; but their measures are
so inconsistent, that all their professions become suspected. By confounding
you with a variety of projects, they perplex your resolutions; and lead you
from executing what is in your power, by engaging you in schemes not reducible
to practice.

It Is true, there was a time, when we were powerful enough, not only to defend
our own borders, and protect our allies, but even to invade Philip in his own
dominions. Yes, Athenians, there was such a juncture; I remember it well. But,
by neglect of proper opportunities, we are no longer in a situation to be
invaders: it will be well for us, if we can provide for our own defense, and
our allies. Never did any conjuncture require so much prudence as this.
However, I should not despair of seasonable remedies, had I the art to prevail
with you to be unanimous in right measures. The opportunities, which have so
often escaped us, have not been lost, through ignorance, or want of judgment;
but through negligence, or treachery. -- If I assume, at this time, more than
ordinary liberty of speech, I conjure you to suffer, patiently, those truths,
which have no other end, but your own good. You have too many reasons to be
sensible, how much you have suffered, by harkening to sycophants. I shall,
therefore, be plain, in laying before you the grounds of past miscarriages, in
order to correct you in your future conduct.

You may remember, it is not above three or four years, since we had the news
of Philip's laying siege to the fortress of Juno in Thrace. It was, as I think,
in October we received this intelligence. We voted an immediate supply of
threescore talents: forty men of war were ordered to sea: and so zealous we
were, that preferring the necessities of state to our very laws, our citizens
above the age of five-and-forty years, were commanded to serve. What followed?
-- A whole year was spent idly, without any thing done; and it was but the
third month of the following year, a little after the celebration of the feast
of Ceres, that Charedemus set sail, furnished with no more than five talents,
and ten galleys not half-manned.

A rumor was spread, that Philip was sick. That rumor was followed by
another, that Philip was dead. And, then, as if all danger died with him, you
dropped your preparations: whereas, then, then was your time to push, and be
active; then was your time to secure yourselves, and confound him at once. Had
your resolutions, taken with so much heat, been as warmly seconded by action,
you had then been as terrible to Philip, as Philip, recovered, is now to you.
"To what purpose, at this time, these reflections? What is done, cannot be
undone." But, by your leave, Athenians, though past moments are not to be
recalled, past errors may be repeated. Have we not, now, a fresh provocation to
war? Let the memory of oversights, by which you have suffered so much, instruct
you to be more vigilant in the present danger. If the Olynthians are not
instantly succored, and with your utmost efforts, you become assistants to
Philip, and serve him more effectually, than he can help himself.

It is not, surely, necessary to warn you, that votes alone, can be of no
consequence. Had your resolutions, of themselves, the virtue to compass what
you intend, we should not see them multiply every day, as they do, and upon
every occasion, with so little effect: nor would Philip be in a condition to
brave and affront us in this manner. -- Proceed, then, Athenians, to support
your deliberations with vigor. You have heads, capable of advising what is
best; you have judgment and experience, to discern what is right; and you have
power and opportunity, to execute what you determine. What time so proper for
action? What occasion so happy? And when can you hope for such another, if this
be neglected? Has not Philip, contrary to all treaties, insulted you in Thrace?
Does he not, at this instant, straiten and invade your confederates, whom you
have solemnly sworn to protect? Is he not an implacable enemy? a faithless
ally? the usurper of provinces, to which has no title nor pretense? a stranger,
a barbarian, a tyrant? and, indeed, what is he not?

Observe, I beseech you, men of Athens, how different your conduct appears,
from the practices of your ancestors. They were friends to truth and plain
dealing, and detested flattery and servile compliance. By unanimous consent,
they continued arbiters of all Greece, for the space of forty-five years,
without interruption: a public fund, of no less than ten thousand talents, was
ready for any emergency: they exercised over the kings of Macedon, that
authority which is due to barbarians; obtained both by sea and land, in their
own persons, frequent and signal victories; and by their noble exploits,
transmitted to posterity, an immortal memory of their virtue, ^perior to the
reach of malice and detraction. It is to them we owe that great number of
public edifices, by which the city of Athens exceeds all the rest of the world,
in beauty and magnificence. It is to them we owe so many stately temples, so
richly embellished; but, above all, adorned with the spoils of vanquished
enemies. -- But, visit their own private habitations. Visit the houses of
Aristides, Militiades, or any other of those patriots of antiquity; you will
find nothing, not the least mark or ornament, to distinguish them from their
neighbors. They took part in the government, not to enrich themselves, but the
public; they had no schemes or ambition, but for the public; nor knew any
interest, but the public. It was by a close and steady application to the
general good of their country; by an exemplary piety toward the immortal gods;
by a strict faith, and religious honesty, betwixt man and man; and a
moderation, always uniform, and of a piece; they established that reputation,
which remains to this day, and will last to utmost posterity.

Such, O men of Athens! were your ancestors: so glorious in the eye of the
world; so bountiful and munificent to their country; so sparing, so modest, so
self-denying to themselves. What resemblance can we find, in the present
generation, of these great men? At a time, when your ancient competitors have
left you a clear stage; when the Lacedaemonians are disabled; the Thebans
employed in troubles of their own; when no other state whatever is in a
condition to rival or molest you; in short, when you are at full liberty; when
you have the opportunity and the power to become once more the sole arbiters of
Greece; you permit, patiently, whole provinces to be wrested from you; you
lavish the public money to scandalous and obscure uses; you suffer your allies
to perish in time of peace, whom you preserved in time of war; and, to sum up
all, you yourselves, by your mercenary court, and servile resignation to the
will and pleasure of designing, insidious leaders, abe^, encourage, and
strengthen the most dangerous and formidable of your enemies. Yes, Athenians, I
repeat it, you yourselves are the contrivers of your own ruin. Lives there a
man who has confidence enough to deny it? let him arise, and assign, if he can,
any other cause of the success and prosperity of Philip. "But," you reply,
"what Athens may have lost in reputation abroad, she has gained in splendour at
home. Was there ever a greater appearance of prosperity? a greater face of
plenty? Is not the city enlarged? Are not the streets better paved? houses
repaired and beautified?" -- Away with such trifles! Shall I be paid with
counters? An old square new vamped up! a fountain! an aqueduct! Are these
acquisitions to brag of? Cast your eye upon the magistrate, under whose
ministry you boast these precious improvements. Behold the despicable creature,
raised, all at once, from dirt, to opulence; from the lowest obscurity, to the
highest honors. Have not some of these upstarts built private houses and
seats, vying with the most sumptuous of our public palaces? And how have their
fortunes and their power increased, but as the commonwealth has been ruined and
impoverished!

To what are we to impute these disorders? and to what cause assign the decay
of a state, so powerful and flourishing in past time? -- The reason is plain.
The servant is now become the master. The magistrate was then subservient to
the people: punishments and rewards, were properties of the people: all
honors, dignities, and preferments, were disposed by the voice and favor of
the people. But the magistrate, now, has usurped the right of the people, and
exercises an arbitrary authority over his ancient and natural lord. You
miserable people! the mean while, without money, without friends; from being
the ruler, are become the servant; from being the master, the dependant; happy
that these governors, into whose hands you have thus resigned your own power,
are so good, and so gracious, as to continue your poor allowance to see plays.

Believe me, Athenians, if, recovering from this lethargy, you would assume the
ancient freedom and spirit of your fathers; if you would be your own soldiers,
and your own commanders, confiding no longer your affairs in foreign or
mercenary hands; if you would charge yourselves with your own defense,
employing abroad, for the public, what you waste in unprofitable pleasures at
home; the world might, once more, behold you making a figure worthy of
Athenians. You would have us then (you say) do service in our armies, in our
own persons; and for so doing, you would have the pensions we receive in time
of peace, accepted as pay in time of war. Is it thus we are to understand you?
-- Yes, Athenians, it is my plain meaning. I would make it a standing rule, that
no person, great or little, should be the better for the public money, who
should grudge to employ it for the public service. Are we in peace? the public
is charged with your subsistence. Are we in war, or under a necessity, as at
this time, to enter into a war? let your gratitude oblige you to accept, as
pay, in defense of your benefactors, what you receive, in peace, as mere
bounty. -- Thus, without any innovation; without altering or abolishing any
thing, but pernicious novelties, introduced for the encouragement of sloth and
idleness; by converting only for the future, the same funds, for the use of the
serviceable, which are spent, at present, upon the unprofitable; you may be
well served in your armies; your troops regularly paid; justice duly
administered; the public revenues reformed, and increased; and every member of
the commonwealth, rendered useful to his country, according to his age and
ability, without any further burden to the state.

This, O men of Athens! is what my duty prompted me to represent to you upon
this occasion. -- May the gods inspire you to determine upon such measures, as
may be most expedient, for the particular and general good of our country!

The PERFECT SPEAKER.
IMAGINE to yourselves, a demosthenes, addressing the most illustrious assembly
in the world, upon a point, whereon the fate of the most illustrious of
nations, depended. -- How awful such a meeting! How vast the subject! Is man
possessed of talents adequate to the great occasion? Adequate -- yes, superior.
By the power of his eloquence, the augustness of the assembly is lost, in the
dignity of the orator; and the importance of the subject, for a while,
superseded, by the admiration of his talents. -- With what strength of
argument, with what powers of the fancy, with what emotions of the heart, does
he assault and subjugate the whole man, and, at once, captivate his reason, his
imagination, and his passions! -- To effect this, must be the utmost effort, of
the most improved state of human nature* -- Not a faculty that he possesses, is
here unemployed: not a faculty that he possesses, but is here exerted to its
highest pitch. All his internal powers, are at work: all his external, testify
their energies. Within, the memory, the fancy, the judgment, the passions are
all busy: without, every muscle, every nerve, is exerted; not a feature, not a
limb, but speaks. The organs of the body attuned to the exertions of the mind,
through the kindred organs of the hearers, instantaneously, and, as it were, with
an electrical spirit, vibrate those energies from soul to soul. --
Notwithstanding the diversity of minds in such a multitude, by the lightning of
eloquence, they are melted into one mass -- the whole assembly, actuated in one
and the same way, become, as it were, but one man, and have but one voice. --
The universal cry is -- LET US MARCH AGAINST PHILIP -- LET US FIGHT FOR OUR
LIBERTIES -- LET US CONQUER -- OR DIE!

On the Duties of Schoolboys, from the pious and judicious ROLLIN.
QUintillian says, that he has included almost all the duty of scholars in this
one piece of advice which he gives them, to love those who teach them, as they
love the sciences which they learn of them; and to look upon them as fathers,
from whom they derive not the life of the body, but that instruction which is
in a manner the life of the soul. Indeed this sentiment of affection and
respect suffices to make them apt to learn during the time of their studies,
and full of gratitude all the rest of their lives. It seems to me to include a
great part of what is to be expected from them.

Docility, which consists in submitting to directions, in readily receiving the
instructions of their masters, and reducing them to practice, is properly the
virtue of scholars, as that of masters is to teach well. The one can do nothing
without the other; and as it is not sufficient for a labourer to sow the seed,
unless the earth, after having opened its bosom to receive it, in a manner
hatches, warms, and moistens it; so likewise the whole fruit of instruction
depends upon a good correspondence between the masters and the scholars.

Gratitude for those who have labored in our education, is the character of an
honest man, and the mark of a good heart. Who is there among us, says Cicero,
that has been instructed with any care, that is not highly delighted with the
sight, or even the bare remembrance of his preceptors, masters, and the place
where he was taught and brought up? Seneca exhorts young men to preserve always
a great respect for their masters, to whose care they are indebted for the
amendment of their faults, and for having imbibed sentiments of honor and
probity. Their exactness and severity displease sometimes, at an age when we
are not in a condition to judge of the obligations we owe to them; but when
years have ripened our understanding and judgment, we then discern that what
made us dislike them, I mean admonitions, reprimands, and a severe exactness in
restraining the passions of an imprudent and inconsiderate age, is expressly
the very thing which should make us esteem and love them. Thus we see that
Marcus Aurelius, one of the wisest and most illustrious emperors that Rome ever
had, thanked the gods for two things especially -- for his having had excellent
tutors himself, and that he had found the like for his children.

Quintillian, after having noted the different characters of the mind in
children, draws, in a few words, the image of what he judged to be a perfect
scholar; and certainly it is a very amiable one: "For my part," says he, "I
like a child who is encouraged by commendation, is animated by a sense of
glory, and weeps when he is outdone. A noble emulation will always keep him in
exercise, a reprimand will touch him to the quick, and honor will serve
instead of a spur. We need not fear that such a scholar will ever give himself
up to sullenness." Mihi ille detur puer, quem laus excitet, quem gloria juvet,
qui virtus fleat. Hic erit alendus ambitu: hunc mordebit objurgatio; hunc honor
excitabit: in hoc desidiam nunquam verebor.

How great a value soever Quintillian sets upon the talents of the mind, he
esteems those of the heart far beyond them, and looks upon the others as of no
value without them. In the same chapter from whence I took the preceding
words, he declares, he should never have a good opinion of a child, who placed
his study in occasioning laughter, by mimicking the behavior, mien, and faults
of others; and he presently gives an admirable reason for it: "A child," says
he, "cannot be truly ingenious, in my opinion, unless he be good and virtuous;
otherwise, I should rather choose to have him dull and heavy than of a bad
disposition." Non dabit spem bonae indolis, qui hoc imitandi studio petet, ut
rideatur. Nam probus quoque imprimis erit ille vere ingeniosus: alioqui non
pejus duxerim tardi esse ingenii, quam mali.

He displays to us all these talents in the eldest of his two children, whose
character he draws, and whose death he laments in so eloquent and pathetic a
strain, in the beautiful preface to his sixth book. I shall beg leave to insert
here a small extract of it, which will not be useless to the boys, as they will
find it a model which suits well with their age and condition.

After having mentioned his younger son, who died at five years old, and
described the graces and beauties of his countenance, the prettiness of his
expressions, the vivacity of his understanding, which began to shine through
the veil of childhood; "I had still left me," says he, "my son Quintillian, in
whom I placed all my pleasure and all my hopes, and comfort enough I might have
found in him: for, having now entered into his tenth year, he did not produce
only blossoms like his younger brother, but fruits already formed, and beyond
the power of disappointment. -- I have much experience; but I never saw in any
child, I do not say only so many excellent dispositions for the sciences, nor
so much taste, as his masters know, but so much probity, sweetness,
goodnature, gentleness, and inclination to please and oblige, as I discerned
in him.

"Besides this, he had all the advantages of nature, a charming voice, a
pleasing countenance, and a surprising facility in pronouncing well the two
languages, as if he had been equally born for both of them.

"But all this was no more than hopes. I set a greater value upon his admirable
virtues, his equality of temper, his resolution, the courage with which he bore
up against fear and pain; for, how were his physicians astonished at his
patience under a distemper of eight months continuance, when at the point of
death he comforted me himself, and bade me not to weep for him! and delirious
as he sometimes was at his last moments, his tongue ran of nothing else but
learning and the sciences: O vain and deceitful hopes! etc.

Are there many boys amongst us, of whom we car truly say so much to their
advantage, as Quintillian says here of his son? What a shame would it be for
them, if born and brought up in a Christian country, they had not even the
virtues of Pagan children! I make no scruple to repeat them here again --
docility, obedience, respect for their masters, or rather a degree of
affection, and the source of an eternal gratitude; zeal for study, and a
wonderful thirst after the sciences, joined to an abhorrence of vice and
irregularity; an admirable fund of probity, goodness, gentleness, civility, and
liberality: as also patience, courage, and greatness of soul in the course of a
long sickness. What then was wanting to all these virtues? -- That which alone
could render them truly worthy the name, and must be in a manner the soul of
them, and constitute their whole value, the precious gift of faith and piety;
the saving knowledge of a Mediator; a sincere desire of pleasing God, and
referring all our actions to him.

HYMNS.
HYMN I.
BEGIN the high celestial strain,
My ravished soul and sing
A solemn hymn of grateful praise
To heaven's Almighty King.
Ye curling fountains as ye roll
Your silver waves along,
Whisper to all your verdant shores
The subject of my song.
Retain it long ye echoing rocks,
The sacred sound retain,
And from your hollow winding caves
Return it often again.
Bear it, ye winds, on all your wings
To distant climes away,
And round the wide-extended world
My lofty theme convey.
Take the glad burden of his name,
Ye clouds, as you rise,
Whether to deck the golden morn,
Or shade the evening skies.
Let harmless thunders roll along
The smooth etherial plain,
And answer from the crystal vault
To every flying strain.
Long let it warble round the spheres
And echo through the sky,
Till angels, with immortal skill,
Improve the harmony.
While I, with sacred rapture fired,
The blessed Creator sing,
And warble consecrated lays
To heaven's Almighty King.
HYMN II. On HEAVEN.
HAIL, sacred Salem! placed on high,
Seat of the mighty King,
What thought can grasp thy boundless bliss!
What tongue thy glories sing?
Thy crystal towers and palaces
Magnificently rise,
And dart their beauteous luster round
The empyrean skies.
The voice of triumph in thy streets
And acclamations sound:
Gay banquets in thy splendid courts,
And purest joys abound.
Bright smiles on every face appear,
Rapture in every eye:
From every mouth glad anthems flow,
And charming harmony.
Illustrious day for ever there
Streams from the face divine;
No pale-faced moon ever glimmers forth,
Nor stars, nor sun decline.
No scorching heats, no piercing colds,
The changing seasons bring;
But over the fields mild breezes there
Breathe an eternal spring.
The flowers with lasting beauty shine,
And deck the smiling ground:
While flowing streams of pleasure all
The happy plains surround.
HYMN III. The CREATION.
NOW let the spacious world arise,
Said the Creator Lord:
At once the obedient earth and skies
Rose at his sovereign word.
Dark was the deep, the waters lay
Confused, and drowned the land:
He called the light, the newborn day
Attends on his command.
He bids the clouds ascend on high:
The clouds ascend, and bear
A watery treasure to the sky,
And float on softer air.
The liquid element below,
Was gathered by his hand;
The rolling seas together flow,
And leave a solid land.
With herbs and plants (a flowery birth)
The naked globe he crow^'d,
Ere there was rain to bless t^ ^rth.
Or sun to warm the groun^
Then he adorned the upper skies,
Behold the sun appears;
The moon and stars in order rise,
To mark our months and years.
Out of the deep the Almighty King
Did vital beings frame,
And painted fowls of every wing,
And fish of every name.
He gave the lion and the worm
At once their wondrous birth:
And grazing beasts of various form
Rose from the teeming earth.
Adam was formed of equal clay,
The sovereign of the rest;
Designed for nobler ends than they,
With God's own image blessed.
Thus glorious in the Maker's eye
The young creation stood;
He saw the building from on high,
His word pronounced it good.
The LORD's PRAYER.
FATHER of all! We bow to thee,
Who dwells in heaven adored;
But present still through all thy works
The universal Lord.
All hallowed be thy sacred name,
Over all the nations known;
Advance the kingdom of thy grace,
And let thy glory come.
A grateful homage may we yield,
With hearts resigned to thee;
And as in heaven thy will is done,
On earth so let it be.
From day to day we humbly own
The hand that feeds us still:
Give us our bread, and we may rest
Contented in thy will.
Our sins and trespasses we own;
O may they be forgiven!
That mercy we to others show,
We pray the like from Heaven.
Our life let still thy grace direct,
From evil guard our way,
And in temptation's fatal path
Permit us not to stray.
For thine the power, the kingdom thine,
All glory's due to thee:
Thine from eternity they were,
And thine shall ever be.
The UNIVERSAL PRAYER.
By Mr. POPE.
FATHER of all, in every age,
In every clime adored,
By saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!
Thou great First Cause, least understood;
Who all my sense confined
To know but this, that thou art good.
And that myself am blind:
Yet give me in this dark estate,
To see the good from ill;
And binding Nature fast in fate,
Left free the human will.
What Conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not to do,
This, teach me more than hell to shun,
That, more than heaven pursue.
What blessings thy free bounty gives,
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid when Man receives,
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to earth's contracted span
Thy goodness let me bound,
Or think thee Lord alone of Man,
When thousand worlds are round:
Let not this weak unknowing hand
Presume thy bolts to throw,
And deal damnation round the land,
On each I judge thy foe.
If I am right, thy grace impart,
Still in the right to stay;
If I am wrong, O teach my heart
To find that better way.
Save me alike from foolish pride,
Or impious discontent,
At aught thy wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy goodness lent.
Teach me to feel another's woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mean though I am; not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy breath;
Oh lead me wheresoe'er I go,
Through this day's life or death.
This day be bread and peace my lot:
All else beneath the sun,
Thou know if best bestowed or not,
And let thy will be done.
To thee, whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth, sea, skies!
One chorus let all being raise!
All nature's incense rise!
CHARACTER OF MAN.
KNOW thou thyself; presume not God to scan:
The proper study of mankind, is man
Placed on this isthmus of a middle state,
A being, darkly wise, and rudely great:
With too much knowledge for the skeptic side,
With too much weakness for the stoic's pride.
He hangs between; in doubt, to act, or rest,
In doubt, to deem himself a God, or beast;
In doubt, his mind or body to prefer;
Born, but to die; and reasoning, but to err:
Chaos of thought and passion, all confused;
Still by himself abused, or disabus'd:
Created, half to rise, and half to fall;
Great lord of all things, yet a prey to all:
Sole judge of truth, in endless error hurled;
The glory, jest, and riddle of the world!
WINTER.
SEE! Winter comes, to rule the varied year,
Sullen and sad, with all his rising train,
Vapors, and clounds, and storms. Be these my theme;
These, that exalt the soul to solemn thought,
And heavenly musing. Welcome, kindred glooms!
Congenial horrors, hail! With frequent foot,
Pleased, have I, in my cheerful morn of life,
When, nursed by careless solitude, I lived,
And sung of nature with unceasing joy,
Pleased, have I wandered through your rough domain;
Trod the poor virgin-snows, myself as pure;
Heard the winds roar, and the big torrent burst;
Or seen the deep fermenting tempest brewed
In the grim evening-sky. Thus passed the time,
Till, through the lucid chambers of the south,
Looked out the joyous Spring, looked out, and smiled.
DOUGLAS'S ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF.
MY name is Norval. On the Grampian hills
My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I longed
To follow to the field some warlike lord:
And heaven soon granted, what my sire denied.
This moon which rose, last night, round as my shield,
Had not yet filled her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rushed, like a torrent, down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety and for succor. I alone,
With bended bow, and quiver full of arrows,
Hovered about the enemy, and marked
The road he took: then, hasted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
'Till we o'ertook the spoil-encomber'd foe.
We fought -- and conquered. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow, from my bow, had pierced their chief;
Who wore, that day, the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in trium^h, I disdained
The shepherd's slothful life: and having heard,
That our good king had summoned his bold peers,
To lead their warriors to the Carron side,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps --
You trembling coward who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I passed these towers;
And, heaven-directed, came this day, to do
The happy deed, that gilds my humble name.
DOUGLAS'S ACCOUNT OF THE MANNER IN WHICH HE LEARNED THE ART OF WAR.
BENEATH a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by shepherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit lived; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wandering swains.
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to see him, and my heart was touched
With reverence and with pity. Mild he spoke.
And, entering on discourse, such stories told,
As made me often revisit his sad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Against the usurping infidel displayed
The blessed cross, and won the Holy Land.
Pleased with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would shake
His years away, and act his young encounters.
Then, having shown his wounds, he would sit him down,
And, all the live long day, discourse of war.
To help my fancy, in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshalled hosts;
Described the motions, and explained the use,
Of the deep column, and the lengthened line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm:
For, all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.
Unhappy man!
Returning homewards by Messina's port,
Loaded with wealth and honors bravely won,
A rude and boisterous captain of the sea
Fastened a quarrel on him. Fierce they fought;
The stranger fell, and with his dying breath
Declared his name and lineage! Mighty God!
The soldier cried, my brother! Oh! my brother!
They exchanged forgiveness:
And happy, in my mind, was he that died:
For many deaths has the survivor suffered.
In the wild desert on a rock he sits,
Or on some nameless stream's untrodden banks,
And ruminates all day his dreadful fate.
At times, alas! not in his perfect mind!
Holds dialogues with his loved brother's ghost;
And often each night forsakes his sullen couch,
To make sad orisons for him he flew.
BAUCIS AND PHILEMON.
IN ancient times, as story tells,
The saints would often leave their cells,
And stroll about; but hide their quality,
To try good people's hospitality.
It happened, on a winter night,
As authors of the legend write,
Two brother-hermits, saints by trade,
Taking their tour in masquerade,
Disguised in tattered habits, went
To a small village down in Kent;
Where, in the strollers' canting strain,
They begged, from door to door, in vain;
Tried every tone might pity win;
But not a soul would let them in.
Our wandering saints, in woeful state,
Treated at this ungodly rate,
Having through all the village passed,
To a small cottage came at last,
Where dwelt a good old honest yeoman,
Called in the neighborhood, Philemon;
Who kindly did these saints invite
In his poor hut to pass the night;
And, then, the hospitable fire
Bid goody Baucis mend the fire;
While he, from out the chimney, took
A flich of Bacon, off the hook,
And, freely, from the fattest side,
Cut out large slices to be fried:
Then stepped aside, to fetch them drink,
Filled a large jug up to the brink,
And saw it fairly twice go round;
Yet (what is wonderful!) they found
'Twas still replenished to the top,
As if they had not touched a drop.
The good old couple were amazed,
And often on each other gazed;
For both were frightened to the heart,
And just began to cry -- What art!
Then softly turned aside, to view
Whether the lights were turning blue.
The gentle pilgrims, soon aware on it,
Told them their calling, and their errand;
"Good folks, you need not be afraid;
"We are but saints," the hermits said;
"No hurt shall come to you or yours:
"But for that pack of churlish boors,
"Not fit to live on Christian ground,
"They, and their houses, shall be drowned;
"While you see your cottage rise,
"And grow a church before your eyes."
They scarce had spoke, when, fair and soft,
The roof began to mount aloft;
Aloft rose every beam and rafter;
The heavy wall climbed slowly after.
The chimney widened, and grew higher,
Became a steeple with a spire.
The kettle to the top was hoist;
With upside down, doomed there to dwell,
It Is now no kettle, but a bell.
A wooden jack, which had almost
Lost, by disuse the art, to roast,
A sudden alteration feels,
Increased by new intestine wheels;
And, straight, against the steeple reared,
Became a clock, and still adhered:
And, now, in love to household cares,
By a shrill voice, the hour declares,
Warning the housemaid, not to burn
The roast-meat, which it cannot turn.
The easy chair began to crawl,
Like a huge snail, along the wall;
There, stuck aloft, in public view,
And, with small change, a pulpit grew.
A bed-stead of the antique mode,
Made up of timber many a load,
Such as our ancestors ^^d use,
Was metamorphos'd into pews:
Which still their ancient nature keep,
By lodging folks disposed to sleep.
The cottage, by such feats as these,
Grown to a church by just degrees;
The hermits then desired their host
To ask for what they fancied most.
Philemon, having paused a while,
Returned them thanks in homely style:
Then said -- "My house is grown so fine,
"Methinks I still would call it mine:
"I Am old, and feign would live at ease --
"Make me the parson, if ye please."
He spoke -- and, presently, he feels
His grazier's coat falls down his heels:
He sees, yet hardly can believe,
About each arm, a pudding sleeve;
His waistcoat to a cassock grew;
And both assumed a sable hue:
But, being old, continued just
As threadbare, and as full of dust.
His talk was now of tithes and dues;
He smoked his pipe, and read the news;
Knew how to preach old sermons next;
Vamp'd in the preface and the text:
At christ'nings, well could act his part;
And had the service all by heart:
Found his head filled with many a system:
But classic authors -- he never missed 'em.
Thus, having furnished up a parson,
Dame Baucis, next, they played their farce on.
Instead of homespun coifs, were seen,
Good pinners, edged with colberteen;
Her petticoat transformed apace,
Became black satin, flounc'd with lace.
Plain Goody would no longer down;
'Twas Madam, in her grogram gown.
Philemon was in great surprise,
And hardly could believe his eyes,
Amazed to see her look so prim.
And she admired as much at him.
Thus happy in their change of life,
Were, several years* this man and wife;
When, on a day (which proved their last)
Discoursing over old stories past,
They went, by chance, amidst their talk,
To the churchyard, to take a walk;
When Baucis hastily cried out,
"My dear, I see your forehead sprout!"
"Sprout!" quoth the man, "what is this you tell us?
"I hope you don't believe me jealous:
"But, yet, methinks, I feel it true:
"And, really, yours is budding too --
"Nay, now I cannot stir my foot;
"It feels as if 'twere taking root."
Description would but tire my muse;
In short, they both were turned to -- yews.
Old goodman Dobson, of the green,
Remembers, he the trees has seen:
He Will talk of them from morn to night,
And goes with folks to show the sight.
On Sundays, after evening prayer,
He gathers all the parish there;
Points out the place of either yew;
"Here Baucis, there Philemon grew:
"Till, once, a parson of our town,
"To mend his barn, cut Baucis down;
"At which, it is hard to be believed
"How much the other tree was grieved;
"Grew scrubby, died a-top, was stunted;
"So the next parson stubb'd, and burnt it."
On HAPPINESS.
OH happiness! our being's end and aim:
Good, pleasure, ease, content! whatever thy name^
That something, which still prompts the eternal sigh,
For which we bear to live, or dare to die:
Which still so near us, yet beyond us lies,
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool, and wise:
Plant of celestial seed! if dropped below,
Say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow:
Fair opening to some court's propitious shrine;
Or deep with di^monds in the flaming mine?
Twined with the wreaths Parnassian laurels yield;
Or reaped in iron harvests of the field?
Where grows? where grows it not? If vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil,
Fixed to no spot is happiness sincere;
It Is no where to be found, or every where.
ORDER is heaven's first law: and, this confessed,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest:
More rich, more wise. But, who infers from hence
That such are happier, shocks all common sense,
Heaven to mankind impartial we confess,
If all are equal in their happiness.
But mutual wants this happiness increase:
All nature's difference keeps all nature's peace.
Condition, circumstance, is not the thing:
Bliss is the same, in subject, or in king;
In who obtain defense, or who defend;
In him who is, or him who finds, a friend.
FORTUNE her gifts may variously dispose,
And these be happy called, unhappy those;
But heaven's just balance equal will appear,
While those are placed in hope, and these in fear*
Nor present good or ill, the joy or curse,
But future views of better, or of worse.
OH sons of earth! attempt ye still to rise,
By mountains pil'd on mountains, to the skies?
Heaven still, with laughter, the vain toil surveys,
And buries madmen in the heaps they raise.
KNOW, all the good that individuals find,
Or God and Nature meant to mere mankind,
Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
Lie in three words -- Health, Peace, and Competence.
SPEECH OF ADAM TO EVE.
NOW, morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl,
When Adam waked; so custom'd; for his sleep
Was airy light, from pure digestion bred,
And temperate vapors bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song
Of birds on every bough. So much the more
His wonder was to find unawken'd Eve
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek,
As through unquiet rest. He, on his side
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love.
Hung over her enamored; and beheld
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar graces. Then, with voice
Mild as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus. -- "Awake,
"My fairest, my espoused, my latest found;
"Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight,
"Awake! -- The morning shines, and the fresh field
"Calls us. We lose the prime: to mark how spring
"Our tended plants; how blows the citron grove;
"What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed;
"How nature paints her colors; how the be
"Sits on the bloom, extracting liquid sweet."
SOLILOQUY AND PRAYER OF EDWARD THE BLACK PRINCE, BEFORE THE BATTLE OF
POICTIERS.
THE hour advances, the decisive hour
That lifts me to the summit of renown,
Or leaves me on the earth a breathless corse.
The buzz and bustle of the field before me;
The twang of bow-stings, and the clash of spears;
With every circumstance of preparation;
Strike with an awful horror! -- Shouts are echoed,
To drown dismay, and blow up resolution
Even to its utmost swell. -- From hearts so firm,
Whom dangers fortify, and toils inspire,
What has a leader not to hope? -- And, yet,
The weight of apprehension sinks me down. --
"O, Soul of Nature! great eternal cause!
"Who gave, and govern'st all, that is here below!
"'It Is by the aid of thy almighty arm
"The weak exist, the virtuous are secure.
"If, to your sacred laws obedient ever,
"My sword, my soul, have owned no other guide;
"Oh! if your honor, if the rights of men,
"My country's happiness, my kings renown,
"Were motives worthy of a warrior's zeal,
"Crown your poor servant with success this day:
"And be the praise and glory all thy own."
INVOCATION TO PARADISE LOST.
OF man's first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater man
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
Sing heavenly muse! that, on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, did inspire
That shepherd, who first taught the chosen seed,
In the beginning, how the heavens and earth
Rose out of chaos: or, if Sion hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's brook that flowed
Fast by the oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventerous song,
That, with no middle flight, intends to soar
Above the Aonian mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme.
And, chiefly thou, O spirit! that do prefer
Before all temples, the upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for thou know: thou, from the first,
Wast present* and with mighty wings outspread,
Dove-like sat^st brooding over the vast abyss,
And made it pregnant: what in me is dark,
Illumine; what is low raise and support;
That, to the height of this great argument,
I may assert eternal providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.
MORNING HYMN.
THESE are thy glorious works, Parent of good!
Almighty! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair: thyself, how wondrous, then,
Unspeakable! who sit'st above these heavens,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine. --
Speak, ye, who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels! for ye behold him, and, with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne, rejoicing. Ye in heaven! --
On earth, join, all ye creatures, to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars! last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou, sun! of this great world both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater: sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,
And when high noon have gained, and when thou fall'st.
Moon! that now meet'st the orient sun, now fly'st
With the fixed stars, fixed in their orb that flies;
And ye five other wandering fires! that move
In mystic dance, not without song; resound
His praise, who out of darkness, called up light.
Air, and ye elements! the eldest birth
Of nature's womb, that, in quaternion, run
Perpetual circle, multiform, and mix
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change
Vary, to our great Maker, still new praise.
Ye mists and exhalations! that now rise
From hill or steaming lake, dusky or gray,
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honor to the world's great Author, rise;
Whether to deck with clouds, the uncolour'd sky,
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers,
Rising, or falling, still advance his praise.
His praise, ye winds! that from four quarters blow,
Breath soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye pines!
With every plant, in sign of worship, wave.
Fountains! and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling, tune his praise. --
Join voices, all ye living souls. Ye birds,
That, singing, up to heaven-gate ascend,
Bear, on your wings, and in your notes, his praise. --
Ye, that in waters glide! and ye, that walk
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep!
Witness, if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill, or valley, fountain, or fresh shade,
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise. --
Hail, universal Lord! Be bounteous still,
To give us only good: and, if the night
Have gathered ought of evil, or concealed --
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
THE HERMIT, by Dr. BEATTIE.
AT the close of the day, when the hamlet is still,
And mortals the sweets of forgetfulness prove;
When naught, but the torrent is heard on the hill;
And naught, but the nightingale's song, in the grove:
'Twas then, by the cave of the mountain afar,
A hermit his song of the night thus began;
No more with himself, or with nature, at war,
He thought as a sage, while he felt as a man.
"Ah! why thus abandoned to darkness and woe,
"Why thus, lonely Philomel, flows thy sad strain?
"For spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
"And thy bosom no trace of misfortune retain.
"Yet, if pity inspire thee, ah! cease not thy lay;
"Mourn, sweetest complainer, man calls thee to "mourn:
"O! soothe him, whose pleasures, like thine, pass "away --
"Full quickly they pass -- but they never return.
"Now, gliding remote, on the verge of the sky,
"The moon, half extinguished, her crescent displays:
"But lately I marked, when majestic on high
"She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
"Roll on, thou fair orb! and with gladness, pursue
"The path that conducts thee to splendour again --
"But man's faded glory no change shall renew:
"Ah fool! to exult in a glory so vain.
"'It Is night; and the landscape is lovely no more;
"I mourn; but ye woodlands! I mourn not for you:
"For morn is approaching, your charms to restore,
"Perfumed with fresh fragrance, and glittering "with dew.
"Nor, yet, for the ravage of winter I mourn;
"Kind Nature the embryo blossom will save --
"But, when shall spring visit the mouldering urn?
"O! when shall it dawn on the night of the grave?"
'Twas thus, by the glare of false science betrayed,
That leads, to bewilder; and dazzles, to blind;
My thoughts wont to roam, from shade onward to shade,
Destruction before me, and sorrow behind.
"O! pity, great father of light!" then I cried,
"Thy creature, who fain would not wander from "thee.
"Lo humbled in dust, I relinquish my pride:
"From doubt, and from darkness, thou only can "free."
And darkness, and doubt, are now flying away,
No longer I roam, in conjecture forlorn.
So breaks on the traveller, faint, and astray,
The bright and the balmy effulgence of morn.
See truth, love, and mercy, in triumph descending,
And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom!
On the cold check of death, smiles and roses are blending,
And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb!
COMPASSION.
PITY the surrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door.
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief and heaven will bless your store.
These tattered clothes my poverty bespeak,
Those hoary locks proclaim my lengthened years;
And many a furrow in my grief-worn cheek
Has been the channel to a flood of tears.
Yon house erected on the rising ground,
With tempting aspect drew me from my road;
For plenty there a residence has found,
And grandeur a magnificent abode.
Hard is the fate of the infirm and poor!
Here as I craved a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial drove me from the door
To seek a shelter in an humbler shed.
Oh! take me to your hospitable dome;
Keen blows the wind, and piercing is the cold*
Shor^ is my passage to the friendly tomb,
For I am poor and miserably old.
Should I reveal the sources of my grief,
If soft humanity ever touched your breast,
Your hands would not withold the kind relief,
And tears of pity would not be represt.
Heaven sends misfortunes; why should we repine;
It Is heaven has brought me to the state you see;
And your condition may be soon like mine,
The child of sorrow and of misery.
A little farm was my paternal lot,
Then like the la^k^ sprightly hailed the morn;
But ah! oppression forced me from my cot,
My cattle died, and blighted was my corn.
My daughter, once the comfort of my age,
Lured by a villain from her native home,
Is cast abandoned on the world's wide stage,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.
My tender wife, sweet smoother of my care,
Struck with sad anguish at the stern decree,
Fell, lingering fell, a victim to despair,
And left the world to wretchedness and me.
Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief and heaven will bless your store.
ADVANTAGES OF PEACE.
OH, first of human blessings, and supreme!
Fair Peace! how lovely, how delightful, thou!
By whose wide tie, the kindred sons of men,
Like brothers live, in amity combined,
And unsuspicious faith: while honest toil
Gives every joy; and, to those joys, a right,
Which idle barbarous rapine but usurps.
Pure is thy reign; when, unaccurs'd by blood,
Naught, save the sweetness of indulgent showers,
Trickling, distills into the vernant glebe;
Instead of mangled carcases, sad scene,
When the blythe sheaves lie scattered over the field:
When only shining shares, the crooked knife,
And hooks imprint the vegetable wound;
When the land blushes with the rose alone,
The falling fruitage, and the bleeding vine.
Oh, Peace! thou source, and soul of social life;
Beneath whose calm inspiring influence,
Science his views enlarges, art refines,
And swelling commerce opens all her ports --
Blessed be the man divine, who gives us thee!
Who bids the trumpet hus^ his horrid clang,
Nor blow the giddy nations into rage;
Who sheathes the murderous blade; the deadly gu^
Into the well-pil'd armory returns;
And, every vigor from the work of death.
To grateful industry converting, makes
The country flourish, and the city ^mile!
Unviolated, him the virgin sing^*
And him, the smiling mother, to her train.
Of him, the shepherd, in the peaceful dale,
Chants; and the treasurers of hi^ labor sure,
The husbandman, of him, as at the plough,
Or team, he toils. With him, the sailor sooths,
Beneath the trembling moon, the midnight wave;
And the full city, warm, from street to street,
And shop to shop, responsive, rings of him,
Nor joys one land alone: his praise extends,
Far as the sun rolls the diffusive day;
Far as the breeze can bear the gifts of peace;
Till all the happy nations catch the song.
PROGRESS of LIFE.
ALL the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players:
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts;
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in his nurse's arms;
And then the whining schoolboy with his satchel,
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then, the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eye-brow. Then, a soldier
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation,
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then, the justice,
In fair round belly, with good capon lined;
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws, and modern instances,
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon,
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side,
His youthful hose well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes,
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness, and mere oblivion;
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
SPEECHES IN THE ROMAN SENATE.
CATO. FATHERS! we once again are met in council.
Caesar's approach has summoned us together,
And Rome attends her fate from our resolves.
How shall we treat this bold aspiring man?
Success still follows him, and backs his crimes.
Pharsalia gave him Rome. Egypt has since
Received his yoke, and the whole Nile is Caesar's.
Why should I mention Juba's overthrow,
And Scipio's death? Numidia's burning sands
Still smoke with blood. It Is time we should decree
What course to take. Our foe advances on us,
And envies us even Lybia's sultry deserts.
Fathers, pronounce your thoughts. Are they still fixed
To hold it out and fight it to the last?
Or, are your hearts su^u'd, at length, and wrought,
By time and ill succe^^, to a submission; --
Sempronius, speak.

SEMPRONIUS. My voice is still for war.
Gods! can a Roman senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, slavery or death?
No -- Let us rise at once; gird on our swords;
And, at the head of our remaining troops,
Attack the foe; break through the thick array
Of his thronged legions; and charge home upon hi^*
Perhaps, some arm, more lucky than the rest,
May reach ^is heart, and free the world from bondage*
Rise, Fathers, rise! It Is Rome demands your help:
Rise, and revenge her slaughtered citizens,
Or share their fate! The corpse of half her senate
Manure the fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here, delib'rating in cold debates,
If we should sacrifice our lives to honor,
Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
Rouse up, for shame! Our brothers of Pharsalia
Point at their wounds, and cry aloud -- to battle!
Great Pompey's shade complains that we are slow*
And Scipio's ghost walks unrevenged amongst us!

CATO. Let not a torrent of impetuous zeal
Transport thee thus beyond the bounds of reason.
True fortitude is seen in great exploits,
That justice warrants, and the wisdom guides;
All else, is towering frenzy and distraction.
Are not the lives of those who draw the sword
In Rome's defense, entrusted to our care?
Should we thus lead them to a field of slaughter,
Might not the impartial world, with reason, say,
We lavished, at our deaths, the blood of thousands,
To grace our fall, and make our ruin glorious?
Lucius, we next would know what is your opinion.

LUCIUS. My thoughts, I must confess, are turned on peace.
Already have our quarrels filled the world
With widows and with orphans. Scythia mourns.
Our guilty wars, and earth's remotest regions
Lie half unpeopled by the feuds of Rome.
It Is time to sheath the sword, and spare mankind.
It is not C^esar, but the gods, my fathers!
The gods declare against us, and repel
Our vain attempts. To urge the foe to battle,
(P^ompted by blind revenge and wild despair)
W^^e to refuse the awards of Providence,
And not to rest in heaven's determination.
Already have we shown our love to Rome:
N^w, let us show submission to the gods.
Ye (...) up arms not to revenge ourselves,
But free the commonwealth. When this end fails,
Arms have no further use. Our country's cause,
That drew our swords, now wrests 'em from our hands,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood
Unprofitably shed. What men could do,
Is done already. Heaven and earth will witness,
If Rome must fall, that we are innocent.

CATO. Let us appear, not rash, nor diffident.
Immod'rate valor swells into a fault;
And fear, admitted into public councils,
Betrays like treason. Let us shun 'em both. --
Fathers, I cannot see that our affairs
Are grown thus desperate. We have bulwarks round us.
Within our walls, are troops inured to toil
In Afric heats, and seasoned to the sun.
Numidia's spacious kingdom lies behind us,
Ready to rise at its young prince's call.
While there is hope, do not distrust the gods:
But wait, at least, till C^esar's near approach
Force us to yield. 'Twill never be too late,
To sue for chains and own a conqueror.
Why should Rome fall a moment ere her time?
No -- let us draw our term of freedom out
In its full length, and spin it to the last:
So shall we gain still one day's liberty.
And, let me perish; but, in Cato's judgment,
A day, an hour, of virtuous liberty,
Is worth a whole eternity of bondage.
CATO solus, sitting in a thoughtful posture: In his hand Plato's book on the
immortality of the soul. A drawn sword on the table by him. IT must be so --
Plato, thou reason'st well! --
Else, whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
This longing after immortality?
Or, whence this secret dread, and inward horror.
Of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul
Back on herself, and startles at destruction? --
It Is the divinity that stirs within us;
It Is heaven itself, that points out -- an hereafter
And intimates -- eternity to man.
Eternity! -- thou pleasing -- dreadful thought!
Through what variety of untried beings,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass*
The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before me --
But shadows, clouds, and darkness, rest upon it. --
Here will I hold. If there is a power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) he must delight in virtue;
And that which he delights in, must be happy.
But, when! or where! This world -- was made for Caesar.
I Am weary of conjectures -- this must end 'em.
Laying his hand on his sword. Thus am I doubly armed: my death and life,
My bane and antidote are both before me:
This, in a moment, brings me to an end;
But this informs me I shall never die.
The soul, secured in her existence, smiles
At the drawn dagger, and defies its point.
The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years;
But thou shall flourish in immortal youth,
U^hur^ amidst the war of elements,
The wrecks of matter, and the crush of worlds.
What means this heaviness that hangs upon me?
This lethargy that creeps through all my senses?
Nature oppressed, and harrass'd out with care,
Sinks down to rest. This once I Will favor her,
That my awakened soul may take her flight,
Renewed in all her strength, and fresh with life,
An offering fit for Heaven. Let guilt or fear
Disturb man's rest; Cato knows neither of 'em,
Indifferent in his choice, to sleep or die.

HAMLET'S MEDITATION ON DEATH.
TO be -- or not to be? -- that is the question. --
Whether it is nobler in the mind, to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune;
Or to take arms against a siege of troubles,
And, by opposing, end them? -- To die -- to sleep --
No more; -- and, by a sleep, to say we end
The heart-ach, and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to -- it is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die -- to sleep --
To sleep -- perchance to dream -- ay, there^s the rub. --
For, in that sleep of death, what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. -- There Is the respect
That makes calamity of so long a life.
For, who would bear the whips and scorns of the time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the laws delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes;
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would sardels bear,
To groan and sweat under a weary life;
But that the dread of something after death
(That undiscovered country, from whose bourne
No traveller returns) puzzles the will;
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied over with the pale cast of thou^ht;
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this ^egard, their current^ ^urn away,
And lose the name of action.
Select Passages from Dramatic Writers, EXPRESSIVE OF THE PRINCIPAL EMOTIONS
AND PASSIONS.
JOY.
THEN is Orestes blessed! My griefs are fled*
Fled like a dream! -- Methinks I tread in air! --
Surprising happiness! unlooked for joy!
Never let love despair! The prize is mine! --
Be smooth, ye seas! and, ye propitious winds,
Blow from Epirus to the Spartan coast!
GRIEF.
I WILL go; and, in the anguish of my heart --
Weep over my child. -- If he must die, my lif^.
Is wrapped in his; I shall not long survive.
It Is for his sake that I have suffered life;
Groaned in captivity: and outlived Hector. --
Yes, my Astyanax! we'll go together;
Together -- to the realms of night we'll go.
PITY.
HAD thou but seen, as I did, how, at last,
Thy beauties, Belvidera, like a wretch
That Is doomed to banishment, came weeping forth,
Whilst two young virgins, on whose arms she leaned,
Kindly looked up, and at her grief grew sad!
Even the lewd rabble, that were gathered round
To see the sight, stood mute when they beheld her,
Governed their roaring throats -- and grumbled pity.
FEAR.
COME on, Sir, -- here is the place -- stand still. --
How fearful it is to cast one's eyes so low!
The crows and choughs, that wing the midway air,
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Half way down,
Hangs one that gathers samphire -- dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than one's head.
The fishermen, that walk upon the beech,
Appear like mice; and you tall anchoring bark
Seems lessened to a cock; her cock, a buoy
Almost too small for sight. The murmuring surge,
That on the unnumber'd idle pebbles chafes,
Cannot be heard so high. -- I Will look no more,
Lest my brain turn, and the disorder make me
Tumble down headlong.
AWE AND FEAR.
NOW, all is hushed, and still as death --
How reverend is the face of this tall pile,
Whose ancient pillars rear their marble heads,
To bear alof^ its arched and ponderous roof,
By its own weight made steadfast and immovable,
Looking tranquillity! It strikes an awe
And terror on my aching sight. The tombs,
And monumental caves of death look cold,
And shoot a chillness to my trembling heart.
Give me thy hand, and let me hear thy voice --
Nay, quickly speak to me, and let me hear
Thy voice -- my own affrights me with its echoes.
HORROR.
HARK! -- the death-denouncing trumpet sounds
The fatal charge, and shouts proclaim the onset,
Destruction rushes dreadful to the field,
And bathes itself in blood. Havoc, let loose,
Now, undistinguished, rages all around:
While ruin, seated on her dreary throne,
Sees the plain strewn, with subjects truly hers,
Breathless and cold.
ANGER.
HEAR me, rash man; on thy allegiance hear me.
Since thou have striven to make us break our vow,
Which, nor our nature, nor our place can bear,
We banish thee for ever from our sight
And kingdom. If, when three days are expired,
Thy hated trunk be found in our dominions,
That moment is thy death -- Away!
EXECRATION.
CURSED be your senate: cursed your constitution:
The curse of growing factions and divisions
Still vex your councils, shake your public safety,
And make the robes of government you wear,
Hateful to you -- as these base chains to me.
REVENGE.
IF it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. He has disgraced me,
and hindered me of half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains,
scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, hated mine enemies.
And what is his reason? -- I am a Jew. Has not a Jew eyes? has not a Jew
hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Is he not fed with the
same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by
the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as a Christian
is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? if you tickle us, do we not laugh? if you
poison us, do we not die? and, if you wrong us -- shall we not revenge? If we
are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a
Christian, what is his humility? -- Revenge. If a Christian wrong a Jew, what
should his sufferance be by Christian example? -- why, revenge. -- The villainy
you teach me, I will execute; and it shall go hard, but I will better the
instruction.

ADMIRATION.
WHAT find I here?
Fair Portia's counterfeit? -- What demi-god
Has come so near creation! Move these eyes?
Or, whether, riding on the balls of mine,
Seem they in motion? -- Here are severed lips,
Parted with sugar breath: so sweet a bar
Should sunder such sweet friends. -- Here, in her hairs,
The painter plays the spider, and has woven
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men
Faster than gnats in cobwebs. But her eye^ --
How could he see to do them! having made one,
Methinks it should have power to steal both his,
And leave itself unfinished!
HAUGHTINESS.
MAKE thy demands to those that own thy power!
Know, I am still beyond thee. And though fortune
Has stripped me of this train, this pomp of greatness,
This outside of a king, yet still my soul,
Fixed high, and on herself alone dependant,
Is ever free and royal; and, even now,
As at the head of battle -- does defy thee!
CONTEMPT.
AWAY! -- no woman could descend so low.
A skipping, dancing, worthless tribe you are;
Fit only for yourselves. You herd together;
And when the circling glass warms your vain hearts,
You talk of beauties that you never saw,
And fancy raptures that you never knew.
RESIGNATION.
YET, yet endure -- nor murmur, O my soul!
For, are not thy transgressions great and numberless?
Do they not cover thee, like rising floods?
And press thee, like a weight of waters, down?
Does not the hand of righteousness af^ict thee? --
And who shall plead against it? who shall say
To Power Almighty, Thou have done enough;
Or bid his dreadful rod of vengeance stay? --
Wait, then, with patience, till the circling hours
Shall bring the time of thy appointed rest,
And lay thee down in death.
IMPATIENCE.
OH! rid me of this torture, quickly there,
My Madam with the everlasting voice.
The bells, in time of pestilence, never made
Like noise, or were in that perpetual motion.
-- All my house,
But now, steam'd like a bath, with her thick breath,
A lawyer could not have been heard, nor scarce
Another woman, such a hail of words
She has let fall.
MELANCHOLY.
THERE is a stupid weight upon my senses;
A dismal fallen stillness, that succeeds
The storm of rage and grief, like silent death,
After the tumult and the noise of life.
Would it were death, as sure it is wondrous like it;
For I am sick of living. My soul is palled:
She kindles not, with anger, or revenge.
Love was the informing active fire within:
Now, that is quenched; the mass forgets to move,
And longs to mingle with its kindred earth.
REMORSE AND DESPAIR.
HENCEFORTH, let no man trust the first false step
Of guilt. It hangs upon a precipice,
Whose deep descent in fast perdition ends.
How far am I plunged down, beyond all thought
Which I this evening framed! --
Consummate horror! guilt beyond a name! --
Dare not, my soul, repent. (...) thee, repentance
Were second guilt; and 'tware blaspheming Heaven
To hope for mercy. My pain can only cease
When gods want power to punish. -- Ha! the dawn --
Rise never more, O sun! -- let night prevail:
Eternal darkness close the world's wide scene --
And hide me from myself.
DISTRACTION.
MERCY! -- I know it not -- for I am miserable.
I Will give thee misery -- for here she dwells,
This is her house -- where the sun never dawns;
The bird of night sits screaming over the roof;
Grim specter sweep along the horrid gloom;
And naught is heard, but wailings and lamenting. --
Hark! -- something cracks above! -- it shakes! -- it totters! --
And see -- the nodding ruin falls to crush me! --
It Is fallen -- it is here! -- I feel it on my brain! --
A waving flood of blueish fire swells over me! --
And now it is out -- and I am drowned in blood. --
Ha! what art thou? thou horrid headless trunk! --
It is my Hastings -- See, he wafts me on!
Away I go! -- I fly! -- I follow thee!
GRATITUDE.
MY father! -- Oh! let me unlade my breast;
Pour out the fullness of my soul before you;
Show every tender, every grateful thought,
This wondrous goodness stirs. But, it is impossible,
And utt'rance all is vile; since I can only
Swear you reign here, but never tell how much.
ENTREATY.
REWARD him for the noble deed, just Heavens!
For this one action, guard him, and distinguish him
With signal mercies, and with great deliverance.
Save him from wrong, adversi^y, and shame.
Let never-fading honors flourish round him;
And consecrate his name, even to time's end.
Let him know nothing else, but good on earth --
And everlasting blessedness hereafter.
COMMANDING.
-- SILENCE, ye winds!
That make outrageous war upon the ocean:
And thou, old ocean! lull thy boisterous waves.
Ye warring elements! be hushed as ^ath,
While I impose my dread commands on hell.
And thou, profoundest hell! whose dreadful sway,
Is given to me by fate and demogorgon --
Hear, hear my powerful voice, through all thy regions;
And from thy gloomy caverns -- thunder the reply.
COURAGE.
A Generous few, the vet'ran, hardy gleanings
Of many a hapless sight, with a fierce
Heroic fire, inspirited each other;
Resolved on death; disdaining to survive
Their dearest country. -- "If we fall," I cried,
"Let us not tamely fall, like passive cowards!
"No -- let us live, or let us die -- like men!
"Come on, my friends. To Alfred we will cut
"Our glorious way: or as we nobly perish,
"Will offer to the genius of our country --
"Whole hecatombs of Danes." -- As if one soul
Have moved them all, around their heads they flashed
Their flaming faulchions -- "Lead us to those Danes!
"Our country! -- Vengeance!" -- was the general cry.
BOASTING.
I WILL tell you, Sir, by the way of private, and under seal, I am a gentleman;
and live here, obscure, and to myself: but, were I known to his Majesty, and
the Lords, observe me, I would undertake, upon this poor head and life, for the
public benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lives of his subjects
in general, but to save the one-half, nay three parts of his yearly charge, in
holding war, and against what enemy soever. And how would I do it, think you?
-- Why thus, Sir. -- I would select nineteen more to myself, throughout the
land; gentlemen they should be; of good spirit, strong and able constitution. I
would choose them by an instinct that I have. And I would teach these nineteen
the special rules; as your Punto, your Reverso, your Stoccata, your Imbroccata,
your Passada, your Montonto; till they could all play very near, or altogether,
as well as myself. This done, say the enemy were forty thousand strong. We
twenty, would come into the field, the tenth of March or thereabouts; and we
would challenge twenty of the enemy: they could not, in their honor, refuse
us! Well -- we would kill them: challenge twenty more -- kill them: twenty more
-- kill them: twenty more -- kill them too. And, thus, would we kill, every
man, his twenty a day; that is twenty score; twenty score; that is two hundred;
two hundred a day; five days, a thousand: forty thousand -- forty times five;
five times forty -- two hundred days kill them all up by computation. And this
I will venture my poor gentleman-like carcass to perform (provided there be no
treason practiced upon) by fair and discreet manhood; that is, civilly, by the
sword.

PERPLEXITY.
-- LET me think --
What can this mean? -- Is it to me aversion?
Or is it, as I feared, she loves another;
Ha! yes -- perhaps the king, the young count Tancred?
They were bred up together -- surely that,
That cannot be -- Has he not given his hand,
In the most solemn manner to Constantia?
Does not his crown depend upon the deed?
No -- if they loved, and this old statesman knew it,
He could not to a king prefer a subject.
His virtues I esteem -- nay more, I trust them --
So far as virtue goes -- but could he place
His daughter on the throne of Sicily --
O! it is a glorious bribe; too much for man!
What is it then? -- I care not what it is.
SUSPICION.
WOULD he were fatter -- but I fear him not.
Yes, if my name were liable to fear,
I do not know the man I should avoid,
So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much --
He is a great observer -- and he looks
Quite through the deeds of men.
He loves no plays: he hears no music.
Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort,
As if he mocked himself, and scorned his spirit,
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
Such men as he be never at heart's ease,
Whilst they behold a greater than themselves --
And, therefore, are they very dangerous.
WIT AND HUMOR.
A GOOD sherris-sack has a twofold operation in it. -- It ascends me into the
brain. Dries (...) there, all the foolish, dull, and crudy vapors which
environ it: makes it apprehensive, quick, inventive; full of nimble, fiery and
delectable shapes, which, delivered over to the voice, the tongue, which is the
birth, becomes excellent wit. -- The second property of your excellent sherris,
is, the warming of the blood: which, before, cold and settled, left the liver
white and pale; which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice. But the
sherris warms it, and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extreme. It
aluminateth the face, which, as a beacon, gives warning to all the rest of this
little kingdom, man, to arm: and, then, the vital commoners, and inland petty
spirits, muster me all to their captain, the heart; who, great, and puffed up
with this retinue, does any deed of courage -- and this valor comes of
sherries. So that skill in the weapon, is nothing without sack; for that sets
it a-work: and learning, a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil, till sack
commences it, and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes it that Prince Harry is
valiant: for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father, he has,
like lean, steril, and bare land, manured, husbanded, and tilled, with drinking
good, and good store of fertile sherries. -- If I had a thousand sons, the
first human principle I would teach them, should be -- To forswear thin
potations, and to addict themselves to sack.

PERTURBATION.
VENGEANCE! death! plague! confusion!
Fiery! what quality? -- Why, Gloucester, Gloucester!
I Would speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife;
The king would speak with Cornwall -- the dear father
Would with his daughter speak; commands her service.
Are they informed of this? -- My breath and blood!
Fiery! The fiery Duke! Tell the hot Duke --
No, but not yet: may be he is not well.
I beg his pardon; and I Will chide my rashness,
That took the indisposed and sickly fit
For the sound man. -- But wherefore sits he there? --
Death on my state! this act convinces me,
That this retir'dness of the Duke and her
Is plain contempt -- Give me my servant forth --
Go tell the Duke and's wife I Would speak with 'em;
Now; instantly -- Bid 'em come forth, and hear me;
Or, at their chamber door, I Will beat the drum --
'Till it cry -- Sleep to death.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Pursuit of Knowledge recommended to Youth p. 1 Directions how to spend our
Time 5 Misspent Time how punished 9 Modesty 15 Affectation 21 The same continued
25 Good Humor and Nature 29 Friendship 32 Detraction and Falsehood 39 The
Importance of Punctuality 50 Temperance and Exercise, the best Preservatives of
Health 55 The Duty of Secrecy 63 Of Cheerfulness 69 On the Advantages of a
cheerful Temper 73 Discretion 77 Pride 81 Drunkenness 84 Gaming 89 Whisperers
and Giglers complained of 93 Beauty produced by Sentiments 98 Honor 107 Human
Nature 110 The Advantages of representing Human Nature in its proper Dignity
114 Custom a second Nature 119 On Cleanliness 124 The Advantages of a Good
Education 127 Learning a necessary Accomplishment in a Woman of Quality or
Fortune 129 On the Absurdity of Omens 132 A Good Conscience, etc. 136 On
Contentment 140 Human Miseries chiefly imaginary 145 A Life of Virtue
preferable to a Life of Pleasure 151 Virtue rewarded 155 The History of Amanda
ib. The Story of Abdalla and Balsora 159 Rashness and Cowardice 167 Fortitude
founded upon the Fear of God 171 The Folly of youthful Extravagance 175 The
Miseries of depending on the Great 180 What it is to see the World 185 The
Story of Melissa ib. On the Omniscience and Omnipresence of the Deity, together
with the Immensity of his Works 190 Motives of Piety and Virtue, drawn from the
Omniscience and Omnipresence of the Deity 195 Reflections on the Third Heaven
199 The present Life to be considered only as it may conduce to the Happiness
of a future one 205 On the Immortality of the Soul 208 On the Animal World, and
the Scale of Beings 211 Providence proved from Animal Instinct 216
Good-Breeding and Complai^ance 219 Further Remarks, taken from Lord
Chesterfield's Letters to his Son 224 Genteel Carriage 228 Cleanliness of
Person 231 Dress 232 Elegance of Expression 234 Small-Talk 237 Observation and
Attention 238 Absence of Mind 240 Knowledge of the World 242 Flattery ib. Study
the ^oibles of Men 243 Judge of other Men by yourself ib. Certain H^urs of
applying to them 244 Command of Temper and Countenance 245 Seem friendly to
Enemies 246 Never see an Affront ib. Wrangling 247 Judge of no Man
pre^ipitately ib. Vanity of the World 248 Trust not too implicitly on any ib.
Beware of proffered Friendship 249 Make no improper Connections ib. Doubt him
who swears 250 Be not ashamed to refuse ib. Choice of Company 251 Adopt no
Man's Vices 253 Laughter 254 Sundry little Accomplishments 255 Honors of the
Table ib. Behavior at Table ib. Drinking of Healths 256 Refusing Invitations
ib. Card-Playing ib. Writing well 257 Spelling well ib. Nicknames 258 Raking
ib. Choice of Amusements 259 Secrecy ib. Pulling out your Watch 260 Hurry ib.
Familiarity ib. Neglecting ol^ Acquaintance 261 Conferring Favors ib. Vanity
in many Respects ib. Make rone feel his Inferiority 262 Being witty at
another's Expense 263 Whispering in Company 264 Reading a Letter in Company ib.
H^mming a Tune, etc. ib. Staring any one in the Face 265 Eating fast ib.
Dignity of Manners ib. Romping ib. Mimicking ib. Passive Complaisance 267
Hastines^ of Temper ib. Directing Servants 268 Outward Appearance ib. Rules for
Conversation ib. Further Remarks on the same, taken from Lord Chesterfield's
Letters to his Son 277 Talking ib. Telling Stories ib. Hackneyed Expressions
278 Digressions ib. Holding People by the Button ib. Jogging People ib. Long
Talkers ib. Incessant Talkers 279 Helping out slow Speakers ib. Contradicting
ib. Giving Advice 280 Inattention ib. Surliness ib. Adapt your Conversation to
the Company 281 Certain rude Expressions ib. Tax not with Breach of Promise ib.
Be not dark or mysterious 282 No long Apologies ib. Look People in the Face
when speaking to them ib. Raise not the Voice when repeating ib. Swearing ib.
Scandal 283 Talk not of your own or others private Matters ib. Jokes, Bon-Mots
ib. Be not clamorous 284 Dispute with good Humor ib. Learn the Character of
the Company before you say much ib. Interrupt no Person in a Story 285 Asking
Questions ib. Reflect on no Body of People 286 Interrupt no Speaker ib. Conceal
your Learning ib. The Vision of Mirza, exhibiting a Picture of Human Life 287
Riches not productive of Happiness; the Story of Ortogrul of Basra 292
APPENDIX.
SPEECH of Romulus after founding Rome 295 Speech of Quinctius Capitolinus 296
Caius Marius to the Romans 298 Demosthenes to the Athenians 302 The perfect
Speaker 307 On the Duties of Schoolboys, from the pious and judicious Rollin
308 Hymns and Prayers 312 Character of Man 317 Winter 318 Douglas's Account of
himself ib. -- how he learned the Art of War 319 Baucis and Philemon 320 On
Happiness 324 Speech of Adam to Eve 325 Soliloquy and Prayer of Edward the
Black Prince, before the Battle of Poictiers 326 Invocation to Paradise Lost
327 Morning Hymn ib. The Hermit, by Dr. Beattie 329 Compassion 330 Advantages
of Peace 332 The Progress of Life 333 Speeches in the Roman Senate 334 Cato's
Soliloquy on the Immortality of the Soul 336 Hamlet's Meditation o^ Death 338
Select Passages from Dramatic Writers.
JOY -- Distressed Mother, 339 Grief -- Distressed Mother, ib. Pity -- Venice
Preserved, ib. Fear -- Lear, ib. Awe and Fear -- Mourning Bride, 340 Horror --
Scanderbeg, ib. Anger -- Lear, ib. Execration -- Venice Preserved, 341 Revenge
-- Merchant of Venice, ib. Admiration -- Merchant of Venice, 342 Haughtiness --
Tamerlane, ib. Contempt -- Fair Penitent, ib. R^signation -- Jane Shore, ib.
Impatience -- Volpone, 343 Melancholy -- Fair Penitent, ib. Remorse and Despair
-- Busiris, ib. Distraction -- Jane Shore, 344 Gratitude -- Fair Penitent, ib.
Entreaty -- Jane Shore, ib. Commanding -- Rinaldo and Armida, 345 Courage --
Alfred, ib. Boasting -- Every Man in his Humor, ib. Perplexity -- Tancred and
Sigismunda, 346 Suspicion -- Julius Caesar, 347 Wit and Humor -- 2d Part of
Henry the IVth. ib. Perturbation -- Lear, 348

