THE ALGERINE SPY IN PENNSYLVANIA.

THE ALGERINE SPY IN PENNSYLVANIA: OR, LETTERS WRITTEN BY A NATIVE OF ALGIERS
ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE United States in America, FROM THE CLOSE OF THE YEAR 1783
TO THE MEETING OF THE CONVENTION.

-- Facto pius et sceleratus eodem.
OVID. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET BETWEEN
FRONT AND SECOND STREETS. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

I DO certify, that on this twenty-eighth day of August, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven, a book entitled The Algerine Spy in Pennsylvania: or,
Letters written by a native of Algiers on the affairs of the United States in
America, from the close of the year 1783 to the meeting of the Convention,
printed by Prichard and Hall, at Philadelphia, was entered by them in the
office of the prothonotary of Philadelphia county as the property of William
Prichard.

J B. SMITH, Prothon.

TO THE PUBLIC.
ABOUT a fortnight ago a large packet was dropped in my store in the dusk of
the evening, as I suppose. It remained unnoticed till next morning, when,
happening to perceive it, I opened it, and, amongst other written papers, found
a letter directed to me, which is subjoined.

In the course of that day and the next, I occasionally dipped into the papers;
but as to sell books, not to criticize them, is my business, all I shall say
is, that the style, if we consider that the work is but a translation, is
tolerably smooth and easy; and the sentiments (due allowance being made for the
disposition and education of an Algerine) are not unworthy of the public
attention.

As these states abound in critics equal to any in the world, it may be
presumed, that some of them will condescend to read the book which they
criticize. If these gentlemen will favor me with their remarks, they shall be
added, by way of appendix, to the third or fourth impression. This addition
will increase the value of the work, by rendering it at once more bulky and
amusing.

I confess that, although a bookseller, I am not fond of large volumes. A huge
folio has an imposing air of dignity, which is very apt to deter people from
having any thing to say to it, as my shelves can testify; but a snug little
pocket volume, neatly bound and lettered, is like an easy good natured friend,
who is ready to sit down with us near a good fire, or to take a walk on the
commons. If we happen to be otherwise engaged, we part from the one, or pocket
the other, without trouble or ceremony.

As for the Algerine gentleman, I declare upon the word of a faithful citizen,
that I do not know him. If he has ever favored me with his custom, I am highly
obliged to him, and, when he gets rid of his melancholy, I shall be happy in
presenting him with a copy of the work and a glass of wine into the bargain,
which, as he is now a good christian, I hope he will not refuse.

With respect to the translator -- but let him speak for himself --

I am the Public's most obedient humble servant, W. P.

Mr. WILLIAM PRICHARD.
SIR,
AS the publication of the herewith enclosed letters will probably excite some
degree of curiosity concerning MEHEMET, the spy, I wish it were in my power to
gratify it. The letters, written in different languages, but chiefly in Arabic,
were delivered into my hands with a note, which contained a request that I
should translate and publish them for the good of the United States. They were
all without dates, which omission will be excused, when it is considered that
they are but copies; but the principal facts mentioned in them are so notorious
and recent, that dates seem unnecessary.

Whether they will either instruct or amuse, I will not pretend to say; but I
am confident, that they will do no harm. The Algerine spy, although as such
inexcusable, is by no means an indecent or immoral writer.

(...) THE ALGERINE SPY IN PENNSYLVANIA.
LETTER I.
TO SOLOMON, AT ALGIERS. GIBRALTAR.
WHEN I parted from thee, a train of ideas, at once melancholy and pleasing,
took possession of my mind. I was conscious, that I had undertaken an office of
the highest consequence to my country and the Musselman faith; that, if
successful, I should rank with those, who have gained immortal honor in this
world, and the joys of Paradise; that, if unsuccessful, I should suffer
disgrace and imprisonment, (death I disregard) pitied by men of sensibility and
insulted by fools and knaves. I ingenuously confess, that I was greatly
dejected; but was relieved from this anxiety of mind (if relief it could be
called) by the most distressing sickness I had ever experienced. My head grew
giddy; a nausea succeeded; large drops of cold sweat issued from every pore;
with difficulty I staggerd to my bed, and, clasping my hands, recommended my
soul to Allah. I slumbered, as I suppose, about four hours; when, finding
myself considerably better, I ventured on deck.

To thee, who, from a very early period of thy life, have been accustomed to
hardships and perils on this turbulent element, this account of my sea-sickness
will appear perfectly ridiculous. If I expected to excite compassion, I would
have addressed this letter to the gallant leader of our warlike troops, or the
venerable interpreter of our most holy law. The first has often experienced
dangers in the conflict of arms, and the no less perilous intrigues of a court;
but I am confident, that his tremors have been greater during a voyage to
Constantinople, than when exposed to the roaring cannon or the equally
destructive whispers of court-sycophants. The last has never been at sea; but
he has often read with exquisite sensibility the description of a voyage by the
royal Israelite.

I shall not trouble thee with a minute account of my distresses during the
whole voyage; the offensive sinell and taste of the water; the roughness of the
captain, which I at first mistook for brutality, or the sneers of the sailors,
who, having been informed that I was a Frenchman, regarded me with eyes at once
expressive of hatred and contempt.

Thou must remember, that when my proposal of embarking for the American
continent was accepted, it was suggested to me to appear in the character of a
native of the south of France. My knowledge of the French language, the
predilection of the citizens of the new states for their allies, and the
swarthiness of my complexion, induced me to follow this advice. This
circumstance exposed me to the insults which I have just mentioned. But the
consciousness of the weighty commission, with which I was charged, repressed my
resentment. I conversed with them freely in English, which I understand
perfectly and speak with tolerable fluency; and very soon conciliated their
favor. They partook of my wine, and liberally offered me their grog, which is
a mixture of water and a spirituous liquor, highly esteemed by the inhabitants
of the new world. The dispensation, which I obtained, permitting me to drink
wine, must, I think, include all fermented and even distilled liquors. But as
wine only is mentioned, I beg you will consult our great spiritual guide on
this occasion, and inform me of his sacred determination.

After a short voyage I landed yesterday in the bay under a promontory, which
with a disdainful superiority, looks down on the ocean, and even its brother
Ceuta on the opposite coast. It has been in the possession of the English more
than eighty years, who took it from the Spaniards, and, notwithstanding several
attacks and sieges, are still masters of it.

Thou may remember with what stupidity both these nations were charged by
several of our countrymen during the last war, the one for attacking, the other
for defending this useless rock, as it was rashly termed. But their accusations
would have ceased, had they considered, that this Pillar of Hercules is no
inconsiderable prop of British opulence and glory.

I lodge in the house of Solomon Mendez, a Jewish merchant, to whom I brought
letters of introduction, and shall soon embark for Lisbon, from which port I
shall take passage for the new world.

Farewell -- Be mindful of the man, who in the midst of infidels will preserve
his friendship inviolate. Protect me by thy eloquence and influence, from the
open attacks or insidious machinations of my powerful enemies, who most
probably suggested this enterprise for the sole purpose of accomplishing my
ruin. Let not the offspring of thy friend experience the want of a father in
his absence; but above all counsel, assist and console the treasure of my
heart. Assure her, that as she has constituted my chief felicity in Africa, no
European or American shall ever rival her in my affection.

FAREWELL.
LETTER II. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
IT may be disputed, whether the possession of this rock has been beneficial to
Great Britain. The expense of defending it has been perhaps greater than the
commercial advantages derived from it. But it is undoubtedly true, that the
Sublime Port and its dependencies in the Mediterranean, are highly interested
in its continuing under its present masters. No true Spaniard can behold it
without indignation, and consequently a wish, that it should be reunited to the
kingdom from which it was violently rent, and has been ignominiously retained.
It has been, I believe, the principal source of enmity betwixt Spain and
Britain, since it was conquered, and has induced the former nation to
cooperate with France in all her plans for reducing the power of the latter.
Spain, if repossessed of Gibraltar, would probably abate of her attachment to
France, to whose views, it must be confessed, she has long been blindly
subservient. The loss of that vast tract of country in America, now called the
United States, by diminishing the power of Britain in that quarter of the
globe, has lessened the terrors, and consequently the enmity of Spain. A new
nation has started up in America, which, if actuated by ambition, (and what
power has long resisted its impulse) may invade, harass and subjugate several
of the Spanish provinces. The enthusiasm of the invaders, the debility of the
invaded, the poverty of the states and the wealth of the provinces, will render
the conquest of Peru and Mexico by no means difficult. The Bourbon union
already regards the American confederacy with a jealous eye, and will never
forgive this new people for having it in their power to attack their
possessions in the west, although the temptation may be resisted for a long
series of years.

The wars amongst the christian powers have generally, I might say invariably,
promoted the interest of the Ottoman empire. Here then is a certain source of
animosity, which must advance the splendour and power of the Port, and may
restore thousands of Moorish families to the possession of their estates in the
fertile, but neglected provinces of Spain.

You must here permit me to make a short digression in favor of toleration.
Had Spain, when she threw off the Moorish yoke, permitted those people to
retain their religion, she would still have held the first rank amongst the
powers of Europe. Moderation would have reconciled our forefathers, or, at all
events, their immediate offspring, to the superstitions of the Nazarenes. They
were undoubtedly an industrious, as well as a brave and intelligent people.
Their expulsion weakened Spain at least as much, as the banishment of the
protestants reduced the internal resources of France in the reign of Lewis the
XIVth. I shall not attempt a regular dissertation on the fatal effects of
religious intolerance; but shall only remind thee, that the followers of
Mahomet have been more indulgent to those who profess christianity, than the
different sects of christians have frequently been to each other.

It must be confessed, that there are schisms even in our holy religion. The
disciples of Hali (not to mention inferior sects) differ in some particulars
from the followers of our prophet; but we defy the most virulent christian to
prove, that either the Ottoman or Persian government has racked, burned, or
even imprisoned, on a religious account, those who dissent from the established
mode of worship in these respective countries. Some brutal Turks and Persians
have been known, it is true, to speak insultingly to, and even spit upon, a
christian in the streets. But in all possible cases the dispensers of justice
never fail to redress the injury by punishing the aggressor. Here then lies the
difference between mahometans and christians in this particular; the rabble
amongst us are sometimes guilty of religious rancour; but in christian
countries, persecution always proceeds from those who are, or at least are
supposed to be, the most enlightened. What glory to the generous followers of
the bold and intrepid Mahomet! What disgrace to the pretended disciples of the
meek and humble Jesus!

FAREWELL.
LETTER III. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
MY host, I have already informed thee, is a Jew. Thou will consequently
suppose him to be guilty of those vices too generally attributed to his
degenerate nation. Those, of whom thou have any knowledge, living under a
government which despises, insults, and even robs them of the fruits of their
industry, are necessarily reserved in their conversation and austere in their
domestic concerns. If poor, they are scoffed at by the populace; if rich, they
are plundered by their superiors. But in Gibraltar (and I believe throughout
the British dominions) they are as fully protected as any other denomination of
men. They are, it is true, excluded by law from all the offices of state, nor
can they purchase lands. But as their commerce is extensive, their influence is
by no means inconsiderable. Their immense property in the national funds gives
them a degree of weight equally advantageous to themselves and the public. They
are by interest, the strongest of all ties, attached to the country which
protects them, and by their correspondence with each other, however widely
dispersed, are enabled to collect intelligence of all the designs of foreign
cabinets. It may occasion some astonishment, that Britain, which liberally
encourages their commercial enterprises, should preclude them from possessing
landed property. I will not say, that this prohibition proceeds altogether from
wisdom; but I am induced to think, that it has been productive of the happiest
consequences. If the Hebrews had been permitted to purchase lands, many of them
would have become mere farmers; an useful race of men, I confess, but on a
narrow scale, if compared with merchants. The cultivator of the earth in a
country not arrived at maturity, is unquestionably the first character; but in
a more advanced state of society he must yield to the merchant. In the former
state the landholder assists his country simply by his own exertions, or those
of his immediate relatives, and may be justly deemed a patriot; in the latter,
the merchant, by advancing the credit of his nation and often by depressing
that of the enemy, by a few strokes of his pen creates fleets and armies, and
often without bloodshed insures success. He is equally a patriot and more of
the statesman than the landholder.

Our imagination is highly delighted, when we read the histories of ancient
Greece and Rome. We are dazzled by the splendour of their victories, and are apt
to attribute more praise to them, than they deserve. But Alexander, at the head
of united and victorious Greece, paid the highest tribute to the utility of
commerce. If, in the madness of false heroism, he destroyed Tire, he
endeavored to repair the injury by founding Alexandria; and Rome, incapable,
by her genius, of commercial greatness, was long retarded in her progress to
universal dominion by the policy, wealth and valor of Carthage. Hence this
state was entitled to her particular hatred; others she merely conquered and
enslaved; but Carthage she utterly destroyed.

It might be entertaining, and perhaps useful, to trace the probable progress
of Carthaginian power, if, in the last Punic war, she had subdued her imperious
rival. Possessed, at that time, of a very lucrative commerce, she would have
aimed at extending it. Conquest would have been but her secondary object. Her
daring navigators had already visited all the discovered parts of the world,
and had made considerable progress along the coast of Africa, lying on the
Atlantic ocean, toward the equator. After a few more attempts, they would have
doubled the cape of Good Hope, and the treasures of the east would have
rewarded her beneficial industry. That nation, which the silver mines of Spain,
at that time the Mexico of Europe, could not corrupt or enervate, would have
prosecuted her plan with the genuine spirit of commerce, which encourages a
degree of foreign industry, as the reward of superior skill and exertion. Her
factories would have increased to cities; these cities, by a happy contagion,
would have acquired over the adjacent countries a species of dominion, which,
being founded on mutual benefits, would have no less advanced the interests,
than conciliated the affection of the original inhabitants. War, as I have
said, would have been moderately attended to. Released from the dread of a
rival, she would have levied armies and equipped fleets solely to maintain
(allow me the expression) the police of the world.

FAREWELL.
LETTER IV. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
I HAVE given thee an imaginary sketch of the probable power of Carthage, (if
she had subdued her rival) a name, which ought to be mentioned in the annals of
Africa with no less honor than Egypt herself. Let us now review the effects,
which the ambition of Rome produced in the human character.

That nation, which boasted its origin from the union of robbers, was
necessarily, even in its infancy, incited to war by the hope of plunder.
Incapable of industry, and confined within very narrow limits, the Romans could
not exist without distressing their neighbors. Having established a place of
refuge for malefactors, their numbers rapidly increased by the accession of all
the banditti of Italy. Their first chief was supposed to have been the son of
Mars. His actions corresponded with his pretended birth. The murder of his
brother inspired his followers with the highest opinion of his heroism. Who
more fit to reign, said they, than he, who is not restrained by the ties of
nature? This sentiment pervaded all their designs, and was infused into their
children. It was glorious not only to die for their country, but to assassinate
their enemies, and even to kill their own offspring.

Thou art sensible, that I am not indulging a romantic fancy. Every page of the
earlier part of their history is stained with insidious assassination or open
murder. A Scaevola is recorded as a hero, for having thrust into the flames the
hand which failed to murder a king at open war with his nation; and a Brutus is
exalted to almost divine honors for having condemned to die two of his sons,
whom the laws of his country might have banished without his unnatural
intervention.

But thou will say, that the Romans were, at the period I allude to, emerging
from barbarism; that great souls, unenlightened by found philosophy and true
religion, are necessarily guilty of excesses. That they were barbarians at this
period, is granted; but let me ask thee, at what time were they enlightened?
Their kings, with the sole exception of Numa, were the worthy leaders of the
greatest desperados we read of. Their perpetual wars in Italy (I might have
called them massacres) ought to have united the whole world against them, as
the pests of human nature.

Nor can we attribute their ferocious exploits to the examples of their kings.
After the regal authority was abolished, their ambition was insatiable. Italy
soon became too narrow a space for their cruelty and thirst of false glory.
Having repelled Pyrrhus, who had brought succors to his allies, the
Tarentines, they attacked Sicily, at that time allied with Carthage. This war
roused the Carthaginians, who being hitherto chiefly employed in commercial
pursuits, or engaged in war as an inferior object, could not behold the
encroachments and usurpations of the Romans without feeling a just resentment.
They armed, they fought; and after experiencing triumphs as well as defeats,
were exterminated by their ungenerous rivals.

Thus fell Carthage, the emporium of commerce, the nursery of humanity! And so
implacable was the fury of her conquerors, or so destructive have been the
ravages of time, that the works of her artists, and the writings of her poets,
statesmen and philosophers are no where to be found, except the comedies of
Terence and the Periplous of Hanno.

Perhaps I have heightened this picture from a predilection for a people, who
were the ornament of Africa, and masters of the place of my nativity; but I am
of opinion, that every impartial person who reviews the Roman history with the
eye of philosophy, must execrate the insidious policy and unbounded ambition of
that restless and domineering people.

FAREWELL.
LETTER V. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
ALTHOUGH comfortably lodged, I am impatient to enter on my office; but am
doubtful, whether I shall take, passage from some port in France for America,
or from Lisbon. In the mean time my host, to whom alone the object of my
travels is known, endeavors to render my abode in this place as agreeable as
possible. He has introduced me to all his acquaintance, some of whom are men of
letters; the rest are merchants. His wife, although sufficiently domesticated,
partakes of all the amusements of the place; she visits, and is visited by,
several respectable families. In deportment an Algerine, a Frenchman in dress
and language, I was at first the object of their amazement; but after the
second visit it abated, and I am no longer the theme of their whispers.
Accustomed to women who are reserved, bashful and timid, I at first blushed
when spoken to and answered their questions with diffidence and hesitation.
Strange, thought I that the man, who, in his haram, inspired awe and even
terror, should in his turn, be awed into silence, and shrink from the eye of
female observation! But I soon suppressed these unmanly feelings, and entered
into the spirit of their conversation, which was decent and lively.

Thou will probably be amused with an account of our conversation. We were
seated in a large room, which was rendered as cool as possible by a free
admission of air; but the ladies, whose constitutions, I presume, were more
susceptible of heat, than those of the men, kept fanning themselves
perpetually, complaining, at every pause in the conversation, of the intense
heat of the weather. They frequently rose from their seats with seeming hurry,
and, stepping hastily to a mirror, adjusted their neck-dresses with the
greatest composure. Their conversation was as unguarded, as their looks and
motions. They spoke of their absent friends without reserve, and sometimes with
acrimony; that a matron was anxious to be divorced from her husband, and that a
virgin was eager to elope with her lover. I heard with astonishment more than
three female voices at a time. A discourse directed to one lady, was
interrupted by another, and the half-uttered question was mutilated by the
premature answer. A lapdog occasionally attracted their notice, which, by
turns, they fondled, kissed and even spoke to with all the rapture of maternal
tenderness.

This scene, which, if related to me, I should scarcely have believed, was
interrupted by a man, superbly, but fancifully dressed, bearing in both hands an
oblong japanned machine, on which several beautiful vessels were arranged,
filled with a smoking liquid. Imagining him to be one of the guests, I rose
from my seat and bowed to him according to the Nazarene fashion. A roar of
laughter proceeded from the females, and even gentlemen could scarcely abstain
from smiling, whilst a blush of sensibility overspread the cheek of the
attendant; for such I now discovered him to be. He presented the japanned
utensil to each of the company in turn, who took hold of a species of plate
which supported the vessel, filled with the hot liquor. This was sipped by all
the company with evident marks of satisfaction, although but a few minutes
before they had all complained of the intense heat of the weather. Having
attentively observed the ceremonial, I was not at a loss how to act. But as the
attendant approached me, his blushes were renewed and the laugh was repeated,
although not so obstreperously as at first. Just at this instant a boy entered
in great agitation, and whispered his business in the ear of a lady, who was
observed immediately to turn pale. A dozen essence-bottles were instantly
applied to her nostrile, and as many fans were in motion. I was truly
distressed for the lady; but what was my surprise, when I was informed, that
her fainting was occasioned by a misfortune, which had happened to her monkey,
who, in attempting to climb a tree, had fallen and slipped his shoulder. She
sighed, wept and wrung her hands, whilst tears of sympathy trickled down the
cheek of these tender hearted ladies. At length the fair mourner, supported by
two of her particular friends, was conducted to an inner apartment in all the
dignity of sorrow. I embraced this opportunity of retiring to my apartment, by
no means edified by a company where the absent had been maligned, a stranger
insulted, and a dog caressed; and where more sorrow had been lavished on a
monkey, than would have been felt for an expiring child.

How different, my friend, are these women from the beloved of my soul; who is
more intent to hear, than eager to speak; who, satisfied with my love, aims not
at the admiration of others* with whom silence is wisdom and reserve is virtue!

FAREWELL.
LETTER VI. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
AS soon as the company had retired, my friend entered my apartment, and
informed me with great delicacy, that the aukwardness of my deportment had
induced the gentlemen to make very particular enquiries concerning me; that he
had however satisfied their curiosity by informing them, that I was a French
gentleman, addicted to study and fond of retirement; that in some of the
letters, which I brought with me, hints were given him of an apprehended
derangement in my intellects, to prevent which, traveling had been prescribed
by my physicians; but that, for his part, he believed I was only a philosopher.
I thanked him for this explanation of my behavior, and am determined to
improve upon the idea in my travels.

At supper I was introduced to a Rabbi, highly esteemed for his probity and
admired for his learning. In the course of our conversation, I discovered, that
he entertained a very exalted opinion of his own understanding, and was by no
means willing, that his abilities should be overlooked by others. The disgust,
occasioned by the tender hearted ladies, was now worn off, and I felt myself
disposed to relish absurdities of another nature.

I happened to mention, that the present age was greatly indebted to ancient
Greece for literature and science, and bestowed some encomiums on Aristotle. At
the name of this celebrated philosopher I observed the cheek of the Rabbi to
glow with indignation. "That Aristotle, cried he, has enlightened the world, I
readily acknowledge; but it is well known from whom he derived his learning. He
attended his pupil, Alexander the Great, in his conquest of the East, and after
the taking of Jerusalem, was entrusted with the writings of Solomon and the
rest of our sages, which the Levites had preserved in the temple. From these
volumes he extracted that mass of knowledge, which he published as his own, and
then destroyed the originals." This instance of national pride reminded me of a
story, pretended to be believed in the West; that an apostate Monk and a
profligate Jew composed the sacred alkoran, which our illustrious prophet
promulgated for the benefit of the elect. How confirmed in error must that
infidel be, who can utter so improbable a fiction?

The Jews are, I think, the principal merchants in Gibraltar; but may it not be
asked, in what part of the world, where they are on a footing with the rest of
the inhabitants, are they not the most industrious and wealthy part of the
community? Wholly employed in commerce, they always educate their children for
the mercantile profession. We rarely find young persons among them, who aim at
applause by a contemptible display of unnecessary literature or superficial
science. Yet there are amongst them men, whose genius and acquirements might
entitle them to seats in the first academies of the world. As prudence is their
characteristic. they are more solid than shining. They are no longer the object
of religious fury. Even Spain is become tolerant, and Portugal has ceased to be
barbarous. The descendant of Jacob can now find an abode in every civilized
country, and, as long as he obeys the laws, mav bid defiance to rapacity and
bigotry.

It may be reasonably supposed, that the genius of the Hebrews, which for ages
has been oppressed by the rude hand of fanaticism, will now spread and flourish
anew. Every nation, which protects them, is entitled to their exertions. But
whilst they promote the good of the country where they reside, by a beneficial
commerce, they ought not to neglect those arts, which, by adorning, improve
human nature. Agriculture is ready to reward their industry a hundred fold;
their lutes and harps need not continue on willows; edifices, although inferior
to Solomon's palace, may give mankind an idea of their former skill in
architecture; they may range through nature from the hyssop to the cedar; and
whilst they wait the coming of their Messiah, they may render themselves worthy
of his presence, by charity and benevolence.

May the light, which shone from Mecca, irradiate the minds of these infidels,
and guide them into the paths of truth!

FAREWELL.
LETTER VII. TO THE SAME.
GIBRALTAR.
MY host is very desirous of giving me an insight into the manners and
amusements of the Nazarenes, that they may not appear altogether strange to me
on my arrival in the new world. He is fully acquainted with the object of my
travels, and will doubtless be secret, because it is his interest to be so. To
have attempted an enterprise of this nature, without imparting the secret to at
least two foreigners, would have been little short of madness. Although an
oeconomist by nature and habit, I may require more money than the sum I shall
take with me. To draw bills in the new states on a merchant at Algiers would
expose me to inevitable destruction, either from their government or the
populace. I have therefore settled a mode of correspondence with Solomon Mendez
at this place, and shall make similar arrangements at Lisbon with Moses
d'Acosta.

It may be asked, as I travel in the character of a French gentleman, why I
have not established a correspondence with some mercantile house in France? To
this I answer, that, although it is right, for many reasons, to assume the
character of a Frenchman, I think it highly dangerous to entrust my secret with
any of that nation. An affected or real attachment to these new republicans,
the hope of conciliating their favor, or the dread of his own government,
might induce a Frenchman to betray me. Even the vanity of being the subject of
public discourse might stimulate him to my ruin. But from Jews I apprehend no
manner of danger. They will not betray me from either patriotism or vanity.
Their immediate interest will prompt them to be faithful, and they have much to
hope from my future patronage in Algiers.

I might immediately proceed through a part of Spain to Lisbon; but I shall be
less exposed to discovery by taking passage in an English vessel. The mariners
of that nation are rough and unsuspicious. When they hear I am a Frenchman,
they will conclude they know the worst of me.

I had written thus far, when I was invited down stairs to partake of the
amusements of a ball. I accepted the invitation for two reasons. I am supposed
to be a Frenchman; and a refusal might have brought my country into question. I
am going to the American states; it is therefore necessary that I should be as
much acquainted as possible with the English fashions.

On my entering the room, I made a low bow (a circumstance I am careful never
to forget) and seated myself in a chair, which separated two matrons, whose
respectable countenances challenged that veneration, which from their dress and
behavior they seemed unwilling to claim. The hot liquid, which is called tea,
was handed round in the manner, which I have already described. They drank it,
because, I presume, they were cold; and they fanned themselves immediately
afterward, because, I am confident, they were hot. The contest betwixt the tea
and the fan continued for some time. At length the tea retired, and the fan,
which had received great assistance from the handkerchief, remained master of
the field. The musicians now entered, and, having neglected to tune their
instruments before their admission, reminded me of the discordant harmony
mentioned by one of the Roman poets. But this was probably done from the view
of rendering by the contrast their music doubly agreeable. The instruments
being now ready, I looked round with some impatience for the dancing girls,
who, I supposed, were ready in the next room. In the mean time, a young
gentleman, approaching with a hat in his hand, made me a low bow. I thought, I
could do no less than make him another. He bowed again, and proceeded to
another gentleman, who, after giving and receiving a bow, took the hat, and
walking with becoming gravity toward one of the matrons, between whom I was
seated, bowed to her. To convince the company, that she was both young and
active, she rose from her seat with such agility, that her ascending bosom and
his descending nose were almost in contact. The gentleman threw back his right
leg, and, drawing his left leg toward it, bowed most profoundly, his eyes very
modestly fixed on the ground during a few seconds. The lady with an air of
complacency and dignity looking full in his face, and, placing both her hands
on her waist before, gently threw back her left foot, and, in a manner, which I
cannot describe, seemed sinking beneath the level of the floor; then rising
gracefully to her natural height, she tendered him one of her hands, which he
gently received with one of his. He now conducted her toward a door, which
opened into another apartment. I at first imagined they were going to enter it;
but both suddenly turning, he bowed, and she sunk and rose again. The music now
began, and the lady expanded the lower part of her apparel in a manner to me
altogether new and astonishing. After a very short space, he bowed and sunk
again, then both turning half round, the bowing and sinking was repeated. The
gentleman with his right hand now took hold of the lady's left hand,
(consequently only one half of her garments remained expanded) and both of
them, moving slowly and majestically, advanced toward the middle of the room,
when, describing nearly a semicircle, they retreated in opposite directions.
The lady's left hand, being now at liberty, restored her garment to its full
expansion. They continued in motion about two or three minutes, approaching,
crossing and retreating, when the lady, extending and waving her right hand in
a most bewitching manner, the gentleman also extended and waved his; and they
advanced toward each other, till the tips of their fingers met. Then
retreating and again advancing, their left hands performed the same graceful
ceremony. They continued approaching, crossing and retreating about two minutes
longer, when the lady, with a languishing look, letting her garment drop into
its natural position, extended both her arms, and advanced to meet the
gentleman, who with his arms also extended, approached her with more than usual
briskness. After turning round, they repaired to the spot, where the ceremony
began, from which, after three more sinks and as many bows, the gentleman lead
her to her seat; and after one more bow and a concluding sink retired.

This serious mummery concluded, I imagined the dancing girls, according to the
Algerine fashion, would be now introduced; but, to my great astonishment, it
was repeated by almost all the company. A pause of about ten minutes succeeded,
when the ladies, having quitted their seats, began to adjust their dresses,
which I could not perceive had been discomposed; their fans were not neglected
and their handkerchiefs were well employed. After some consultation, attended
with many bows and sinks, the males and females formed two distinct rows, each
male opposite to a female at about the distance of three feet. Hitherto their
countenances had been settled and even severe, their conversation carried on in
whispers, and their demeanor more expressive of devotion than festivity; nay, I
had been almost tempted to believe, that they had been engaged in performing
some religious ceremonies, not unlike the rites of the ancient Corybantes, or
the extatic evolutions of our holy dervises. But how was I deceived! -- One of
the musicians stamping with his foot by way of signal, the sprightliest notes
were heard. In an instant gravity was put to flight, and in my opinion, decorum
suffered not a little. Smiling, capering and nodding ensued. A gentleman turned
a lady round with one hand, then with the other; sometimes three turned round
together, sometimes four, and, occasionally, even six. The circle appeared to
me their favorite figure; but, to prevent giddiness as I suppose, they
sometimes practiced the right line. One figure gave me much satisfaction,
which, after some observation, I discovered to be the arithmetical 8.

Thus far they proceeded on mathematical principles; but in the course of their
fooleries, I thought I perceived a degree of mystic morality. The lady at times
fled from the gentleman, as if she was offended; whilst he, from the hope of
appeasing her anger, followed her with becoming tenderness; but deeming her
implacable, and conscious of his own dignity, gives over the pursuit and flies
from her. She, justly apprehensive of losing him entirely, follows him in turn;
a reconciliation ensues, and their hands are reunited. It was altogether the
most diverting scene I had ever beheld, and I had every reason to be pleased,
that no hired dancing girls had been introduced. The ladies and gentlemen, some
few inadvertencies (which ought not to be mentioned) and one or two slips,
(attended with no bad consequences) excepted, performed their parts with grace
and agility, and, as I was the sole spectator, were entitled to my warmest
applause.

I have as yet received no letters from Algiers; but, should any arrive at this
place after my departure, they will be dispatched to Lisbon by Solomon Mendez.
An English vessel, in which I have already engaged my passage, will sail in a
few days for that celebrated port. Thou will doubtless give me a particular
account of all that has been done or is doing at court or in the city. If
Fatima's grief has subsided, she will inform me of my domestic concerns. I have
invested her with sufficient authority for the government of my haram; but in
dubious cases she will apply to thee for advice. Her beauty at first inflamed
my heart; her discretion, I am certain, will secure my esteem.

FAREWELL.
LETTER VIII. TO THE SAME.
LISBON.
I AM induced to think that sea-sickness resembles the smallpox, with which we
are never afflicted a second time; but I speak with becoming diffidence, not
choosing to build an hypothesis on a single fact.

My voyage from Gibraltar to this beautiful port was in every respect
delightful. The winds were favorable and gentle, the sea as smooth as I could
have wished, and the azure of the sky seldom obscured by a cloud. I found
myself so much at ease, that I was almost constantly on the deck.

Doubtless, thought I, if the sea was never agitated by tempests, a
considerable part of mankind would prefer it for their abode; like the Chinese
and Hollanders who, with their families, reside on rivers in floating mansions.
Several occupations might be followed as well on the sea as the land. Raw
materials, supplied by the cultivator of the earth, might be manufactured by
the inhabitants of the ocean. A tarif, regulating the commerce of the
terraqueous globe, might easily be established; fish might be bartered for
flesh and vegetables; and, since the ladies on both elements must have
ornaments, pearls might be exchanged for diamonds; nor would the powers of the
earth have any reasonable excuse for waging war, as long as any part of the
ocean remained uncolonized. Archimedes asserted, that, if he had but a spot to
stand upon, he would play at tennis with the ball which we inhabit; for the
establishment of my system, I require but the annihilation of tempests. Nor
should the sea-scurvy be mentioned as an objection by the medical faculty, till
the plague is eradicated by their skill; the latter disorder being at least as
destructive as the former.

Before we passed the rock of Lisbon, I observed a particular archness in the
looks of the sailors, which gave me no uneasiness, as I was acquainted with the
cause of it. My friend, Solomon Mendez, had informed me of a custom amongst
English mariners, of exacting a tribute from all on board on their first seeing
this celebrated rock. I readily complied with an usage which, like many others
as pertinaciously adhered to, has no foundation in nature or reason. The wine
was produced; the sailors wished me health with a surly benevolence, and we
jovially entered this noble port, which for several years was the center of
commerce between Europe and Asia.

Thou art not unacquainted with the exertion of maritime enterprise and
military prowess, which distinguished this people in the fifteenth century. The
secrecy with which they conducted their plan of deposing king Philip, their
prudence in choosing the duke of Braganza for their monarch, their conquests in
Asia, and their settlements in Africa and America, contributed to render them a
rich and a glorious nation. They may even at present be considered as a people
possessed of a considerable share of commerce; but their national valor is no
longer the theme of panegyric.

The mere historian is capable of giving us a regular detail of events. It
belongs to the philosopher alone to trace the rise and fall of national
character, and to investigate those causes, which exalt men to heroism, or sink
them in servitude. I confess myself unequal to the task; but shall only remark,
that the revolution in Portugal was simply a change of masters. Don Juan was
certainly a brave and humane Prince; but the royal authority, on the deposition
of Philip, was in no respect restrained or regulated. Thus their political
happiness depending on the characters of their succeeding princes, the
Portugueze have shared the fate of other nations in similar circumstances; they
have been wisely governed.

It has been my fate, since I left Algiers, to travel with Englishmen and
sojourn with Jews. I am lodged at the house of Isaac d'Acosta, whose civility
makes ample amends for his extreme bigotry. Methinks I hear thee exclaim, are
not bigotry and civility incompatible? By no means; a wolf subdued by his
keeper, is a harmless animal in his presence; and this Jew, not entirely
recovered from the dread of the inquisition, is a tractable being.

May the great inquisition of reason be established throughout the world! Thus
shall our holy faith be established in the hearts of the barbarous idolator,
and the obstinate Jew and Christian!

FAREWELL.
LETTER IX. TO THE SAME.
LISBON.
THE Hebrew religion being odious to the people and obnoxious to the
government, my host is but little troubled with the company of the Portugueze.
Nor is his disposition or talents suited to liberal conversation. To me he is
distant; to his family morose. How different from Solomon Mendez, whose house
was the abode of cheerfulness! I am impatient to begin my voyage, confident,
that I shall find more society on the Atlantic than in this populous city. But
let me not be hasty or unjust. Perhaps his reserve is the result of
constitution; or his affairs may be deranged; or his domestic felicity
impaired. He has probably been rendered unhappy by a disobedient child or a
false friend. In short, I am willing to assign any reason for his supercilious
distance, rather than attribute it to a bad disposition.

Yesterday after dinner I had some conversation with a Rabbi, who is in
appearance less arrogant, than his brother at Gibraltar, but more base and
wicked. As a specimen of his conversation, I shall relate a tale, which he
told. "When God created Adam, said the Rabbi, he formed him so high and large,
that his head reached the heavens, and his sides extended from the east to the
west. The angels, terrified at his appearance, implored the protection of the
Creator who, to rid them of their fears, put his hand on the head of Adam and
reduced his size to one thousand cubits; but, according to other Jewish
doctors, to less. His first wife was called Lileth, who, being formed of as
good earth as himself, disdained to submit to his authority, and flying up into
the air, refused to return to her husband, although entreated by hosts of
angels." From this improbable fiction he inferred the extreme degeneracy of
man, and the inherent obstinacy of woman. At the conclusion of this legend,
equally improbable and absurd, Isaac nodded assent; but his family discovered
evident marks of dissatisfaction. I wanted no further proof of the baseness of
this sanctified villain, who aimed at ingratiating himself with his patron by
destroying his peace of mind. The cause of his discontent was now evident. A
domestic traitor imbittered his life, and established in his bosom that worst
of inquisitions, a distrust of his own family.

I shall certainly disclose my sentiments to d'Acosta on this head before my
departure; my conscience otherwise will not be at rest.

As my stay will be short, I shall not have it in my power to give thee an
adequate idea of this city, which I am told, is as well built, as it was before
the earthquake. Portugal is not my object. Her weakness is too well known at
Algiers to create apprehensions. Ignorance, sloth and barbarism characterise
her sons, and her daughters are the victims of pride and superstition. Her
streets swarm with monks, and her convents are crowded with nuns. Too eager in
the pursuit of commerce, she neglected agriculture and manufactures. Her gold,
which enriches others, is dross to her, and the precious stones of the Brazils
can scarcely procure bread for her children. Yet this country was not always
contemptible. Her people were once industrious, and her priests were learned.
She could boast a Camoens and a Gama, and was governed by an Emanuel and a
Braganza; whose names are at this day less known in Portugal, than in any other
part of Europe. Surely this nation was ordained to accumulate wealth to reward
the industry of the English and the valor of the Algerines!

A philosophical history of commerce, would be an invaluable present to
mankind. But if ever it should appear, I will venture to predict, that its
principles will be but little attended to. The ambition of princes and the
avarice of merchants will never be restrained or regulated by systems. The
custom-house books alone will be read by the former. If the imports have been
productive, nothing further will be required. The merchant, in summing up his
accounts, will be perfectly content, if there be a consiberable balance in his
favor; but experience evinces, that Britain has derived more solid wealth from
the tin mines of Cornwall, than Spain from the silver mines of Mexico; and the
nutmegs of Borneo, have been more beneficial to Holland, than the diamonds of
Brazil to Portugal.

FAREWELL.
LETTER X. TO THE SAME.
LISBON.
THE ship, in which I have engaged a passage, will sail for the new world
tomorrow. I shall soon behold a region, which has never been trod by an
Algerine. A mixture of hope and fear, of delight and terror, occupies my heart;
but religion and patriotism support me in the conflict. I consider myself as
another Empedocles. Anxious to explore the causes of those convulsions, which
agitate Aetna and lay waste the fair fields of Sicily with liquid fire, he
perished in the glorious attempt. My fate may be similar; but my glory shall be
greater. He died without accomplishing his object; but if I arrive in the new
states, which have lately been the political Aetna of the world, I shall seize
every opportunity of acquiring and communicating information.

A vast field lies before me. An extensive coast, abounding in harbors; an
immense tract of country, divided into thirteen states, but united, with
respect to national exertion, under one head; a soil, capable of producing all
the necessaries, and most of the luxuries of life, the greater part of which is
still covered with the noblest timber, and abounds in the most useful mines,
the inexhaustible materials of future navies; towns rising into cities, and
cities already aspiring to be the emporiums of commerce; the inhabitants free,
active and intelligent; their governments mild and enlightened; religion
promoted by a benevolent toleration, and morality enforced by the brightest
examples; these blessings have been founded throughout Europe, as eminently
possessed by the new states. The echo has reached Algiers and attracted the
attention of her vigilant regency.

But as in all matters of consequence, vague conjectures are indulged and hasty
conclusions are drawn; as facts are often exaggerated by fancy, or
misrepresented by interest; as truth has been too frequently violated by
enthusiasm, and philosophy itself has been the dupe of hypothesis, it was
thought necessary to employ a man of observation and experience, who, by
residing on the spot, might separate the specious from the solid, and, divested
of prejudice, be directed solely by candor. After many consultations, the eyes
of our governors were fixed on me. My friends imputed to me the necessary
qualifications, and my enemies in silence expressed their approbation. I
accepted the office with affected joy; for had I hesitated but a moment, my
courage and my patriotism would have been questioned; and the malice of my
enemies would have been as effectually gratified by my disgrace at home, as it
can be by want of success abroad. The former was inevitable; the latter is but
probable.

All letters of consequence from me shall be sent under cover to Solomon Mendez
at Gibraltar, who will take care to forward them to Algiers. All letters
diected to me from Algiers must also come through his hands.

Having now arranged our mode of correspondence, I must trespass on your
patience with respect to my private concerns. I received from the treasury the
day before I sailed, two thousand Johanneses for the purpose of defraying my
expenses, with assurance of a reward adequate to my trouble and risque. A part
of this sum I have deposited in the hands of Solomon Mendez; the remainder I
take with me, together with a sum belonging to myself.

No man of prudence ought to defer the disposal of his affairs till the hour of
sickness. My will therefore, which I delivered, properly executed, to thee,
will convince Fatima that I have not been unmindful of her attachment and
fidelity; the rest of my property, (some few marks of my esteem excepted) is
settled on my child. The younger part of my slaves I have emancipated; the rest
will not only have freedom, but competency; I owe no money, and all that I
could claim from others, was either received or compounded before I failed; so
that this executorship, if I should die, will be attended with as little
trouble as possible.

Perhaps what I have just written will appear to thee to be the result of
timidity. But will thou rashly conclude, that I want courage, because I am
prudent? Once for all, let me tell thee, that I go prepared to execute my
commission, with a mind as unruffled, as when under thy command I assisted in
repelling the enemies of our faith and country. I anticipate the honors, which
our government shall bellow on me; I hear the shouts of applauding thousands; I
grasp the hand of congratulating friendship; I am clasped in the folds of
exulting love -- farewell -- let Fatima know -- but enough --

FAREWELL.
LETTER XI. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
I AM arrived. I tread on the western continent. A native of Algiers is lodged
under the roof of a Pennsylvanian. Yet the genius of the state seems
unconscious of danger, and the unsuspecting crowd are as busily employed in
their affairs or pleasures, as if I was at home extended on my sopha. So let
them be. Released from the fatigues and perils of war, let their young men
indulge in dissipation, and their maidens in festivity; let their farmers
resume their long neglected ploughs, whilst their merchants anticipate their
ideal thousands. I am pleased with their bustle. The more they are occupied,
the less notice will they take of me. The mind, which is eager in the pursuit
of wealth or pleasure seldom stops short to indulge curiosity. The cloud, which
prevented the Carthaginians from perceiving Aeneas and Achates, those
illustrious spies, was undoubtedly the hurry of business.

I have delivered my letters of introduction to the gentlemen to whom they are
addressed. These letters describe me as a French gentleman, who wishes to see
the country before he engages in either commerce or agriculture. Some hints are
given of a domestic misfortune, which has rendered his own country disagreeable
to him. I decline dining abroad, but in the afternoon occasionally visit a few
families. As it is known that I came last from Lisbon, no French letters could
be expected from me. I am yet at an inn, which is crowded with foreigners, but
shall remove shortly to lodgings in a private family, which admits but one
stranger. The few Frenchmen whom I have seen, finding me distant, are
determined to be equally so. Their pride in this particular is far from being
disagreeable to me.

A part of my money is deposited in a bank, which in its principles resembles
many of the European banks; but as I am not thoroughly acquainted with its
plan, I shall not entrust it with all my stock.

You cannot as yet expect any thing particular from me. In general I am pleased
with the appearance of the people. Their deportment is gentle and unassuming,
and my ears have not as yet been offended with many oaths.

I observe a particular class of men, their hair loose and unpowdered, their
hats uncocked, their linen without ruffles, and their coats, which are
generally light colored, with mohair buttons. Can these be the officers and
soldiers of the late army, who, having parted with their military dress, still
affect an uniformity in apparel? I am convinced I am right; and I think I
perceive in them a commanding look and an air of dignity, which are more
readily acquired in camps than cities.

I was called to this employment so suddenly, that I had not time to read many
books written on American subjects. The British colonies on this continent were
as little known to the Algerines before the last war, as the most remote parts
of Europe and Asia. We had often heard of Peru and Mexico through the medium of
Spain; but a Pennsylvanian was less known to us, than a Greenlander or a
Chinese. They shall however have no reason in future to complain of our
neglect. Due attention shall be paid by us to their national ensigns on the
ocean; nor shall their government or resources continue unnoticed. They have
invited all the mercantile world to their ports. Our countrymen, more modest
than others, shall visit only their coasts. Several nations have complimented
them with splendid embassies. Averse to magnificence and ostentation I live
among them without ceremony, and shall not flatter their pride or excite their
avarice by promises of commercial treaties never intended to be performed. If
my employment was known, it is probable that I should be condemned to die by
their tribunals, unless torn in pieces by the populace. How ungrateful, how
ungenerous would such conduct be, since it can be proved, that the councils of
nations, as well as the behavior of individuals, may be benefited by a
consciousness of their being narrowly watched!

I spend a part of the day in walking through the city, partly to preserve my
health, and partly to imitate the air and manners of the people. My head is
perfectly reconciled to my hat, and my instep, which at first was sorely
oppressed, cheerfully submits to the tyranny of the buckle. My body, which was
at first rendered almost incapable of action by my Lisbon tailor, performs its
evolutions, according to the discipline of the country, with ease and agility,
and at my meals I handle my arms with sufficient dexterity. How dull must the
Russians have been, who spent a century in attaining accomplishments, which I
have acquired in a few weeks. But as vanity is dangerous and offensive, I
suppress its emotions.

When I suryey my person in a mirror, I rejoice for two reasons; first, that I
resemble a Christian, and secondly, that I am not observed by an Algerine. I
have so much the air of a Christian slave on his first landing at Algiers, that
if Fatima were to see me in this dress, I should risque the loss of her
affection.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XII. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
THESE Philadelphians seem to me as well calculated to excel in commerce as to
triumph in war. Their river is crowded with shipping, and their warehouses and
shops with merchandise. Almost every man I meet is or seems to be a merchant. I
am frequently jostled in the street; but how can I be offended, since I as
frequently jostle others. Even the pride of a Castilian (if a Castilian could
condescend to mix with traders) would not be offended at their well meaning
bustle. But as I have nothing to sell, and want to buy but a few trifling
articles, I shall not expose myself a second time to the risque of suffocation
in a place, which they call the City Coffee-house.

It is surprising to see the immense quantities of rich manufactures imported
into a country, which, as I am informed, has no silver mines or any other rare
production of nature. These importations, I am led to think, can only injure
the country by introducing a premature luxury with its concomitant evils.

In most nations there are three sorts of tyranny; the first civil; the second
ecclesiastical; the third I shall call the tyranny of fashion. The first is
well known at Algiers; the second has been heard of; but the third is
altogether unknown. The Pennsylvanians have known but little of the first, and
nothing of the second; but the greater part of them is grievously oppressed by
the last.

The origin of fashion is perhaps coeval with the creation of man; but the more
enlightened are of opinion, that, immediately after the fall, she sprang from
the head of Eve, as Minerva is said to have issued from the brain of Jupiter.
At first simple and artless, she indulged herself in innocent levities. She
formed a head-dress of flowers for Eve, and another of green leaves for Adam.
But the father of mankind, with becoming dignity, rejected the present, till,
persuaded by Eve, he consented to wear it to screen him, as he said, from the
too powerful rays of the sun. After this success the influence of fashion
extended to their sons and daughters. Her invention grew more lively and her
exertions more varied. In these days, it is recorded, she was attended by
simplicity, a nymph whose cheeks vied in freshness with the blushes of the
morn, and whose limbs, frequently exercised in the chase, excelled in symmetry
and strength. Guided by simplicity the reign of fashion was gentle and
delightful. The maidens, obeying her dictates, were lovely and tender; and the
young men, who were then under the dominion of reason, were sincere and
affectionate. The fragrant fields, the delicious fruits and the transparent
streams, constituted the luxuries of man, whilst the harmony of the soul was
improved by the music of the groves.

But as happiness, since the great transgression, has been inconstant and
fleeting, a gradual degeneracy took place. The young men became thoughtless,
irregular and dissipated. Rejecting reason and disdaining the guidance of
simplicity, many of them were seduced by the siren voluptuousness; others
pursued the fantom false glory, and not a few were infatuated by the demon
avarice. The maidens finding the young men growing inattentive to their charms,
and determined at all events on exciting admiration, were, with much
reluctance, compelled to dismiss simplicity and call in art to the assistance
of fashion. By this alliance fashion was at first strengthened; but afterward
weakened. The maidens, it is true, triumphed in the contest, but soon abused
their victory. Many of them, by the advice of art, formed a league with levity
and caprice, and some of them have gone so far as to set humanity at defiance,
and are closely allied to deceit and cruelty. It is difficult to say, how this
unnatural warfare will end; but it is very probable, that, unless matters are
speedily compromised by fair concessions, the young men will have recourse to
insensibility and neglect, and the young women will yield to peevishness and
despair.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XIII. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
I HAVE seen the building, which they call the University; but know nothing of
its regulations. A worthy citizen lately told me, in the joy of his heart, that
boys are well instructed in it on the English plan, and at a pretty cheap rate.

I am truly astonished, that the wisdom of the state has not established a
system of education adapted to its constitution and government. Are they not
aware, that the education of youth ought to be particularly attended to in
republics? I am convinced, they are. Their good sense is unquestionable; but
they appear to me too much attached to the customs of the old continent*

In the universities of Europe, as I have been well informed, great pains are
taken to render the students as useless as possible to themselves, their
families and their countries. What benefits can be derived from societies,
where, after much misspent application and an irreparable loss of time, a
young man is imperfectly instructed in two or three unnecessary languages;
where reason is fettered by logical rules, and religion involved in
metaphysical subtilties, and where the mind, too often disgusted by unsuitable
studies, loses all relish for either elegant literature or useful science.
Boys, even in their infancy, are too often designed for a particular profession
by their parents or friends. This is evidently absurd, in as much as neither
their talents or inclinations can be consulted at so early a period. But the
absurdity is enhanced, when the youth, destined to the mercantile profession,
must pursue those studies, which as he advances in life, he will find
altogether useless and and scarcely ornamental, and which are only calculated
to render the lawyer a wrangling sophist, and the divine an artful polemic.
Would any man in his senses apprentice his son to a tailor, when he intends him
to be a shoemaker?

When I know more of their plan of education, I shall inform thee more fully on
that head, and shall only observe at present, that the most powerful operations
of nature are performed in the simplest manner. The soil, the shower and the
sun, are sufficient to produce the towering oak, as well as the humble shrub.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XIV. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
THE legislative authority of this state is lodged in a single house, elected
by the people, and is called the Assembly. The executive power, elected also by
the people, is lodged in a Council. The president of the council is appointed
by the joint ballot of the assembly and council. The judicial authority is
separate from both. Every seventh year a Council of Censors is elected by the
people, who are authorized to point out all violations of the constitution, and
in short all state misconduct. This council has also the right of calling a
convention, who are empowered to explain and amend the constitution. This short
sketch may give thee some idea of this republic.

The constitution, which seems to have been dictated by wisdom, has been
greatly censured by some political writers. Their grand objection appears to
be, that as the legislative authority is lodged in a single house, there can be
no balance. Even if this be granted, to what will it amount? As the house can
never be unanimous in any serious attempt on the rights of their constituents,
the minority will always operate as a check, till the people are alarmed. I am
greatly mistaken, if this check will not be adequate to the danger; if not,
what can be said, but that the people have been weighed in a balance, and found
altogether light and unworthy of political freedom. In short, no form of
republican government can long oppress a brave and enlightened people. If their
constitution is experimentally found to be good, they will maintain it; but the
best will prove defective, if they are ignorant of their rights, or inattentive
to the preservation of them.

Men of lively imaginations are fond of similes. The constitution of
Pennsylvania, says one, is like a loaded wagon -- and he fairly proves the
resemblance. A good constitution, says another, is like a pair of scales -- and
he also establishes his simile.

When I was a lad I was thought to possess a tolerable knack of making similes.
In middle aged men fancy begins to flag; however I will try my hand.

The superiority of a single legislature is thus proved. --

FIRST PROOF.
The constitution of Pennsylvania may be compared to a football, which is
kicked from goal to goal by two parties or sets of players, with alternate
triumph. The spectators are deeply interested in the success of the one or the
other party. Well kicked, says one; there it goes, cries a second; here it
comes, exclaims a third; what a fall neighbor Bustle has had, roars a fourth;
he is up again, like a clever fellow, bellows a fifth. Huzza! huzza! -- But if
a second football should be introduced, the greatest confusion would ensue.
Two foot-balls at once! What a solecism in that manly exercise!

SECOND PROOF.
The constitution of Pennsylvania may be compared to a piece of beef transfixed
by a spit, and placed horizontally before a rousing fire. The spit (and with it
the beef) is turned round regularly by an ingenious piece of mechanism called a
jack, which is proved, by daily experience, to be equal to the talk. But should
a speculative cook introduce a second jack, which should attempt to govern the
other end of the spit, who can affirm, that this innovation would be productive
of any solid advantage? On the contrary, would not this second jack be at once
an expensive and useless article, not to mention Betty's extraordinary trouble
in winding up two jacks, and her mistress's loss of temper in finding the
dinner every day either too much or too little done.

THIRD PROOF.
The constitution of Pennsylvania may be compared to a hen's egg, (a sound one,
I mean; an addled egg will not suit my purpose) placed between two hands, the
fingers of which are intermixed with each other. The ends of the egg being
equally pressed by the hands, the egg will continue unbroken, although the
greatest strength should be exerted. But should another egg be placed in
contact with the first, the least pressure would infallibly crush both; and
thus the hands would be in a filthy condition.

In a republic parties must exist; perhaps you will say I have already caught
the infection; but I sincerely hope, it will not be imputed to partiality, that
I adduce but one simile in confirmation of the opposite opinion.

The constitution of Pennsylvania is like a wheel-barrow. That state has but
one legislature, and a wheel-barrow but one wheel. -- Good -- Now if this
wheel-barrow be managed carelessly or rashly (and those who direct
wheel-barrows are as liable to neglect and inadvertency, as those who
superintend states) it will most probably be overturned, and its contents
discharged into the kennel; whereas if a double wheeled wheel-barrow had been
provided, it would not have been by half exposed to so much danger; but your
marketing most probably would have been brought in safety to your door.

Whilst these infidels are disputing about government, may thou continue an
ornament to thy country, and a terror to a corrupted populace, whose vices, if
they were ruled by even the mildest laws, would merit the severest punishments!

FAREWELL.
LETTER XV. TO FATIMA.
PHILADELPHIA.
TWO of thy letters are now before me. Why will thou tear my heart with thy
tender complaints? Art thou not always present to me? Thrice every day I
address myself to Allah to comfort thee in my absence.

Even this absence, which thou call cruel and intolerable, ought to endear
me to thee. To render myself worthy of thy charms, thy tenderness, and thy
virtue, I defied the terrors of the raging ocean, and have ventured to breathe
the same air with profane christians. But my rewards, though slow, will more
than compensate my toils and dangers. Algiers will acknowledge my services, and
Fatima will again bless me with her love.

Our child, thou say, is sickly. Thy maternal care may be excessive. Fatima,
remember, that thy child, however dear, has no right to rob me of thy health.

In Pennsylvania enthusiasm is frequently found; but the influence of
superstition is trifling. I have lately heard the rhapsody of a female
preacher. I figure to myself thy extreme surprise on this occasion. Yes,
Fatima, a female preacher, in a garb, long, white and flowing, her head
uncovered, her hair in natural ringlets, her countenance by turns expressive of
pity and anger, of joy and terror, proclaimed to an attentive audience the
coming of Christ. Yet she is not supposed to be mad. Although women are
forbidden by one of the first Nazarene teachers to speak in their churches, or
to appear in them with their heads uncovered, yet this woman, in violation of
both these precepts, dared to appear in the manner I have described. She was
not only listened to attentively, but even excited tears. Fatima, this woman,
thus apparelled, or, to speak more properly, almost unapparelled, preached to a
crowded congregation in a civilized country.

What shall I tell thee of a city, where women appear barefaced in the streets,
and, what is still more extraordinary, the men behold them with insensibility.
I saw this very morning a man in decent apparel accost a well-dressed woman;
grasping her ready hand, he led her across the street, and she thanked him with
a smile, to which no man but her husband could be entitled. Even in the
churches they gaze on the men with undaunted eyes, nor have I, since my
arrival, seen a blush on a female cheek, a child about ten years old excepted,
who walking carelessly, had been in danger of falling. When the cheek ceases to
blush, the heart, I conclude, is grown callous to shame. Yet are they lovely in
the extreme. Nature has profusely adorned them with charms, but a bad education
diminishes the luster of their beauties. They often speak before they are
spoken to; they smile in the presence of men, and a giddy girl, the other day,
not more than sixteen, at the tea-table, the room full of company and in the
sight and hearing of her venerable parents, laughed immoderately at the
distress of a young gentleman who had scalded his lips in sipping his tea
somewhat hastily. She threw herself backward in her chair, then forward, and
continued agitated by convulsive laughter more than two minutes, her cheeks
glowing, her eyes darting fire, and her bosom rising and falling during this
paroxism of outrageous mirth. At length rising hastily and tripping light as a
woodnymph, she darted out of the room, and retired up stairs. After a short
absence she returned to the company with a countenance, as composed, as if she
had been guilty of no indiscretion.

If this young woman were blessed with thy conversation, how would thy precepts
and example at once enlighten her understanding and improve her conduct! She
would learn from thee, that not even the beauty of a Houri can atone for the
levity of laughter.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XVI.
TO -- AT ALGIERS. PHILADELPHIA.
THE attention paid to the body of a deceased friend in this city is decent and
amiable; but the manner to a stranger must appear particular and ludicrous.

A man is employed to announce the death of a citizen. For this purpose he raps
at all the doors, and in a loud and solemn tone of voice invites the family to
the funeral. I went yesterday to purchase a pair of gloves at a shop, the
mistress of which is pregnant. Whilst I was busied in trying them on, a
trumpeter of death, thrusting his funereal face into the shop, pronounced the
doleful invitation in shrill and tremulous accents. The woman turned pale and
had scarcely strength to call for a glass of water. Mentioning this affair in
company, I was told, with an air of indifference, that the woman must have had
weak nerves and was probably a stranger.

In one of my late walks, I perceived a number of these men, whom in a former
letter I conjectured to be the officers of the late army, entering the door of
a large building. Finding that they were followed by several not dressed in
uniforms, I took the liberty of entering with them. I perceived a great number
of them seated on benches, placed at equal distances with great exactness. I
sat down amongst them, prepared, if questioned, to have told them, with the
greatest politeness, that I was a French gentleman on my travels, and would be
extremely happy in being honored with their acquaintance; but not one of them
took the least notice of me or of each other. Their ladies, who seemed also to
wear uniforms, were seated separate from the men. An awful silence prevailed,
which I had hitherto imagined was not numbered amongst christian virtues,
especially when ladies are present. At length, the men began occasionally to
groan, and the women to sigh. An air of serious sorrow was diffused over all
their faces, which (with shame I confess it) affected me with horror. Not a
word was uttered; but the sighs and groans were repeated with scarce any
intermission. Surely, thought I, this is a scene of enchantment. For what
purpose are these people assembled? mirth cannot be their object; for they are
all serious, and some even sorrowful; nor can mercantile business be transacted
in such profound silence. Have they committed excesses during the war, which
they publicly meet to expiate? This cannot be the case; for their humanity was
as conspicuous as their valor; besides, with what cruelties can their wives
and daughters be charged, who seem equally sorrowful and penitent? A thought
now prevailed in my mind, which I am ashamed to confess even to thee. I
suspected, that I was seated amongst some of those benevolent Genii, whose
mavelous exploits are the subjects of our romances. Impressed with this idea,
and determined on being convinced, I trod, as if by accident on the toes of my
next neighbor. The young man withdrew his foot somewhat hastily and looked as
if he felt pain; but continued as silent as before. He is composed of flesh and
blood, thought I with much satisfaction, and doubtless their females, many of
whom were pretty, are equally so.

At length I concluded, that they were assembled to see and hear one of those
exhibitions (I think they are called tragedies) with which the Nazarenes are
extremely delighted, because they make them weep; but that the performers had
disappointed them.

The whole assembly, as if a signal had been given, rose at once from their
seats, and quitted the house; and I repaired to my lodgings, ruminating on the
strangest scene I had ever beheld.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XVII. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
THE object of my voyage to this continent, was to inform our illustrious
regency of the actual strength of these states, and their future probable
exertions; of the manners and pursuits of the inhabitants; their commerce,
manufactures and agriculture; their government and laws.

Confident that the substance of my letters will be more attended to than their
style, and that little method can be expected from a man, who commits to paper
partial and incoherent information collected each day; I continue with
cheerfulness to execute my commission, not doubting, that due allowance will be
made by my illustrious masters for the weakness and incapacity of their slave.

The strength of these states does not consist in numerous and disciplined
armies, or well appointed fleets. When his country demands his service, every
citizen is a soldier. The army, which repelled the British forces, it is true,
exists no more, except a few companies sufficient to check the inroads of the
Indians; but their militia in the midst of peace is preserved in decent
discipline. The people being free and their enemies remote, there is no
occasion for a standing army.

The last war, has convinced these states of two serious truths; they are too
strong to be conquered, and too weak to think of conquering others.

Although an Algerine, devoted to the service of my country, you, must permit
me at times to be the philosopher -- at least in words. There can be no excuse
for one nation making war on another, but the want of sustenance. This people
if but moderately industrious, will not for ages make use of this plea. Their
soil is productive and their climate not unfavourable; nor is their population
by any means proportioned to their extent of territory.

Their governments are censured by several amongst themselves. These censures
are the strongest proofs of the excellence of their governments, since no man
is punished for his censures. Were an Algerine supposed to have imagined only
in a dream what a Pennsylvanian speaks, prints, publishes, maintains and
glories in, he would suffer the severest tortures.

The manners and behavior of the people correspond with their government. No
man creates or feels terror. The national countenance is therefore mild, and
the national deportment manly. There are undoubtedly some unworthy citizens;
but the noblest soil often nourishes the most venomous serpents.

Of their private virtues I can only say, that benevolence must prevail among a
people, who build hospitals and never enquire about a man's religion.

The Pennsylvanians, said an exiled foreigner to me, are inhospitable.

They have given thee a country, said I.

They want the graces, said a fop.

But they are modest, said I, and capable of improvement.

They do not, said a dancing master, sufficiently encourage merit.

A worthy blacksmith, whispered I, with whom I have some acquaintance, will
give thee employment.

Their women are distant and insensible, said a coxcomb.

They are fully apprised of thy merit, said I.

Yet it must be confessed, that the trading part of the community is
discontented. By excessive importations the manufactures have been greatly
injured, and the merchant begins to think, that commerce on a small scale would
have been more advantageous, than the wild plan, which has been pursued. As
soon as the war was over, the American republics seemed to have inconsiderately
adopted the commercial plan of Holland. That commonwealth, superabounding in
men, wisely encouraged commerce. Situated in the center of Europe, her ships
supplied one nation with the produce and manufactures of another. She even
established colonies in Asia and America. Her councils at home were wise and
steady, and her triumphs abroad were at once brilliant and solid. Her heroes
protected her merchants, and her merchants honored and rewarded her heroes.

The American states are in a very different situation. The number of
inhabitants bears no proportion to the extent of their country. The arts are
still in their nonage, and many of them in their cradles. Why therefore did her
statesmen borrow maxims from rich and triumphant Holland, when Switzerland,
laborious and frugal, could have furnished them with better.

May I venture to say, that there is a taste in government as well as the
polite arts. Inattentive to the want of proportion and symmetry, we are too
often captivated by the brilliancy of the colors.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XVIII. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
I HAVE given thee a hasty sketch of the constitution of Pennsylvania, and
intend shortly to acquaint thee with the system, which constitutes her a member
of a confederation, consisting of thirteen states represented by a Congress.

The constitution of this congress, which assisted by patriotism, was found
adequate to the exigences of war, is discovered to be defective in peace; like
a ship, which having resisted the fury of the storm, is endangered by the
hollow swell during a calm.

A Convention consisting of members from all the states, is expected to meet in
this city for the purpose of revising the confederation. It is expected, that
their resolves will silence all disputes by remedying every grievance. For my
part I doubt the success of their deliberations, although sanctioned by the
presence and enlightened by the wisdom of their late commander in chief.

General Washington, who has done as much as any hero, and a great deal more
than most, who have been flattered with that title, resides, as a private
gentleman, on his estate in Virginia. Those who are honored with his
conversation, are delighted with his affability, vivacity and solid sense. In
the field he has manifested the qualities of the general and the hero; at his
abode he displays the accomplishments of the gentleman, and the virtues of the
husband and friend. But the most arduous task remains; the talents of the
legislator are now expected from him.

During the heat of the war the confederation was formed by the noblest efforts
of patriotism and wisdom. But patriotism was sometimes more active than
judicious; and wisdom often saw defects, which she could not remedy.

The state of Rhode Island, the least considerable in the union, has hitherto
defeated the best commercial plans. She has refused to send members to this
convention, and by this conduct will defeat unanimity, and countenance
defection and revolt.

The state of Massachusett's Bay is now convulsed by the desperation of
factious individuals; but the wiser part of the community happens to constitute
a majority. Some blood however has been shed, and more is apprehended. In
Massachusett's Bay, an ignorant multitude, headed by Shays, have attempted --
they know not what; but in Rhode Island the opposition to foederal measures is
conducted by the government, the members of which are guided by their private
interest which they perfectly understand.

As interest is generally a more prevailing rule of action than justice or
patriotism, it is highly probable that Rhode Island will persevere in her
opposition; and compulsive measures, should they be adopted by the other
states, will but excite resentment and provoke resistance.

Ever attentive to the welfare and glory of my country, I have revolved in my
mind the means of rendering this very probable revolt beneficial to Algiers,
and glorious to the Sublime Port, by establishing an Ottoman Malta on the
coasts of America. An European Bonneval was received, honored and promoted by
the ministers of the Port. Is not an American Shays entitled to equal rewards,
if capable of rendering equal services? Should this idea merit your
approbation, I will immediately (but with due caution) commence a negotiation
with Shays, the Massachusetts insurgents, and the refractory leaders of the
revolt in Rhode Island. They will without doubt expect a large sum of money, in
which, I think, they ought to be gratified. But the gold, for greater security,
must be conveyed to their ports by a very respectable fleet, and presented to
their leaders by a Bashaw of Three Tails at the head of about one hundred
thousand spahis and janissaries. This army, acting only on the defensive, will
effectually protect them from the resentment of their late associates; and, as
all nations ought to pay for protection, these new subjects may be permitted to
pay their tribute to the sultan in a certain number of virgins.

The dominion of the island being thus secured, free ports must be established
for the Algerine vessels, whose cruises, it is true, will not be rewarded by
the capture of many American vessels, (the navigation of the states being
almost totally ruined by disunion and faction) but their defenseless coasts,
bays and rivers may be plundered without the least risque, and their young men
and maidens triumphantly carried into captivity.

The resentment of an offended noble subjected Spain to the yoke of our
forefathers for ages. May not this mad insurgent, in order to gratify his pride
and satiate his resentment, involve his country in similar evils?

FAREWELL.
LETTER XIX. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
THE republican form of government is extremely flattering to the pride of man.
Orators, poets and philosophers, have sounded its praises, whilst the civilized
part of the world has listened with rapture. Who is not soothed by the splendid
dreams of Plato and Rousseau? Who is not roused by the thunder of Demosthenes
and Cicero?

But in all matters, which involve the welfare of nations, fancy should be
restrained and judgment alone consulted.

In every form of government the people are undeniably the source of authority.
The throne of the greatest despot, as well as the tribunal of the humblest
magistrate, is founded on the consent of the governed. I may be told, that
despotism is generally established and always maintained by force. But can the
personal force of one man control and subdue a nation? Alas! the depravity of
thousands must cooperate with the ambition of their leader, and the power of
the supreme tyrant is supported by inferior tyrants for the gratification of
their own passions.

I have often lamented the situation of our Deys. No sooner is one murdered,
than another is elected by the murderers of his predecessor. Should he dare to
decline this honor, his refusal is followed by instant death. To preserve his
own life, he is obliged to act the tyrant, and reluctantly consents to murders,
which the brutal soldiers demand and execute with rapture. The authority of the
Dey is founded on the soldiery -- and surely the soldiers are men.

Has not Constantinople herself often beheld an emperor triumphant in the
morning and a headless trunk at night, whilst his trembling successor is
compelled by the janissaries to accept the semblance of authority, as a sanction
for their rapine and cruelty? Let no man call him a monarch, who is every hour
exposed to the sabre of a popular janizary. The shrine of the saint may be
gazed on; but the offerings are the property of the priests. But I may be told,
that these are the excesses of a ferocious soldiery. -- Are not these soldiers
men?

Let us now visit Russia, the most extensive monarchy in Europe. A woman,
without any natural right, has been raised to the throne of that country by the
soldiery, who by this single act govern the monarchy and the monarch. She takes
care to supply them with pay and plunder, and they continue to respect the work
of their own hands. Here one part of the people (all could not be present at
the election) chose a sovereign for the whole, and for fashion sake are content
to be called subjects. Therefore the authority of this autocratix is derived
from the people.

The French monarchy shows great attention to the nobility and soldiery; and
for very good reasons. The soldiery and nobility support the crown; and are not
nobles and soldiers men? If not, what are they?

The last monarchy I shall mention is Sweden. The illustrious monarch of this
country, the worthy nephew of the immortal Frederick (and he too derived his
authority from the people, who were constantly represented by two or three
hundred thousand delegates, elected with great caution and fully instructed in
the principles of government) this king of the Goths* I say, resenting that one
part of his people should be oppressed by another, formed a wise resolution,
that there should be no longer any complaints on that head. Assembling
therefore both parties, he by the advice of proper counselors, chosen from the
body of the people, brought the contending parties to reason. The rights of
both nobles and people were placed in his hands, and he seems determined to
keep them as pledges of their affection. Surely all must confess that his
authority also is derived from the people.

It can be proved, I think, (without citing any more examples) that all human
authority and power are derived from the the people; because, I apprehend,
that, if there was no people, there could be no human authority or power.

What minion of despotism, after seriously perusing these arguments and
examples, will deny, that authority proceeds from the people? Or what
enthusiastic demagogue, who is capable of conviction, will insist, that
dominion not only proceeds from, but is inherent in, the people? The first
ought to reflect, that there can be no stream without a source; and the second
must be convinced by observation, that rivers invariably seek the ocean. There
is occasionally a partial reflux of power, but it never reaches the fountain
head.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XX. TO THE SAME.
PHILADELPHIA.
I AM pleased that thou have received in good condition the map of these
states. It will show thee at one view the amazing extent of the country. The
rivers are numerous and deep; the harbors capacious and secure; the cultivated
land is generally extremely productive, and the soil, which is still covered by
forests, planted by the hand of nature, promises equal fertility.

Their constitutions, formed by a great majority of the people, inculcate as
much liberty as men in society can enjoy. New laws, when necessary, are made by
delegates freely chosen, and administered by officers, who glory in being
deemed the servants of the public. The people, temperate and laborious, seem
only to want encouragement, which may excite emulation, and systems, which may
direct their exertions. The phantom of foreign commerce, no longer pursued with
inordinate avidity, must soon yield to the solid efforts of domestic industry,
guided by the wisdom of the philosopher and patriot. If this encouragement is
given and these systems established, the American republics will no longer be
tributary to European industry, and the speculations of our Algerine statesmen
will be found altogether ideal and illusive.

I expect with impatience permission from the regency to return, which I beg
you will solicit with all the ardour of friendship. My domestic concerns may
require my immediate presence, and claim all my attention, especially as in
this station I can render no essential service to my country. What refinements
of policy can be apprehended from popular assemblies, who are more studious to
increase the happiness of the people than to create enemies? Their ambition
ought not to be dreaded by foreign powers; nor should their factions invite
foes, since, on the first appearance of hostilities, they would undoubtedly
unite in repelling invasion. Even the unworthy conduct of Rhode Island will not
stimulate the other states to oppress or desert an unenlightened or
unprincipled sister; nor could the Port derive any advantage from the
possession of that island. Its wealth would not pay, nor its territory feed, a
sufficient garrison; nor would the annoyance of the trade of all the other
states (according to the present situation of commerce) defray the expenses of
twenty Algerine rovers. In short, the American states, rich in the productions
of nature, are poor with respect to the improvements of art. They are too
strong to be conquered, and too weak to attempt conquest.

I have lately heard of a society in this country, called Free-masons, who are
remarkable for inviolable secrecy. Rather than disclose a secret, they would
endure extreme torture and submit to be torn in pieces. What admirable spies
would these men make, if employed by their country at foreign courts! But
perhaps their established reputation would render their exertions ineffectual,
just as a very skilful gamester, when his talents are known, finds no body
willing to play with him except for trifles. I too am possessed of a secret,
but am by no means desirous of appearing to possess it. Ambition is best
concealed by a show of popular humility, and secrecy rendered secure by
apparent frankness.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XXI.
SOLOMON MENDEZ TO MEHEMET. GIBRALTAR.
WITH the greatest anxiety for thy welfare and life I snatch this opportunity
to inform thee, that thou must never think of returning to Algiers. If this
letter should find thee in Philadelphia, how happy shall I be! The Rabbi, with
whom thou had some acquaintance at Lisbon, has effected thy ruin by the
blackest calumnies. How thou have offended him I know not; but I am well
informed by an intelligent friend at Algiers, that he has represented thee to
the regency as a christian and a fugitive from thy country. By order of the
Dey, thy lands, house, furniture and slaves (two excepted) are confiscated to
the state. Thou art proclaimed a traitor; consequently if ever thou should be
found within the territories of Algiers, thy life will be forfeited, Unhappy
man! -- But perhaps thy fortitude will raise thee above thy distresses. -- I
sincerely hope so --

The sum, which thou did entrust to me, is at thy disposal. None of thy
bills, if thou have yet drawn any, have been presented to me. Thy frugality
allows me to hope, that thou have not expended the money, which was thought
adequate to thy probable necessities during thy abode in America. Thy economy,
even when there was no immediate occasion for it, was remarkable and exemplary.
It is now absolutely necessary. If enough shall remain to render age not
altogether uncomfortable, what more can thou require? besides thou may
rely on my assistance. In all exigencies look on me as a warm disinterested
friend. My house, my purse, my credit, are at thy service. Can I do less for a
man, who thought me worthy of his confidence, not only in pecuniary matters,
but even in an affair on which his life depended?

Having now administered comfort to thee with respect to thy future prospects,
I request that thou will read the enclosed letters with becoming fortitude. Thy
child they will inform thee is in heaven; and that thou art preserved from the
machinations of two domestic traitors, ought to afford thee extreme happiness.

FAREWELL.
LETTER XXII.
TO MEHEMET. ALGIERS.
HOW shall I inform thee of thy misfortunes? What language shall I adopt,
which, whilst it reveals thy ruin, may administer consolation and inspire
fortitude? Mehemet, thou art declared a traitor! The malice of thy foes is
triumphant. Thy friends are struck with terror. Myself alone dared to speak in
thy favor to Osman; but was commanded to be silent. "His traitorous conduct,
said this haughty favorite, is too evident. A letter from a Rabbi at Lisbon
created suspicion, and the flight of the partner of his bed and his chief
gardener has confirmed his guilt." I still had the boldness to request, that he
would peruse the enclosed letters. He condescended to read them, but in the
greatest hurry; then returning them, expressed himself in these very words, as
well as I can remember, "Wretch! begone, Do thou hope to impose on my
understanding by such shallow devices? After having taken with him his money
and jewels, does he think, that the flight of his favorite slaves will not be
attributed to the design of meeting him in some christian country, where, after
having embraced the superstition of these infidels, they will unite in reviling
our laws and religion?" -- Thus thy greatest misfortune being regarded as a
proof of thy guilt, I was incapable of making any reply, and departed in
silence.

What I have written will inform thee, that Fatima and thy chief gardener are
fled. The enclosed letter, which arrived about a week ago from Spain, will
doubtless give thee the particulars. Fatima's jewels and apparel remain; as for
cash, no more has been supplied by me, than what was necessary for domestic
uses. There remain in my hands of thy property, thirteen hundred and fifteen
Johannesses, besides the above mentioned jewels, which shall be immediately
paid to thy order.

I am extremely sorry to inform thee, that thou must resign all hopes of
returning. Thy slaves, house, gardens and furniture, have been publicly
purchased by Achmet, the tool of Osman, who, it is supposed by thy friends,
will soon take possession of his villainously acquired property. How will thy
friends be mortified, when they see this renegado possessed of thy abode, where
taste and magnificence were united!

Mehemet! thy youth has been honorably spent. Let not fortitude desert thee in
the meridian of thy faculties. Algiers has now no claim on thee. Thy child died
a few weeks before the departure of his unworthy mother, and thy friends will
rejoice to hear, that thou art happily situated in a country where the
adoration of but one God is enjoined.

Solomon Mendez has frequently written to me concerning thee in the most
friendly manner. His character is so well established, that I might safely
remit thy property to him; but I shall wait till I hear from thee.

How will thy enemies exult, should they hear, that thou have yielded to
desperation or melancholy! -- How will thy friends rejoice, when they are
informed, that philosophy has triumphed over rapacity, and that Mehemet is
happier in his retirement, than Osman in the zenith of false glory!

FAREWELL.
LETTER XXIII.
ALVAREZ TO SOLOMON. MALAGA.
BEING informed by Maria, formerly Fatima, who, having received baptism
according to the rites of the church, has consented to be my wife, that you are
authorized by Mehemet to superintend his business during his absence, I think
it reasonable, in order to relieve you from suspense, to inform you, that we
arrived in this port, after a very short passage, in perfect health. As I am
under no obligation to Mehemet, no apology for my conduct is due to him. His
behavior to me, I confess (due allowance being made for education and example)
was humane and liberal. The money therefore, which he gave as the price of my
freedom, shall be restored to him speedily and with interest. As he has
frequently acknowledged my industry and fidelity, he will then be in my debt.

He will probably say, that I have robbed him of Maria; but as he shall have no
just reason to complain of me with respect to any part of his property, her
value also, according to the current price of beauty at Algiers, shall be paid
to him. As for her affections, he may rest assured, that he never possessed
them. She endured his company, because she was his slave, and her mildness of
temper prevented her from expressing discontent.

Let it not be said, that I made use of unjustifiable methods in gaining her
heart. As long as their child was living, I considered her as united to Mehemet
by that tie. I pitied her situation and esteemed her for her gentleness and
discretion. But on the death of the child, pity produced affection and esteem
ripened into love. My eyes and behavior at first testified my sentiments. She
saw, and did not disapprove. At length I ventured to disclose my passion. She
listened, and consented. A virtuous affection removed her natural timidity. Our
love was mutual and ardent; the coast of Spain not distant. We ventured and
succeeded; but by what methods must remain a secret. Convinced by my arguments,
she is now a christian and my wife. The liberality of some merchants supplied
us with decent clothing, and their patronage will afford me the means of
supporting a family by industry.

When you write to Mehemet, you may acquaint him that I retain a due sense of
his mildness and forbearance. Not to be severe is meritorious, in a country
where slavery is established. I am no longer his slave, and am therefore
capable of being his friend. As for Maria, she does not speak of him with
disrespect. She is a christian and forgives him.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient Humble servant, ALVAREZ.

LETTER XXIV.
MEHEMET TO SOLOMON MENDEZ. PHILADELPHIA.
RUINED, did thou say? -- No; I am preserved. I am free and delight in the
freedom of others, and am no longer either a slave or a tyrant. At once a
christian and a Pennsylvanian, I am doubly an advocate for the rights of
mankind.

On the receipt of this packet, instantly dispatch the enclosed letters to the
young couple. The letter to Alvarez contains a deed, which gives to him and his
wife an immediate right to the half of my property, and to the remainder at my
death. Supply them with a thousand dollars, in order to free them from debts,
if they have contracted any, and to enable them to repair to Philadelphia. If
that sum be not sufficient, supply them with more. Convinced from a perfect
knowledge of the fluctuation of our councils, that the charge I undertook,
exposed me to more danger in Algiers than America, I brought with me a greater
sum than even thou were aware of; a part of which, since the account of my
ruin, as thou call my deliverance, I have laid out in the purchase of two
extensive farms; on one of which I shall reside myself; the other is the
property of Alvarez and his wife. Him I shall regard as my friend and Maria
shall be unto me as a daughter.

Insult not my understanding by bestowing the name of generosity on this
conduct. If I can be just to this ill treated pair, my mind will be at ease,
nor can I in this instance, lay claim, to the merit of philosophy. At sixty the
tumult of the passions ought to subside, without any assistance from
philosophic resignation.

Yet I must confess, that, on the receipt of thy last letter, I was greatly
shocked. A fever ensued, attended with a delirium. My extreme temperance alone
preserved my life. At length the fever abated; I am restored to health and
peace, and am even astonished, that my mind should have been so long the seat
of unworthy passions. Was my love the result of reason? by no means; I have
therefore discarded it. Was my ambition founded on justice? Alas! treachery and
virtue are incompatible. How am I afflicted, when I recollect, that, in all
possible cases, the laws of the country, which I meant to betray, would have
protected me from insult and injury. An open enemy may challenge esteem; a spy
is a mean and detestable character. I have written to Solomon at Algiers,
concerning a sum of money belonging to me, which is in his possession. He will
remit that sum to thee on my account, which will remain in thy hands, till the
arrival of Maria and her husband in Philadelphia. When my family (they are all
that Mehemet can now lay claim to) shall arrive, I shall close my affairs in
Africa and Europe, and establish my future tranquillity on the pillars of
freedom, justice, friendship and religion.

Algiers! thou, who have often beheld me, animated by glory, or incited by
avarice, preparing to encounter the raging tempest and the furious battle; who
have often welcomed thy returning son, adorned with trophies and loaded with
spoils; who have often seen him encouraging the ardour of youth and soothing
the woes of age; honored for his valor, and scarcely envied for his
magnificence. Algiers, thou witness of my glory and disgrace, farewell! And thou
Pennsylvania, who have promised to succor and protect the unhappy, that fly to
thee for refuge, open thy arms to receive Mehemet the Algerine, who, formerly a
mohammedan, and thy foe, has renounced his enmity, his country and his religion,
and hopes, protected by thy laws, to enjoy, in the evening of his days, the
united blessings of FREEDOM and CHRISTIANITY.

FAREWELL.
THE END.

