OBSERVATIONS ON THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION OF THE THIRTEEN UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, Entered into in July, 1778, and ratified and completed the 1st of
March, 1781.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY S. and J. LOUDON, No. 5, Water-Street.

Observation on the Articles of Confederation, etc.
BY these Articles, it clearly appears to have been intended by the Parties,
that Congress should be the supreme sovereign Power, in all Cases, and that
their Acts and Proceedings should be supremely efficacious, as much as any
sovereign Acts whatsoever. -- Some Persons may imagine, that no Acts can be
Sovereign Acts, without a King, as in Great Britain, and other Nations ruled by
Kings; but it is not the Name or Person of a King, which makes him the
Sovereign, or which makes his Acts supreme and absolute, but he becomes
sovereign, and his Acts become supreme, by the Constitution, or by the People
assenting to his possessing and exercising the sovereign and supreme Power. --
It is very plain, that a free People, of any Nation or Country, may lodge the
sovereign and supreme Authority, for their own Government, in a Number or Body
of Men, without Regard to a King, or the Name of a King, or any single Person.
-- It was accordingly meant by the Parties to the Articles of Confederation,
that Congress should possess and exercise the sovereign and supreme Power over
all the United States in Confederation; and that without such Possession and
Exercise, the Union and Confederation of the States must be defective and
incomplete.

A few Remarks, taken from the British Union, may be of Use, to cast some Light
on the American Articles of Union. -- In the Union between England and
Scotland, the Scotch retained their former Laws and their former Courts of
Justice; but after the Union, their Laws were to be all made in the Parliament
of Great Britain; for it would be inconsistent with the Idea of a complete
Union, under one Legislature, of King, Lords, and Commons, legislating at
Westminster, that the Scotch should, at Home, still be their own Legislators,
as before the Union; and though they considered that the King, Lords, and
Commons, composing the Legislature of England, were, by their Constitution, as
absolute, and might, on Occasions, be as arbitrary and oppressive as the Grand
Turk; and that after the Union, and even after the Accession of sixty-one
Members, sixteen Lords, and forty-five Commoners from Scotland, the British
Legislature would still, by their Constitution, be as absolute as before, and
might, on Occasions, be oppressive; they nevertheless, for the Sake of a
complete and consistent Union, chose to have their Representatives in the
British Parliament, and to have their Laws, in Time to come, from that
Parliament; stipulating at the same Time, that Laws concerning the Regulation
of Trade, Customs, and Excise, were to be the same in Scotland as in England;
but all other Laws in Use in Scotland, were to remain in Force after the Union,
but alterable by the Parliament of Great Britain; and that Laws concerning
public Right, Policy, and civil Government, should be made the same throughout
the whole united Kingdom, but no Alteration should be made in Laws concerning
private Right, except for the evident Utility of the Subjects in Scotland.

Though the Circumstances of the British Union were not similar to the
Circumstances of the American Union, and the Parties in the British Union were
not in pari Casu with the Parties in the American Union, the main Point in the
British Union being to subject the Scotch to the Parliament of England, to be
thereafter composed of English and Scotch; and the Parties to the American
Union having no King, Lords, or Commons to be subject to, or governed by, yet
still the following Remarks, arising from the Constitution of the British
Union, may be useful to show the Defects of the American Union.

I. If it had been reserved to the Scotch, in some or any particular Cases or
Case, to make Regulations for themselves, after the Union, and that in such
particular Cases reserved, the Parliament of Great Britain should not
interfere; such a Reservation would have been inconsistent with the Union, and
should soon occasion much confusion.

II. If the British Treaty for an Union, had only declared an Union generally,
and that the King of England should, under such general Union, be the sole
Arbiter of Peace and War, for Scotland as well as England, and that the Scotch
should aid and assist England in all Wars, offensive and defensive; but without
infringing or violating the legislative Right of Scotland, within its own
Limits; such a Stipulation would be extremely absurd, and would soon occasion
much Confusion, because if any legislative Right had been left with Scotland,
after the Union, there would have been no End of legislating Pretentions, on
various Emergencies and Occasions, nor any precise Boundary left between the
legislative and executive Powers, under the Union.

III. If the Articles of the British Union had stipulated nothing concerning
the Laws for the Regulation of Trade, Customs, and Excise, or the Laws
concerning public Right, Policy, and civil Government, and had not enacted that
such Laws should, in Time coming, be the same in Scotland as in England, this
would have occasioned the utmost Confusion, by Laws for the Regulation of
Trade, Customs, and Excise and concerning public Right, Policy, and civil
Government in Scotland, being different from, and clashing with, or derogatory
to those Laws in England.

So much for Remarks upon the British Union, as a Kind of Introduction to the
following Observations on the Articles of the American Union, and those
Articles, in a political Sense, truly appear to be improperly penned, in
various Particulars herein after observed upon:

I. The Stipulation, that each State retains it is Sovereignty and Independence,
etc. (as in Article 1st) appears to be wrong. Under the Idea of a political
Union of thirteen several States confederating together, the Sovereignty of any
individual State ought not to have been considered or expressed to be retained
by such individual State, because no Sovereignty ought to be supposed to exist
in any individual State after the Union, the only Sovereignty which could be
useful or of Importance being the United Sovereignty, and of course, the whole
Sovereignty of the Thirteen United States ought to be lodged with, and
concentered in the Congress, as being the supreme Body or Tribunal, constituted
for the Purpose of possessing the united Sovereignties of the Thirteen several
United States.

II. If this is just, it will appear, that after the Union, no individual State
ought to be it is own Legislator, but that the Laws of each State ought to be
made and passed in Congress. -- Perhaps this would not have been relished by
the individual States, at the Time of the Articles of Union entered into; but
now, after some Experience had under those Articles, during which Experience,
various Events are said to have happened, to show the Inconvenience of
individual States making their own Laws, ad Libitum, without regarding
Congress; perhaps the individual States will not consider an Alteration to be
made in this Respect, either by themselves or Congress, severally or jointly,
as any Infringement or Violation of the legislative Right of any individual
State, but will consider it as a proper and even necessary Alteration for the
Benefit of the Union, and for rendering it more consistent and more complete.

III. If it is considered to be too much for individual States to give up what
is called their Sovereignty, their legislative Right, still they may be willing
and satisfied to have the Exercise of such their sovereign and legislative
Rights modified and abridged, or limited so far that no Law or Laws, Regulation
or Regulations, to be made by any individual State, in Time coming, shall be
valid, or of any Force or Effect, without the Assent of Congress first had and
interposed thereunto. -- If this Matter is suffered to continue, as it was
left, under the Articles of Union, it will then be clear, that the individual
States of the Union choose to keep up an absurd Imperium in Imperio, by
individual Sovereignties, and legislative Rights, militating against, and
destructive of the Authority of Congress, which ought to be the only sovereign,
supreme, and absolute Authority, over, in, and throughout every Part of the
United States.

Upon this Head it is unnecessary to mention the natural Distinctions between
Laws and Regulations of one Kind and those of another Kind, between the Laws
for the Regulation of Trade, Customs, and Excise, and the Laws concerning
public Right, Policy, and civil Government, or to mention that such Laws and
Regulations ought to be the same every where, throughout the Whole of the
United States, because the Thing is plain and obvious; and if the Doctrine
above laid down, is applied to the making an Alteration in the Exercise of
Legislation, such Alteration will prevent or remedy the Inconveniences arising
from the former Exercise of Legislation, under the Articles of Union, as well
in Regard to Laws for the Regulation of Trade, Customs, and Excise, as Laws
concerning public Right, Policy, and civil Government.

The Case that is said to have happened in the State of Massachusetts, after
that State had made a Navigation Act, subjecting all Foreigners to pay double
Duties, a heavy Tonage, and high Light-Money, in the Ports of that State, is a
deplorable Instance of the Absurdity of any individual State making Laws for
itself, for imposing Duties on Ships and Merchandise, when, in the Ports of
other individual States of the Union, no such Duties had been imposed, or
existed; and the Consequence was, that every foreign Ship destined for the
Massachusetts, during the Continuance of the said Duties, went to other Ports,
where they could deal to greater Advantage, and thereby Merchandise of immense
or very considerable Value, which would have been exchanged for the
Massachusetts Produce, to the great Increase of their Revenue, was diverted
into other Channels, and lost to the State of Massachusetts.

This Case alone (though there are other absurd Cases which might be stated) is
sufficient to show the Necessity and Propriety of Congress being the sole
Legislators, in commercial Matters, for all and every of the States, and also
to show, that the commercial Laws and Regulations of all the States of the
Union, ought to be the same throughout, for that otherwise it will always be in
the Power of individual States to take Advantage of, and sharp upon other
States, as much as if they were disunited States.

Sharping being here mentioned, it may not be impertinent to touch upon a
Practice had in some States, of decrying and depreciating, and refusing to take
the Paper Money of other States, in Payments, unless a certain Discount is
allowed by the Tenderer of such Paper Money to the Tenderee or Person who is to
receive the same. Of this Kind of Traffic there have lately been glaring
Instances, in Regard to the Paper Money of the State of New Jersey, which the
Dealers in New York, and even New-Jersey-Men themselves, refused, and still do
refuse, to take, except upon a Discount of at least one Penny in every
Shilling; and by artful Management, this Practice has been extended so as to
introduce a Variety of Tricks and Frauds into different Dealings and
Transactions. From such Practice it must be obvious that artful Dealers have it
in their Power to decry and depreciate the Paper Money of any State, and
thereby to Sharp upon innocent and plain Persons at every Turn, and on all
Occasions of their Dealing. One Way to prevent such Practice for the future
might be, for Congress, by an Act, to declare that all Paper Money, or Bills
for Money on Credit, emitted by any individual State, in Time coming, shall be
aided, countenanced, and supported by the Credit of the United States* and
where any individual State shall ultimately become deficient in Credit, or in
the satisfying of Demands upon them, on Account of their Paper Money, that such
Deficiency shall ultimately be made a Charge against the United States, which
they shall be answerable to pay, and the deficient State shall be bound to
relieve and indemnify the United States, of and from all Deficiency, in the
best and most expeditious Manner that such deficient State can relieve and
indemnify the United States. -- Another Way to discourage, if not to prevent
the abovementioned Practice, might be by an Act to be passed by Congress,
making it a public Offense and Misdemeanor, in and for any Person or Persons to
decry or depreciate, or prevent the Currency of the Paper Money of any
individual State, or to take any Discount on any Paper Money of any individual
State, and making it lawful for any Person or Persons inhabiting in any of the
United States, to summon the Offender and Offenders in the Premises, to appear
before any one or two or more Justices acting in the State where the Offender
resides; and upon Proof being made of the Offense, by the Oath of one or more
credible Witnesses, the Justice or Justices taking Cognizance of the Offense,
to fine the Offender in any Sum not exceeding Twelve Pounds Currency, to be
paid to the Person or Persons complaining, besides his or their reasonable
Charges and Costs in that Behalf sustained. And upon the Offender neglecting or
refusing to pay such Fine and Costs, making it lawful for such Justice and
Justices to commit the Offender to the next Gaol, there to continue imprisoned
till he pays the Fine and Costs.

So much concerning a Practice not provided against by the Articles of
Confederation, may be deemed a Digression; but now to return to the
Observations on the penning of the American Articles.

IV. It appears to be stipulated, that in determining Questions in the United
States in Congress assembled, each State shall have one Vote, (as in Article
5th) But this appears to be wrong; for that a State twice as large and twice as
populous as another State, ought to have two Votes, when the lesser State has
only one Vote, and the least or smallest State must certainly have one Vote;
but the larger, more extensive, more considerable, and more respectable States,
ought to have more than one Vote, ought to have two, or three, or four, or more
Votes, in Proportion to the Difference between a considerable or large State,
and a smaller State. To maintain otherwise, is to disregard an equal and fair
Representation of the States by their Delegates in Congress assembled. But if
more than one Vote is to be allowed to some States, still it will not be
necessary to cause those States to send a Delegate for each Vote they may
become entitled to; for that if they have but one Delegate attending in
Congress, such one Delegate may vote as many Times as his Constituents are
entitled to vote on any Question.

V. Where it is provided, that no Treaty of Commerce shall be made, whereby the
legislative Power of the respective States shall be restrained from imposing
such Imposts and Duties on Foreigners, as their own People are subjected to, or
from prohibiting the Exportation or Importation of any Species of Goods or
Commodities whatsoever (as in Article 9th.) It appears to be most improperly
expressed and penned; for that no Treaty of Commerce ought to be made, or
permitted to be made or entered into, by any Power, other than the Congress,
and no individual State ought to possess a legislative Power of imposing Duties
on Foreigners, or of prohibiting the Exportation or Importation of any Goods or
Commodities, all which ought to be left to Congress, as possessing the
sovereign and united legislative Powers of all the individual States; and under
this Head of Observations, what has been mentioned above, in the 3d Head of
Observations, will forcibly apply.

VI. That the United States in Congress assembled, should be the last Resort,
on Appeal, in all Cases (as in the said Article 9th) appears to be right and
proper; but then there is no Provision made for enforcing the Decisions or
Determinations of Congress, or for carrying them into Execution or Effect; and
such Provision may have been designedly omitted, by the Opinion of some Person
or Persons concerned in the penning of the Articles, who might consider such a
Provision unnecessary, because it is a Principle or Rule in Law, that where a
Jurisdiction is given to any Person, or a Body of Persons, to determine Matters
in Controversy or Dispute between Parties, it follows by Consequence, that the
Person, or Body of Persons entitled to the Jurisdiction, must have an inherent
Right to render their Jurisdiction effectual, and to have their Decisions and
Determinations enforced and carried into due Execution, by all the Ways and
Means in Law, usual or practicable for enforcing the Decisions and
Determinations of any Jurisdiction whatever. But as this Principle, or Rule of
Law, is recondite, and not obvious to every Person, or any Persons not learned
in the Law, it would be better to have an express Provision for enabling
Congress to enforce their Decisions, and carry them into Execution. For this
Purpose a Law may be passed by Congress, enacting, that in all Cases of
Decisions or Determinations made by Congress, upon Matters of Controversy or
Dispute between one individual State and another State, or more individual
States, the State or States refusing or declining to obey and conform to such
Decisions and Determinations, or to acquiesce therein, shall be deemed guilty
of the highest Contempt against the sovereign Authority of Congress, and making
it lawful for Congress to punish any refractory State or States, by and with
such high Penalties, Fines, or Amerciaments, for their Contempt, as such their
Contempt may appear to Congress to deserve: And also making it lawful to and
for any Person or Persons, to be appointed by Congress for that Purpose, to
attach any two or more of the most reputable and most responsible Inhabitants
of and in such refractory and disobedient State or States, and the Persons so
attached to be answerable for the Whole of the State or States they belong to,
and liable to pay such Fines, Penalties, and Amerciaments, as shall, by
Congress, be imposed on the delinquent State or States; but the Person and
Persons so answering and paying for the delinquent State or States, to be
reimbursed and indemnified by the respective State or States, according to the
Rules and Usage of Law, in Cases where a certain small Number of Persons in a
State, County, Parish, or other District (...) attached to answer for the Whole.

VII. Where it is declared, that the United States in Congress assembled, shall
never engage in a War, etc. unless nine States assent to the same (as in Part
of the said Article 9th). It appears wrong and absurd; for it is plain, that
the sovereign, supreme, and absolute Power was properly intended to be lodged,
and ought to be lodged with Congress; and their Resolves and Engagements,
whether concerning a War, or any other public Matter, ought, in all Cases, to
go by a Majority of the Votes or Voices of the delegated Members, present and
acting at the Time, and in no Resolve or Engagement, ought the Assent of nine
States to be considered as necessary or proper, but on the contrary unnecessary
and improper; because, in many Cases, and on many Occasions of Importance, it
might happen, that Nine States, out of Thirteen, might not have their Delegates
present in Congress, which might stop, impede, and even defeat, some very
important Resolve, however necessary it might be for the public Good to have it
passed instantly.

Here it may appear pertinent to mention one other Defect of the Articles of
Union, which is, that Congress, in any Part of the Articles, is not vested with
any Power or Control over any of its own Members, and it has been said, that
any Member, on the Principle of Law, that Inter Pares nulla Potestas, may leave
Congress, whenever he pleases, without Leave from Congress, or the State he
represents; and that there has been an Instance, of a late Question before
Congress, being lost by the wilful Absence of a Member. If it has been so, it
must be considered an egregious Defect in the Articles of Union, for it is
believed, that this has been the first Instance in the World, of a sovereign
and supreme Jurisdiction, conferred on a Body of Men, and at the same Time
leaving them without any Power or Authority over their own individual Members.
In various Jurisdictions, in different Countries, it has frequently happened,
that individual Members, have been attached, fined, and even imprisoned for
Absence, Neglect, and Contempt of Duty; and so it ought to be in Congress, and
such Power ought to be assumed by Congress, as a Matter of Course, incident to,
and inherent in their Jurisdiction; but if it is weakly considered, that
Congress cannot exercise any Power or Authority over their own Members, without
an express Law for that purpose; such Law may easily be passed by Congress,
making it a high Misdemeanor, in and for any Member to depart, or absent
himself from his duty in Congress, without the Leave of Congress, first had and
obtained, and to make those Members of Congress who counteract such Law, liable
and subject to such Fines and Censures as to Congress, by the Majority of
Votes, shall, in their Discretion, seem meet; and to such Law, no Concurrence
of any individual State or States, can, in the Nature of the Thing, be at all
necessary or proper.

A WELL WISHER to the United States of America, who came lately from London to
New York, surprised to find Newspapers filled with Censures on the Lameness of
the Articles of the American Union, was thereby induced to consider those
Articles and Censures with some Care, and thereupon, volunteeringly, to write
his Observations, as above, which he hopes will give some Satisfaction to those
who will peruse them.


