A BILL FOR ESTABLISHING The Constitution, OF The STATE of SOUTH CAROLINA.

CHARLESTOWN: Printed by PETER TIMOTHY. M, DCC, LXXVII.

In the Legislative Council, The 3d Day of February, 1777.
ORDERED,
THAT the Bill, entitled A Bill for establishing the Constitution of the State
of South Carolina, as it came up to this House from the General Assembly, be
printed and made public.

By Order of the House. THOMAS FAR, Clerk.

A BILL FOR ESTABLISHING The Constitution, OF The STATE of SOUTH CAROLINA.
THAT, inasmuch as the Constitution or Form of Government, agreed to, and
resolved upon, by the Freemen of this Country, met in Congress the 26th Day of
March last, was temporary only, calculated for, and suited to, the then
Situation of their public Affairs, looking forward to an Accommodation with
Great Britain, an Event then desired: And whereas the American States have been
since constituted Independent States, and the political Connection heretofore
subsisting between them and Great Britain entirely dissolved, by the
Declaration of the Honorable the Continental Congress, dated the 4th Day of
July last, for the many great and weighty Reasons, therein particularly set
forth: It therefore becomes absolutely necessary, to frame a lasting
Constitution suitable to that great Event: Be it therefore Constituted and
Enacted. by His Excellency JOHN RUTLEDGE, Esquire, President and Commander in
Chief, in and over the State of South Carolina, by the Honorable the
Legislative Council, and General Assembly and by the Authority of the same,
That the following Articles, agreed upon by the Freemen of this State, now met
in General Assembly, be henceforth and forever (unless altered by the
Legislative Authority of this State) looked upon as the Constitution and Form
of Government thereof.

I. That the Style of this Country be, hereafter, the State of South Carolina.

II. That the Legislative Authority be vested in a Legislative Council and
General Assembly.

III. That as soon as may be, after the first Meeting of the Legislative
Council and General Assembly, they shall jointly, in the General Assembly,
choose, by Ballot, from among themselves, or from the People at large, a
President and Commander in Chief, and a Vice President of the State, and Privy
Council, to continue for Two Years: And till such Choice shall be made, the
former President and Commander in Chief, Vice President, and Privy Council,
shall continue to act as such.

IV. That a Member of the Legislative Council, or General Assembly, being
chosen, and acting as President and Commander in Chief, or Vice President,
shall vacate his Seat, and another Person shall be elected in his Room.

V. That every Person who shall be elected President and Commander in Chief of
the State, or Vice President, or a Member of the Privy Council, shall be
qualified as follows, that is to say, the President and Vice President, shall
have been Residents in this State for Ten Years, and the Members of the Privy
Council Five Years, preceding their said Election, and shall have in this
State, a settled Plantation or Freehold, in their and each of their own Right,
of the Value of at least Ten Thousand Pounds Currency, clear of Debt; and, on
being elected, they shall take an Oath of Qualification, in the General
Assembly.

VI. That no future President or Commander in Chief, who shall serve for Two
Years, shall be eligible to serve in the said Office, after the Expiration of
the said Term, until the full End and Term of Four Years.

VII. That no Person in this State shall hold the Office of President thereof,
or Vice President, and any other Office or Commission, civil or military,
except in the Militia, either in this State, or under the Authority of the
Continental Congress, at one and the same Time.

VIII. That in Case of the Death of the President and Commander in Chief, or
his Absence from the State, the Vice President of the State shall succeed to
his Office, and the Privy Council shall choose, out of their own Body, a
Vice President of the State. And in Case of the Death of the Vice President of
the State, or his Absence from the State, one of the Privy Council, to be
chosen by themselves, shall succeed to his Office, until a Nomination to those
Offices respectively, by the General Assembly and Legislative Council, for the
Remainder of the Time for which the Officer so dying or being absent was
appointed.

IX. That the Privy Council, whereof the Vice President of the State shall of
Course be a Member, and President of the Privy Council, shall consist
(including the Vice President) of Nine Members; Five of whom shall be a Quorum.
Provided always, that no Officer of the Army or Navy, in the Service of the
Continent or this State, nor Judge of any of the Courts of Law, shall be
eligible, -- nor shall the Father, Son, or Brother to the President for the
Time being, be elected in the Privy Council during his Administration. A Member
of the Legislative Council or General Assembly, being chosen of the Privy
Council, shall not thereby lose his Seat in the Legislative Council or General
Assembly, unless he be elected Vice President of the State, in which Case he
shall, and another Person shall be chosen in his Stead. The Privy Council is to
advise the President and Commander in Chief when required; but he shall not be
bound to consult them, unless directed by Law. If a Member of the Privy Council
shall die, or depart this State, another shall be chosen in his Room, in Manner
above mentioned.

X. That in Case of the Absence from Charlestown, or Sickness of the
President, the Vice President, or in Case of his Absence, any one of the Privy
Council, may be empowered by the President, under his Hand and Seal, to act in
his Room.

XI. That the executive Authority be vested in the President and Commander in
Chief, limited and restrained in Manner herein after mentioned.

XII. That each Parish and District throughout this State, shall, on the last
Monday in November and the Day following, which will be in the Year of our Lord
One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-eight, and on the same Days of every
Second Year thereafter, elect by Ballot, One Member of the Legislative Council
(except the District of St. Philip and St. Michael's Parishes, Charlestown,
which shall elect Two Members; and except also the District between Broad and
Saludy-Rivers, in Three Divisions, viz. the Lower District, Little-River
District, and Upper or Spartan District, each of which said Divisions, shall
elect One Member) to meet on the second Monday in January, at the usual Place
in Charlestown, unless the Casualties of War* or contagious Disorders, should
render it unsafe to meet there, in which Case the President and Commander in
Chief for the Time being, may, by Proclamation, with the Advice and Consent of
the Privy Council, appoint a more secure and convenient Place of Meeting, and
to continue for Two Years, from the said last Monday in November. And that no
Person shall be eligible to a Seat in the said Council until he has attained
the Age of Thirty Years. Not less than Thirteen Members shall be a Quorum to do
Business; but, the Speaker, or any Three Members, may adjourn from Day to Day.
No Person who resides in the Parish or District for which he is elected, shall
take his Seat in the Legislative Council, unless he possesses a settled Estate
and Freehold, in his own Right, in the said Parish or District, of the Value of
Two Thousand Pounds currency at least, clear of Debt. And no Non-Resident shall
be eligible to a Seat in the said Council, unless he is Owner of a settled
Estate and Freehold in his own Right, in the Parish or District where he is
elected, of the Value of Seven Thousand Pounds Currency at least, also clear of
Debt.

XIII. That on the last Monday in November and the Day following* which shall
be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-eight, and on
the same Days of every second Year thereafter, Members of the General Assembly
shall be chosen, to meet on the second Monday in January then next, at the
usual Place in Charlestown, unless the Casualties of War, or contagious
Disorders, should render it unsafe to meet there, in which Case the President
and Commander in Chief for the Time being, may, by Proclamation, with the
Advice and Consent of the Privy Council, appoint a more secure and convenient
Place of Meeting, and to continue for Two Years from the said last Monday in
November. Each Parish and District within this State shall send Members to the
General Assembly in the following Proportions, that is to say, The Parishes of
St. Philip and St. Michael, Charlestown, Thirty Members. The Parish of
Christ-Church, Six Members. The Parish of St. John, in Berkley County, Six
Members. The Parish of St. Andrew, Six Members. The Parish of St. George,
Dorchester, Six Members. The Parish of St. James, Goose-Creek, Six Members. The
Parish of St. Thomas and St. Dennis, Six Members. The Parish of St. Paul, Six
Members. The Parish of St. Bartholomew, Six Members. The Parish of St. Helena,
Six Members. The Parish of St. James, Santee, Six Members. The Parish of Prince
George, Winyah, Six Members. The Parish of Prince Frederick, Six Members. The
Parish of St. John, in Colleton County, Six Members. The Parish of St. Peter,
Six Members. The Parish of Prince William, Six Members. The Parish of St.
Stephen, Six Members. The District to the Eastward of the Wateree-River, Ten
Members. The District of Ninety-Six, Ten Members. The District of Saxe-Gotha,
Six Members. The District between Broad and Saludy-Rivers, in Three Divisions,
viz. The Lower District, Four Members. The Little-River District, Four Members.
The Upper or Spartan District, Four Members.
The District between Broad and Catawba Rivers, Ten Members. The District
called the New Acquisition, Ten Members. The Parish of St. Matthew, Six
Members. The Parish of St. David, Six Members. The District between
Savannah-River and the North Fork of Edisto, Six Members.


And the Election of the said Members shall be conducted, as near as may be,
agreeable to the Direction of the Election Act. And where there are no Churches
or Churchwardens in a District or Parish, the General Assembly, at some
convenient Time before their Expiration, shall appoint Places of Election, and
Persons to receive Votes end make Returns. The Qualification of the Electors
shall be, that every free white Man, and no other Person, who acknowledges the
Being of a God, and believes in a future state of rewards and punishments, and
who has attained to the age of one and twenty years, and has been a resident
and an inhabitant in this state for the space of one whole year, before the
date of the writs for the election he offers to give his vote at, and has a
freehold at least of fifty acres of land, or a town lot, and has been legally
seized and possessed of the same, at least six months, previous to such
election, or has paid a tax the preceding year, or was taxable the present
year, at least Six months previous to the said election, in a sum equal to the
tax on fifty acres of land, to the support of this government, shall be deemed
a person qualified to vote for, and may be capable of electing, a
representative or representatives, to serve as a member or members, in the
Legislative Council and General Assembly; for the parish or district where he
actually is a resident, or in any other parish or district in this state where
he has the like freehold. Electors shall take an oath, or affirmation of
qualification, if required by the returning officer. The qualification of the
elected, if residents in the parish or district for which they shall be
returned, shall be same as mentioned in the election act, and construed to mean
clear of debt. But no non-resident shall be eligible to a seat in the General
Assembly, unless he is owner of a settled estate and freehold, in his own
right, of the value of three thousand and five hundred pounds currency at
least, clear of debt, in the parish or district for which he is elected.

XIV. That if any parish or district neglects or refuses to elect members; or,
if the members chosen do not meet in General Assembly; those who do meet shall
have the powers of the General Assembly. Not less than forty-nine members shall
make an House, to do business; but the Speaker, or any seven members may
adjourn from day to day.

XV. That when proper information can be had of the particular and comparative
strength and taxable property of the different parts of the state, that then
the present representation be proportioned in the most equal and just manner,
regard being always had to the number of white inhabitants and taxable property
of the people.

XVI. That all money bills for the support of government, shall originate in
the General Assembly, and shall not be altered or mended by the Legislative
Council, but may be rejected by them: But that no money be drawn out of the
public treasury, but by the legislative authority of the state. All other bills
and ordinances may take rise in the General Assembly or Legislative Council,
and be altered, amended, or rejected by either. Bills having passed the General
Assembly and Legislative Council, shall be signed by the President and
Commander in Chief for the time being, the Speaker of the Legislative Council,
and the Speaker of the General Assembly, in the Council Chamber, and shall then
have all the force and validity of an act of General Assembly of this (...).
And the General Assembly and Legislative Council respectively, shall enjoy all
other privileges which have, at any time, been claimed or exercised, by the
Commons House of Assembly.

XVII. That the General Assembly and Legislative Council may adjourn themselves
respectively; and the President and Commander in Chief shall have no power to
adjourn, prorogue, or dissolve them: But may, if necessary, by and with the
advice and consent of the Privy Council, call them, before the time to which
they shall stand adjourned. And where a bill has been rejected, it may, on a
meeting after an adjournment for not less than three days, of the General
Assembly and Legislative Council, be brought in again.

XVIII. That the General Assembly and the Legislative Council shall each choose
their respective Speakers, and their own officers, by ballot, without control.
And that, during a recess, the Speakers, of either House, shall issue writs for
filling up vacancies, occasioned by death, in their respective Houses, giving
at least three weeks, and not more than thirty-five days previous notice, of
the time appointed for the election.

XIX. That if any parish or district shall neglect to elect a member or
members, on the day of election; or, in case any person chosen a member of the
Legislative Council or General Assembly, shall refuse to qualify and take his
seat as such, or die, or depart the state; the said Legislative Council or
General Assembly, as the case may be, shall appoint proper days, for electing a
member or members of the said Legislative Council or General Assembly, in such
cases respectively.

XX. That if any member of the General Assembly, or of the Legislative Council,
shall accept any place of emolument, or any commission (except in the militia)
he shall vacate his seat, and there shall thereupon be a new election; but he
shall not be disqualified from serving, upon being re-elected, without he is
appointed Secretary of the state, a Commissioner of the Treasury, an Officer of
the Customs, Register of Mesne Conveyances, a Clerk of one of the Courts of
Justice, Powder-Receiver, Clerk of the Legislative or Privy Council, Clerk of
the General Assembly, Surveyor-General, or Commissary of Military Stores; which
officers are hereby declared disqualified, from being members either of the
Legislative Council or General Assembly.

XXI. That no Minister of the Gospel, or public preacher, of any religious
persuasion, be eligible, for the future, either as a member of the Legislative
Council, or of the General Assembly.

XXII. That the Delegates of this state in the Continental Congress, be chosen,
annually, by the General Assembly and Legislative Council jointly, by ballot,
in the General Assembly; and nothing contained in this Constitution shall be
construed to extend to vacate the seat of any member, who is, or may be, a
Delegate from this state to the Continental Congress, as such.

XXIII. That the Vice President of the state and the Privy Council, or the
Vice President and a majority of the Privy Council for the time being, shall
exercise the powers of a Court of Chancery. And there shall be an Ordinary, who
shall exercise the powers heretofore exercised by that officer in this state.

XXIV. That the jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty be confined to maritime
causes.

XXV. That Justices of the Peace shall be nominated by the General Assemby, and
commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief, during pleasure. They
will not be entitled to fees, except on prosecutions for felony; and, not
acting in the magistracy, they shall not be entitled to the privileges allowed
them by law.

XXVI. That all other judicial officers shall be chosen, by ballot, jointly by
the General Assembly and Legislative Council, in the General Assembly, and,
except the Judges of the Court of Chancery, commissioned by the President and
Commander in Chief, during good behavior: But shall be removed, on address of
the General Assembly and Legislative Council.

XXVII. That the Sheriffs, qualified as by law directed, shall be chosen by the
freeholders in each district throughout the state, and commissioned by the
President and Commander in Chief, for two years only.

XXVIII. That Commissioners of the Treasury, the Secretary of the State, the
Register of Mesne Conveyances, Attorney General, Powder-Receiver, Collectors,
Controllers, Waiters, and Surveyor-General, be chosen by the General Assembly
and Legislative Council jointly, by ballot, in the General Assembly, and
commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief, during good behavior;
but shall be removed on address of the General Assembly and Legislative Council.

XXIX. That all Field Officers in the army, and all Captains in the navy, shall
be, by the General Assembly and Legislative Council, chosen jointly, by ballot,
in the General Assembly, and commissioned by the President and Commander in
Chief, except in cases where they are to receive their commissions from
Congress. And that all other officers, in the army and navy, shall be
commissioned by the President and Commander in Chief.

XXX. That in case of vacancy in any of the offices above directed to be filled
by the General Assembly and Legislative Council, the President and Commander in
Chief, with the advice and consent of the Privy Council, may appoint others in
their stead, until there shall be an election by the General Assembly and
Legislative Council to fill those vacancies respectively.

XXXI. That the President and Commander in Chief, with the advice and consent
of the Privy Council, may appoint, during pleasure, until otherwise directed by
the resolution of the General Assembly and Legislative Council, all other
necessary officers, except such as are by law directed to be otherwise chosen.

XXXII. That the President and Commander in Chief shall have no power to
commence war, or conclude peace, or enter into any final treaty, without the
consent of the General Assembly and Legislative Council.

XXXIII. That the resolutions of the late Congresses of this State, and all
laws now of force here (and not hereby altered) shall so continue, until
altered or repealed by the legislature of this state, unless where they are
temporary, in which case they shall expire at the times respectively limited
for their duration.

XXXIV. That the President and Commander in Chief, Vice President of this
state, and Privy Council respectively, shall have the same personal privileges,
as are allowed by act of assembly to the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and
Privy Council. That the President and Commander in Chief for the time being, by
and with the advice and consent of the Privy Council, may lay embargoes, or
prohibit the exportation of any commodity, for any time not exceeding thirty
days, in the recess of the General Assembly.

XXXV. That all persons who shall be chosen and appointed to any office, or to
any place of trust, civil or military, before entering upon the execution of
office, shall take the following oath: I A. B. do acknowledge the State of
South Carolina, to be a Free, Independent, and Sovereign State, and that the
People thereof owe no Allegiance or Obedience to George the Third, King of
Great Britain: And I do renounce, refuse, and abjure, any Allegiance or
Obedience to him. And I do swear, or affirm [as the Case may be] that I will,
to the utmost of my Power, support, maintain and defend the said State, against
the said King George the Third, and his Heirs and Successors, and his or their
Abettors, Assistants, and Adherents, and will serve the said State in the
Office of which I now hold, and in any other Office which I may hereafter hold,
by the Appointment, or under the Authority, of the said State, with Fidelity
and Honor, and according to the best of my Skill and Understanding.

XXXVI. That the following yearly salaries be allowed to the public officers
under mentioned: The President and Commander in Chief, five thousand five
hundred and thirty-eight dollars and one half: The Chief Justice, two thousand
one hundred and twenty-one dollars: The Assistant Judges, one thousand seven
hundred and twenty-four dollars each: The Attorney General, one thousand two
hundred and ninety-three dollars, in lieu of all charges against the public for
fees on criminal prosecutions: The three Commissioners of the Treasury, one
thousand two hundred and thirty-one dollars each.

XXXVII. That all persons and religious societies, who acknowledge, that there
is one God, and a future state of rewards and punishments, and that God is
publicly to be worshipped, shall be freely tolerated. The Christian Religion
shall be deemed, and is hereby constituted, and declared to be, the established
religion of this State. That all denominations of Christians in this state,
demeaning themselves peaceably and faithfully, shall enjoy equal religious
privileges. To accomplish this desirable purpose, without injury to the
religious property of those societies of Christians which are by law already
incorporated, for the purposes of religious worship; and to put it fully into
the power of every other society of Christians, either already formed, or
hereafter to be formed, to obtain the like incorporation; It is hereby
constituted, appointed, and declared, That the respective societies of the
Church of England, that are already formed in this state, for the purposes of
religious worship, shall still continue incorporate, and hold the religious
property now in their possession: And that, whenever fifteen or more male
persons, not under twenty-one years of age, professing the Christian Religion,
and agreeing to unite themselves in a society for the purposes of religious
worship, they shall (on complying with the terms herein after mentioned) be,
and be constituted, a Church, and be esteemed and regarded in law as of the
established religion of the state, and on petition to the legislature, shall be
entitled to be incorporated, and to enjoy equal privileges: That every society
of Christians so formed, shall give themselves a name or denomination, by which
they shall be called and known in law; and all that associate with them for the
purposes of worship, shall be esteemed as belonging to the society so called:
But that, previous to the establishment and incorporation of the respective
societies of every denomination as aforesaid; and in order to entitle them
thereto, each society so petitioning, shall have agreed to, and subscribed, in
a book, the following five articles without which, no agreement or union of
men, upon pretense of religion, shall entitle them to be incorporated, and
esteemed as a Church of the established religion of this state. First, That
there is one eternal God, and a future state of rewards and punishments.
Second, That God is to be publicly worshipped. Third, the Christian Religion is
the true religion. Fourth, That the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, are divinely inspired, and are the rule of faith and practice.
Fifth, That it is lawful, and the duty of every man being thereunto called by
those that govern, to bear witness to truth. That every inhabitant of this
state, when called to make an appeal to God, as a witness to truth, shall be
permitted to do it in that way which is most agreeable to the dictates of his
own conscience. And, that the people of this state may forever enjoy the right
of electing their own pastors or clergy; and, at the same time, that the state
may have sufficient security, for the due discharge of the pastoral office, by
those who shall be admitted to be a Clergyman on the establishment; no person
shall officiate as minister of any established Church, who shall not have been
chosen by a majority of the society to which he shall minister, or by persons
appointed by the said majority to choose and procure a minister for them, nor
until the minister so chosen and appointed, shall have made and subscribed to
the following declaration, over and above the aforesaid five articles, viz.
That he is determined, by God's grace, out of the Holy Scriptures, to instruct
the people committed to his charge, and to teach nothing (as required of
necessity to eternal salvation) but that which he shall be persuaded may be
concluded and proved from the scripture; that he will use both public and
private admonitions, as well to the Sick as to the whole, within his cure, as
need shall require and occasion shall be given; and that he will be diligent in
prayers, and in reading of the Holy Scriptures, and in such studies as help to
the knowledge of the same; that he will be diligent to frame and fashion his
own self, and his family, according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both
himself and them, as much as in him lies, wholesome examples and patterns to
the flock of Christ; that he will maintain and set forwards, as much as he can,
quietness, peace, and love, among all Christian people; and especially among
those that are or shall be committed to his charge. No person shall disturb or
molest any religious assembly, nor shall use any reproachful, reviling or
abusive language, against any church; that being the certain way of disturbing
the peace, and of hindering the conversion of any to the truth by engaging them
in quarrels and animosities, to the hatred of the professors, and that
profession which otherwise they might be brought to assent to. Any person
consenting to associate with, and subscribing to, the writing or instrument by
which any denomination of Christians shall form themselves into a society,
before any five members, shall thereby be made a member thereof. Any person
striking out his name from such writing or instrument as aforesaid, or having
his name struck out, by any person thereto authorized by the society to which
he belongs, shall cease to be a member. No person whatsoever shall speak any
thing, in their religious assembly, irreverently, or seditiously, of the
government of this state. No person shall, by law, be obliged to pay toward
the maintenance and support of a religious worship that he does not freely join
in, or has not voluntarily engaged to support: But, the Churches, Chapels,
Parsonages, Glebes, and all other property, now belonging to any societies of
the Church of England, or any other religious societies, shall remain, and be
secured, to them for ever. No Person shall be capable of any place of honor,
trust or profit, under the authority of this state, who is not a member of some
church of the established religion thereof. Marriages shall be solemnized,
after publication three several Sundays preceding such marriage, in some public
place of worship, in the parish or district where the woman resides, or by
license, which shall be directed to any Minister of the Gospel, without
specifying the denomination, or prescribing the mode of solemnization. The poor
shall be supported, and elections managed in the accustomed manner, until laws
shall be provided, to adjust those matters in the most equitable way.

XXXVIII. That no Clergyman, Preacher, or Minister of the Gospel, shall be
entitled to any greater exemption from punishments inflicted by law, by reason
of any Benefit of Clergy, than if such Clergyman, Preacher or Minister was a
layman; but that every such Clergyman, Preacher or Minister being found guilty
of any offense which is clergyable or not clergyable by the law, shall suffer
as a layman.

XXXIX. That no part of this Constitution shall be altered without a notice of
ninety days being previously given: Nor shall any part of the same be changed,
without the consent of a majority of the members of the General Assembly and
Legislative Council.

XL. That the General Assembly and Legislative Council shall not proceed to the
election of a President or Vice President, until there be a majority of both
Houses present.


