AN ENQUIRY INTO THE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC PUNISHMENTS UPON CRIMINALS, AND UPON
SOCIETY.

READ IN THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING (...) ENQUIRIES, CONVENED AT THE HOUSE OF
HIS EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE IN PHILADELPHIA, MARCH 9th, 1787

Accustomed to look up to those Nations from whom we derived our Origin, for
our Laws, our Opinions, and our Manners; we have retained, with
undistinguishing Reverence, their Errors, with their Improvements; have
blended, with our Public Institutions, the Policy of dissimilar Countries; and
have grafted, on an Infant Commonwealth, the Manners of ancient and corrupted
Monarchies. Preface to Laws of the Society for Political Enquiries.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH JAMES, IN CHESNUT-STREET M.DCC.LXXXVII.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE EFFECTS OF PUBLIC PUNISHMENTS UPON CRIMINALS, AND UPON
SOCIETY.
THE design of punishment is said to be, -- 1st, to reform the person who
suffers it, -- 2dly, to prevent the perpetration of crimes, by exciting terror
in the minds of spectators; and, -- 3dly, to remove those persons from society,
who have manifested, by their tempers and crimes, that they are unfit to live
in it.

FROM the first institution of governments, in every age and country (with only
a few exceptions) legislators have thought that punishments should be public,
in order to produce the two first of these intentions. It will require some
fortitude to combat opinions that have been sanctified by such long and general
prejudice, and supported by universal practice. But truth in government, as
well as in philosophy, is of progressive growth. As in philosophy, we often
arrive at truth by rejecting the evidence of our senses; so in government, we
often arrive at it after divorcing our first thoughts. Reason, though deposed and
oppressed, is the only just sovereign of the human mind. Discoveries, it is
true, have been made by accident; but they have derived their credit and
usefulness only from their according with the decisions of reason.

IN medicine, above every other branch of philosophy, we perceive many
instances of the want of relation between the apparent cause and effect. Who,
by reasoning a priori, would suppose, that the hot regimen was not preferable
to the cold, in the treatment of the smallpox? But experience teaches us, that
this is not the case. Cause and effect appear to be related in philosophy, like
the objects of chemistry. Similar bodies often repel each other, while bodies
that are dissimilar in figure, weight and quality, often unite together with
impetuosity. With our present imperfect degrees of knowledge of the properties
of bodies, we can discover these chemical relations only by experiment. The
same may be said of the connection between cause and effect, in many parts of
government. This connection often accords with reason, while it is repugnant to
our senses -- and when this is not the case, from our inability to perceive it,
it forces our consent from the testimony of experience and observation.

IT has been remarked, that the profession of arms owes its present rank, as a
science, to its having been rescued, since the revival of letters, from the
hands of mere soldiers, and cultivated by men acquainted with other branches of
literature. The reason of this is plain. Truth is an unit. It is the same thing
in war -- philosophy -- medicine -- morals -- religion and government; and in
proportion as we arrive at it in one science, we shall discover it in others.

AFTER this apology, for dissenting from the established opinions and practice,
upon the subject of public punishments, I shall take the liberty of declaring,
that the great ends proposed, are not to be obtained by them; and that, on the
contrary, all public punishments tend to make bad men worse, and to increase
crimes, by their influence upon society.

I. THE reformation of a criminal can never be effected by a public punishment,
for the following reasons:

1st, AS it is always connected with infamy, it destroys in him the sense of
shame, which is one of the strongest out-posts of virtue.

2dly, IT is generally of such short duration, as to produce none of those
changes in body or mind, which are absolutely necessary to reform obstinate
habits of vice.

3dly, EXPERIENCE proves, that public punishments have increased propensities
to crimes. A man who has lost his character at a whipping-post, has nothing
valuable left to lose in society. Pain has begotten insensibility to the whip;
and shame to infamy. Added to his old habits of vice, he probably feels a
spirit of revenge against the whole community, whose laws have inflicted his
punishment upon him; and hence he is stimulated, to add to the number and
enormity of his outrages upon society. The long duration of the punishment,
when public, by increasing its infamy, serves only to increase the evils that
have been mentioned. The criminals, who were sentenced to work in the presence
of the city of London, upon the Thames, during the late war, were prepared, by
it, for the perpetration of every crime, as soon as they were set at liberty
from their confinement. I proceed,

II. To show, that public punishments, so far from preventing crimes by the
terror they excite in the minds of spectators, are directly calculated to
produce them.

ALL men, when they suffer, discover either fortitude, insensibility, or
distress. Let us enquire into the effects of each of these upon the minds of
spectators.

1st, FORTITUDE is a virtue, that seizes so forcibly upon our esteem, that
wherever we see it, it never fails to weaken, or to obliterate, our detestation
of the crimes with which it is connected in criminals. "I call upon you (said
major Andre, at the place of his execution, to his attendants) to bear witness,
gentlemen, that I die like a brave man." The effect of this speech upon the
American army is well known. The spy was lost in the hero; and indignation,
every where, gave way to admiration and praise. But this is not all -- the
admiration which fortitude, under suffering, excites, has in some instances
excited envy. In Denmark, uncommon pains are taken to prepare criminals for
death, by the conversation and instructions of the clergy. After this they are
conducted to the place of execution, with uncommon pomp and solemnity. The
criminals, under these circumstances, suffer death with meekness -- piety --
and sometimes with dignity. The effects of this, I have been well informed,
have been, in several instances, to induce deluded people to feign or confess
crimes, which they had never committed, on purpose to secure to themselves a
conspicuous death and a certain entrance into future happiness. There is
something, in the presence of a number of spectators, which is calculated to
excite and strengthen fortitude in a sufferer. "It is not so difficult a thing
(said Lewis the XIV. to his courtiers, who stood around his deathbed) to die,
as I expected." No wonder, says Voltaire, who relates this anecdote "for all
men die with fortitude, who die in company." The bravery of soldiers is
derived, in a great degree, from the operation of this principle in the human
mind.

2dly, IF criminals discover insensibility under their punishments, the effect
of it must be still more fatal upon society. It removes, instead of exciting
terror. In some instances, I conceive it may excite a desire in the minds of
persons whom debt or secret guilt have made miserable, to seek an end of their
distresses in the same enviable apathy to evil. -- Should this insensibility be
connected with cheerfulness (which is sometimes the case) it must produce still
more unfriendly effects upon society. But terrible must be the consequences of
this insensibility and cheerfulness, if they should lead criminals to retaliate
upon the inhuman curiosity of spectators, by profane or indecent insults or
conversation.

3dly, THE effects of distress in criminals, though less obvious, are not less
injurious to society, than fortitude or insensibility. By an immutable law of
our nature, distress of all kinds, when seen, produces sympathy, and a
disposition to relieve it. This sympathy in generous minds, is not lessened by
the distress being the offspring of crimes; on the contrary, even the crimes
themselves are often palliated by the reflection, that they were the
unfortunate consequences of extreme poverty -- of seducing company -- or of the
want of a virtuous education, from the loss or negligence of parents in early
life. Now, as the distress which the criminals suffer, is the effect of a law
of the state, which cannot be resisted, the sympathy of the spectator is
rendered abortive, and returns empty to the bosom in which it was awakened. Let
us briefly examine the consequences of this abortive sympathy in society. It
will not be necessary here to dwell upon all the advantages of this principle
in human nature. It will be sufficient to observe, that it is the vicegerent of
the divine benevolence in our world. It is intended to bind up all the wounds
which sin and death have made among mankind. It has founded hospitals --
erected charity-schools, and connected the extremes of happiness and misery
together, in every part of the globe. -- Above all, sensibility is the sentinel
of the moral faculty. It decides upon the quality of actions before they reach
that divine principle of the soul. It is of itself, to use the words of an
elegant female poet Miss MOORE.
, "A hasty moral -- a sudden sense of right."

IF such are the advantages of sensibility, now what must be the consequences
to society, of extirpating or weakening it in the human breast? But public
punishments are calculated to produce this effect. To prove this, I must borrow
an analogy from the animal economy. -- The sensibility of the human body is
said to be active and passive. The first is connected with motion and
sensation: the second only with sensation. The first is increased, the second
is diminished, by the repetition of impressions. The same phenomenon take place
in the human mind. Sensibility here is both active and passive. Passive
sensibility is lessened, while that which is active is increased by habit. The
passive sensibility of a physician, to the distress of his patients, is always
diminished, but his active sensibility is always increased by time; hence we
find young physicians feel most -- but old physicians, with less feeling,
discover most sympathy with their patients.

IF such be the constitution of our minds, then the effects of distress upon
them will be, not only to destroy passive, but, to eradicate active sensibility
from them. The principle of sympathy, after being often opposed by the law of
the state, which forbids it to relieve the distress it commiserates, will cease
to act altogether; and, from this defect of action, and the habit arising from
it, will soon lose its place in the human breast. Misery of every kind will
then be contemplated without emotion or sympathy. -- The widow and the orphan
-- the naked -- the sick, and the prisoner, will have no avenue to our services
or our charity -- and what is worse than all, when the sentinel of our moral
faculty is removed, there is nothing to guard the mind from the inroads of
every positive vice.

I PASS over the influence of this sympathy in its first operation upon the
government of the state. While we pity, we secretly condemn the law which
inflicts the punishment -- hence arises a want of respect for laws in general,
and a more feeble union of the great ties of government.

I HAVE only to add, upon this part of my subject, that the pernicious effects
of sympathy, where it does not terminate in action, are happily provided
against by the Jewish law. Hence we read of a prohibition against it, where
persons suffer for certain crimes. To spectators, the voice of Heaven, under
such circumstances, is, "thine eye shall not pity him."

4thly, BUT it is possible the characters or conduct of criminals may be such,
as to excite indignation or contempt, instead of pity, in the minds of
spectators. Let us therefore enquire, briefly, into the effects of these
passions upon the human mind. Every body acknowledges our obligations to
universal benevolence. But these cannot be fulfilled, unless we love the whole
human race, however diversified they may be by weakness or crimes. The
indignation or contempt which is felt for this unhappy part of the great family
of mankind, must necessarily extinguish a large portion of this universal love.
Nor is this all -- the men, or perhaps the women, whose persons we detest,
possess souls and bodies composed of the same materials as those of our friends
and relations. They are bone of their bone, and were originally fashioned with
the same spirits. What then must be the consequence of a familiarity with such
objects of horror, upon our attachments and duties to our friends and
connections, or to the rest of mankind? If a spectator should give himself time
to reflect upon such a sight of human depravity, he would naturally recoil from
the embraces of friendship, and the endearments of domestic life, and perhaps
say, with an unfortunate great man, after having experienced an instance of
treachery in a friend, "Oh! that I were dog, that I might not call man my
brother." -- The Jewish law forbad more than nine and thirty lashes, left the
sufferer should afterward become "vile" in the sight of spectators. It is the
prerogative of GOD alone, to contemplate the vices of bad men, without
withdrawing from them the support of his benevolence. Hence we find, when he
appeared in the world in the person of his son, he did not exclude criminals
from the benefits of his goodness. He dismissed a woman caught in the
perpetration of a crime, which was capital by the Jewish law, with a friendly
admonition; and he opened the gates of paradise to a dying thief.

5thly, BUT let us suppose, that criminals are viewed without sympathy --
indignation -- or contempt. This will be the case either when spectators are
themselves hardened with vice, or when they are too young, or too ignorant, to
connect the ideas of crimes and punishments together. Here then a new source of
injury to society arises from the public nature of punishments. Every portion
of them will appear, to spectators of this description, to be mere arbitrary
acts of cruelty. Hence will arise a disposition to exercise the same arbitrary
cruelty over the feelings and lives of their fellow creatures. To see blows, or
a halter, imposed in cold blood, upon a criminal, whose passive behavior,
operating with the ignorance of the spectators, indicates innocence more than
vice, cannot fail of removing the natural obstacles to violence and murder in
the human mind.

6thly, PUBLIC punishments make many crimes known to persons, who would
otherwise have passed through life in a total ignorance of them. They moreover
produce such a familiarity in the minds of spectators, with the crimes for
which they are inflicted, that, in some instances, they have been known to
excite a propensity to them. It has been remarked, that a certain immorality
has always kept pace with public admonitions in the churches in the eastern
states. In proportion as this branch of ecclesiastical discipline has declined,
fewer children have been born out of wedlock.

7thly, IGNOMINY is universally acknowledged to be a worse punishment than
death. Let it not be supposed, from this circumstance, that it operates more
than the fear of death in preventing crimes. On the contrary, like the
indiscriminate punishment of death, it not only confounds and levels all
crimes, but by increasing the disproportion between crimes and punishments, it
creates a hatred of all law and government, and thus disposes to the
perpetration of every crime. Laws can only be respected, and obeyed, while they
bear an exact proportion to crimes. The law which punishes the shooting of a
swan with death in England, has produced a thousand murders. Not is this all
the mischievous influence which the punishment of ignominy has upon society.
While murder is punished with death, the man who robs on the high way, or
breaks open a house, must want the common feelings and principles which belong
to human nature, if he does not add murder to theft, in order to screen
himself, if he should be detected, from that punishment which is acknowledged
to be more terrible than death.

IT would seem strange, that ignominy should ever have been adopted, as a
milder punishment than death, did we not know, that the human mind seldom
arrives at truth upon any subject, till it has first reached the extremity of
error.

8thly, BUT may not the benefit derived to society by employing criminals to
repair public roads, or to clean streets, overbalance the evils that have been
mentioned? I answer, by no means. On the contrary, besides operating in one, or
in all the ways that have been described, the practice of employing criminals
in public labor, will render labor of every kind disreputable, more
especially that species of it which has for its objects the convenience or
improvement of the state. It is a well known fact, that white men soon decline
labor in the West Indies, and in the southern states, only because the
agriculture, and mechanical employments of those countries, are carried on
chiefly by Negro slaves. But I object further to the employment of criminals on
the highways and streets, from the idleness they will create by alluring
spectators from their business; and thereby depriving the state of greater
benefits from the industry of its citizens, that it can ever derive from the
public labor of criminals.

THE history of public punishments, in every age and country, is full of facts,
which support every principle that has been advanced. -- What has been the
operation of the seventy thousand executions, that have taken place in
Great Britain from the year 1688, to the present day, upon the morals and
manners of the inhabitants of that island? Has not every prison door that has
been opened, to conduct criminals to public shame and punishment, unlocked, at
the same time, the bars of moral obligation upon the minds of ten times the
number of people? How often do we find pockets picked under a gallows, and
highway-robberies committed within sight of a gibbet? From whence arose the
conspiracies, assassinations and poisonings, which prevailed in the decline of
the Roman empire? Were they not favored by the public executions of the
amphitheatre? It is therefore to the combined operation of indolence,
prejudice, ignorance -- and the defect of culture of the human heart, alone,
that we are to ascribe the continuance of public punishments, after such long
and multiplied experience of their inefficacy to reform bad men, or to prevent
the commission of crimes.

III. LET it not be supposed, from any thing that has been said, that I wish to
abolish punishments. Far from it -- I wish only to change the place and manner
of inflicting them, so as to render them effectual for the reformation of
criminals, and beneficial to society. Before I propose a plan for this purpose,
I beg leave to deliver the following general axioms.

1st, THE human mind is disposed to exaggerate every thing that is removed at a
distance from it, by time or place.

2dly, IT is equally disposed to enquire after, and to magnify such things as
are secret.

3dly, IT always ascribes the extremes in qualities, to things that are
unknown; and an excess in duration, to indefinite time.

4thly, CERTAIN, and definite evil, by being long contemplated, ceases to be
dreaded or avoided. A soldier soon loses, from habit, the fear of death from a
bullet, but retains, in common, with other people, the terror of death from
sickness or drowning.

5thly, AN attachment to kindred and society is one of the strongest feelings
in the human heart. A separation from them, therefore, has ever been considered
as one of the severest punishments that can be inflicted upon man.

6thly, PERSONAL liberty is so dear to all men, that the loss of it, for an
indefinite time, is a punishment so severe, that death has often been preferred
to it.

THESE axioms being admitted (for they cannot be controverted) I shall proceed
next to apply them, by suggesting a plan, for the punishment of crimes, which I
flatter myself will answer all the ends that have been proposed by them.

1st, LET a large house, of a construction agreeable to its design, be erected
in a remote part of the state. Let the avenue to this house be rendered
difficult and gloomy by mountains or morasses. Let its doors be of iron; and
let the grating, occasioned by opening and shutting them, be increased by an
echo from a neighboring mountain, that shall extend and continue a sound that
shall deeply pierce the soul. Let a guard constantly attend at a gate that
shall lead to this place of punishment, to prevent strangers from entering it.
Let all the officers of the house be strictly forbidden ever to discover any
signs of mirth, or even levity, in the presence of the criminals. To increase
the horror of this abode of discipline and misery, let it be called by some
name that shall import its design.

2dly, LET the various kinds of punishment, that are to be inflicted on crimes,
be defined and fixed by law. But let no notice be taken, in the law, of the
punishment that awaits any particular crime. By these means we shall prevent
the mind from accustoming itself to the view of these punishments, so as to
destroy their terror by habit. The indifference and levity with which some men
suffer the punishment of hanging, is often occasioned by an insensibility that
is contracted by the frequent anticipation of it, or by the appearance of the
gallows suggesting the remembrance of scenes of criminal festivity, in which it
was the subject of humor or ridicule. Besides, punishments should always be
varied in degree, according to the temper of criminals, or the progress of
their reformation.

3dly, LET the duration of punishments, for all crimes, be limited, but let
this limitation be unknown. I conceive this secret to be of the utmost
importance in reforming criminals, and preventing crimes. The imagination, when
agitated with uncertainty, will seldom fail of connecting the longest duration
of punishment, with the smallest crime.

I CANNOT conceive any thing more calculated to diffuse terror through a
community, and thereby to prevent crimes, than the combination of the three
circumstances that have been mentioned in punishments. Children will press upon
the evening fire in listening to the tales that will be spread from this abode
of misery. Superstition will add to its horrors, and romance will find in it
ample materials for fiction, which cannot fail of increasing the terror of its
punishments.

LET it not be objected, that the terror produced by the history of these
secret punishments, will operate like the abortive sympathy I have described.
Active sympathy can be fully excited only through the avenues of the eyes and
the ears. Besides, the recollection that the only design of punishment is the
reformation of the criminal, will suspend the action of sympathy altogether. We
listen with paleness to the history of a tedious and painful operation in
surgery, without a wish to arrest the hand of the operator. Our sympathy, which
in this case is of the passive kind, is mixed with pleasure, when we are
assured, that there is a certainty of the operation being the means of saving
the life of the sufferer.

NOR let the expense of erecting and supporting a house of repentance, for the
purposes that have been mentioned, deter us from the undertaking. It would be
easy to demonstrate, that it will not cost one-fourth as much as the
maintenance of the numerous jails that are now necessary in every
well-regulated state. But why should receptacles be provided and supported at
an immense expense, in every country, for the relief of persons afflicted with
bodily disorders, and an objection be made to providing a place for the cure of
the diseases of the mind?

THE nature -- degrees -- and duration of the punishments, should all be
determined beyond a certain degree, by a court properly constituted for that
purpose, and whose business it should be to visit the receptacle for criminals
once or twice a year.

I AM aware of the prejudices of freemen, against entrusting power to a
discretionary court. But let it be remembered, that no power is committed to
this court, but what is possessed by the different courts of justice in all
free countries; nor so much as is now wisely and necessarily possessed by the
supreme and inferior courts, in the execution of the penal laws of
Pennsylvania. I shall spend no time in defending the consistency of private
punishments, with a safe and free government. Truth, upon this subject, cannot
be divided. If public punishments are injurious to criminals and to society, it
follows, that crimes should be punished in private, or not punished at all.
There is no alternative. The opposition to private punishments, therefore, is
founded altogether in prejudice, or in ignorance of the true principles of
liberty.

THE safety and advantages of private punishments, will appear further, when I
add, that the best governed families and schools are those, in which the faults
of servants and children are rebuked privately, and where confinement and
solitude are preferred for correction, to the use of the rod.

IN order to render these punishments effectual, they should be accommodated to
the constitutions and tempers of the criminals, and the peculiar nature of
their crimes. Peculiar attention should be paid, likewise, in the nature,
degrees and duration of punishments, to crimes, as they arise from passion,
habit or temptation.

THE punishments should consist of BODILY PAIN, LABOR, WATCHFULNESS, SOLITUDE,
and SILENCE. They should all be joined with CLEANLINESS and a SIMPLE DIET. To
ascertain the nature, degrees and duration of the bodily pain, will require
some knowledge of the principles of sensation, and of the sympathies which
occur in the nervous system. The labor should be so regulated and directed, as
to be profitable to the state. Besides employing criminals in laborious and
useful manufactures, they may be compelled to derive all their subsistence from
a farm and a garden, cultivated by their own hands, adjoining the place of
their confinement.

THESE punishments may be used separately, or more or less combined, according
to the nature of the crimes, or according to the variations of the constitution
and temper of the criminal. In the application of them, the utmost possible
advantages should be taken of the laws of the association of ideas, of habit,
and of imitation.

TO render these physical remedies more effectual, they should be accompanied
by regular instruction in the principles, and obligations of religion, by
persons appointed for that purpose.

THUS far I am supported, in the application of the remedies I have mentioned,
for the cure of crimes, by the facts that are contained in Mr. Howard's history
of prisons, and by other observations. It remains yet to prescribe the specific
punishment that is proper for each specific crime. Here my subject begins to
oppress me. I have no more doubt of every crime having its cure in moral and
physical influence, than I have of the efficacy of the Peruvian bark in curing
the intermitting fever. The only difficulty is, to find out the proper remedy
or remedies for particular vices. Mr. Dufriche de Valaze, in his elaborate
treatise upon penal laws, has performed the office of a pioneer upon this
difficult subject. He has divided crimes into classes, and has affixed
punishments to each of them, in a number of ingenious tables. Some of the
connections he has established between crimes and punishments, appear to be
just. -- But many of his punishments are contrary to the first principles of
action in man; and all of them are, in my opinion, improper, as far as he
orders them to be infflicted in the eye of the public. His attempt, however, is
laudable, and deserves the praise of every friend to mankind.

IF the invention of a machine for facilitating labor, has been repaid with
the gratitude of a country, how much more will that man deserve, that shall
invent the most speedy and effectual methods of restoring the vicious part of
mankind to virtue and happiness, and of extirpating a portion of vice from the
world? -- Happy condition of human affairs! when humanity, philosophy and
christianity, shall unite their influence to teach men, that they are
brethren; and to prevent their preying any longer upon each other! Happy
citizens of the United States, whose governments permit them to adopt every
discovery in the moral or intellectual world, that leads to these benevolent
purposes!

LET it not be objected, that it will be impossible for men, who have expiated
their offenses by the mode of punishment that has been proposed, to recover
their former connections with society. This objection arises from an
unfortunate association of ideas. The infamy of criminals, is derived, not so
much from the remembrance of their crimes, as from the recollection of the
ignominy of their punishments. Crimes produce a stain, which may be washed out
by reformation, and which frequently wears away by time: But public punishments
leave scars, which disfigure the whole character; and hence persons, who have
suffered them, are ever afterward viewed with horror or aversion. If crimes
were expiated by private discipline, and succeeded by reformation, criminals
would probably suffer no more in character from them, than men suffer in their
reputation or usefulness from the punishments they have undergone when boys at
school.

I AM so perfectly satisfied of the truth of this opinion, that methinks I
already hear the inhabitants of our villages and townships counting the years
that shall complete the reformation of one of their citizens. I behold them
running to meet him on the day of his deliverance. -- His friends and family
bathe his cheeks with tears of joy; and the universal shout of the
neighborhood is, "This our brother was lost and is found -- was dead, and is
alive." --

IT has long been a desideratum in government, that there should exist in it no
pardoning power, since the certainty of punishment operates so much more than
its severity, or infamy, in preventing crimes. But where punishments are
excessive in degree, or infamous from being public, a pardoning power is
absolutely necessary. Remove their severity and public infamy, and a pardoning
power ceases to be necessary in a code of criminal jurisprudence. -- Nay,
further -- it is such a defect in penal laws, as in some measure defeats every
invention to prevent crimes, or to cure habits of vice. If punishments were
moderate, just and private, they would exalt the feelings of public justice and
benevolence so far above the emotions of humanity in witnesses, juries and
judges, that they would forget to conceal, or to palliate crimes; and the
certainty of punishment, by extinguishing all hope of pardon in the criminal,
would lead him to connect the beginning of his repentance with the last words
of his sentence of condemnation. To obtain this great and salutary end, there
should exist certain portions of punishment, both in duration and degree, which
should be placed by law beyond the power of the discretionary court before
mentioned, to shorten or mitigate.

I HAVE said nothing upon the manner of inflicting death as a punishment for
crimes, because I consider it as an improper punishment for any crime. Even
murder itself is propagated by the punishment of death for murder. Of this we
have a remarkable proof in Italy. The Duke of Tuscany, soon after the
publication of the Marquis of Beccaria's excellent treatise upon this subject,
abolished death as a punishment for murder. A gentleman, who resided five years
at Pisa, informed me, that only five murders had been perpetrated in his
dominions in twenty years. The same gentleman added, that after his residence
in Tuscany, he spent three months in Rome, where death is still the punishment
of murder, and where executions, according to Doctor Moore, are conducted with
peculiar circumstances of public parade. During this short period, there were
sixty murders committed in the precincts of that city. It is remarkable, the
manners, principles, and religion, of the inhabitants of Tuscany and Rome, are
exactly the same. The abolition of death alone, as a punishment for murder,
produced this difference in the moral character of the two nations.

I SUSPECT the attachment to death, as a punishment for murder, in minds
otherwise enlightened, upon the subject of capital punishments, arises from a
false interpretation of a passage contained in the old testament, and that is,
"he that sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed." This has been
supposed to imply, that blood could only be expiated by blood. But I am
disposed to believe, with a late commentator The Reverend Mr. WILLIAM TURNER,
in the second Vol. of the Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society of
Manchester.
upon this text of scripture, that it is rather a prediction, than a law. The
language of it is simply, that such will be the depravity and folly of man,
that murder, in every age, shall beget murder. Laws, therefore, which inflict
death for murder, are, in my opinion, as unchristian as those which justify or
tolerate revenge; for the obligations of christianity upon individuals, to
promote repentance, to forgive injuries, and to discharge the duties of
universal benevolence, are equally binding upon states.

THE power over human life, is the solitary prerogative of HIM who gave it.
Human laws, therefore, rise in rebellion against this prerogative, when they
transfer it to human hands.

IF society can be secured from violence, by confining the murderer, so as to
prevent a repetition of his crime, the end of extirpation will be answered. In
confinement, he may be reformed -- and if this should prove impracticable, he
may be restrained for a term of years, that will probably be coeval with his
life.

THERE was a time, when the punishment of captives with death or servitude, and
the indiscriminate destruction of peaceable husbandmen, women and children,
were thought to be essential to the success of war, and the safety of states.
But experience has taught us, that this is not the case. And in proportion as
humanity has triumphed over these maxims of false policy, wars have been less
frequent and terrible, and nations have enjoyed longer intervals of internal
tranquillity. The virtues are all parts of a circle. Whatever is humane, is wise
-- whatever is wise, is just -- and whatever is wise, just, and humane, will be
found to be the true interest of states, whether criminals or foreign enemies
are the objects of their legislation.

I HAVE taken no notice of perpetual banishment, as a legal punishment, as I
consider it the next in degree, in folly and cruelty, to the punishment of
death. If the receptacle for criminals, which has been proposed, is erected in
a remote part of the state, it will act with the same force upon the feelings
of the human heart, as perpetual banishment. Exile, when perpetual, by
destroying one of the most powerful principles of action in man, viz. the love
of kindred, and country, deprives us of all the advantages, which might be
derived from it, in the business of reformation. While certain passions are
weakened, this noble passion is strengthened by age; hence, by preserving this
passion alive, we furnish a principle, which, in time, may become an overmatch
for those vicious habits, which separated criminals from their friends, and
from society.

NOTWITHSTANDING this testimony against the punishment of death and perpetual
banishment, I cannot help adding, that there is more mercy to the criminal, and
less injury done to society, by both of them, than by public infamy and pain,
without them.

THE great art of surgery has been said to consist in saving, not in
destroying, or amputating, the diseased parts of the human body. Let
governments learn to imitate, in this respect, the skill and humanity of the
healing art. Nature knows no waste in any of her operations. Even putrefaction
itself, is the parent of useful productions to man. Human ingenuity, imitates
nature in a variety of arts. Offal matters, of all kinds, are daily converted
into the means of increasing the profits of industry, and the pleasures of
human life. The soul of man alone, with all its moral and intellectual powers,
when misled by passion, is abandoned, by the ignorance or cruelty of man, to
unprofitable corruption, or extirpation.

IF the foregoing reasonings and facts, have been urged in vain, in favor of
private punishments, I shall add one more argument, which I hope will be
irresistible. The punishments of wicked men, in the world of spirits, are
invisible; we have no knowledge of their reality, nature, degrees, or duration,
but what was revealed to us near eighteen hundred years ago; and yet
governments owe their stability, chiefly, to that morality, which the terror of
these invisible, remote, and indefinite punishments, excites in the human mind.

A WORTHY prelate of the church of England once said upon seeing a criminal led
to execution, "There goes my wicked self." Considering the vices to which the
frailty of human nature exposes whole families of every rank and class in life,
it becomes us whenever we see a fellow creature led to public infamy and pain,
to add further, "There goes my unhappy father, my unhappy brother, or my
unhappy son," and afterward to ask ourselves, whether private punishments are
not to be preferred to public.

FOR the honor of humanity it can be said, that in every age and country,
there have been found persons in whom uncorrupted nature has triumphed over
custom, and law. Else, why do we hear of houses being abandoned near to places
of public execution? Why do we see doors and windows shut on the days or hours
of criminal exhibitions and processions? Why do we hear of aid being secretly
afforded to criminals, to mitigate or elude the severity of their punishments?
-- Why is the public executioner of the law an object of such general
detestation? These things are the latent struggles of reason, or rather the
secret voice of God himself, speaking in the human heart, against the folly and
cruelty of public punishments.

I SHALL conclude this enquiry by observing, that the same false religion and
philosophy, which once kindled the fire on the altar of persecution, now doom
the criminal to public ignominy and death. In proportion as the principles of
philosophy and christianity are understood, they will agree in extinguishing
the one, and destroying the other. If these principles continue to extend their
influence upon government, as they have done for some years past, I cannot help
entertaining a hope, that the time is not very distant, when the gallows, the
pillory, the stocks, the whipping-post, and the wheel-barrow (the usual engines
of public punishments) will be connected with the history of the rack, and the
stake, as marks of the barbarity of ages and countries, and as melancholy
proofs of the feeble operation of reason, and religion, upon the human mind.


