THOUGHTS UPON FEMALE EDUCATION, ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY,
MANNERS, AND GOVERNMENT. IN THE United States of America. Addressed to the
VISITORS of the YOUNG LADIES' ACADEMY IN PHILADELPHIA, 28 JULY, 1787, AT THE
CLOSE OF THE QUARTERLY EXAMINATION. BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. Professor of
Chemistry in the University of Pennsylvania. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A PRAYER, BY
SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D. Rector of St. Paul's Church, and Vice-Provost of the
University of Pennsylvania; DELIVERED UPON THE SAME OCCASION.

PHILADELPHIA: (...) PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET, BETWEEN FRONT AND
SECOND STREETS. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

At a meeting of the Visitors of the Young Ladies' Academy in the city of
Philadelphia, held at the said Academy on the 28th of July, 1787,
Resolved,

THAT the thanks of this board be presented to Doctor BENJAMIN RUSH, for the
Thoughts delivered this day by him, at the close of the quarterly examination,
on the subject of Female Education; and that the doctor be requested to furnish
a copy thereof for publication.

Resolved, also,

THAT the thanks of the board be presented to the Rev. Doctor SAMUEL MAGAW, for
the Prayer delivered by him on the same occasion; and that he be also requested
to favor the board with a copy thereof for publication.

Signed by order of the board, J. SWANWICK, Secretary.

TO Mrs. ELIZABETH POWEL.
MADAM,
SOME of the opinions contained in the following pages are so contrary to
general prejudice and fashion, that I could not presume to offer them to the
public, without soliciting for them, the patronage of a respectable and popular
female name.

Permit me therefore MADAM to commit this little work to your protection, and
at the same time to assure you, of the great respect and esteem, with which I
have the honor to subscribe myself,

Your most obedient, Humble servant, BENJAMIN RUSH.

GENTLEMEN,
I HAVE yielded with diffidence to the solicitations of the Principal of the
Academy, in undertaking to express my regard for the prosperity of this
Seminary of Learning, by submitting to your candor, a few Thoughts upon Female
Education.

The first remark that I shall make upon this subject, is, that female
education should be accommodated to the state of society, manners, and
government of the country, in which it is conducted.

This remark leads me at once to add, that the education of young ladies, in
this country, should be conducted upon principles very different from what it
is in Great Britain, and in some respects different from what it was when we
were part of a monarchical empire.

There are several circumstances in the situation, employments, and duties of
women, in America, which require a peculiar mode of education.

I. The early marriages of our women, by contracting the time allowed for
education, renders it necessary to contract its plan, and to confine it chiefly
to the more useful branches of literature.

II. The state of property, in America, renders it necessary for the greatest
part of our citizens to employ themselves, in different occupations, for the
advancement of their fortunes. This cannot be done without the assistance of
the female members of the community. They must be the stewards, and guardians
of their husbands' property. That education, therefore, will be most proper for
our women, which teaches them to discharge the duties of those offices with the
most success and reputation.

III. From the numerous avocations to which a professional life exposes
gentlemen in America from their families, a principal share of the instruction
of children naturally devolves upon the women. It becomes us therefore to
prepare them by a suitable education, for the discharge of this most important
duty of mothers.

IV. The equal share that every citizen has in the liberty, and the possible
share he may have in the government of our country, make it necessary that our
ladies should be qualified to a certain degree by a peculiar and suitable
education, to concur in instructing their sons in the principles of liberty and
government.

V. In Great Britain the business of servants is a regular occupation; but in
America this humble station is the usual retreat of unexpected indigence; hence
the servants in this country possess less knowledge and subordination than are
required from them; and hence, our ladies are obliged to attend more to the
private affairs of their families, than ladies generally do, of the same rank
in Great Britain. "They are good servants (said an American lady of
distinguished merit Mrs. GRAEME.
in a letter to a favorite daughter) who will do well with good looking after."
This circumstance should have great influence upon the nature and extent of
female education in America.

The branches of literature most essential for a young lady in this country,
appear to be,

I. A knowledge of the English language. She should not only read, but speak
and spell it correctly. And to enable her to do this, she should be taught the
English grammar, and be frequently examined in applying its rules in common
conversation.

II. Pleasure and interest conspire to make the writing of a fair and legible
hand, a necessary branch of female education. For this purpose she should be
taught not only to shape every letter properly, but to pay the strictest regard
to points and capitals The (...) among persons of taste is to use a capital
letter only for the first word of a sentence, and for names of persons, places
and months, and for the first word of every line in poetry. The word should be
so shaped (...) a straight line may be drawn between two lines. (...) of the
word in either of them
.

I once heard of a man who professed to discover the temper and disposition of
persons by looking at their hand writing. Without enquiring into the
probability of this story; I shall only remark, that there is one thing in
which all mankind agree upon this subject, and that is, in considering writing
that is blotted, crooked, or illegible, as a mark of a vulgar education. I know
of few things more rude or illiberal, than to obtrude a letter upon a person of
rank or business, which cannot be easily read. Peculiar care should be taken to
avoid every kind of ambiguity and affectation in writing names. I have now a
letter in my possession upon business, from a gentleman of a liberal profession
in a neighboring state, which I am unable to answer, because I cannot discover
the name which is subscribed to it. For obvious reasons I would recommend the
writing of the first or christian name at full length, where it does not
consist of more than two syllables. Abbreviations of all kinds in
letter-writing, which always denote either haste or carelessness, should
likewise be avoided. I have only to add under this head, that the Italian and
inverted hands which are read with difficulty, are by no means accommodated to
the active state of business in America, or to the simplicity of the citizens
of a republic.

III. Some knowledge of figures and bookkeeping is absolutely necessary to
qualify a young lady for the duties which await her in this country. There are
certain occupations in which she may assist her husband with this knowledge;
and should she survive him, and agreeably to the custom of our country be the
executrix of his will, she cannot fail of deriving immense advantages from it.

IV. An acquaintance with geography and some instruction in chronology will
enable a young lady to read history, biography, and travels, with advantage;
and thereby qualify her not only for a general intercourse with the world, but,
to be an agreeable companion for a sensible man. To these branches of knowledge
may be added, in some instances, a general acquaintance with the first
principles of astronomy, and natural philosophy, particularly with such parts
of them as are calculated to prevent superstition, by explaining the causes, or
obviating the effects of natural evil.

V. Vocal music should never be neglected, in the education of a young lady, in
this country. Besides preparing her to join in that part of public worship
which consists in psalmody, it will enable her to soothe the cares of domestic
life. The distress and vexation of a husband -- the noise of a nursery, and,
even, the sorrows that will sometimes intrude into her own bosom, may all be
relieved by a song, where found and sentiment unite to act upon the mind. I
hope it will not be thought foreign to this part of our subject to introduce a
fact here, which has been suggested to me by my profession, and that is, that
the exercise of the organs of the breast, by singing, contributes very much to
defend them from those diseases to which our climate, and other causes, have of
late exposed them. -- Our German fellow-citizens are seldom afflicted with
consumptions, nor have I ever known but one instance of a spitting of blood
among them. This, I believe, is in part occasioned by the strength which their
lungs acquire, by exercising them frequently in vocal music, for this
constitutes an essential branch of their education. The music-master of our
academy Mr. ADGATE.
has furnished me with an observation still more in favor of this opinion. He
informed me that, he had known several instances of persons who were strongly
disposed to the consumption, who were restored to health, by the moderate
exercise of their lungs in singing.

VI. DANCING is by no means an improper branch of education for an American
lady. It promotes health, and renders the figure and motions of the body easy
and agreeable. I anticipate the time when the resources of conversation shall
be so far multiplied, that the amusement of dancing shall be wholly confined to
children. But in our present state of society and knowledge, I conceive it to
be an agreeable substitute for the ignoble pleasures of drinking, and gaming,
in our assemblies of grown people.

VII. The attention of our young ladies should be directed, as soon as they are
prepared for it, to the reading of history -- travels -- poetry -- and moral
essays. These studies are accommodated, in a peculiar manner, to the present
state of society in America, and when a relish is excited for them, in early
life, they subdue that passion for reading novels, which so generally prevails
among the fair sex. I cannot dismiss this species of writing and reading
without observing, that the subjects of novels are by no means accommodated to
our present manners. They hold up life, it is true, but it is not as yet life,
in America. Our passions have not as yet "overstepped the modesty of nature,"
nor are they "torn to tatters," to use the expressions of the poet, by
extravagant love, jealousy, ambition, or revenge. As yet the intrigues of a
British novel, are as foreign to our manners, as the refinements of Asiatic
vice. Let it not be said, that the tales of distress, which fill modern novels,
have a tendency to soften the female heart into acts of humanity. The fact is
the reverse of this. The abortive sympathy which is excited by the recital of
imaginary distress, blunts the heart to that which is real; and, hence, we
sometimes see instances of young ladies, who weep away a whole forenoon over
the criminal sorrows of a fictitious Charlotte or Werter, turning with disdain
at two o'clock from the sight of a beggar, who solicits in feeble accents or
signs, a small portion only, of the crumbs which fall from their fathers'
tables.

VIII. It will be necessary to connect all these branches of education with
regular instruction in the christian religion. For this purpose the principles
of the different sects of christians should be taught and explained, and our
pupils should early be furnished with some of the most simple arguments in
favor of the truth of christianity Baron Haller's letters to his daughter on
the truths of the christian religion, and Dr. Beatie's "evidences of the
christian religion briefly and plainly stated" are excellent little tracts, and
well adapted for this purpose.
. A portion of the bible (of late improperly banished from our school) should
be read by them every day, and such questions should be asked, after reading
it, as are calculated to imprint upon their minds the interesting stories
contained in it.

Rousseau has asserted that the great secret of education consists in "wasting
the time of children profitably." There is some truth in this observation. I
believe that we often impair their health, and weaken their capacities, by
imposing studies upon them, which are not proportioned to their years. But this
objection does not apply to religious instruction. There are certain simple
propositions in the christian religion, that are suited in a peculiar manner,
to the infant state of reason and moral sensibility. A clergyman of long
experience in the instruction of youth The Rev. Mr. NICHOLAS COLLIN, minister
of the Swedish church in Wicocoe.
informed me, that he always found children acquired religious knowledge more
easily than knowledge upon other subjects; and that young girls acquired this
kind of knowledge more readily than boys. The female breast is the natural soil
of christianity; and while our women are taught to believe its doctrines, and
obey its precepts, the wit of Voltaire, and the style of Bolingbroke, will
never be able to destroy its influence upon our citizens.

I cannot help remarking in this place, that christianity exerts the most
friendly influence upon science, as well as upon the morals and manners of
mankind. Whether this be occasioned by the unity of truth, and the mutual
assistance which truths upon different subjects afford each other, or whether
the faculties of the mind be sharpened and corrected by embracing the truths of
revelation, and thereby prepared to investigate and perceive truths upon other
subjects, I will not determine, but it is certain that the greatest discoveries
in science have been made by christian philosophers, and that there is the most
knowledge in those countries where there is the most christianity This is true
in a peculiar manner in the science of medicine. A young Scotch physician of
enterprizing talents, who conceived a high idea of the state of medicine in the
eastern countries, spent two years in enquiries after medical knowledge in
Constantinople, and Grand Cairo. On his return to Britain he confessed to an
American physician whom he met at Naples, that after all his researches and
travels, he "had discovered nothing except a single fact relative to the
plague, that he thought worth remembering or communicating." The science of
medicine in China according to the accounts of De Halde is in as imperfect a
state (...) among the Indians of North America.
. By knowledge I mean truth only; and by truth I mean the perception of things
as they appear to the divine mind. If this remark be well founded, then those
philosophers who reject christianity, and those christians, whether parents or
schoolmasters, who neglect the religious instruction of their children and
pupils, reject and neglect the most effectual means of promoting knowledge in
our country.

IX. If the measures that have been recommended for inspiring our pupils with a
sense of religious and moral obligation be adopted, the government of them will
be easy and agreeable. I shall only remark under this head, that strictness of
discipline will always render severity unnecessary, and that there will be the
most instruction in that school, where there is the most order.

I have said nothing in favor of instrumental music as a branch of female
education, because I conceive it is by no means accommodated to the present
state of society and manners in America. The price of musical instruments, and
the extravagant fees demanded by the teachers of instrumental music, form but a
small part of my objections to it.

To perform well, upon a musical instrument, requires much time and long
practice. From two to four hours in a day, for three or four years,
appropriated to music, are an immense deduction from that short period of time
which is allowed by the peculiar circumstances of our country for the
acquisition of the useful branches of literature that have been mentioned. How
many useful ideas might be picked up in these hours from history, philosophy,
poetry, and the numerous moral essays with which our language abounds, and how
much more would the knowledge acquired upon these subjects add to the
consequence of a lady, with her husband and with society, than the best
performed pieces of music upon a harpsichord or a guittar! Of the many ladies
whom we have known, who have spent the most important years of their lives, in
learning to play upon instruments of music, how few of them do we see amuse
themselves or their friends with them, after they become mistresses of
families! Their harpsichords serve only as side-boards for their parlours, and
prove by their silence, that necessity and circumstances, will always prevail
over fashion, and false maxims of education.

Let it not be supposed from these observations that I am insensible of the
charms of instrumental music, or that I wish to exclude it from the education
of a lady where a musical ear irresistably disposes to it, and affluence at the
same time affords a prospect of such an exemption from the usual cares and
duties of the mistress of a family, as will enable her to practice it. These
circumstances form an exception to the general conduct that should arise upon
this subject, from the present state of society and manners in America.

I beg leave further to bear a testimony against the practice of making the
French language a part of female education in America. In Britain where company
and pleasure are the principal business of ladies; where the nursery and the
kitchen form no part of their care, and where a daily intercourse is maintained
with Frenchmen and other foreigners who speak the French language, a knowledge
of it is absolutely necessary. But the case is widely different in this
country. Of the many ladies who have applied to this language, how great a
proportion of them have been hurried into the cares and duties of a family
before they had acquired it; of those who have acquired it, how few have
retained it after they were married; and of the few who have retained it, how
seldom have they had occasion to speak it, in the course of their lives! It
certainly comports more with female delicacy as well as the natural politeness
of the French nation, to make it necessary for Frenchmen to learn to speak our
language in order to converse with our ladies, than for our ladies to learn
their language, in order to converse with them.

Let it not be said in defense of a knowledge of the French language, that many
elegant books are written in it. Those of them that are truly valuable, are
generally translated; but, if this were not the case, the English language
certainly contains many more books of real utility and useful information than
can be read, without neglecting other duties, by the daughter, or wife of an
American citizen.

It is with reluctance that I object to drawing, as a branch of education for
an American lady. To be the mistress of a family is one of the great ends of a
woman's being, and while the peculiar state of society in America imposes this
station so early, and renders the duties of it so numerous and difficult, I
conceive that little time can be spared for the acquisition of this elegant
accomplishment.

It is agreeable to observe how differently modern writers, and the inspired
author of the proverbs, describe a fine woman. The former confine their praises
chiefly to personal charms, and ornamental accomplishments, while the latter
celebrates only the virtues of a valuable mistress of a family, and a useful
member of society. The one is perfectly acquainted with all the fashionable
languages of Europe; the other, "opens her mouth with wisdom" and is perfectly
acquainted with all the uses of the needle, the distaff, and the loom. The
business of the one, is pleasure; the pleasure of the other, is business. The
one is admired abroad; the other is honored and beloved at home. "Her children
arise up and call her blessed, her husband also, and he praises her." There is
no fame in the world equal to this; nor is there a note in music half so
delightful, as the respectful language with which a grateful son or daughter
perpetuates the memory of a sensible and affectionate mother.

It should not surprise us that British customs, with respect to female
education, have been transplanted into our American schools and families. We
see marks of the same incongruity, of time and place, in many other things. We
behold our houses accommodated to the climate of Great Britain, by eastern and
western directions. We behold our ladies panting in a heat of ninety degrees,
under a hat and cushion, which were calculated for the temperature of a British
summer. We behold our citizens condemned and punished by a criminal law, which
was copied from a country where maturity in corruption renders public
executions a part of the amusements of the nation. It is high time to awake
from this servility -- to study our own character -- to examine the age of our
country -- and to adopt manners in every thing, that shall be accommodated to
our state of society, and to the forms of our government. In particular it is
incumbent upon us to make ornamental accomplishments, yield to principles and
knowledge, in the education of our women.

A philosopher once said "let me make all the ballads of a country and I care
not who makes its laws." He might with more propriety have said, let the ladies
of a country be educated properly, and they will not only make and administer
its laws, but form its manners and character. It would require a lively
imagination to describe, or even to comprehend, the happiness of a country,
where knowledge and virtue, were generally diffused among the female sex. Our
young men would then be restrained from vice by the terror of being banished
from their company. The loud laugh, and the malignant smile, at the expense of
innocence, or of personal infirmities -- the feats of successful mimickry --
and the low priced wit, which is borrowed from a misapplication of scripture
phrases, would no more be considered as recommendations to the society of the
ladies. A double entendre, in their presence, would then exclude a gentleman
forever from the company of both sexes, and probably oblige him to seek an
asylum from contempt, in a foreign country. The influence of female education
would be still more extensive and useful in domestic life. The obligations of
gentlemen to qualify themselves by knowledge and industry to discharge the
duties of benevolence, would be increased by marriage; and the patriot -- the
hero -- and the legislator, would find the sweetest reward of their toils, in
the approbation and applause of their wives. Children would discover the marks
of maternal prudence and wisdom in every station of life; for it has been
remarked that there have been few great or good men who have not been blessed
with wise and prudent mothers. Cyrus was taught to revere the gods, by his
mother Mandane -- Samuel was devoted to his prophetic office before he was
born, by his mother Hannah -- Constantine was rescued from paganism by his
mother Constantia -- and Edward the sixth inherited those great and excellent
qualities which made him the delight of the age in which he lived, from his
mother, lady Jane Seymour. Many other instances might be mentioned, if
necessary, from ancient and modern history, to establish the truth of this
proposition.

I am not enthusiastical upon the subject of education. In the ordinary course
of human affairs, we shall probably too soon follow the footsteps of the
nations of Europe in manners and vices. The first marks we shall perceive of
our declension, will appear among our women. Their idleness, ignorance and
profligacy will be the harbingers of our ruin. Then will the character and
performance of a buffoon on the theater, be the subject of more conversation
and praise, than the patriot or the minister of the gospel; -- then will our
language and pronunciation be enfeebled and corrupted by a flood of French and
Italian words; -- then will the history of romantic amors, be preferred to the
immortal writings of Addison, Hawkesworth and Johnson; -- then will our
churches be neglected, and the name of the supreme being never be called upon,
but in profane exclamations; -- then will our Sundays be appropriated, only to
feasts and concerts; -- and then will begin all that train of domestic and
political calamities -- But, I forbear. The prospect is so painful, that I
cannot help, silently, imploring the great arbiter of human affairs, to
interpose his almighty goodness, and to deliver us from these evils, that, at
least one spot of the earth may be reserved as a monument of the effects of
good education, in order to show in some degree, what our species was, before
the fall, and what it shall be, after its restoration. -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Thus, gentlemen, have I briefly finished what I proposed. If I am wrong in
those opinions in which I have taken the liberty of departing from general and
fashionable habits of thinking, I am sure you will discover, and pardon my
mistakes. But, if I am right, I am equally sure you will adopt my opinions; for
to enlightened minds truth is alike acceptable, whether it comes from the lips
of age, or the hand of antiquity, or whether it be obtruded by a person, who
has no other claim to attention, than a desire of adding to the stock of human
happiness.

I cannot dismiss the subject of female education without remarking, that the
city of Philadelphia first saw a number of gentlemen associated for the purpose
of directing the education of young ladies. By means of this plan, the power of
teachers is regulated and restrained, and the objects of education are
extended. By the separation of the sexes in the unformed state of their
manners, female delicacy is cherished and preserved. Here the young ladies may
enjoy all the literary advantages of a boarding-school, and at the same time
live under the protection of their parents Unnatural confinement makes a young
woman embrace with avidity every pleasure when she is set free. To relish
domestic life, one must be acquainted with it; for it is in the house of her
parents a young woman acquires the relish. Lord Kaims's thoughts upon
education, and the culture of the heart.
. Here emulation may be excited without jealousy, -- ambition without envy, --
and competition without strife. The attempt to establish this new mode of
education for young ladies, was an experiment, and the success of it has
answered our expectations The number of scholars in the academy at present,
amounts to upwards of one hundred.
. Too much praise cannot be given to our principal and his assistants, for the
abilities and fidelity with which they have carried the plan into execution.
The proficiency which the young ladies have discovered in reading -- writing --
spelling -- arithmetic -- grammar -- geography -- music -- and their different
catechisms, since the last examination, is a less equivocal mark of the merit
of our teachers, than any thing I am able to express in their favor.

But the reputation of the academy must be suspended, till the public are
convinced, by the future conduct and character of our pupils, of the advantages
of the institution. To you, therefore, YOUNG LADIES, an important problem is
committed for solution; and that is, whether our present plan of education be a
wise one, and whether it be calculated to prepare you for the duties of social
and domestic life. I know that the elevation of the female mind, by means of
moral, physical and religious truth, is considered by some men as unfriendly to
the domestic character of a woman. But this is the prejudice of little minds,
and springs from the same spirit which opposes the general diffusion of
knowledge among the citizens of our republics. If men believe that ignorance is
favorable to the government of the female sex, they are certainly deceived;
for a weak and ignorant woman will always be governed with the greatest
difficulty. I have sometimes been led to ascribe the invention of ridiculous
and expensive fashions in female dress, entirely to the gentlemen The very
expensive prints of female dresses which are published annually in France, are
invented and executed wholly by GENTLEMEN.
, in order to divert the ladies from improving their minds, and thereby to
secure a more arbitrary and unlimited authority over them. It will be in your
power, LADIES, to correct the mistakes and practice of our sex upon these
subjects, by demonstrating, that the female temper can only be governed by
reason, and that the cultivation of reason in women, is alike friendly to the
order of nature, and to private as well as public happiness.

Concluding Prayer, BY SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D.
HEAVENLY FATHER! Eternal Source of Truth and Goodness! in Thee should all our
works begin; in Thee should they be continued; -- that their end may be happy!
We come into thy presence, conducting these our DAUGHTERS to receive thy
Blessing! The Parents, and the Children shelter themselves near the Mercy-seat,
trusting in thy acceptance, looking for thy salvation! Our Crown of Glory, and
Diadem of Beauty Thou art in the season of prosperity; and, if affliction
comes, thou art a sure refuge! We worship thee! we glorify thee! we thankfully
acknowledge thee to be the LORD!

WHEN we look around, O Infinite GOD! on the works which thou have made --
although we see but a little way -- we are struck with their magnificence and
arrangement! Parts combine with parts; systems rise on systems, in number,
weight, and measure, beyond all utterance! Yet, thou have given us to know,
that however great thy material works; thy intelligent creation is still
greater: that the Excellency of MINDS, is the highest Excellency: that the
Universe is a Theater, on which, the prevalence of wisdom and moral goodness,
the confirmation of Purity and Righteousness, is the essential, leading Object
for ever!

WHILE noblest orders of intellectual Being -- Cherubim and Seraphim, -- the
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers, dwelling in heaven --
incessantly beholding thy face, O King Immortal! receiving ineffable
irradiations of the Divine majesty and favor, which raise and dignify their
immense faculties still more and more, -- and bring them nearer, and nearer to
THEE in bliss; -- we rejoice with reverence, Thou FRIEND of human Nature! that
thou art also bringing many sons and daughters unto glory, from this inferior
world! -- that, by a rich dispensation of mercy, thou art incorporating them
with those elder-born Sons of light, into one innumerable, grand Company! --

THOU have honored Us with a Religion established in thy SON! Thou art
repairing the ruins of our fall! Thou art shedding abroad the light that guides
into the way of peace! Thou art bestowing liberally the aids that render meet
for the Life which is celestial! -- In all the researches and studies of
mankind, may this great business be considered as supreme; may every ray of
Science upon earth, and all its institutions, to the end of time, pay homage to
"the Wisdom that is from above!"

O MOST HIGH! without whose aid, nothing can prosper, -- we beseech thee to
regard with favor every Seminary of sound Learning! May they answer fully the
purposes of their appointment; and let the number of them be increased! From
them, may knowledge flow in living streams! In them, let multitudes be
receiving continually impressions, which will secure the usefulness of each
individual, and lay a firm foundation for private and public Virtue!
Especially, we beseech thee to further in these respects, and to bless this
ACADEMY!

FATHER, who delightest in the Children who obey! Be ever gracious unto these
before thee! Endue them with thy power! Enrich them with thy love! At this most
interesting time of life, may every circumstance, and every measure, through
thy kind Providence, be directed to their benefit! Heighten the parental
attentions! Assist and adorn the Preceptor's skill! -- May they be convinced,
and affectionately feel, that their happiness must be our happiness!

As the ground of their improving in whatsoever things are "lovely and of good
report," O LORD and SAVIOR! keep them confirmed in filial confidence, and
filial duty: May each of them "honor her Father and her Mother!" May they
grasp with ardour to their bosoms, and never lose the remembrance of, "the
first commandment with promise!" -- Hereby, directed to their ultimate and
chief dependence, -- in delightful gradation, may their affections be
continually rising to thee, PARENT OF ALL!

SHEPHERD of Israel! defend this tender Flock from evil! Preserve to them the
charms of innocence; -- the treasures of an approving Conscience! In
gentleness, humility, and patience, give them to possess their souls!

LET thy Maidens carry hence, those sentiments of Prudence, -- those habits of
application, -- that taste for mental accomplishment, -- that exercise of the
virtues of the heart, -- which will be increasing continually through life, and
render them the EXCELLENT AMONG WOMEN!

MAY we be accepted also concerning one thing more, O God, who art no respecter
of persons! -- Our spirit is stirred with compassion for the multitudes of
Children in this great City, who stroll about unheeded, and untaught -- exposed
to all temptation; preparing for any wickedness -- LORD of MERCY! make speed to
save them, by putting it into the hearts of the humane and affluent to gather
those destitute ones into some kindly folds of Instruction, that they likewise
may become useful and happy!

WE now go in peace -- trusting that our necessities are all provided for; and
every blessing secured to us, and thy whole Church, by the mediation of JESUS
CHRIST our LORD: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory,
forever and ever. AMEN.

BY the encouragement of a number of Gentlemen, an Academy was opened, on the
first of May 1786, in the city of Philadelphia, under the immediate direction
of Mr. ANDREW BROWN, for the sole purpose of educating young ladies in the most
useful and necessary branches of literature.

THE CONSTITUTION is as follows.
Article I. The English language shall be taught grammatically, and strict
attention paid to its pronunciation, and the reading of it with elegance and
propriety; writing, arithmetic, and geography, are also a part of the education
proposed for this school, in which such further improvements, in other branches
of useful knowledge, will be hereafter adopted as circumstances may direct, and
the visitors shall approve.

II. That an early sense of the reverence due to the Deity may be impressed on
the minds of the young ladies of this seminary, the business of the day shall
be introduced, and ended, with public prayers in the school; and such
catechisms shall be taught in it, as the parents of the children may appoint
for their instruction in the first principles of religious knowledge.

III. Select portions of the Bible shall be read daily by the children,
together with extracts from the most approved prose, and poetical English
authors.

IV. The visitors will hold quarterly examinations of the young ladies, in the
presence of their parents, or guardians, whose attendance, on such occasions,
will be requested.

V. The laws and regulations, for the well governing of the school, shall be
jointly made by the master and visitors. Three of the visitors shall form a
quorum.

VI. The hours of attendance, for young ladies, shall be from nine till twelve
o'clock in the forenoon; and from three till five in the afternoon.

VII. After the first year shall have elapsed, the visitors shall be annually
elected, by the parents, and guardians, of the young ladies, at the quarterly
examination to be held in May; and the following gentlemen have agreed to act
as visitors, until the first election can be made in May 1787.

The Reverend Dr. WILLIAM WHITE. The Honorable CHARLES PETTIT, Esquire. Dr.
GERARDUS CLARKSON. TIMOTHY PICKERING, Esquire. JOHN GILL, Esquire. SAMUEL MILES, Esquire.
Dr. BENJAMIN RUSH. JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire.
The visitors elected on the second of May for the present year, are,

The Right Reverend Dr. WILLIAM WHITE, Bishop of the Episcopal Church in
Pennsylvania. The Reverend Dr. HENRY HELMUTH, Minister of the German Lutheran
Church. The Reverend Dr. GEORGE DUFFIELD. The Reverend Dr. SAMUEL MAGAW.
CHARLES PETTIT, Esquire. JOHN GILL, Esquire. SAMUEL MILES, Esquire. RICHARD BACHE, Esquire. Mr.
THOMAS BARTOW. Dr. GERARDUS CLARKSON. JOHN SWANWICK, Esquire. Dr. BENJAMIN RUSH.
[ Entered agreeably to Act of Assembly.]


