Mr. SPALDING's SERMON, On the Execution of ISAAC COOMBS.

The Prayer of a true Penitent for Mercy; or, the Publican's Prayer,
ILLUSTRATED. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT SALEM, DEC. 21, 1786, PREVIOUS TO THE
EXECUTION OF ISAAC COOMBS, AN INDIAN, WHOSE CRIME WAS THE MURDER OF HIS WIFE.

BY JOSHUA SPALDING, A. M. PASTOR OF THE TABERNACLE CHURCH, IN SALEM.

[PUBLISHED BY DESIRE.]

SALEM: PRINTED BY DABNEY AND CUSHING, MDCCLXXXVII.

A SERMON, etc.
LUKE XVIII. 13. GOD be merciful to me, a Sinner!
WHAT is more solemn than to see a man die! -- to see a fellow creature, who
must exist an eternity, take his departure immediately to the bar of God! -- to
have his state unalterably fixed, either in eternal life, or in utter darkness,
everlasting punishment and despair! -- Death is the king of terrors, though
viewed in his most frequent and common forms; but to see one in health cut down
in the midst of life, by the hand of justice, O how shocking! this fills the
mind with ideas which cannot be expressed. At the repeated request of such an
one, I am now to preach the last sermon he is ever to hear! and, peradventure,
the last which may ever be heard by many others in this assembly. What serious
address becomes this occasion! Excellency of speech, and artful words of man's
wisdom, suit not this solemnity. An attempt at this time to be curious would be
inexcusably criminal; for if ever great plainness of speech was necessary, it
is now. The words chosen for our text compose the prayer of a poor publican --
the penitent, earnest cry of a brokenhearted sinner, who went up into God's
holy temple, but had such a sense of his sin and guilt, that he dared not come
nigh, and, standing afar off, would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven,
but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me, a sinner!

THIS, O Isaac, is a prayer for you, in the most earnest and penitential
manner; let this be the cry of your whole heart, every moment you have to live.

IN discoursing upon this subject, we shall observe the following method:

I. Inquire what is implied in a sinner's praying for mercy.

II. Consider what is comprised in God's showing mercy to a praying sinner.

III. Improve the subject with several remarks and addresses.

IN a sinner's praying for mercy is implied,

1. A felt and unfeigned sense of sin. The publican realized his being a
sinner; his heart was affected with a sense of it; and whoever heartily adopts
his prayer, has a painful sense of sin against God -- has become guilty before
God, and sees he has done that abomination which the Lord hates. His sin
appears to cover his head like a thick cloud, and to cry, even unto heaven,
against him. He is convicted of transgressing the law of God -- a law that is
holy, just and good; and the consequence of such conviction must forever be
what the Apostle confessed, I am carnal, sold under sin: He can offer no excuse
for his conduct -- can plead nothing in his favor -- can find no one
circumstance that could in the least alleviate his guilt. Thus he stands
condemned by God -- sensibly condemned by his holy law -- condemned by the
whole bible. The law, with a voice like the thunder of Mount Sinai, curses him
for not continuing in all things written therein, to do them. When he looks to
the gospel, he finds he has been guilty of the sin of unbelief; and that he who
believes not is condemned already. He finds, yea, he now feels, the sentence
of condemnation in his own soul; for both reason and conscience flash in his
face. Heaven and earth are ready to witness against him, and judgment is before
him. He apprehends God will immediately enter into judgment with him; -- it
appears amazing, and passing wonder, that he has not done it long ago. There
appears no probability that his final doom will be delayed any longer; and if
not, he knows he cannot stand in the judgment, but must fall under
condemnation, to all eternity. He sees he has no right to any thing temporal or
spiritual: when he treads on the earth, he cumbereth the ground -- he breathes
not a breath but by mere sufferance. It appears truth to him, that God could
not punish him too much; that everlasting sufferings are his due, and God must
be just, do with him what he will. Such a sense of sin is occasioned by a
proper sight of God's law; for by the law is the knowledge of sin. The law
makes sin revive, and become exceedingly sinful. A true sight of the law is a
discovery of its holiness and spirituality, as exhibiting the infinite glory of
the blessed God; and until one has such a sight of the exceeding holiness of
this law, as sets the glory of the divine perfections in the most awful and
adorable view, he is in the same situation of mind with a persecuting Saul --
alive without the law; he has no true sense of sin, and no proper idea of his
own real character: but when he is brought to see this, then sin appears what
it really is -- a transgression of the law, opposition to holiness, and enmity
against God. This lays the foundation of that painful and unfeigned sense of
sin, which we have been attempting a little to describe. Here we may observe,
that in a true sense of sin, one is not affected barely with the fear of
punishment, or the sufferings which are his just wages; but it is a sense of
his having sinned against God, that breaks his heart; his having dishonored a
holy God, and injured his infinitely sacred character: -- this wounds his
spirit! this gives him his greatest distress! David sinned, and shed innocent
blood; and a dreadful sentence from God proceeded against him -- that the sword
should never depart from his house; yet when he was brought to a true sense of
what he had done, he found something in his conduct more distressing to his
soul, than all his punishment; it was this, Against thee, thee only, have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. And when the prodigal son came to
himself, and returned to his father, he did not say, Father I have sinned, and
have undone myself -- I have been starving in foreign lands, and I am now
perishing with hunger: -- no; there was something in his conduct more affecting
to his soul, than his own wretchedness -- more painful, than his hunger -- it
was this -- Father, I have sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no
more worthy to be called thy son. The penitent sinner is not insensible of his
own misery, neither is he at all indifferent as to his perishing circumstances.
The publican cries for mercy, and the prodigal begs for the bread of an hired
servant; but, at the same time, in a true sense of sin. The dishonor and
injury done to ourselves appears comparatively small, to the dishonor and
injury done to a holy God.

2. IN this prayer is implied, a realizing sense of dependence on God. The
sinner finds himself perishing -- that he has destroyed himself, and is sinking
under the insupportable weight of his guilt -- that help he must have, and such
help, too, as Almighty God alone can give. He sees the absolute impossibility
of his helping himself -- that he can make no atonement for his crimes -- it
would avail him nothing, should he give his body to be burned for his
transgressions, or the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul -- that
Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor all the beasts thereof, for a
burnt-offering; he therefore renounces all hope in himself, and looks to God,
saying, with David, Help, Lord, for vain is the help of man. The sinner who
thus prostrates himself at the throne of grace, is sensible, if God appears for
him, it will be mercy, pure sovereign mercy, and if not, it will be just. Every
gleam of hope is in the mercy of that God who has a sovereign right either to
cast off or save -- to kill or make alive. He has now but this one petition,
God be merciful to me, a sinner! and if this fail, he must sink into despair --
his mouth is stopped, for there is no other plea. God would be just in
withholding his mercy from sinners. He is under no obligation to manifest it to
any one; though it is otherwise with man; it is criminal in us not to show
mercy to the utmost of our ability, for this plain reason, we have all, in a
greater or less degree, received mercy at the hand of God. Every moment we have
lived, every thing temporal and spiritual we have enjoyed, is the fruit of mere
mercy; and if we have freely received, we ought freely to give. We are under
obligation to be like God. Does God forgive enemies? so must we. Does he do
good to the evil and unthankful? so must we. Do we pray, forgive us our
trespasses? then we must forgive, from our very heart, all those who have
trespassed against us. The servant, who had no compassion on his
fellow servants, was condemned; and the reason of his condemnation was, that, a
little before, his Lord forgave him his whole debt. Hence we have this command,
Be ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful. But God has been laid under
no such obligation, for who has first given unto him? And this is realized by
him who feels his absolute dependence on sovereign mercy. O who can describe
the situation of one who stands guilty before God, having nothing but eternity
in view -- sensible of deserving nothing but frowns -- feeling himself on the
brink of deserved ruin, and there wholly dependent on the mere pleasure of an
angry Judge -- an injured God -- who knows what he has done, and now beholds
his sin with perfect indignation, and can, with infinite ease, glorify himself
in his condemnation! He pleads for mercy, but is sensible that he pleads for
undeserved, uncovenanted mercy. He repeats his request, but feels himself
unworthy, of all sinners the most unworthy, of being heard. He knows he must
perish forever, if his suit is not granted; but, alas! it now comes fresh to
his remembrance, how many times he has slighted this mercy. God has called,
and he has refused; the Lord has stretched out his hand, and he has
disregarded; and that he might now laugh at his calamity, and mock at his fear.
But notwithstanding all this, he has no where else to go for help, but unto
God; he is therefore resolved to prostrate his soul before the throne of all
grace, and if he dies, to die at the feet of Sovereign Mercy. His final
conclusion is this, Let me fall now into the hand of the Lord, and if I perish,
I perish!

3. THIS prayer implies an apprehension of the mercy of God. God is merciful in
himself. He is a God of great and tender mercy. There must be a greatness in
that mercy, which can reach a sinner's case. Of this Moses was sensible, when
pleading for a sinful people; he says, Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of
this people, according to the greatness of thy mercy. And again, Let the power
of my Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, the Lord long-suffering,
and of great mercy. This is found in God. Here is mercy, of such eminence, and
infinite power, as removes every thing that lies in its way; it triumphs over
sin and guilt; it leaps over mountains of iniquity and transgression, and makes
its way into the stubborn heart. Many of the chief of sinners have been made
the joyful captives of this all-conquering mercy. We, of the human race, have
had abundant opportunity to know, that the divine nature is such as delights in
mercy. We were miserable -- God pitied us. We were sinful, -- God detested us;
yet though we were an abhorrence in his sight, his mercy neither ceased nor
abated: witness Christ's dying for the ungodly. This is the mercy craved in the
text. The poor sinner apprehends the glorious truth; upon this his eye fixes,
whilst he ceases not to implore this sovereign help; and mercy! mercy! is his
repeated cry.

THE sinner at this time apprehends a fullness in the mercy of God. If he has
any hope, he must see enough in God to relieve him; and he who sees himself,
must see, that nothing short of infinite is enough -- yea, so far from being
sufficient, that all that men or angels could do for him, would not give him
the least possible relief. Nothing but an infinite fullness of grace -- nothing
but an arm absolutely almighty, stretched out by infinite mercy, can reach down
to the gates of hell, where he now finds himself sinking; therefore he prays,
God be merciful! -- as much as to say, thou art merciful -- an inexhaustible
ocean of grace is in thee. O display all that fullness and infinite freeness of
mercy, and thus appear for my help. David had this view of his own situation
and others, when he called upon God in these words -- Stir up thy strength, and
come and save us. He saw, if God did not appear in all his strength, in all his
omnipotence, they could not be saved. Such is the situation of every sinner;
and surely for God to appear in this manner, for the relief of a poor,
perishing soul, is a display of infinite mercy.

4. THE prayer expressed in the text implies some apprehension of the method of
salvation. The publican evidently conceived it possible for God to show mercy
in a way consistent with himself, that he might be just in doing it; and this
was his encouragement to pray -- his only support. For though God is merciful,
yet if the way was not open, in which he might manifest it, according to
righteousness and truth, it could never appear. This mercy is of too divine a
nature, to have flown out in any way, that would in the least have injured the
holy law of God, his justice, or any of his adorable perfections; and if some
method is not revealed in which this can be done, there is no hope. Fallen
angels know God is merciful, but this gives them no hope; for they have had no
intimations of any way being devised, in which God can be reconciled to them;
therefore there must be some apprehension of the gospel method of salvation,
wherever a sinner addresses himself to the throne of grace. This apprehension
may be very dark, as we know it always was before the sufferings and death of
our Lord and Savior; but God had even then, in various ways, proclaimed his
name in relation to sinners of the human race, the Lord God gracious and
merciful. Ever since that early promise, The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent's head, it has been known in our world, that God designed mercy for the
fallen race of Adam. This has been believed by true penitents, in all
generations; and they have always been persuaded, that in showing mercy, God
would take care of his own glory, and do it in a way that should harmonize with
all his perfections. This way of salvation, through a Mediator, is made clear
and plain to us, in the gospel of Jesus Christ, who died, the j^^^ for the
unjust, and bore our sins in his own body, on the tree -- who fulfilled the law
by his holy and obedient life, and satisfied divine justice by the sacrifice of
himself, and has thus brought in an everlasting righteousness, that, through
the redemption which is in his blood, we might be justified freely by the grace
of God. This precious redemption -- this complete atonement, is the sinner's
refuge -- is the grand pillar of all his hopes; on this is grounded that
peculiar hope, which, as an anchor to the soul, reaching within the veil, is
sure and steadfast. When once the true penitent has a view of this glorious
method of salvation, it appears so complete, so every way suited to his
circumstances, that he will hope -- he cannot but trust his immortal all in the
hands of Jesus; (...), he can say, if I had a thousand souls to save, I could
trust them all on this glorious foundation. Thus, weary and heavy laden with
sin and guilt, he flies to the faithful arms of everlasting love; and O! what
excellency appears in Christ! unto him he is precious -- altogether lovely --
the chiefest of ten thousands; worthy to be loved, and adored with the whole
heart, in time and eternity, on account of his own glories, he being the
brightness of the Father's glory, and the express image of his person. And
notwithstanding the great sense he has of his sinfulness (...), this discovery
of the mercy of God in Christ strengthens his soul, and afresh supports him to
agonize in prayer, and to cry with the most earnest importunity, God be
merciful to me, a sinner!

WE shall now pass to the consideration of the second general head of this
discourse; which was, to consider what is comprised in God's showing mercy to a
sinner: --

AND, in the first place, shall observe, this mercy contains a pardon of sin.

THE publican undoubtedly had this, first, and principally, in view -- that
God, for his own name's sake, would pardon his sin; for, when he received a
gracious answer, he went down to his house, justified. The publican's being
said to be justified rather than the other, who was a self-righteous pharisee,
must mean, that he was justified, and the other was not; for we know of no such
thing, as being justified in part, or pardoned in part; when the Lord gives,
he gives liberally, and upbraideth not.
And we consider justification as an act of God's free grace, wherein he
pardons all our sins. When God justifies, he does it freely and fully: he
will abundantly pardon the truly penitent. The publican asked a pardon of all
his sins, and in his justification he received a full pardon, and went
rejoicing home. Nothing short of this would have satisfied him, or in any
degree have relieved his troubled soul. The pardoning grace of God extends to
sinners, only on account of the atonement made by Christ, which is received,
and trusted in, as complete, and divinely suitable, as we have already
attempted to describe. This is gospel faith, the subjects of which are
considered as being in Christ; and as Christ has finished transgression, and
made an end of sin, their sins are taken away -- their iniquities are blotted
out as a cloud, and their transgressions as a thick cloud; for there is now no
condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus. Righteousness, the glorious and
complete righteousness of Jesus, is imputed unto them, which presents them
faultless to the eye of holiness itself. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
will not impute sin, to whom righteousness is imputed by faith: this is free
grace -- this is mercy indeed!

2. IN God's showing mercy to a sinner, there is not only this act of free
forgiveness, but there is also by the Holy Ghost an application of his
pardoning love to the soul. The love of God is shed abroad in the heart, which
immediately removes the guilt of sin; the heart is sprinkled from an evil
conscience. All sin loads the conscience with guilt, but the blood of Jesus
cleanses from all sin. A believing application of this gives instant freedom
to the soul that is bowed down under a sense of the most aggravated guilt. O!
how heavy is the guilt of innocent blood! it made Cain cry out, My punishment
is greater than I can bear. David, sinking under this weight, cries out in
agonies of pain, Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God! His earnestness is
like one who feels, that if God should not deliver him, he must sink into hell.
But here is deliverance; the atoning blood of Jesus removes even the guilt of
blood. Though innocent blood has a voice so loud as to reach heaven with its
avenging cries, yet these cries, by an application of a crucified Christ, are
silenced in a moment. We read, that the blood of Abel cried unto God, from the
ground -- it cried for vengeance against the murderer; but the blood of
sprinkling, the blood of Jesus, speaks better things -- it speaks peace!
peace! and all is peace! The whole weight of guilt is gone -- the wounded
conscience is healed -- the deepest stains of sin are washed away. This, even
this, is comprised in the mercy of God to sinners.

3. DIVINE mercy does not stop here; it is so rich -- so abundant, as to bring
penitents home to God, and adopt them as the children of his family. Behold
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God. God sends forth the spirit of his Son into their hearts,
crying, Abba, Father. When the prodigal repented and returned, he not only
received a pardon, but was claspt in his Father's arms; his pardon was sealed
with parental kisses; he was again called a son; the father said to his
servants, bring forth the best robe, and put it on him, and let a joyful feast
be made ready: for this my son was dead, and is alive; he was lost, and is
found. So, likewise, when God has mercy on a sinner, he seals his pardon with
every tender expression of love. After ye believed, says the Apostle, ye were
sealed with that holy spirit of promise; and the immediate effect of this is
peace with God, joy and peace in believing. The poor sinner is now made to
rejoice with that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory.

4. PERFECT holiness, and the full enjoyment of God to all eternity, are
comprised in God's showing mercy to a penitent, praying sinner. When a sinner
is first brought to repentance, he is, in some degree, the subject of holiness*
for repentance implies hatred to sin, and love to righteousness, which is
holiness. After such a change, his life is a warfare against sin; he hates it
in all its forms and delusive charms; he groans earnestly for deliverance; he
looks on him whom he has pierced, and mourns; whilst he longs, and hungers and
thirste for righteousness -- to be holy like God and Christ. These affections
will increase, as long as he lives; and when death shall do his kind office,
and lay his body asleep in Jesus, then he will live indeed; for, being freed
from that body of death, under which he groaned while he lived, he comes to the
full possession of that promise in Christ Jesus, He shall save his people from
their sins. Now the scenes of sorrow close, and the scenes of joy and
immortality open. Now, adieu to an alluring world and tempting devil -- a long
farewell to a spiritual warfare and manifold tribulations -- welcome life and
glory. Thus being made free as a celestial, and bearing the image of the
heavenly, he passes, as in a moment, to the paradise of God -- the Jerusalem
which is above, to join the general assembly of the church of the firstborn,
whose names are written in the Lamb's book of life; there to be guest with
saints and angels, and, what is more, to dwell in the eternal light, in the
presence of God, where there is fullness of joy; and at his right hand, where
there are pleasures forevermore. And the Lamb in the midst of the throne shall
feed him, and lead him unto fountains of living waters, and God shall wipe away
all tears from his eyes: here the wicked cease from troubling, and his weary
soul is forever at rest. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them who love
him. But, my brethren, by faith we may look within the veil, and behold the
redeemed standing on Mount Zion, clothed in white robes, having their Father's
name in their foreheads, with crowns upon their heads, and palms in their
hands, singing the new song before the throne of God and the Lamb: for by faith
we see things which are invisible.

HAVING thus attended to the doctrinal parts of this subject, we shall now
proceed to an improvement.

FROM what has been said, we may learn the great encouragement sinners have to
look to God for mercy. The Lord has already looked mercifully toward sinners.
With an eye of tender pity and infinite compassion, he has viewed our
deplorable situation; for mercy has pleased him. A glorious work of redemption
has been set on foot by everlasting love and infinite wisdom, which have
joined in planning and laying it out; and all things have been well ordered and
made sure by Almighty Power; and for a long while God has been passing before
sinners, in the dispensation of the gospel, saying, live! live! for I have
found a ransom. And there is not only a door opened, through which God may show
mercy to sinners, but there is an appointed Mediator, in whose ever-prevailing
name, we may come to the throne of grace, and plead for mercy, with the
greatest assurance; for he that comes before God, believing the truth as it is
witnessed in Jesus, shall in no wise be cast out* Sinners may venture to draw
near to God, through the glorious Mediator; yea, they have a good warrant to
come; yea, more, they have a free and urgent invitation to come -- The spirit
and the bride say, come. And let him that hears, say, come. And let him that
is athirst, come: and whosover will, let him take the water of life freely. The
greatness of God's mercy is an encouragement; it is exceeding great; it passes
knowledge -- is beyond all comparison -- nothing but God himself can represent
it. The greatness and extent thereof can be measured only by infinite lines;
where it is displayed, it snatches the sinner from eternal misery -- it places
him in eternal happiness. The freeness and readiness of this mercy is an
encouragement; it appears in the moment of distress. God is a present help in
trouble. He looks down from the height of his sanctuary, to hear the groaning
of the prisoner, and to loose those who are appointed to death. He is more
ready to give his holy spirit unto such as truly ask it, than earthly parents
are to give bread to their own children. This mercy is not only great and free,
but it is also sure and effectual. The soul that receives it can never fail.
The gifts and callings of God are without repentance; they are the sure mercies
of David. There is also this encouragement, that God has appointed repentance
unto life eternal; and, what is still more, he has exalted Jesus Christ to
give repentance, and has added, even to this, his promise, that he will have
mercy on sinners, who truly repent. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and unto our God, for he will abundantly pardon. This,
certainly, is encouraging; for it is offering mercy on the lowest terms; for he
who repents not, and forsakes not his unrighteous way, cannot inherit the
favor of God, for it is an holy gift, and cannot be received or enjoyed by an
unholy and impenitent heart. Besides, we have examples to encourage us. The
poor publican found mercy; the prodigal, who only sought for a master, found a
father, and one too who had bowels and mercies. Manasseh, who filled Jerusalem
with innocent blood, was not out of the reach of God's pardoning mercy. O
unmeasurable, unsearchable grace! Why then shall any one despair, or ever cease
to cry, God be merciful to me, a sinner!

I WOULD now address a few words to this numerous audience, to look to God for
mercy.

MY dear fellow-mortals, we all stand in need of mercy, for all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God, and the wages of sin is death. He that is to
suffer this day, is not the only one in this assembly under the sentence of
death; for death has passed upon all, for all have sinned. Man goes to his
long home -- born on by time's swift wings. We are going whence we shall not
return. No more shall we return to our house; our place shall know us no more.
But it is not only appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment.
The solemn moment is fast approaching, when all our states will be fixed for an
eternity; and he that is unjust, shall be unjust still; and he that is filthy,
shall be filthy still; and he that is righteous, shall be righteous still; and
he that is holy, shall be holy still. You see, my dear hearers, that at the her
of God there is only this one distinction, holy and unholy, just and unjust;
and it will there be decided, unto which of these classes we belong, and we
must take our overlasting portion accordingly, for from this decision there is
no appeal. And can we be just, righteous, and holy, without the mercy of God?
Can we be thus of ourselves? No; it is the highest arrogance and presumption to
suppose it. Shall man be just before God? Shall any son of man presume he is
righteous? Folly and madness all! What is man that he should be clean? Behold!
God puts no such trust in his saints, and the heavens are not clean in his
sight -- how much more abominable and filthy is man, who drinks iniquity like
water! These are the words of everlasting truth; and though by nature we are
thus unholy, and far from righteousness, yet, as truly as God lives, without
holiness and perfect righteousness, no man shall see the Lord in peace. Do we
not then stand in need of mercy, and infinite displays of mercy too? By God's
free spirit we must have an application of the blood of Jesus made to our
souls, that our sins may be washed away; we must have the love of God shed
abroad in our hearts, that our consciences may be purged from sin and dead
works, by an act of the free grace of God the Father; the glorious and complete
righteousness of Jesus Christ must be imputed unto us for our justification --
And is not this mercy, for God to do all this for poor hell-deserving sinners?
Therefore, in the name and by the authority of the Son of God, I must testify
unto you all, who hear me this day, except you have all this done for you by
the mere mercy of God, you must be everlastingly damned! O sinners! be not
angry with this plain dealing with your souls; if you will not believe this to
be truth, you must run the awful hazard of your unbelief; but, for myself, I
dare not shun to declare the whole counsel of God! O realize your dependence on
God; remember your help is alone in the arm of Jehovah; all your encouragement
is there. While then the door of mercy is open, be persuaded to bow the knee --
become beggars at the throne of grace. I know we may well blush to ask such
favors from one we have so wronged, but necessity calls for it; therefore, let
every one be importunate for this mercy of God in Christ Jesus; great as it is,
you must all obtain it, or you cannot escape the wrath to come; yea, an
eternity of happiness depends upon your success; go then, and take the
publican's place, confess your guilt, and cry, God be merciful to me, a sinner!
Never give over your suit, whatever discouragements you may apprehend in the
way, yet, look toward the holy temple, and the Lord will send you answers of
peace.

WE shall now close with a particular address to the poor criminal, to look to
God for mercy.

Isaac Coombs, I have now, for the last time, to urge upon your mind, these
important and eternal realities and will you then take one more view of your
situation? You have sinned, and shed innocent blood, for which you are
condemned by an earthly judge. You have received sentence of death! and are now
within one or two hours of your execution, which will separate your soul and
body. Today your probation for eternity ends! In a few hours, with you, time
will be no longer! But there is something in your situation more shocking than
death! you have sinned against an holy God; you have poured contempt on his
sacred authority; your heart has been stout against God; and, after your hard
and impenitent heart, you have sinned with an high hand, which you confess has
been against your own conscience, and against solemn warnings and reproofs;
this is what gives death his sting, the sting of death is sin; for the wrath of
God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men;
and you appear to be now exposed to this wrath. You have a soul of an infinite
value, and as we wish the salvation of your immortal spirit, we must tell you
plainly, you have not appeared to be a true penitent. Sometimes you have been
affected with your situation, and we have been encouraged that you would lay it
to heart; but, alas! these impressions have soon worn off, and you have
discovered a strong inclination to those very sins which have been your ruin.
We must, therefore, look upon you as being in the very gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity. Life and death has been set before you -- the way of
repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, has been pointed
out to you, and there is no other way. Therefore, if you do not repent -- hate
sin, forsake it, and turn to God, you cannot be saved. For though God is
merciful in Christ, to such as truly repent, yet he is a God of strict justice,
he will, by no means, (...) the guilty. His law is exceeding broad. Whosoever
is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment:
but whosoever shall say, thou fool, shall he in danger of hellfire. These are
the true sayings of God. O then! how great is your desert! you are going to
appear before the Judge of all, to know these truths from the bar of God; and
if you are not there found interested in Jesus, you must immediately sink down
amongst the spirits in prison, to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, to
dwell with everlasting burnings. Your poor soul will be sentenced by the Judge
of quick and dead, to welter out an eternity under his scorching wrath. If
Cain, for sheding the blood of a brother, must be avenged seven fold, truly, if
strict justice takes place in thee, for sheding the blood of a nearer relation,
thou must be avenged seventy and seven fold. Think how much blood there is in
your case. You confess the people of God have cleared their garments of your
blood. Christ Jesus has shed his blood to make an atonement for sinners; and,
except you are interested in this atonement, by faith; that blood you have
shed, your own blood, and the blood of Jesus Christ too* will all rest upon you
head. This punishment will be greater than you can bear. Repent, therefore, O
repent! repent! that your sins may be blotted out, and refreshing might come to
your soul, from the presence of the Lord. In thyself thou art lost, utterly
lost; O Isaac! thou have destroyed thyself, but in the Lord Jesus there is
help; he is all sufficient for thee; look unto him, and be thou saved. Behold
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world; he is the end of the
law for righteousness, to every one that believes. -- Jesus Christ, that
beloved Son God, in whom he is well pleased, came into the world, and lived an
holy and perfect life; he was condemned at Pilate's bar; he died upon the
cross, on Mount Calvary; he rose again from the dead, and ascended into heaven,
and is seated at the right hand of the Father, there exalted to give repentance
and remission of sins. Our Lord suffered and died, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life. He rose from the dead for
their justification; he lives to make intercession for them. Now, Isaac, if
you want pardon, look to a crucified Christ; if you want justification, look to
a risen Savior; if you want to be washed and made fit for God's right hand,
the blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin. Finally, look to Jesus for all you
want; there is enough in him. In the atoneing blood of Jesus put your hope --
on this glorious foundation rest your soul. He that believes shall be saved;
and he that believes not shall be damned. What thou do, do quickly! Isaac,
I bid thee farewell! until we meet at the bar of God! and the Lord have mercy
on thy never-dying soul!

FINIS.

