Christ the true victim and conqueror.

A History of the War, In which the SON OF GOD engaged with all the powers of
darkness, concerning the righteousness of God as moral Governor -- How it
commenced; and how he decided it, by being made a victim and sacrifice in the
devil's kingdom; by means of which, he conquered and destroyed God's enemies --
made ATONEMENT for sin -- paid the price of our ransom -- merited the kingdom
of the universe to himself -- and redeemed multitudes to God out of every
nation.

By Josiah Sherman, A. M.

Published at the desire of the Hearers.

'WHICH immense debt we owe to God, and have nothing to pay.'

"CHRIST obtains the benefits men have through him, by a proper merit of
condignity; and a true purchase by an equivalent."

President EDWARDS. LITCHFIELD: Printed by T. COLLIER, in the South End of the
Courthouse.

Christ the true victim and conqueror. SERMON I.
Rev. v. 9. "And they sung a new song, saying -- Thou art worthy to take the
book and open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood -- out of every kindred and tongue, and people and nation."


THE work of man's redemption, through the merit of the Son of God, is a most
important theme! It is the principal design and subject of divine revelation --
comprehends in it all divine and saving knowledge -- It is a subject which the
angels desire to look into, nor is one desire gratified, 'till new ones arise;
-- for here is scope for alternate inquiry, and pleasing admiration, 'till time
shall be no more, and to all eternity -- And this truth known and embraced by
men, will make them wise to salvation. -- It is a song that is, and ever will
be new -- a song melodious in the ears of God himself -- entertaining to saints
and angels on earth and in heaven, and will be their delightful employment to
all eternity. And a clear knowledge and understanding of the truths contained
in it, will be the means, in the hand of the spirit, of dispelling all the
clouds of ignorance and mists of error, that have so long overvailed the
nations, and diffusing through them all, knowledge and grace, purity and joy --
the means of converting thousands and ten thousands from sin to holiness;
delivering them from the power of darkness, and translating them into the
kingdom of God's dear Son -- the means of bringing on the latter day glory;
breaking the serpent's head; exposing his infernal designs, and destroying his
kingdom and power over the hearts of men, and of happyfying saints and
tormenting devils and wicked men for ever and ever. -- And the words I have now
read to you, afford us a very comprehensive view of this subject. -- "Thou art
worthy to take the book and open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood." -- -- And in treating on them, I shall
do the following things -- I. Show what is implied in our redemption to God.
II. How the Son of God has accomplished this work. III. The honors conferred
on him as the reward of his merit. Lastly, make improvement.


I. I am to show what is implied in our redemption to God.

And in general, it implies that we are in a state of bondage -- out of which
the Son of God has redeemed us, by paying the price of our ransom, and by
conquering and subduing that power by which we were held.

Man, in his first creation, was made in the image of God. His soul consisted
of three faculties, understanding, principle and will. -- His understanding is
the seat of ideas and speculative knowledge; his principle is the seat of
sensation, perception and moral taste -- his will is the seat of exercises and
volitions.

The principle of the soul, as it is a distinct faculty, is sometimes called
disposition of heart, temper, affection, instinct, etc. In scripture it is
called mind, nature, treasure, fountain, etc. And it is evident that
understanding or will cannot supply the place of principle, by being the seat
of sensation, perception or moral taste. See Pr. Edwards Orig. Sin, p. 157.
--

And the soul created with these faculties, dependent on the will of God for
its existence and activity, is capable of forming ideas, perceptions and
volitions itself. Though God creates and upholds these faculties; yet God does
not create the ideas, perceptions and volitions, with their rectitude or
sinfulness, which are only contingent modes of the exercises.

The ideas, perceptions and volitions of the mind, are transient; but the three
faculties of the soul are permanent; and will remain the same in substance to
all eternity, though they may alter as to their moral quality and perfection.

And in these faculties of soul consisted the natural image of God, in which
man was created. And the moral image of God, in which man was created,
consisted in the rectitude of his principle; which laid a foundation for right
perception, or moral taste, of those objects that were formed in his
understanding. The understanding is not the seat of moral rectitude or taste;
but the heart, including the Sea Pr. Edwards on Orig. Sin, part 2d, chap. 1st,
sec. 1.
principle and will is the seat of all holiness and sin. And as the principle,
in the first creation of angels and men, was right and uncorrupted, all the
perceptions and exercises of their principle and will, were holy: God made man
upright; in his own image, in knowledge, righteousness and true holiness.

And regeneration is a rectifying this principle, and removing its corruption,
by the supernatural influences of the holy spirit of God, which is again
ministered to mankind, through the knowledge of Christ and his gospel. See 2.
Pet. i. 3.4. Man being provided with the means of knowledge, was capable of
forming the truth of God's character, law and government in his understanding;
and of perceiving and relishing the moral beauty and excellency of them, in his
principle, and his will was disposed and inclined to love God's character, obey
his law, and submit to his government, and all his subordinate affections and
passions to a proper exercise. Man, then, placed his happiness in the knowledge
of God, love to him and joy in him. And now, when God had brought moral
creatures into existence, it was necessary that there should be a moral
government; and therefore God gave them a law, and established a moral
government over his intelligent creatures -- to this law he annexed a penalty,
in order to support the authority of it, and the dignity and vigor of his
government. And it was necessary that the threatening of this law be inflicted
on transgressors; otherwise God himself could not uphold moral government over
his intelligent creatures. To suppose that God governs rational creatures
without a law, enforced by promises and threatenings, rewards and punishments,
but by irresistible force, or divine efficiency, is to confound the distinction
between natural and moral government -- For God to create or produce sin and
righteousness, obedience and transgression, by omnipotent power, as he does a
world or light, is inconsistent with the very idea of moral government -- of
blame or praise -- or any accountableness for our exercises or actions. Sin is
not a created existence produced by God, but only a contingent mode of
exercise, originated by a rational creature in transgression; and always
pre-supposes error in the understanding of such a creature, which is
incompatible with a being perfect in knowledge. And the great God, in order to
manifest and support the honor of his own character, as moral Governor, and
the authority and dignity of his law and government, and command obedience, and
so promote the peace, prosperity and happiness of his moral kingdom; declared
himself to be infinite, eternal and immutable in his existence, knowledge,
wisdom and power. And in his moral perfections, such as benevolence, justice
and truth, or in one word, his righteousness or holiness. And, consequently,
that his laws must be holy, just and good, and his government righteous. So
that all the subjects of his moral kingdom may put an implicit faith in his
word, and yield an implicit obedience to his laws and commands, and an implicit
subjection to his government.

And God's moral kingdom was now in peace; and all the subjects of it high in
the divine favor; possessed of liberty and life; and probationers for
immortality, in a state of holiness and happiness in the favor of God forever.
They were disposed to love God's moral character, and yield an implicit
obedience to his commands, and rejoice in his government and works -- And when
the foundations of the world were laid, all the sons of God shouted for joy!
And the law of God, as a transcript of his moral perfections, expressed his
will, and was calculated to manifest the RIGHTEOUSNESS of God as moral
Governor; i. e. his benevolence, his justice and truth; and so to lead them
into a more perfect knowledge of God; and consequently to increase their
conformity to him, in holiness and happiness. And they had the indwelling of
the holy spirit, in its vital influences, to accompany the truth of God's
character, and increase their love to it.

The righteousness of God exhibited in his law (as we just observed) consists
in three things, viz. Benevolence, Justice and Truth -- By benevolence, I mean
the goodness, love, mercy and grace of God -- by justice, I mean his
distributing to every one rewards and punishments according to their deserts --
of treating every one according to his moral character -- And by truth, I mean
the divine veracity and faithfulness to his threatenings and promises; or his
punctually fulfilling his word. The moral law is a transcript of these
perfections of God -- and the moral perfection of any intelligent creature is a
conformity of heart and life, to these perfections of the Deity. This was the
righteousness of the holy angels, and of innocent man in paradise. This
righteousness of God, as moral Governor, the moral law was designed to
manifest. The law, in its precepts, promises and threatenings, expressed God's
infinite regard to his own glory, and his benevolence to his moral kingdom, and
his disposition and determination to promote the peace, prosperity and
happiness of it; by communicating to them, the knowledge of himself in his true
character; and their duty to him, themselves and each other. The precept of the
law is holy; suited to conform the sinless observer to the moral image of God,
and so promote his happiness. The rewards promised in the law are good,
infinitely exceeding the merit of the most perfect observer -- And the penalty
just, and shows the infinite displeasure of God against sin; and is no more
than adequate to the crime; and is well suited to deter from transgression, and
so maintain the peace and happiness of the obedient. And this law, as it
manifests God's righteousness as moral Governor, has a natural and moral
tendency to promote the happiness of its observers.

And unless the Governor of the Universe, makes it appear by his punctually
conferring the promised rewards, and executing the threatened punishments of
his law, that he is infinite in his benevolence, inflexible in his justice, and
inviolable in his truth; his government cannot be supported, but will be
unhinged in the minds of his subjects, and will fall into contempt, and tend to
dissolution.

And God, in his first creation of intelligent creatures, placed them in a
situation near to himself, and surrounded them with the happy fruits and
testimonies of his love, and under this holy, just, and good law, every way
suited to advance his honor and glory, and their happiness and well being. And
all this happiness was suspended upon condition of their yielding an implicit
obedience to a known, positive command of God; given them for their trial;
disobedience to which command, was threatened with death: which death implied a
withdrawment of the divine favor, and the indwelling of the holy spirit, in
its vital influences, and so, in the total corruption of the moral principle --
and in the loss of liberty, life and immortal happiness, in the divine favor
-- and in a confirmed state of wickedness and misery, under the wrath and curse
of God for ever.

A number of the angels (perhaps not seeing the reasonableness of some plain,
positive command given to them for their trial) transgressed, and revolted from
God, and fell under the penalty or curse -- and had it immediately executed
upon them, without any mercy or reprieve. Upon this revolt, a grand moral
contest commenced between heaven and hell, concerning the righteousness of God
as moral Governor: and the devil set himself to oppose God's moral government,
not by natural force, but by temptation, by beguiling, deceiving, and so
prevailing on the subjects of Gods moral kingdom, to believe and embrace that
error, "God will not execute the threatened penalty, if you do transgress his
command." This implied that God is not inflexibly just, and inviolably true;
and that it is inconsistent with his infinite benevolence to inflict the
punishment according to the threatening. And in consequence of this, infinite
dishonor is cast on God's character, and infinite damage done to his moral
kingdom.

The devil having risen in rebellion against God by disobeying his will, seeks
to set up a kingdom founded in error and wickedness, in opposition to God's
moral kingdom, founded in truth and righteousness. The devil (as I have before
observed) does not contend with the Almighty for the natural kingdom or
dominion of the universe -- or seek to resist the natural power or omnipotence
of God by force. But he contends with God for the moral kingdom -- and opposes
God, by opposing his truth and righteousness -- The devil opposes God, by
leading his subjects into erroneous notions concerning God's moral character,
law and government, and inducing them to believe, that it is for their interest
to embrace them and practice upon them; and to disbelieve the threatening of
God; or believe that God will not execute the threatening, if they transgress
his commands. And the nature of virtue and vice, and the very essence of moral
government, forbid that moral agents should be overruled, compelled or
influenced by natural force or divine efficiency; but require that they be
influenced by the manifestation of truth to their minds, and by proposing to
them rewards and punishments, in promises and threatenings.

Man being put in a state of trial, under a plain, positive command of God;
satan, under the form of a serpent, or rather a seraph (as it is in the
original) deceived, beguiled, and so prevailed upon our first parents to
believe that God would not execute the threatening on them if they did
transgress -- and upon this temptation, they were emboldened to partake of that
fruit which was pleasant to the eyes, good for food, and desired to make them
wise; though they knew it was prohibited by an express command of their all-wise
and benevolent Creator. And the evil of this sin consisted, in its being
rebellion to the known command of their rightful Lord and Sovereign; to whose
known and express commands, they were under infinite obligation to yield an
implicit obedience, though to them, no reason for the command appeared, but the
contrary. With such a command Abraham was tried, and yielded an implicit
obedience to it, though to him no other reason for obedience appeared, but only
it was a command of God; in every other view it must have appeared unreasonable.

The first sin was not enmity to God's moral character; for that implies a
previous withdrawment of the holy spirit of God from the soul, in its vital
influences; and a corruption of the moral principle, which must have been a
judicial act of God, or punishment for sin, which could not consistently
precede transgression.

But some may say, How could there be transgression without previous enmity,
since all sin now proceeds from corruption of principle, and want of love to
God? To this I answer, it is evident there may be transgression which does not
proceed from want of love to God's moral character, but from deception. We have
an instance of it 1 Kings xiii. in the prophet of the Lord that was sent to
Bethel, to denounce judgments against that place, and was expressly commanded
by God, "To eat no bread, nor drink water, in that place:" and the prophet
appeared well disposed to obey the command of God; till an other prophet
pursued him, and overtook him in his return; and said to him, "I am a prophet
also as thou art; and an angel spoke unto me, by the word of the Lord, saying,
bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread, and drink
water. But he lied unto him." "So he went back with him and did eat bread in
his house, and drink water." And will any one suppose that the disobedience of
the prophet, that came from Judah, proceeded from want of love to God? Did it
not evidently proceed from his being deceived and beguiled by the prophet, that
lied to him, in the name of the Lord? And yet was not his disobedience a horrid
sin in the sight of God, which cost him his life? Had that prophet been in the
exercise of supreme love to God, without any enmity to his moral character,
would this have been any security against his being deceived, or his
disobedience? Did he not act as much under the influences of love to God, in
the last act, as in the first?

And may we not as rationally suppose, that Eve was influenced by the devil to
disobedience in the same manner? The devil came to her, in the form of a
seraph; which form, holy angels often assume when they bring messages to this
world from God; and it is very probable, that the devil before his fall, as an
angel of light, had appeared to our first parents in the same form, as their
guardian angel, with messages from God; and now he transforms himself again
into an angel of light. To which instance, the Apostle may have reference, 2.
Cor. xi. 14. "For satan himself is transformed into an angel of light." And the
devil tells them as an express a lie, in the name of God, as the old prophet
told the other -- and by this lie the woman was deceived, and so was in the
transgression. And love to God's moral character could not have secured her
against the deception. But yet this was an horrid sin in our first parents, and
subversive of all moral government. For it is impossible that moral government,
over creatures, that are imperfect in their knowledge and wisdom, should be
supported, unless they will put an implicit confidence in the wisdom, an
implicit faith in the word, and yield an implicit obedience to the command of
their sovereign, whose wisdom and benevolence they have no reason to doubt.
What confusion would it make in an army, if the under officers and soldiers
refuse obedience to the commands of their General, but insist upon seeing the
reasonableness of every command before they execute it? Love to the moral
character of the Sovereign, and sincere benevolence to the interest of his
moral kingdom, would neither secure their obedience, or excuse their
transgression. God might have prevented their deception, and secured their
obedience, by immediate revelation of the truth of his will, and their danger;
but I do not see how this could have been done, by increasing their love to his
moral character, by internal influences. And in consequence of this
transgression of our first parents, and not before, the favor of God, and the
vital influences of his holy spirit, were withdrawn from the soul; in
consequence of which their moral principle became totally corrupted and
depraved -- they lost all love to God, and were filled with enmity to truth,
righteousness and holiness -- and love to darkness, error and wickedness --
lost their liberty, life and immortal happiness -- became prisoners of divine
justice -- involved in death spiritual, and exposed to death temporal, became
dead in law, and were consigned over by God, to a confirmed state of darkness,
error and wickedness and misery; under the wrath of God, the power of sin, the
tyranny of the devil, with sinning angels in hell; according to the threatened
penalty or curse, "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die." To be
thus left of God, under the power of spiritual death, and given up to their own
hearts lusts, to walk in their own counsels, and choose their own delusion, and
destruction, is not only the sin of men, but their punishment. as you may see,
Psalm. lxxxi. 11.12. Sin, being the sinner's own choice and delight, does not
make it a less punishment but a greater curse. And God threatens sinners with
such spiritual plagues -- and in these moral evils a great part of the
punishment of the damned consists.

Now, our redemption by the Son of God consists, in his delivering us from the
penalty or punishment, threatened in the divine law, to sin -- from the wrath
and curse of God, and the dreadful prison of hell; from the power of spiritual
death, ignorance, error and wickedness; from the delusion and tyranny of the
devil, and all that everlasting shame and misery, to which we are liable,
whilin the devil's kingdom -- and restoring us to the moral image and favor of
God -- and to liberty, life, and eternal glory and felicity in the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In redeeming us to God, he redeems
us to all the sacred trinity; and reinstates us in the favor of all.

II. We proceed to consider, how the Son of God has accomplished this work of
redemption.

And in order to have a comprehensive view of this matter, we must take into
our consideration, that eternal stipulation or compact which was made between
the Father and the Son, called the covenant of redemption or of peace, and the
law of mediation, of which law or covenant the Psalmist speaks, psalm. xl. 7.8.
"Then said I, lo I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me: I
delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart." And Zach.
vi. 13. "And the covenant of peace shall be between them both." This covenant
contained in it certain conditions to be performed by the Son as God's servant,
and certain honors to be conferred upon him as the reward of his merit, by the
Father. And the righteousness of Christ, by which he paid the price of our
redemption, made satisfaction for sin, and merited all the honors conferred on
himself, and all the benefits bestowed on his spiritual seed, consists in what
he did and suffered in obedience to this law or covenant; for in fulfilling
this law, consisted his chief work and business in this world. And as a
distinct divine agent, previous to his being under any obligation to obey, God
the Son took upon him the office of Mediator and Redeemer, before he assumed
human nature -- and executed several parts of the mediatorial office without
human nature. He drew nigh to God the Father, and treated with him about terms
of peace and reconciliation for men -- entered into a covenant of redemption
with the Father -- and the human nature had no voice in this stipulation --
before he assumed human nature he became a surety for men, and received
promises and blessings for them upon the credit of that fountain of merit which
he engaged to procure by his services and sufferings in time -- and he agreed,
in the covenant, to do and suffer all that the Father required of him, in order
to procure such a fountain of righteousness or merit. And to make such terms,
agreements and promises, no more required a human nature in the Son, than in
the Father. But when it was proper for him to perform these services and endure
these sufferings, it was necessary for him to assume human nature (and cloth
it with the moral character of his divine, that he might put his divine
character in the power of his enemies) and not before. And as a divine agent he
obeyed the law of mediation in the execution of the offices of prophet, priest
and king. And he fulfilled all that was required of him, as to obedience and
sufferings, in the covenant of redemption. The Son engaged to declare the
righteousness and glory of God as moral Governor -- support the dignity and
authority of the divine law and government and secure, maintain and promote the
good of his moral kingdom, more fully than they could have been, by the
punishment of the sinner, recording to the threatening -- and manifest the evil
of sin, and the displeasure of God against it, and his disposition and
determination to punish the sinner, unless satisfaction be made adequate to the
crime; and display his justice in punishing the sinner, in such a manner that
the sinner may be convinced that it is an evil and bitter thing to violate the
law of God -- and the violation deserves, and may be expected to be followed
with the most awful consequences. The Son engages to make it fully appear, by
what he shall do and suffer, that God is infinite in his benevolence,
inflexible in his justice, and that his truth is inviolable; that his law is
holy, just and good, and his government righteous, and that he is the same in
execution as in legislation. And these things being done, atonement and
satisfaction are made; and God can, consistent with his justice, be propitious
to him that receives this atonement, by believing in Jesus -- and can pardon,
justify and confer eternal life upon the sinner. For on this covenant of
redemption God has founded a covenant of grace, in which he has promised
these benefits to all that shall believe in his Son. And the Son of God engaged
in the covenant of redemption, not only to make satisfaction to divine justice
for sin, and a purchase for believers; but he also engaged to deliver his
people from the power of darkness, and translate them into his own kingdom, and
gain their hearts to himself, and set up his kingdom in their hearts, and
destroy God's enemies. Now, to answer these purposes, the Son of God came into
this world to engage in a war with God's enemies -- and to decide the moral
contest concerning God's righteousness; and so take the possession of the
hearts of sinners for himself, by delivering them from the error, delusion and
wickedness of the devil's kingdom -- and causing them to embrace truth and
righteousness, and so build up a kingdom for himself, upon the ruins of the
devil's kingdom. And the grand controversy is, Whether it is consistent with
the righteousness of God as moral Governor of the universe, i. e. with his
justice, benevolence, love and goodness to his moral kingdom, to inflict
eternal death upon any of his creatures for disobedience or transgression. God
declares, that his righteousness or glory, as moral Governor, obliges him to do
this -- He has threatened it in his law, and to remit the penalty in one
instance, unless adequate satisfaction be made, so as to secure the rights of
government; is to give up the honor of his truth and justice, and his
benevolence to his moral kingdom. And God will not pardon sinners, unless he
can do it in a way consistent with his own glory and the good of his moral
kingdom -- a way, in which the dignity and authority, of the law and
Legislator, and the existence and righteousness of moral government may be
preserved. That which rendered the punishment of the sinner necessary was, that
the infinite evil of sin, and righteous displeasure of God against it, might be
expressed -- and the dignity and authority of the law might be maintained --
the vigor of divine government be supported, and the happiness of God's moral
kingdom by this mean advanced.

The devil says, God is not righteous; he cannot maintain his truth
inviolable, his justice inflexible, and yet manifest his infinite benevolence
-- and he will not execute the threatening. And sinners are in the devil's
kingdom and interest, they espouse his cause, and are continually contending
with the Almighty, and replying against God. They cannot see how it is
consistent with his benevolence to verify the truth of his threatening on
sinners. Hence they deny the eternity of hell torments, and plead for universal
salvation, and an other state of probation after this life is ended. And
presuming upon the goodness and benevolence of God, they transgress his
commands with the hope of impunity. You cannot make an infidel or impenitent
sinner believe, by the preaching of the law, that God will verify the
threatening on sinners. To convince sinners of this is what the law cannot do,
because it is become weak through the flesh; but God sending his own Son, in
the likeness of sinful flesh, his being made a sacrifice for sin has condemned
sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in all
that believe in Christ Jesus, and walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit; by faith in this sacrifice, the sinner is fully convinced of sin,
righteousness and judgment, and is interested in a righteousness which fully
answers the demands of the law; and so the righteousness of the law is
fulfilled in them. See Romans viii. 3.4.

But here let us enquire, and show particularly,

First, How the Son of God was slain.

Secondly, How his blood is a mean of our redemption to God. And,

Thirdly, Wherein his worthiness or merit does consist, "Thou art worthy -- for
thou wast slain; and have redeemed us to God by thy blood."

First, I am to show, how the Son of God was slain. And he was slain as a
victim a sacrifice. A sacrifice (in Heb.) is minchah, and presupposes a victim,
a conquest or victory, obtained over an enemy; and is that which is slain, or
that on which they feast, in triumph of the victory obtained. Thus, among
ancient nations, when any one obtained a victory over an other in war; the
conqueror supposed he had a right to slay the victim or conquered foe, and take
their substance as a prey; and they slew beasts, and prepared a feast of the
spoils. And sometimes among the barbarous, they feasted on the flesh and blood
of the victims; and this was called a sacrifice, or a feast upon a victim.
Corban, (in Heb.) is any kind of gift or offering made to God. But Minchah is a
sacrifice or feast upon a victim.

And thus was Christ, the Son of God slain, as a victim and sacrifice in the
devil's kingdom, by the hand of his enemies, in the exercise of all their
spite, enmity and malice to his moral character, as the HEIR of the kingdom.
"This is the HEIR (say they) come let us kill him, and seize on the
inheritance."

By the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God the Father, he is
delivered up, and set forth to be a propitiation, i. e. a victim and sacrifice.
And God the Son assumes human nature, and clothes it with the moral perfections
of his divine, on purpose to put his divine, moral character into the power of
his enemies -- And then this great Theanthropos, as the high priest under the
law, offers up himself -- to be made a victim and sacrifice, by his enemies --
and they with wicked hands did to him, what ever God's hand and counsel
determined before to be done; not as passive weapons in the hand of God the
Father; but as free, distinct agents from God; who could form their own
designs, and execute them, in opposition to God's designs, in carrying on this
war. And they first conquer him, and then sacrifice and slay him, and triumph
in their conquest. They first slay him in a moral sense -- i. e. deprive him of
his divine moral character, in the view of his moral subjects.

The moral character of a holy being is his life in a moral sense -- And the
divine character of Christ, as moral Governor, suffered in an infinite degree
when he hung upon the cross; and his enemies denied his divinity; and
challenged his veracity -- saying, "He said, he was the Son of God" -- and, "If
thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross, and we will believe" -- and
he appeared to be so under the power of his enemies, that he was unable to save
himself, or vindicate his character from these reproaches and slanders -- And
says, "This is your hour, and the power of darkness." And this was all the
death it was possible for any one to die, in a moral sense. It was not possible
for the Deity to suffer in his essence: But God the Son could, and did suffer
to an infinite degree in his divine and moral character as the Governor of the
universe, in the view of his moral subjects, when he hung on the cross. But all
the reproach was wiped off by his resurrection from the dead, in the view of
all that believed that he arose. By his resurrection from the dead, he was
declared to be the Son of God with power -- and the truth of all he said,
concerning his Father's righteousness, and his own divinity, was confirmed.

This death, which the Son of God suffered, in the reproaches cast on his
divine character, when he was obliged to endure the cross, despising the shame,
was the most bitter ingredient in all the cup that his Father put into his hand
to drink. The prospect of this overwhelmed his holy, benevolent soul, in the
garden. When God the Son represented to his human soul, the great evil of sin,
as it casts such infinite reproach on the divine character as moral Governor,
the infinite displeasure of God against it, and the dreadful consequences of it
to the damned: This put him into an agony, and caused him to sweat drops of
blood, and say, "Now is my soul troubled;" all out of love to holiness and
benevolence to sinners, and a sense of their sin and danger, and his desire of
their salvation. And when his enemies reproach him, and insult him, as if he
was forsaken of God, because he was not rescued from the cross; "He trusted in
God (say they) let him deliver him if he would have." This was a very cutting
part of his sufferings, that they should be made the occasion of such a thought
as this, that God had forsaken him, and that there was no help for him in God
-- This causes the human nature of Christ to cry to God the Son, in the
exercise of a most steadfast sense of his love and union with him, and
continuance of his trust in his power and grace. "My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me!" i. e. in the view of my enemies, which has given them occasion
thus to reproach and insult my confidence in thee -- not that the Son had in
himself any distrust of God's power or love and favor; or apprehension of any
real desertion or dereliction of his Father. This is not the cry of God the Son
to God the Father; but of the human nature to God the Son, who was the God and
Father and Creator of his human nature, and was now in an intimate union with
it. For God the Son could not in any sense be forsaken of God the Father.

His enemies also slay his body by crucifying him in a most ignominious, cruel
and distressing manner; and this being in union with his divine nature -- and
being put to death out of enmity to his divine and moral character as the heir
of the kingdom, exceedingly aggrevate his sufferings, and the sin of his
crucifiers. And the Son of God willingly submits to be thus conquered and slain
by his enemies, in the exercise of the greatest humility, patience, meekness
and condescension; and is, by them, "Brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as
a sheep dumb before her shearers; and so he opened not his mouth." He laid down
his life of himself, though he was not his own executioner, nor did he create
the sin of his crucifiers.

To this victim and sacrifice of the Son of God, all the victims and sacrifices
under the law, had reference; and especially the lamb slain for a burnt
offering. These were all, but so many prophecies and types of this real victim
and sacrifice of the Son of God incarnate -- they all point to this -- and are
suited to direct the mind of the offerer from his own merit and righteousness,
to the merit of this victim and sacrifice for sin, conquered and slain by his
enemies; when he was substituted by God, to make atonement for sin, by the
sacrifice of himself; and did actually sacrifice his liberty, life and glory to
redeem ours. His sufferings were vicarious. And wherever a sacrifice is
mentioned in scripture, it presupposes such a victim or conquest. The beast,
before it was slain for a sacrifice, evidently represented such a victim, and
was so called. It was to be considered as a conquered foe, lead forth to be
slain, and patiently submitting to the sacrificial knife. And when the Lord is
said to have a sacrifice in Bozrah, a conquest of enemies is presupposed, and
this is a feast in triumph of such a conquest. The bread and wine brought forth
by Melchizedek to Abraham, was a feast upon a conquest. And the invitation of
wisdom, Prove. ix. 5. "Come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
mingled," is to represent a feast upon a victim. "Wisdom has killed her
victims;" as you may see ver. 2.

And the sacrament of the Lord's supper is a feast upon the victim, and
sacrifice of the Son of God, by his enemies, by which means he obtained a
complete victory over them, and will finally sacrifice them all, if they submit
not in heart to his government. And the Lord's supper is designed to represent
this victim and sacrifice of the Son of God, by his enemies; and the conquest
he obtains over them, in this way. And this wonderful transaction we celebrate
in that sacred feast! How the blessed God, when he set forth his Son to be a
propitiation, i. e. a victim and sacrifice, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness; was so well pleased for his righteousness sake --
that he passed over believers in the execution of his wrath; and caused his
displeasure to fall on their enemies; as was the case in Egypt, in consequence
of the sacrifice and sprinkling of blood. To this the Apostle refers, i. Cor.
v. 7.8. "For even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us; therefore, let us
keep the feast." And hence Christ is called the Hilasteerion, or mercy seat,
and the propitiation; because he interposed himself between the wrath of God
and curse of the law, and his people, and renders him propitious. The
mercy-seat was that which covered the ark of the covenant, in which the tables
of the Law were deposited; -- upon this mercy-seat God is represented as
setting between the cherubim, that were fixed on each end of this seat, so as
to form a throne with their wings; and this mercy-seat, and these cherubim,
were of pure gold. And as this mercy-seat, or propitiation, came between God
and the law, that contained the curse; so Jesus Christ, as our Mediator, by
being made a victim, sacrifice, or a curse for us, interposeth himself between
God our Judge, and the law by which we stand condemned and cursed; and by being
made such a curse, i. e. a victim and sacrifice for us, delivers us from the
curse of the law, and renders God propitious.

Secondly, We are to consider, how his blood is a mean of our redemption to
God. By his blood here we are to understand all he suffered while here upon
earth, in his divine character, and his human nature as the HEIR of the kingdom
and moral Governor of the universe. The blood signifies the life; and in taking
away his divine character as moral Governor, they took away his liberty, his
life and glory. And had not this been taken away, the shedding his blood, and
the sufferings he endured in his human nature, would have been of no avail in
making atonement for sin. -- The infinite evil of sin, and the righteousness of
God, would not have been declared, nor his infinite wrath and displeasure
against sin been manifested, or his love to holiness displayed by his death, or
adequate satisfaction made.

And the way in which the blood of Christ is a mean of our redemption to God,
is in that, hereby God's righteousness is manifested and declared to all that
have says in his blood, as the life of the Son of God taken away for sin: And
that sin is both the procuring and instrumental cause of his death. The
righteousness of God has been declared by the law, as has been shown, and it
has been witnessed by the prophets.

And the Son of God declared, by his preaching, the righteousness of God's
character, law and government. This was the grand theme of his preaching, as a
teacher sent from God, -- and he confirmed his mission by miracles -- and in
him all the prophecies of the old testament were accomplished. And he declared
the righteousness of the law, by his yielding a sinless obedience to it, in
human nature, to all that believed in his divinity: For surely that must be a
holy, righteous and good law, to which the Son of God himself yields a perfect
and sinless obedience. Whoever believes his divinity, will not doubt of the
righteousness of the law, to which he paid such great respect.

But this righteousness of God, which was witnessed by the law and the
prophets, and which was confirmed by the preaching and obedience of our Savior
-- is manifested without the law, by this victim and sacrifice, in a more
conspicuous and convincing manner to all that believe in Christ. Every branch
of God's righteousness is declared to all that shall be convinced, that this
was the blood of the Son of God, a person of infinite dignity and merit. As all
shall be convinced of it, either in this world for their salvation, or at the
day of judgment for their eternal condemnation and punishment -- Then both men
and devils shall be convinced of this truth, by the blood of Christ, that the
judgment of God, in condemning sinners to eternal death, for their sin and
disobedience, is according to truth and righteousness. By this mean the
infinite benevolence of God is declared; which is one very important branch of
his righteousness.

The benevolence of God, was manifested in the law (as has been shown) but how
much more fully manifested in the blood of Christ? For God not to spare his
son, infinitely dear to him, but to substitute him to make satisfaction for
sin, as our surety, and deliver him up for us all -- for sinners, for enemies,
and when we as sheep were gone astray, to lay on him the iniquities of us all;
to impute to him that immense debt we owed to divine justice, that he might
satisfy for it -- that it should please the Father to bruise him and put him to
grief, by delivering him up out of his bosom, into the hands of his enemies, to
be wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, when the
chastizement of our peace was on him, that by his stripes we might be healed --
that he should wake up the malice and rage of his enemies against him, by the
manifestation of truth to their consciences, saying, "Awake, O sword, against
my shepherd, against the man that is my fellow" -- what great benevolence must
it manifest! For though God the Father was not himself the executioner, or
inflictor of any sufferings on his Son, by his decree, efficiency or command --
nor was the Son ever the object or victim of his Father's wrath, but always the
object of his infinite love, under his greatest sufferings; yet, in delivering
him up into the hands of his enemies, to be made a victim and sacrifice by them
for the cause of truth, meekness and righteousness, the Father signified his
pleasure that he should suffer in this manner, as sully as if he had himself
inflicted these sufferings on his Son: So that it may with great propriety be
said, that it pleased the Father to bruise him, and put him to grief, "and we
esteemed him stricken and smitten of God;" -- for his enemies could have done
nothing, unless it had been given them from above, and the Father and the Son
had put him in their power: And therefore his suffering in this manner is a
wonderful proof and manifestation of the love of God, who set him forth to be a
propitiation for sin.

The benevolence or love of God, is not the effect, but the cause of Christ's
coming into the world, and suffering what he did in it. Christ did not die to
purchase the love of God to sinners, or to incline him to love them, and
exercise mercy and grace to them, but to open the way for God freely to
exercise his grace to sinners, consistently with his justice. "God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son." See John iii. 16.17. And the Apostle
John speaks of it, as being as great an expression and proof of God's love, and
benevolence, as if God had laid down his own life. See i. John iii. 16. "Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because HE laid down his life for us." The
character of any being is his life in a moral sense.

No being, but one of infinite benevolence, would part with a son so dear to
him, and equal to himself, in every divine perfection, and deliver him up into
the hands of his enemies, to be treated by them in such an ignominious, cruel
manner, for the sake of opening a way for the salvation of rebellious sinners.
Had God sent his Son merely to yield obedience to his holy law, without
requiring any sufferings, his love to sinners would not have appeared so great;
because this would have been easy, and honorable, and no self-denial would
have been exercised.

And the divine benevolence, is manifested not only in God's sending his Son to
bear our sins, and suffer in our room and stead; but also in the Son's
consenting to become a servant, and freely offer up himself, and submit to such
great humiliation and sufferings, in order to work out our redemption. His
great love and benevolence to sinners -- his relation to them, and the desire
he had of their salvation -- was the occasion of all that overwhelming distress
and sorrow of his soul, that great agony and bloody sweat he endured in the
garden, when he cried out, "What shall I say! Father deliver me from this
hour?" (No) 'For this cause came I to this hour:' (But this I will say) "Father
glorify thy name." Here was the travel of his soul in bringing many sons to
glory. He felt for sinners the evil of sin, its turpitude and guilt, and the
displeasure of God against them on account of sin, more than they could feel
for themselves, by reason of his great love to them. No tender and indulgent
parent could feel so much for a beloved child, when justly exposed to suffer a
most shameful, dreadful death from the hand of justice, as Christ now felt for
sinners; as they were polluted, guilty and justly exposed to the wrath and
vengeance of Almighty God. And thus by sympathy, as well as otherwise, he bore
our sins; when he made satifaction for them. And what great love and
benevolence to sinners must it argue, for the Son of God to engage in such a
war, with all the powers of earth and hell for the sake of redeeming sinners,
enemies, when he knew it would cost him his liberty, life and glory! "Greater
love has no man, than that a man lay down his life for his friend; but God
has commended his love to us, that while we were enemies Christ died for us."

And the inflexible justice of God (which is another branch of his
righteousness) is manifested and declared, in that God will not pardon, justify
and release the sinner from the punishment, unless a satisfaction be made by
the surety, adequate to the damages he has sustained by sin, in the honor of
his character and the interest of his kingdom, as moral governor.

And his truth expressed in the threatening, is declared to be inviolable in
that no sinner can be pardoned and justified on account of this satisfaction,
'till he is united to the Redeemer by faith in his blood, and so is interested
in his merit. And then God can exercise his grace freely in pardoning and
justifying the sinner, consistent with his justice, as you may see Romans iii.
23, 24, 25, 26. "For all have sinned, come short of the glory of God; being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus:
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins -- that he might be just,
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus." And by this law of faith all
boasting is excluded, because the believer receives the righteousness by which
he is justified by faith alone: "It is by faith that it might be by grace"

And God the Son, by thus declaring his Father's righteousness in being made a
propitiation (i. e. a victim and sacrifice) for sin has judged, condemned,
conquered and destroyed all God's enemies; and decided the grand moral
controversy; and laid a sure foundation to put an eternal end to the war. By
this mean sin, that implacable enemy to God and his moral kingdom, is condemned
and the dominion and power of it destroyed. Every one that really believes that
Christ was the Son of God, must be convinced, by his death, that sin is an
infinite evil in its nature and tendency -- that it is pregnant with moral
enmity to God, and mischief to his moral kingdom; and would dethrone God, and
destroy him as moral governor, and ruin his kingdom, if it had sufficient power
on its side. The devil knew that Christ was the holy one of God, that he was
the heir of the kingdom, and that he came to be the Savior of the world, and
this was his motive in putting him to death: and it was in the devil's kingdom,
by his subjects, and under his influence that the Lord of Life and Glory was
crucified. See Rev. xi. 8. And sin, or the temper of the devil, and his
disposition to oppose God and his righteousness, was never acted out in
persecuting the saints, or in slaying the prophets, or at any other time, as it
was in the crucifixion of the Son at God. Satan and his subject say, "This is
the heir, come let us kill him and seize on the inheritance." Now does not this
evidently show sin to be an infinite evil? and consequently that it is a holy,
just and good law, that threatens it with an infinite or endless punishment, in
miserably destroying Satan's kingdom and subjects.

And in the death of Christ the devil, as the prince of this world, is judged,
condemned, conquered and destroyed in a moral sense. See John xii. 31, 32, and
xvi. 11. And how this is effected by the death of Christ, appears in that
ancient prediction of this war, Genesis iii. 15. "It shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel." Here it is foretold how the devil, by making the
Son of God, in human nature, his victim and sacrifice for a time, bruised
Christ's heel; and by conquering and slaying Christ, the seed of the woman, the
devil, destroyed himself in a moral sense. Jesus Christ by submitting to be
conquered and slain in the devil's kingdom broke the serpent's head, laid open
all his wicked designs against the character and kingdom of God; and destroyed
Satan's power and dominion over the hearts of men. The Son of God by his death
upon the cross, and his resurrection from the dead, conquered the devil,
exposed him openly, and disarmed him at once, of all three of his weapons, the
curse of the law, the strength of sin, and the power of death; and led him at
his chariot wheels, as a victim and captive. See Co^. ii. 5. And thus he
destroyed him that had the power of death; and delivers those who through fear
of death were all their life time subject to bondage. And Samson, in this, was
a lively type of Christ: by being conquered himself, he conquered the enemies
of his people; and by being slain he slew them. And thus Phine has made
atonement, and (...) God's wrath by executing judgment on God's enemies, See
Numb. xxv.

And the Son of God carried on this war in a manner diverse from all others,
and of which the devil was not aware. "For every battle of the warrior is with
confused noise and garments rolled in blood, but this shall be with burning and
fuel of fire -- " without any noise or violence; and yet effectual to destroy
his enemies, See Isa. ii. 5.

"He did not cry nor strive, neither did any man hear his voice in the street
-- he did not break the bruised reed nor quench the smoking flax, 'till he
brought forth judgment unto victory." See Isa. xl. 1, 2. compared with Mat.
xii. 17, 18.

And in Isa. lxiii. we have a remarkable prophecy of this war, and how it was
decided, and all his enemies slain -- and a feast upon a victim or sacrifice
prepared in Bozrah. Here the Son of God appears in dyed garments, red with his
own blood first, and then the blood of his enemies is sprinkled upon his
garments, and he stains all his raiment, by treading them down in his anger and
trampling them in his fury* to recompense them for their iniquities, and work
out redemption for his people.

And Psalm. xlv. we have a prediction of this battle and conquest, and the
conqueror returning with the spoils of his enemies -- his garments smelling of
myrrh, and aloes and cassia. And Psalm. cx. contains a clear prophecy of this
battle and the victory obtained.

And we have an account of the prosecution of this same battle after the
controversy was decided on the cross. And now it is carried on by the truths
manifested by this transaction, See Rev. vi. 2. "And I saw, and behold a white
horse, and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him; and he
went forth conquering and to conquer." This white horse represents the gospel.
He that sat on him the Son of God, in the power of his spirit; the bow the word
of truth; and the arrows the truths of the gospel exhibited in the cross: And
the conquests he makes are souls converted by his word and spirit of truth.

And Rev. xix. We have an account of the destruction he makes by his word and
spirit of truth, of all his implacable and incurable enemies; who will not
submit to the scepter of his grace. The battle here described is a decisive
one; and the most bloody and awful battle that ever was or will be fought: and
this is of a moral kind. The sword by which this mighty sacrifice of God's
enemies is made, is the word of truth, which proceeds out of the mouth of him
that sat upon the horse. And all the spirits are called to feed on these
victims or sacrifices; the flesh of kings and captains and mighty men, and all
men both free and bond, small and great. And all this victim and sacrifice is
made by virtue and efficacy of the blood of the Lamb of God shed upon the cross
by his enemies, when he was by them made a victim and sacrifice in the devil's
kingdom; that great city, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord
was crucified, See Rev. xi. 8. And all the angels and saints in heaven are
called to this sacrifice made by Christ of God's enemies; and to feast on these
victims. And this feast consists in a display of the vindictive justice of God,
in the righteous judgment executed on his obstinate and finally impenitent and
implacable enemies, which will be a feast to holy beings in heaven to all
eternity.

The design of the Son of God's coming into this world, and being made a victim
and sacrifice in the devil's kingdom, was not only to open a way for God to
display his free and sovereign grace, in the salvation of all that believe in
him, but also that he may display his wrath and vindictive vengeance in
executing judgment upon devils, and upon all among the children of men that
shall obstinately reject his Son, and finally continue in sin and unbelief. And
in what a striking light must the infinite displeasure of God against sin, and
sinners, and his love of righteousness, appear in this view of the matter! For
God to deliver up his infinitely dear and most glorious Son to engage in such a
hazardous and bloody war, for the cause of condemning sin, and punishing
sinners, according to their demerit! This shows how determined God is to
support the honor of his law by executing the threatening on sinners. Had we
seen eternity run through, and the threatening executed according to the truth
and justice of it, it could not afford a more convincing proof of the justice
and truth of the Legislator; and his disposition and determination to execute
the threatening, notwithstanding his infinite benevolence to his creatures,
than is now manifested to every believer in the death of Christ, and the design
of it. This transaction expresses God's displeasure against sin, as fully as it
does his love to righteousness, and the heirs of glory, whom he undertook in
this manner to redeem* What an evil and a bitter thing must sin appear in this
view to the convinced sinner! That sin, under the influence of which, the Lord
of Life and Glory was slain, by the devil and his agents, must appear an
infinite evil: And the wrath of God and the Lamb against it, must appear most
awful; since God delivered up his Son, and did not spare him: and the Son ha^
sacrificed his liberty, life and glory, in order to execute judgment and wrath
upon sinners, in a most aggrevated and dreadful manner!

O, who can stand before their indignation, or escape their wrath! What can
express God's infinite hatred of sin more clearly, than his being at such an
infinite expense, to deliver mankind from the guilt, power and consequences of
it; and to execute his wrath and displeasure upon sinners! Sin, in its nature,
must be infinitely opposed to the will of God; he never created it; nor would
he ever have permitted it to come into his kingdom, had he not known that he
could overrule it for great good.

Thirdly, We are to show, wherein the worthiness or merit of the Son of God
does consist. And the worthiness or merit of the Son of God consists in three
things, --

First, in the dignity of his person -- Secondly, in the honor brought to God,
and the good brought to his moral kingdom -- And, thirdly, the means and method
by which he procured this honor, and obtained this good. -- And all these
being considered, will make it appear, that the worthiness and merit of the Son
of God is infinite -- and that the value God the Father has received of him is
infinite -- and it was procured and obtained at an infinite price. -- The
infinite dignity of the Son of God, consists in his being God equal with the
Father, and independent on his Father's will or act for his existence or
happiness; being in himself self-existent, self-sufficient and independent, and
possessed of every divine perfection. And he brought infinite honor to God and
good to his kingdom, by declaring his righteousness and executing judgment on
his enemies. And in order to procure and obtain these, he sacrificed his own
liberty, life and glory. (in the manner which has been shown) which is an
infinite sacrifice -- his whole divine character, as moral Governor of the
universe, was sacrificed for a time.

Now this merit of Christ was the price of our redemption; by this our ransom
was paid; and hence we are said to be bought with a price; "and redeemed, not
by corruptible things, such as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ; as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. See 1 Pet. i. 18.19.

We were led captive by satan, and have lost our liberty, life and inheritance
-- and this merit of the Son of God is the price of our redemption -- and in
this sense, he may be said to redeem us to God by his blood.

And the other sense, in which his blood is the mean of our redemption is, as
by the truths manifested in his cross, attended by the holy spirit, sin is
condemned, and the power of satan in the soul destroyed, by convictions of sin,
and in our conversion to God; and so we are reconciled to God, to his
character, law and government, and the heart is gained.

The Son of God, by his blood, has not only paid the price of our ransom; but
made an infinite purchase for believers by an equivalent. He has purchased the
holy spirit in all its gifts and graces -- and the kingdom of heaven in all its
glory and felicity.

IMPROVEMENT.
BEFORE we proceed to the next head of this discourse, we shall make the
following inferences from what has been said --

First, From what has been said upon the origin of moral evil, we may learn,
that God is in no sense the maker, creator, or author of that mode of exercise
called sin, or moral evil, either by his decrees, efficiency, commands, or by
tempting his creatures with evil. God cannot be the creator or author of sin,
in forming his decrees in eternity, because this implies no causeality in them
-- as has been shown. He cannot be the maker or author of sin by his
efficiency, or executing his decrees in time, because this is to destroy the
idea of moral government; as it supposes that God governs the moral world as he
does the material world, without instructions or motives, or any moral law: And
that the obliquity or retrograde motion of a planet is as sinful as the
transgression of a moral agent* and that moral agents are no more blameworthy
or accountable for their exercises, than a machine for its motions. Sin is
enmity against God; and can God create enmity and opposition, and rebellion to
himself? Sin is confusion and war in God's kingdom; but God is not the author
of confusion and war, but of peace. 1 Cor. xiv. 33. And sin could not possibly
exist before there was a creature imperfect in knowledge, and so liable to
conceive or form error in his understanding, and mutable in his nature and so
liable to change in his preceptions and choice. And when God had created the
heavens and the earth, and all their numerous hosts, upon the first six days,
no sin was then created, nor did exist among all God's works; for they were all
very good. But God created angels and men free moral agents, but imperfect in
their knowledge and mutable in their nature, and so liable to form error in
their understandings and sin in their hearts. And they could not be created
otherwise than imperfect and mutable. And he introduces his first begotten Son,
(i. e. one that was of the same nature and essence, and likeness in all
perfections with himself, and infinitely near and dear to him, and heir of all
things, and worthy of equal honor with himself) with this command -- Let all
the angels of God worship him! -- Some of the angels refused to put an implicit
faith in God's word, and yield an implicit obedience to his commands, and so
became transgressors of a known command of their infinitely wise and benevolent
Creator. And in consequence of transgression, they became sinners, and were by
sin transformed into devils, and filled with error, pride and enmity to God and
holiness. God never made a sin or a devil -- God made those who are now devils,
holy angels, in his own moral image; but they made sin, by transgression, and
so made themselves devils. And the scripture no where tells us, that sin is the
work or creature of God, but expressly tells us that it is the work of the
devil. See John viii. 44. "The devil was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lie, be speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it." And the
devil is in this sense the father of error, sin and sinners. And he that makes
sin is of the devil; for the devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose
the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil."
But if error and sin are the works of God, created by him; then we should read
thus -- " For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of God -- works which God created and made:" but who does not see the
blasphemy of this? (But this is according to Home's ideal scheme.)

And as God did not make or create sin in forming or executing his decrees, or
by his immediate efficiency; so neither is he the author of it by his commands,
or by tempting his creatures with evil. "Out of the mouth of the Most High does
not evil and good proceed." See Lam. iii. 38. "Let no man say, when he is
tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted, neither tempts he
any man, with evil." "But every good gift, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the Father of lights," etc. See James i. 13.17 All
error and sin or wickedness, is from the devil, the father of darkness; and all
truth and righteousness is from God, the Father of lights. If God created the
sin and enmity of wicked men and devils, and all their rebellion* he must carry
on both sides of the war, and act in direct opposition to himself; and if he is
the author, he can manifest no glory of vindictive justice in punishing the
sinner for it. God permits sin, and overrules it for his own glory. But God
made angels and men holy and upright -- and he was not accessory to their
original sin or apostasy. He did not create their sin by his decree or
efficiency; nor did he command them to sin -- nor did he induce or incline them
to sin by tempting them with evil -- nor did he corrupt their moral principle,
or withdraw or withhold from them, that fell, any divine influences that were
necessary to their standing, (which he granted to those that stood) until they
did wilfully transgress a known, positive command. The angels might take the
Son of God to be a creature; and for that reason refuse to pay divine worship
to him; but this was to set up their own reason in opposition to an known,
express command of God, which is subversive of all moral government. And man,
under the influence of satan, disbelieved the threatening, and so was embolden
to transgress. But this was not because God withdrew or withheld the holy
spirit or any internal divine influences from them, before they transgressed.
But immediately upon transgression, all divine favor and influences of the
holy spirit were withdrawn in a judicial way; and then the moral principle
became totally corrupt. But God has been pleased, in his sovereign grace, to
make provision for the restoration of mankind, and to convey to them the holy
spirit by the revelation of the gospel; so that all who will hear and
understand the gospel, and receive the truths of it by faith and love, may be
saved: and if they do not hear and understand, etc. they will be left without
excuse, if they enjoy the means of knowledge and grace. -- And should any
enquire, why did not all the angels transgress, if they all were equal as to
divine influences? -- To this I answer, it is probable some waited till they
saw the effect of apostasy in others before they refused obedience; and this
opened their eyes and prevented their fall, and confirmed them in obedience.
And it is probable, that if Adam had waited 'till he saw the effect of
transgression in Eve, and the angels that sinned, he never would have
transgressed, but been confirmed in holiness, as the saints will in heaven, to
all eternity, by the punishment of sinners in hell. This is perfectly
consistent with moral government.

Second, We may infer from what has been said upon redemption, that those do
greatly err, who say, that the atonement and satisfaction made by Christ,
consists only in his obedience to the moral law, and that he did not die for
our sins, or in our room and stead; but only for our sakes, or for our good and
benefit, to set us a perfect example of patience and submission under
sufferings. But if Jesus Christ was made a propitiation for sin; if he was
slain for us as our sacrifice; if he offered up himself to be a victim and
sacrifice in order to declare God's righteousness, and conquer and destroy his
enemies, that by the merit of his blood, the price of our redemption might be
paid, before our sins could be remitted consistent with the justice of God --
if he died, not only by the sins of men, but for them: and his death is to be
considered, not merely as a pledge to assure us of the mercy of God, but as a
real, proper victim and sacrifice, wherein the legal victims and sacrifices had
their final accomplishment; then he must have died in our room, and as
substituted in our place, to discharge our immense debt to justice, which we
contracted by our rebellion. The ends for which atone-were designed, could not
have been answered by mere obedience, (as has been shown) The infinite evil of
sin, and the infinite displeasure of God against it; and his disposition and
determination to punish it to all eternity; and the love of God and Christ to
sinners, and many other important truths, could not have been expressed by the
mere obedience of an holy being to a holy law. And unless these truths had been
manifested, sin could not have been pardoned, or one sinner justified in the
sight of God, consistent with his righteousness as moral Governor: So, true it
is, that, "Without shedding of blood, there can be no remission." The blood of
Christ (not typical blood) does truly and properly atone for, and take away
sin. He died for our sins, as our substitute, in our stead, as the sacrifices
under the law, did for the sins, and in the stead of the offenders.

Third, We may infer, that there is a trinity of persons in the Godhead. This
is a doctrine denied by many at this day, because they cannot see its
consistency with reason. The being and perfections of one God, may be fully
proved from the light of nature; but the trinity of persons or agents in the
divine essence, depends upon immediate revelation for its proof. And this
doctrine is often represented as a speculative point, of no great importance,
whether it be believed or not: so mysterious and curious that it had better be
let alone. But it is evident that it enters into our salvation in all its parts
-- into all the doctrines of the gospel, and into the experience of the saints.
As soon as ever a man is convinced of his sinful and miserable state by nature,
he sees that there is a Divine Person offended, and there needs another Divine
Person to make satisfaction for his offenses, and a third to sanctify him.

And it is no more repugnant to reason, that three distinct agents should
depend for their existence upon one essence; and exist eternally and
necessarily in one essence -- than that one infinite agent should exist
eternally and necessarily without any cause of his existence; or that thousands
of distinct agents should depend on one will (the will of God) for their
existence. And when the second person in the sacred trinity is called a SON, an
only begotten or first born SON, these, I take, to be figurative expressions,
not to express his work or office, but to denote his being of one and the same
nature and essence with the Father, the express likeness of his person,
infinitely dear to him, and the heir of all things equally with the Father; as
children are of the same nature and image of their earthly parents, and so
exceedingly dear to them, and heirs, by birth, to their estates. But these
epithets are not designed, when applied to the second person in the Godhead, to
express any priority or superiority in the Father, or any will or act of the
Father in generating or giving existence to the Son; as if the Son depended on
the will or act of the Father for his existence: For eternal generation or
creation is a solecism in speech.

Paraclet^s, or comforter, denotes work or office in the third person of the
trinity -- and servant, Mediator, Surety, Advocate, etc. denote work or office
in the second person: but Father, Son or Holy Spirit, are not designed to
express work or office, but nature, essence, etc. And although God the Son took
on himself the form of a servant, and engaged in the office of a Mediator, and
became obedient to the Father in the covenant of redemption, even to the death;
yet he was a Son by nature and essence, and heir of all things, and so equal
with the Father, and the creator of all things, both in heaven and on earth.
And where he is called the protokotos, rendered first born of every creature;
it should have been rendered first progenitor of every creature; "for by him
were all things created that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and
invisible. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." See
Col. i. 15.16.17. And not in respect to his office, but in respect to his
nature, essence, heirship, likeness and dearness to the Father, he is called a
Son. But God does not depend on his own will for his existence, nor on the will
of any other being, because his existence is necessary and eternal; nor do
either of the persons in the sacred trinity depend on their own will, or the
will or act of each other, for their existence; but all exist eternally and
necessarily, in one and the same essence; though their agency and operations
are distinct, free and limited by their wisdom and will.

And that there is an eternal plurality of persons in the Godhead, seems to be
necessarily implied in the perfection of their happiness; for happiness lies
not in solitude, but in society -- and the sacred trinity must have enjoyed
infinite delight, communion, complacency and happiness in themselves, before
any creature existed. See Prove. viii. 30. And had not our Redeemer been God, a
person of infinite dignity and merit, and under no previous obligation to obey,
he could not have merited any thing at the hand of God.

No mere creature, by any thing he can do or suffer, can merit of God by way of
condignity, because he owes his all to him, and can render nothing to God, but
what he first received from him; and he can never pay his own debt, for his
existence and happiness, be he ever so holy and obedient. The honor he brings
to God, and the good he does to his moral kingdom, is small in comparison of
the benefits he receives from God -- and when once he has sinned, the merit of
all the creatures in the universe could not make amends for the dishonor done
to God's character by one sin: For God could not, consistent with his justice,
pardon one sin for a merit of congruity, or out of respect to the tried virtue
and obedience of all created beings; to do it would be an infinite reproach to
his character.

And none but one of infinite perfections could conquer and subdue satan, and
triumph over all the powers of earth and hell, as the Son of God has done, in
order to make atonement; and who but a God could execute the office of a
Redeemer? God's own arm brought salvation! And the scripture is abundant in the
proof of this doctrine of a trinity.

Fourth. We infer that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was well qualified for
this work. -- Jesus Christ was one to whom the rights of the Deity must be
exceeding dear; so that he upon no account would see them violated in the least
degree; for he was himself God; and an holy God would trust no other in this
affair, in which his own glory was so nearly concerned. And he was a person of
infinite dignity and merit, and none but such an one could make atonement for
sin. And he had a sincere and ardent love for sinners, and a great desire for
their salvation, so that he was willing to take their destruction upon himself,
and expend as much of his own interest and happiness for their sakes, as was
equivalent to the whose of theirs.

And how wonderful is this love and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to sinners!
Consider God the Son as self-existent and independent on all his creatures for
his happiness, but rich in all the perfections and glories of the Deity -- and
what great love must that be, that could move him to pay such regard to his
creatures! Consider the world sunk in sin, without any good desert, but
deserving everlasting punishment; and what wonderful love must that be, that
could move Him to have compassion upon such a world, so as to lay aside the
robes of his glory and become poor, assume human nature into a personal union
with his divine, appear in our world, now become the seat of the devil's
kingdom! And consent to become a victim and sacrifice -- be deprived of his
liberty, life and glory, for the sake of redeeming sinners! It was a great
thing for Him to create this world for our residence -- and bestow upon us the
bounties of his providence continually, with such a liberal hand! but what is
it to speak an all-creating word for our existence, and to open his all-liberal
hand for our support, in comparison of shedding the blood of his heart for our
redemption!

Well may you that are the children of God cry out, "Behold what manner of love
the Father has bestowed on us!"

O let the love of Christ constrain you to live not to yourselves but to Him
that has loved you and died for you.

SERMON II.
REV. V. 9. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book
and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and nation.


We proposed,

I. TO show what is implied in our redemption to God.

II. How the Son of God has accomplished this work.

III. Consider the honors conferred on him as the reward of his merit.

The two first of these propositions have been considered. -- We have shown,
that our redemption implies, that we are in a state of bondage -- and the Son
of God has delivered us from that state. By our sin and rebellion, we have
reproached the character of God as moral Governor, and so have forfeited his
favor, and our liberty, life and inheritance; and have incurred his
displeasure and the curse of the law, which is a confirmed state of sin and
misery, under the wrath of God forever. We have revolted from God, and are in
the kingdom of the devil, and led captive by him. And we are unable of
ourselves to pay the price of our redemption by making good the damages God
has received or sustained by sin, in the honor of his character, as moral
Governor, and therefore are liable to suffer the penalty to all eternity; and
we have neither inclination nor power to deliver ourselves from the power of
sin and the tyranny of satan. And from this state of guilt and corruption the
Son of God redeems us. And in accomplishing this work God the Son, as a divine
agent, equal with God the Father, being self-existent, self-sufficient and
independent on the will of God the Father for his existence or happiness, and
unsubordinate to him, freely took on himself the office of a Mediator and
Redeemer, and entered into a covenant of redemption. And by fulfilling the
conditions of that covenant, in the execution of the offices of Prophet,
Priest, and King, as God's servant and our Redeemer, has procured an infinite,
inexhaustible fountain of merit with the Godhead, by vindicating, and bringing
infinite honor to the character of God, as moral Governor, and so infinite
good to his moral kingdom. In this affair God the Father has received more in
value, by the righteousness of his Son, than he could have received by the
perfect service of angels, had they never sinned, or by inflicting the penalty
of the law on devils and all mankind, for sin, to all eternity. -- His
benevolence, his wisdom, his law, his justice, his truth, and all his
perfections are manifested, and proved in a more illustrious manner. -- So that
God will lose nothing in the honor of his character, law or government, by the
sin of angels or men -- or by dispensing pardons freely to sinners through the
merit and righteousness of his Son.

But, the Son of God not only redeems his chosen people, by paying the price of
their ransom to God; but, by the power of those truths, manifested by his
cross, accompanied with the influences of his spirit, he redeems them from the
power of sin, and tyranny of satan.

III. We proceed to consider, the honors conferred on our Redeemer, as the
reward of his merit. -- And all the honors and glory conferred on Christ, as
the reward of his merit, are comprehended in these words, in our text, "To take
the book, and to open the seals thereof." God the Father, has delivered the
kingdom of the universe into his power, "the Father judges no man; but has
committed all judgment unto the Son," etc And that he may be able to govern,
and dispose all things according to the divide plan, formed from eternity, in
the divine mind, the book of God's eternal decrees, containing his whole plan
of government, all the counsels of infinite wisdom, and all divine truth, are
delivered into his hand, from the right hand of God the Father; and he has
undertaken to reveal and execute all these decrees. For God in forming his
decrees produces no effects; creates no worlds, nor creatures, nor things
whatever: these things are produced not in forming decrees in eternity, but in
executing them in time. For, forming decrees implies no causality in them. And
this mediatorial kingdom of Christ extends to all parts of the universe, that
he may manage them all, so as to advance his own glory, as moral Governor, and
promote the good of his friends, and baffle and overwhelm all opposition. And
the holy spirit, as the fruit of his infinite merit, is appointed the great
agent in his kingdom of grace, to reveal his will, and to operate with divine
truth, to carry his purposes into execution. All the holy angels are
ministering spirits in his kingdom, to execute his orders in every part of his
vast empire. And the inanimate world is subjected to him; he causes the sun to
shine, the rain to fall, and the earth to yield her increase, to furnish
provision for the subjects of his kingdom in this world; and all times and
seasons are at his control. And the moral government of the universe is
committed to him; he overrules all the wicked designs of devils to promote his
own glory, and the good of his friends; though he does not form or create any
of their wicked designs. The government and disposal of the whole world of
mankind, as moral agents, are committed to him, as a reward of his merit; and
he will have the honor to dispose of them all according to his pleasure, so as
to bring glory to his name. And the scepter of his kingdom, by which he rules
moral agents, is truth -- as he himself declares. "For this end was I born, and
for this cause came I into the world, to be a witness to the truth -- and all
that are of the truth hear my voice." By the truth, accompanied with the holy
spirit, he enlightens, convinces and converts some, and makes them holy and
happy. And by the manifestation of the same truth, attended with the holy
spirit, he hardens and torments others to all eternity.

And in order to spread abroad the truth, and communicate the speculative
knowledge of it, he employs some of the children of men, as the ministers of
his word and ordinances, and these are workers together with him. And all among
the children of men, that are delivered from the kingdom of darkness and
translated into the kingdom of his grace, shall be accounted to him for sons,
and daughters -- and of these he shall have a numerous offspring at last to
present before the throne with exceeding joy.

And all those multitudes among the children of men, who continue impenitent,
and in unbelief, and in rebellion to his government, and enemies to his true
character, belong to him as a reward of his merit, as much as his friends; he
has purchased these, and will be glorified in them -- "Ask of me (says God the
Father) and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shall break them with a
rod of iron; thou shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel." Psalm. ii.
8. So that the damnation of all may be as fully proved from the infinite merit
of Christ with the Father, as the salvation of all. The Son of God, by a merit
of condignity, has purchased the honor of damning his enemies, as much as he
has of saving his friends. It will be a great honor to Christ, at the last
day, to pass the sentence of condemnation on wicked men, and devils; and say,
"Go, ye cursed into everlasting fire." And to execute it, by saying. "Those my
enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and
slay them before me." And when the smoke of their torments shall ascend up for
ever and ever, all the heavenly host will ascribe glory to him, the glory of
his vindictive justice. So that none of the merit of Christ will be lost by the
damnation of sinners; nor will Christ by this means lose any of his reward.

And Jesus Christ received great honor as a reward of his merit, when he arose
from the dead. In his resurrection he triumphed over death, and all the powers
of earth and hell, and all the enemies of his people; and entered into his
kingdom. In raising Christ from the dead God set to his seal, that he had
executed faithfully, the important commission he had received.

And Jesus Christ in his ascension into heaven was distinguished with signal
honors. Angels appeared, who proclaimed his ascent; and that in the same
manner he should descend again to judgment. See Psalm. lxviii. 17.18.19.

And his reception into heaven, as a mighty conqueror, is represented in lofty
expressions, Psalm. xxiv. 7.

And when he sat down on his Father's right hand in heaven, and was glorified
with the same glory he had with his Father before the world was, he received
great honor, as a reward of his merit. In heaven he received the worship and
adoration of all the heavenly inhabitants, saying, "Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to take the book, and open the seals thereof," etc. "Blessing and honor
and glory and power and salvation be to him that sits on the throne, and
unto the Lamb, for ever and ever."

In heaven he appears as the advocate of his people; showing the wounds that he
has received in his Father's cause, but not from his Father's hand, but from
the hands of his enemies. And by virtue of his merit he makes prevalent
intercession for all that come to God by him. And he there reigns in majesty
and glory, as King of kings; vested with universal rule in the kingdom of
nature, providence and grace. By his spirit and truth he rides in the chariot
of his gospel conquering and to conquer; making his omnipotent power appear in
the dreadful famines, pestilence, wars and earthquakes; and all the judgments
he sends on the inhabitants of the earth; to draw their attention to the truth.
And he will reign till he has destroyed the kingdom and power of darkness, by
the efficacy of his word, and spirit of truth. And instead of error and
wickedness, he will cause truth and righteousness to prevail; "Till the
kingdom, and the greatness of the kingdom and dominion under the whole heavens
shall be given to the saints of the most high God." And the latter day glory of
the church shall fill the whole earth -- and he shall become king of nations,
and he shall reign a thousand years.

Thus has God highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every
name.

And in a little time he shall descend from heaven to judge the universe in
righteousness. He shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's glory; and
all his holy angels with him. And he shall have the honor to raise the dead;
which shall all hear his voice, and come forth. And then shall he sit on the
throne of his glory, and all nations shall be gathered before his august
tribunal. And he shall declare the righteous judgment of God. And men, angels
and devils shall receive their final doom from the sentence of his mouth:
Either "Come ye blessed," or "Go ye cursed." And when all the solemnities of
that awful day shall be over, and each one shall receive his final and
irreversible award -- The wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment; but
the righteous into life eternal. And these shall attend their ascending Judge
into the highest heavens; where they shall live and reign with him, in his
everlasting kingdom; seated on thrones of glory; with never fading crowns of
victory on their heads; in joy and triumph, and happiness for ever and ever.
And all this honor of passing the sentence of condemnation, and inflicting
punishment on his enemies, and pronouncing the sentence of justification, and
conferring rewards on his friends, has the Son of God obtained by the merit of
his blood.

IMPROVEMENT.
First. WE may learn from what has been said, in what the atonement and
satisfaction of Christ consists. Some have supposed that it consisted only in
Christ's obedience to the moral law. in human nature: and they support it by
what the apostle affirms, Romans v. 19. "For as by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners, so by the obedience of one many shall be made righteous."
And his sufferings (say they) were not designed to make satisfaction, but only
to express the strength of his obedience in the most trying circumstances.
Others hold that the satisfaction and merit of Christ consisted principally, if
not entirely, in his suffering the individual penalty or curse, threatened to
the sinner, in the moral law inflicted on him, by the immediate hand, decree or
command of God the Father; and as his human nature was in union with the
divine, and a God of infinite power and perfections inflicted the curse or
penalty, this rendered his sufferings infinitely meritorious, and so sufficient
to make satisfaction and atonement for sin.

But now, is it not evident that the mere obedience of an holy being to the
moral law, cannot make satisfaction or avail for the remission of one sin:
since without suffering or shedding of blood there is no remission? It was by
the virtue of the sacrifice and death of the Son of God, in our room and stead,
that he made satisfaction and atonement. And although Christ did yield a
perfect and sinless obedience to the moral law in human nature, yet, his
merits, by which he made atonement, did not consist in his obedience to the
moral law. And the curse which Christ was made, was not the individual curse or
penalty threatened to the sinner in the moral law; but the substitute of it: as
has been shown; nor was it inflicted by the hand, decree or command of his
Father; but by his enemies, in exercise of enmity to his divine character. Had
God the Father inflicted the curse, with his own hand, on the human nature of
Christ thousands of ages, this would not have rendered his sufferings infinite;
for the infinite dignity, power, and perfections of the inflictor cannot make
the sufferings of a creature infinite, nor in any wise increase the merit of
them; but really diminishes it. And the divine character could not suffer by
the hand of the Father. But all these difficulties vanish, when we consider,
that neither the obedience, or sufferings of Christ, by which he made atonement
and satisfaction for sin, and merited honor for himself and benefits for men,
were required of him in the moral law, but in the mediatorial law, or covenant
of redemption; which contained those commands of God, to which he was subject,
only as he was our mediator and surety. As the obedience of the first Adam,
wherein his righteousness would have consisted, if he had stood, was not
obedience to the moral law -- but to a plain positive command, to abstain from
the tree of knowledge of good and evil; which was not a command contained in
the moral law, but in a special covenant or law, to which Adam was subject, as
the moral head and surety of all mankind; so the obedience of the second Adam,
in which his righteousness consists, lies not in his obedience to the moral
law, to which he was subject merely as a man; but to that special law or
covenant of redemption, to which he was subject in his office, as mediator and
surety for man. And when the apostle says (as in the before cited Romans v. 19.)
"For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one many shall be made righteous." Neither the disobedience of Adam, or the
obedience of Christ, respect the moral law, but these special covenants or laws
to which they were subject as public heads, and sureties. And to this law or
covenant of redemption, and not to the moral law, the Psalmist has respect,
Psalm xl. 6, etc, "Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire; my ear have
thou opened: burnt offering and sin offering have thou not required. Then said
I, lo, I come: in the volume of the book it is written of me: I delight to do
thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart."

In this law or covenant of redemption the Father gave his Son commands to
teach such doctrine, to preach the gospel, to work such miracles, to call such
disciples, to appoint such ordinances, and go through such humiliation,
abasement and sufferings, and at last to lay down his life; and he did all
these things in obedience to the commands he had received of his Father; not in
the moral law, but in the covenant of redemption. To his obedience to this
mediatorial law belongs his going through his last sufferings, beginning with
his agony in the garden, and ending with his resurrection from the dead. And he
performed his obedience to this covenant, freely, perfectly and universally,
and under the greatest trials and temptations, and in the exercise of infinite
love to God, and the cause of truth and righteousness, and benevolence to
mankind. And his obedience and sufferings, are not to be considered as being
performed or endured by him, merely in human nature, but as God the Son, in his
divine character as heir of the universe. It was a person of infinite dignity
that obeyed and suffered in his divine character -- and this rendered his
obedience and sufferings infinitely meritorious. Not that he suffered in his
divine nature or essence, but in his divine character, as Heir of the kingdom.
In all that reproach and ignominy cast on his divine character by devils, and
wicked men he suffered. Had he not suffered in his divine character, his
sufferings or sacrifice, would not have been infinite or sufficient to make
satisfaction for one sin, or have answered the purposes of redemption. And the
infinite virtue of his obedience consisted in its being yielded to the covenant
of redemption, as a divine person -- He, as God-man in the exercise of infinite
love to God became obedient unto death. And in this obedience there was
infinite virtue and merit. And as his duty and work, so his reward was
assigned, and ascertained; not in the moral law, but in the covenant of
redemption. And unless we attend to this distinction between the law of
mediation, and the moral law, and the curse threatened to the sinner, and the
curse which Christ was made, we cannot have a clear idea how Christ paid the
price of our redemption to God by his blood. But here we can see how the
satisfaction of Christ frees believers from misery, as it pays their debt
contracted by sin; and how the merit of Christ by its intrinsic value, and by
the agreement between the Father and the Son, in the covenant of redemption,
procures a title to happiness, for all that believe in him. And here we may see
the impropriety of applying the term passive to any part of the obedience of
Christ; since it was the obedience of God the Son to the covenant of redemption.

Secondly. We may infer, from what has been said, that the merit of Christ the
Son of God, is a merit of condignity. By a merit of condignity I understand, a
merit that is equal in value to the reward. And we have heard what the reward
is, which God the Father has bestowed on the Son; and which he promised to
him, not in the moral law, but in the covenant of redemption. And we have heard
in what his merit consists. And let any one judge, if the merit of the Son of
God, considering the dignity of his person, as being equal with God the Father,
and independent on his will or act for his existence or happiness, and under no
obligation from without himself, to obey, antecedent to his own voluntary
consent to the covenant of redemption, into which he entered with his Father.
And considering the great honor he brought to God, and the good to his moral
kingdom, which must be of infinite value, and be esteemed so by God from
eternity.

And considering the means and methods by which he procured this honor, and
obtained this good; even by his infinite humiliation, arduous services and
great sufferings; in sacrificing his liberty, life and divine glory; in being
made a victim and sacrifice, in the devil's kingdom, in order to declare God's
righteousness, and execute judgment on God's enemies, and decide the moral
controversy, and put an end to the dreadful war; and advance God's glory, and
promote the peace, prosperity and happiness of his kingdom to an infinite
degree: which great ends could by no other person or means be effected. I say,
let any one judge, if this merit of the Son, is not equal to all the honors
the Son has received from God the Father for himself, and all the benefits men
receive from God through him. And if so, then his merit is a proper merit of
condignity; and whatever he has purchased of the Father, he has purchased by
an equivalent.

But this does not imply that God has received any new adition to his honor
or felicity, or has any increase of knowledge. For these were all comprehended
in his infinite understanding, and composed a part of his glory and happiness,
in eternity, and the value was then received.

Nor does this imply that God is under any obligation to save all mankind. For,
the salvation of mankind does not depend upon the condignity or sufficiency of
the merit of the Son of God, but upon the agreement made between the Father and
the Son, in the covenant of redemption, what his particular reward should be.
The merit is sufficient for, and equivalent to the salvation of all; for it is
of infinite value to God the Father, otherwise it would not have been
sufficient for the salvation of one. But God the Father did not see cause to
assign the salvation of all to him as his reward, in the covenant of
redemption. God might have promised him the salvation of all as his reward, if
he had seen it to be consistent with his wisdom, and his benevolence to his
moral kingdom; but we are assured he has not; and that all will not eventually
be saved; for all will not repent, and believe in Christ; and he that believes
not shall be damned. God has promised him the free pardon, justification and
salvation of all that shall believe on him, through his word acompanied by his
spirit of truth; and this shall be a numerous offspring which he shall present
at last, before the throne, with exceeding joy; saying, "Here am I, and the
children thou have given me." But all will not believe in Christ -- but
multitudes will remain enemies to him, and have to appear at his left hand, in
the retinue of satan, and hear the dreadful sentence from his mouth, "Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." And they
will feel the execution of this dreadful sentence, when Christ shall say,
"Those my enemies that would not that I should reign over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me." And to pass this sentence and to execute it on
his enemies, will be as real a part of the reward of Christ's merit of
condignity, as to pass the sentence of absolution and justification, and bestow
rewards upon his friends. But Christ will be considered as having paid the
price of the redemption of all the heirs of glory, by a proper merit of
condignity; and to have purchased their happiness by an equivalent: and they
will to all eternity ascribe the glory of their redemption to the price and
power of his blood, as the Lamb slain. Neither does the condignity of Christ's
merit detract any thing from the freeness of divine grace, in the pardon and
justification of the sinner. Plenary satisfaction and free pardon are perfectly
consistent on this plan. For, though what Christ has done to make atonement
secures the honor of God, the authority of the law, and the dignity and vigor
of government, and consequently the peace, prosperity and happiness of his
kingdom, in the salvation of all that believe in Jesus; yet the atonement and
satisfaction made by Christ, and repentance of sin, and faith in his blood, do
not alter the personal character of the sinner; so as to cause him to cease to
be a sinner, or a debtor to divine justice, or to deserve punishment, or give
the sinner any claim to pardon, upon the score of justice. Even Christ himself
could lay claim to the pardon and justification of the sinner, notwithstanding
the condignity of his merit, only upon the foundation of the stipulation or
promise made to him by the Father, in the covenant of redemption; were it not
for that promise and agreement, God the Son could lay no claim to that
particular favor as his reward; though his merit was sufficient to purchase it
-- yet God in his infinite wisdom, and free and sovereign grace must determine
that this, shall be his reward. And it was infinite love, unpurchased, unmoved
love (by any thing without himself) that determined God the Father to bestow
these as a reward upon his Son. The merit of the Son laid him under no
obligation to make this distinction. He might have sent his Son (as his reward)
to condemn the whole world; they all deserved it; but it was free and sovereign
grace that prevented it.

And the believer in Jesus can lay no claim upon the score of justice. The
merit of Christ, and the repentance, faith and love and good works of the
believer, do not cause him to cease to be a sinner; or entitle him to the merit
or righteousness of Christ, on account of any moral goodness there is in them.
The believer does not by these earn or merit any favor, but by faith he lays
hold on the promise, and receives the atonement; and all the benefits of
Christ's purchase. And were it not for the free promise the believer must still
remain in a state of guilt and condemnation. But the believer can lay claim to
these promises of the covenant of grace. But the merit of the believer, who is
united to Christ by faith, is only a merit of congruity, i. e. a suitableness
to receive favors from a righteous God. And God can as consistently justify a
believer in Christ, as he can Gabriel. But though a creature may have a merit
of congruity, yet no creature can have a merit of condignity with respect to
God; because he is infinitely indebted to him, for his being, etc. And
therefore no creature could make atonement for sin, or purchase any favor of
God, for himself or any other. Adam in innocence had, and all the holy angels
in heaven now have, a merit of congruity. And could God have pardoned sin out
of respect to the merit of congruity, or out of respect to the tried virtue of
one who was under obligation from justice, or any thing from without himself,
antecedent to his own consent to obey; then there would have been no need of a
person of infinite dignity, coequal, co-essential and coeternal with God the
Father, to undertake this work. Because an holy creature by his obedience and
sufferings might have accomplished it with the assistance of the Deity. And to
deny the condignity of the merit of Christ, is in effect to deny his divinity,
and equality with the Father. For, if one that had only a merit of congruity
would have answered, to substitute one that had a merit of condignity was not
wise; because it supposes a needless expense of merit. The wisdom of
substituting a person of infinite dignity, consists in the necessity of it. But
had not the Mediator been a person of infinite and divine dignity, and his
merit a merit of condignity with God, no atonement or satisfaction could have
been made by his obedience and sufferings; out of respect to which God could
have pardoned one sin, consistent with his righteousness, as moral Governor.
And hence infinite wisdom and benevolence is displayed in this substitution.
"When he looked, there was none to help, -- none to uphold; therefore his own
arm brought salvation unto him!" See Isa. lxiii. 5. But God in pardoning the
sinner, out of respect to the merit of Christ, acts as freely as if no
atonement had been made; since the atonement made by Christ or the condignity
of the merit, laid God under no obligation to discharge one sinner from his
debt to justice, antecedent to stipulation: nor in the least alter the personal
character of the sinner. Nor can God, consistent: with his justice, pardon,
justify or save one sinner on account of the infinite merit of Christ, 'till
the sinner believes in Jesus; and then he treats him infinitely more
favorably than his personal character deserves. But, the condignity of
Christ's merit has opened a way for the consistent exercise of this free grace
to the sinner -- but laid God under no obligation to exercise it to any one.

And I would here observe the distinction between free and sovereign grace.

UNCONDITIONAL FAVORS, to which the sinner can lay no claim on the score of
justice, or by any promise of God made to him, are bestowed on him in the
exercise of God's sovereign grace. Such are election, the gift of Christ, the
revelation of the gospel; and the gift of the Holy Spirit in its internal
influences, and all the means of grace, and the production of regeneration,
conviction, repentance, faith and love in the soul; these are all unconditional
favors; and bestowed on sinners in the exercise of sovereign grace, without
respect to any moral qualification in them, as deserving these favors. But
when the sinner by believing in Christ, has complied with the condition of the
covenant of grace, to which the promise is made -- pardon, justification and
eternal life, may be said to be bestowed in the exercise of free grace, more
properly than sovereign grace. For the believer in Christ has a right humbly
to lay claim to the promise, and to plead the justice and faithfulness of God,
for the fulfillment of it. See 1 John i. 9. "If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness," i. e. If with penitent believing hearts we confess our sins,
God has obliged himself in covenant to pardon, justify, sanctify and save us.

Thirdly. We may learn how the substitution of the Son of God, and his
vicarious sufferings, and the imputation of his merit or righteousness to
penitent, believing sinners, for their pardon, justification and eternal
salvation are consistent with reason and justice. Had God the Father, with his
Son's consent substituted him to bear the individual penalty or punishment
threatened to the sinner, in the moral law, and had the Father inflicted this
penalty on his Son with his own hand, I do not see how this would have been
consistent with reason or justice, or answered any ends in making atonement or
satisfaction. I do not see how it could be any satisfaction to an infinitely
wise and holy God to inflict any sufferings on his innocent, holy and
infinitely glorious Son, with his own hard or immediate command. And indeed for
God to reproach the divine character of his Son as the Heir of the kingdom,
would have been as impossible as for God to deny himself. And if God had
crucified his Son, how could sinners he told with truth or propriety, "Ye have
taken and with wicked hands have crucified and slain the Prince of life? repent
therefore," etc. As in acts ii. 37. And how would his being made a sacrifice
for sin, have condemned sin, in devils and wicked men; as pregnant with mortal
enmity to God's character and kingdom? And how did he endure the contradiction
of sinners against himself?

But consider God the Son as being under the covenant of redemption, as
distinct from the moral law, and being substituted by the Father and his own
consent to become a servant, to do and suffer what should fulfill the conditions
of that covenant, and answer its requirements, in deciding this war; and here
we shall see the agency of God the Father -- the agency of God the Son -- and
the distinct agency of the enemies of truth and righteousness, in their proper
light and importance. In this affair God the Father expresses his infinite
benevolence in delivering up his only begotten, i. e. co-essential, infinitely
dear, transcendently glorious, and divinely excellent Son from his bosom, and
setting him forth to be a propitiation for sin. God the Son displays his
infinite grace and love in offering up himself, to become a victim and
sacrifice, in the devil's kingdom. The enemies of truth and righteousness
manifest their mortal enmity to God's character, as moral Governor, and the
interest of his kingdom, and the infinite evil of sin, in its nature and
tendency, in conquering and sacrificing the Son of God, and depriving him of
his liberty, life and divine glory, as the Heir of the kingdom. God the Father
declares his inflexible justice, in his insisting on an infinite satisfaction,
before he pardons one sinner. God the Son makes this satisfaction, by declaring
God's righteousness, and executing judgment on his enemies; and laying a
foundation for the conviction and conversion of sinners, and the destruction of
satan's kingdom; and the increasing the moral kingdom of God in glory and
felicity, to an infinite degree, by occasion of sin. And every one from among
the children of men that believes in Jesus, and receives by faith and love the
atonement he has made, may, out of respect to his merit, be pardoned,
justified, and saved in the exercise of God's free and sovereign grace,
consistent with his justice, and to the honor of his character, law and
government. And though the curse that Christ was made for us, was not the
individual curse threatened to the sinner, in the moral law, nor was it
inflicted on him by the hand or command of his Father, yet, considering the
dignity of his person, and the greatness of his humiliation in submitting to be
conquered and slain, in such an ignominious manner, on the cross, and in having
his divine character reproached, and his divine glory eclipsed, by the insults
of his own sinful creatures, that were enemies to truth and righteousness; the
curse Christ was made, and the sufferings he endured were greater than the
curse threatened to the sinner in the moral law; and more than equivalent in
supporting the rights of government, and making atonement and satisfaction for
sin. For, by this means God's justice appears inflexible and his truth
inviolable, when his justifies the sinner that believes in Jesus. And should
any enquire, How does the infinite evil of sin appear, in Christ's enemies
conquering and slaying him, since his crucifiers did it through ignorance; they
did not know he was the Lord of glory -- but took him to be an imposter! how
then does their enmity in putting him to death appear to be aimed against his
divine character as Heir of the kingdom? To this I answer, That it is probable
that many that had an immediate hand in his crucifixion, did not believe him to
be the true Messiah, and Savior of the world; if they had they would have
committed the unpardonable sin in crucifying him. And therefore the Apostle
tells them, "Ye did it ignorantly, as did also your rulers; repent therefore,"
etc. but though their ignorance alleviated their guilt, yet it did not excuse
them, because they had sufficient means of knowledge, but their love of
darkness and wickedness prevented their attending to these means; and in this
consisted their condemnation. But though the immediate crucifers of Christ, did
not know he was the true Messiah and Lord of glory, yet the devils knew it. "We
know thee, who thou art, the holy one of God." And this is the language of the
devil, as the prince of darkness, and god of this world; and the languege of
his subjects and agents. "This is the Heir, come and let us kill him, and seize
on the inheritance." And all Christ's crucifers were under the influence of the
error and temper of the devil. And if the sin of devils contains in it mortal
enmity to God's character, as moral Governor, and so is an infinite evil,
pregnant with infinite mischief to being in general, the sin of men is the
same. And if the sin of devils is condemned by the cross of Christ as an
infinite evil, and so deserving of an infinite or endless punishment, then the
sin of all mankind stands equally condemned; notwithstanding any deficiency of
speculative knowledge or natural powers. And one great reason of Christ's being
made a sacrifice for sin, was thus to condemn sin in devils, and wicked men,
and so destroy the power of satan, over the hearts of men, and destroy him in a
moral sense.

Fourthly. We may infer, from what has been said, that the gospel must be of
divine original.

Prophecies, and miracles afford us very strong and convincing proofs of this
truth, and ought to bear great weight upon the mind. The prophecies, seem to be
rather descriptions, and histories of past transactions than predictions of
future events; and whoever attends to them properly, must be convinced that
they are derived from supernatural inspiration. The miracles recorded in the
New Testament were certainly a convincing proof to those that saw them, of the
divine mission of Christ, and his Apostles; and come as well attested to us, as
any other historical facts: as they were seen of numbers, and wrought on so
great and wonderful an occasion. For it is in no wise incredible, that a
supernatural revelation should be foretold, and enforced by supernatural means.
And from this book, may be collected a system of morality or eithicks, which
exceeds all others for its purity and perfection; and to which the wisest
philosophers, of preceding ages, can make no pretentions. All its moral
precepts are founded in reason -- tend to improve our natures, and are
conducive to the happiness of mankind. -- Read the decalogue -- And what other
religion, besides the Christian, ever carried the moral virtues of piety to
God, benevolence to men, justice, charity, temperance and sobriety to so high a
degree of purity and perfection; and so severely prohibited the commission of
the contrary vices, which tend to debase our natures, and by mutual injuries,
introduce universal disorder; and consequently universal misery?

What other religion ever required of its votaries that humility and poorness
of spirit, that forgiveness of injuries and charity to all men, as the best
expedient to prepare them for the kingdom of heaven! -- Read our blessed
Savior's sermon on the mount, and hear him say, "Blessed are the poor in
spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. -- Ye have heard that it has been
said, Thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy: But I say unto you,
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you." A new
commandment give I unto you (says our blessed Lord) that ye love one another,
as I have loved you, by this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, if
ye have love one to another." And did he not speak as never man spoke? And read
the Apostle Paul's admirable description of charity; "Charity suffers long
and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself; is not puffed
up; does not behave itself unseemly; seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked; thinks no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the
truth; bears all things; hops all things; endures all things.

But the prophecies and miracles contained in the scriptures, and the
excellency and purity of the morals therein prescribed, though they are very
weighty and good arguments, and demand our most serious attention and
admiration, yet they are by no means the only, or even the principal proofs of
their divine origin. But, the principal and most conclusive evidences of the
divine origin of the gospel, are the doctrines peculiar to divine revelation;
such as the trinity of persons or agents in the divine essence -- the apostasy
of angels and man. The grand contest that commenced upon this apostasy between
heaven and hell, concerning the truth and righteousness of God's character as
moral Governor, and how this concontroversy has been carried on from age to
age; and how it was decided by God the Son upon the cross; and his resurrection
from the dead; the appointment of the eternal Logos to engage in this
controversy, when it was impossible for any other to decide it. The covenant of
redemption, into which he entered with the Father, and the terms of that
covenant. The incarnation of the Son of God, his amazing humiliation, arduous
services and great sufferings; when he was made a victim and sacrifice in the
devils kingdom; by which means he declared the truth and righteousness of God's
character as moral Governor, and so made atonement, and paid the price of
man's redemption, and opened a way for God to justify him that believes in
Jesus, consistent with his justice; and by the same means laid a foundation
for the conviction and conversion of sinners, and to condemn sin as an infinite
evil, pregnant with infinite mischief to God's character and government -- and
destroy satan in a moral sense, and finally ruin his kingdom and dominion over
the hearts of men, and prepare the way for the manifestation of the righteous
judgment of God at the last great day. And all that is required of sinners in
order to their being interested in all the precious benefits of his purchase is
comprehended in faith, which is a self emptying, Christ magnifying and God
exalting grace: which brings nothing but receives all of free and sovereign
grace. In exercise of faith in the Mediator, the sinner gives up all created
wisdom, and depends only upon divine revelation for direction. Gives up all
righteousness of his own; and depends on the merit of Christ for righteousness
and life, grace and glory. Gives up self government, and depends on Christ to
rule in and reign over him, and expects to overcome his enemies only by the
blood of the Lamb, and the testimony he holds. -- Now these are things that no
created benevolence could ever conceive, no created wisdom ever devise, or
created power accomplish; and do as fully prove the divine origin of the holy
scripture, as the marks of infinite wisdom, power and goodness manifested in
the works of creation, do that this world is of divine original; and could not
be planned or made by any creature: because no created wisdom or power is equal
to such a production.

The devil never invented this plan of salvation; for it is subversive of his
kingdom and interest. It is inconsistent with the character of any good
creature to put such a cheat upon mankind (if he was able) as to attribute that
to God, of which he himself was the author. But no created being was able to
lay out such a plan, thus to display the perfections of God by the occasion of
sin; and even render them more illustrious, than if sin had never entertered
into his kingdom; and thus to bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil!
bring righteousness out of sin, and life out of death! to conquer by being
conquered, and slay his enemies by being slain by them! and by being
sacrificed, to enter into his kingdom! at one and the same time to appear as a
lamb, and a lion! a victim and a conqueror!

This plan of salvation has never been corrupted; if it had, it never could
have been rectified, and appear as it now does, in its divine glory and
perfection! Let any rational infidel read and understand the gospel, and he
will be obliged to confess, that not one doctrine it contains is repugnant to
reason, but the whole is harmonious and consistent.

Infidels impute the mistaken notions of fallible men, and their corrupt
explanations of the scriptures, to the scriptures themselves; and then villify
and reproach the scriptures, as containing such unreasonable doctrines; which
is very unfair: It would be much more rational, if they would first study the
scriptures, and well understand them, and the doctrines they contain, before
they reject and villify them.

Fifthly, Let all be exhorted and prevailed upon to receive the atonement, and
be reconciled to God immediately. God the Father has manifested his infinite
benevolence to sinners, and his willingness to be reconciled to them, and has
opened a way for reconciliation, consistent with his righteousness, by sending
his Son to die.

The Son has discovered his infinite love and grace to sinners, and his
interest in the court of heaven, by making a complete atonement and
satisfaction; so that the honor of his Father's law and government may be
supported, and advanced, in the salvation of all that will receive the
atonement. God the Father has already received the atonement, and set to his
seal, that he has approved all that his Son has done and suffered, as our
Mediator and Surety. He has raised him from the dead, and declared with a
voice from heaven, that Christ is his beloved Son in whom he is well pleased;
and commanded all to hear him and believe in him.

And all that remains to complete the union is, that you give your hearts to
Christ, and cordially receive Him as your Mediator, renouncing all merit or
righteousness in yourself, and owning the sentence of the law just, and
relinquish the kingdom of satan, and become Christ's friend, and lay hold on
his covenant; and all that he has done and suffered shall be made over to you
for your everlasting advantage. These benefits cost the Father dear, and the
Son dear; but they will cost you nothing: you may freely receive them, and they
will become yours without money and without price: they are as free and
unmeritted as to you, as if no atonement had been made: God requires no good
desert in you, previous to your receiving his Son.

And will you not heartily approve, and fall in with this way of salvation,
which God in infinite love and wisdom has provided for sinners? Will you not
give your hearts to Christ, and declare him to be your beloved Savior, in whom
you are well pleased? Do not all created and uncreated glories center in him?
If you reject the atonement, do you think you can devise some wiser, easier and
better way of salvation than this? or that any other prince or savior has a
better claim to your hearts?

Sixthly, We learn how impossible it is, that he who neglects this salvation,
and finally rejects Christ Jesus, should escape the eternal wrath and vengeance
of God. It is inconsistent with the righteousness of God, as moral Governor of
the universe, that any such should escape. The righteousness of God (as we have
observed) consists in his benevolence, justice and truth; and should he violate
either of these he would cease to be righteous; and his government must fall
into contempt among his subjects, and tend to annihilation. And this would
introduce confusion and ruin into his moral kingdom. And if God should pardon
one sin till adequate satisfaction be first made, he must violate his
righteousness; for he has threatened death to every sin: "The soul that sins
shall die;" and his truth stands engaged for the execution of this threatening;
and his truth must appear inviolable: and his justice, as well as his truth,
demands that this threatening be executed; and this must appear inflexible; for
sin, as it is committed against God, and is pregnant with mortal enmity to his
character, as moral Governor, and tends to dethrone him and ruin his kingdom,
deserves an infinite or endless punishment; and to remit this penalty in one
instance of disobedience, is inconsistent with inflexible justice. And infinite
benevolence to his moral kingdom, and the best good of all the moral subjects
of it, demands that the rights of moral government be supported: for the whole
of the peace and happiness of a kingdom depends upon the righteousness of the
character, law and government of the Supreme Ruler. He must appear the same in
execution that he is in legislation, or his government will fall into contempt
among his subject. And it was this that rendered an infinite atonement or
satisfaction necessary, in order to open a way for God to exercise his mercy to
sinners, consistently with his justice. Had not God set forth his Son to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, he could
not have justified one sinner consistently with his justice. But since Christ
has taken our law place, so as to make satisfaction for our sins, God can
justify the greatest sinner that by faith in Jesus Christ receives the
atonement which he has made, as consistently as he can the most holy angel in
heaven. And God's insisting on such an infinite satisfaction being made, and
the sinner's being interested in it, before he pardons him, declares that sin
is an infinite evil in God's esteem; and that every sinner that is not
interested by faith, in the satisfaction which his Son has made, must suffer
an infinite or endless punishment: for there is no way far the truth and
justice of God in the threatening to be vindicated, and the rights of
government to be supported, but one of these two -- an infinite satisfaction,
or an endless punishment. And there was no being in the universe that could
make this infinite satisfaction but God the Son; and it cost him his liberty,
life and divine glory; which was an infinite sacrifice. And this was the only
remedy. And the sinner can receive no benefit from the infinite satisfaction
Christ has made, any way but by being united to him, and one with him in a
covenant relation. The rights of government must be supported by inflicting on
all others a punishment adequate to their crime. There is no other name or way
in which we can be saved but by Jesus Christ; and if we neglect this way, and
reject this Savior, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. And in
neglecting this way, we offer the greatest affront to God, who has in infinite
mercy provided this Savior for us! -- What a strange punishment, then, will be
inflicted on them who despise and reject God's own eternal Son; turn a deaf ear
to his gospel, and stifle and grieve his spirit! Verily, though he that
believes on him is not condemned, yet he that believes not is condemned
already, because he has not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of
God. Unbelief, or rejecting Christ, is the formal cause of the sinner's
damnation: It is that sin which binds the guilt of all his other sins upon him,
and consigns him over to damnation. This sin not only procures damnation, but
no damnation like it. Wherefore we may justly conclude, that whosoever finally
neglects or rejects Christ and the common salvation purchased and offered by
him to sinners, shall in no wise escape the eternal wrath and vengeance of God.

Lastly, Let all unregenerate, christless sinners, be exhorted, directed and
prevailed upon, to attend to the gospel, and hear and understand the saving
truths therein contained, and receive them by faith and love, as the only means
of being made partakers of this salvation.

I have endeavored to set before you, your own true character, as you are
sinners in satan's kingdom and interest, in a state of enmity and rebellion to
God, justly condemned to eternal misery; helpless and hopeless in yourselves;
destitute of all righteousness: dead in law, and spiritually dead; and entirely
in the hands of a sovereign God.

I have represented to you the character of God, as he is infinite in his
benevolence, and yet inflexible in his justice, and his truth is inviolable;
and he will in no wise clear the guilty. And I have prohibited to you the
character of Jesus Christ, as he is the true Messiah and the only Savior of
the world. And I have opened unto you the only method by which you can be
saved; the only method that can afford the least gleam of hope to a convinced
perishing sinner. And this salvation is brought to your very door by divine
revelation; and put in the power of every sinner that lives under the light of
the gospel, and has capacity and opportunity to hear and understand the truths
therein contained. God the Father has devised this method of salvation; God
the Son has purchased it; and God the Spirit has revealed it: and the
ministers of Christ exhibit and explain it to you. But neither God the Father,
Son, or Holy Spirit, or the ministers of Christ, can receive it for you. This
must be your own act, as free and distinct moral agents. And it is the wisest,
the easiest and best method, for the salvation of a sinner, that can be devised
or desired. And if you understand, and cordially fall in with this method, you
may be saved in a way that will bring honor to God's character, law and
government.

But you will say, How can we be entitled to this salvation, since we have no
righteousness of our own, and are dead in law? To this I answer, That the
righteousness of Christ is sufficient to justify you in the sight of God, and
free you from condemnation, and entitle you to this salvation. And you must
come to Christ and receive his righteousness by trusting in his merit alone by
faith. But you will say, How can we come to Christ, and by faith receive his
righteousness? You tell us we are spiritually dead, and have no power to change
our hearts. And our Savior tells us -- "No man can come to me except the
Father which sent me draw him." -- To this I answer, That though you are
spiritually dead, and have no power to change your hearts; and you cannot come
to Christ unless drawn by the Father; yet the spirit of God is able to
communicate spiritual life to your souls. And the Father is able to draw you to
Christ, by his word and spirit of truth. And what you have to do is to receive
this word and spirit of truth, by hearing and learning of the Father, by
attending to the truths of divine revelation. We have no need to make use of
any metaphysical distinction between natural and moral power, in order to
understand our Savior's meaning here, or to fasten blame upon the sinner that
is not drawn by the Father, and so cannot come to Christ. The blame of the
Scribes and Pharisees, is their not attending to divine revelation, and to the
instructions of our blessed Savior, and being taught of God; or hearing and
learning of the Father: their inordinate love of worldly honor, and strong
prejudices in favor of error, and conceit of their own knowledge and
righteousness, kept them in ignorance of the truth of their own character, the
character of God and his righteousness, and the character of Christ and the way
of salvation by him. And it was impossible this ignorance, error and prejudice
should be removed, and they brought to receive the truth in the love of it, and
give up their own righteousness, and depend upon the righteousness of Christ
alone for salvation, 'till they could be prevailed upon to hear and learn the
gospel, and understand the truths of it. They erred, not knowing the
scriptures: and it was not because God withheld any internal influences, or was
wanting as to the means of instruction; but it was because they would not hear
and learn the gospel, and receive the spirit in its vital influences, by
obtaining the knowledge of the truth. Had they heard and learned of the Father,
they would have received the spirit of truth; and the knowledge and spirit of
truth could soon have removed their ignorance, corrected their errors, humbled
their pride, mortified their self-righteous spirit, changed their hearts, and
drawn them to receive his truth and righteousness, and eternal life, through
faith in his name. But they perished for lack of knowledge, because they would
not hear and learn of God the Father -- See John vi. 44.45.

It is the excellency of the holy scriptures, above all other writings, that
they contain and reveal to us the knowledge of this salvation: and it is the
excellency of the gospel that it is the ministration of the spirit to sinners,
in its vital influences, by means of this knowledge. And it is this that causes
the power of divine truth to be so omnipotent, when it takes hold of the mind.
The words of Christ are spirit and life. And when divine truth enters the mind,
how soon are the clouds of ignorance, darkness and error dispelled from the
understanding? What divine light does it diffuse through the soul? It gives
life to the dead, and calls dead sinners from their tombs; and gives light to
the blind. This divine truth converts the soul -- makes wise the simple --
rejoices the heart -- enlightens the eyes, and endures forever. By receiving
the knowledge of divine truth, the poor will find gold tried in the fire, to
enrich them! The naked will find white raiment to clothe them! And the blind
find eye salve to restore their sight! The truths of the gospel are a feast
provided by infinite wisdom for hungry, perishing souls: and they are offered
to all; and if sinners obtain the knowledge of them, they may expect that the
spirit of truth will accompany them, and by his powerful influences, remove the
corruption of the principle of the heart. Regeneration is produced in the
principle of the soul, by an immediate, instantaneous, irresistible operation
of the spirit of God: but to obtain this knowledge, is a work of time and
pain^: and all such as arrive to a high degree of perfection in this knowledge,
free from errors and prejudices, before regeneration, will be full grown
christians, and able also to teach others, upon their first receiving this
saving change by the spirit of God. But such as have been regenerated forty
years, but have made but small seize in this orthodox knowledge of the
scriptures, will be but babes in Christ, and novices in religion. "And when for
the time they ought to have been teachers, they have need that one teach them
again, which be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such
as have need of milk and not of strong meat." See Heb. v. 12. But let their
seize in knowledge, before regeneration, be ever so high, unless they
attain that pure knowledge or understanding of the truths of the gospel, which
is essential to salvation, all their seize in knowledge will but serve to
increase and aggravate their damnation. And they will not be able to excuse
themselves by saying, that God withheld from them those influences of his
spirit that were needful to change their hearts. For unless they first obtain
this knowledge themselves, by attending to the gospel, they have no reason to
expect the spirit will ever change their heart. But the blame will lie at their
own door for neglecting these means and opportunities. And never think you have
obtained this knowledge 'till you find a love to the truth produced in your
hearts. And none may expect to receive the spirit in its vital influences, and
a love to the truth, but those who first obtain this knowledge, in the exercise
of their natural principles and powers. And this is called divine knowledge, as
it is obtained only from the light of divine revelation, and not from the light
of nature, by human reason. The moral law, and the light of nature, are a
ministration of death and condemnation; but the gospel is a ministration of the
spirit of life and of righteousness -- See 2 Cor. iii. And this causes the
gospel to exceed all other dispensations in glory. And it is by hearing the
gospel, so as to obtain the knowledge of it, that the holy spirit of life is
received by sinners -- See Gal. iii. 2. And faith comes by hearing the word of
God -- Romans x. 17. And all saving blessings are communicated to sinners through
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Through this knowledge
sinners receive the holy spirit, in its regenerating influences, and so are
made partakers of a divine nature, and escape the corruption of the world --
See 2 Pet. i. 2.3.4.

After sinners have obtained this knowledge of the truth, and so have received
the spirit of truth, in its vital influences, and are regenerated by the
spirit, they have the love of the truth; and this is called spiritual
knowledge, as it is produced in principle, immediately by the spirit of God, in
what is called passive regeneration, and it is a sense of heart, or perception
of the spiritual beauty and excellency of divine objects, that are formed first
in the understanding. But that knowledge, of which I am now speaking, is very
different from this spiritual knowledge: and it is called speculative or
doctrinal knowledge: and is not produced in the soul by the holy spirit in
regeneration, as spiritual knowledge is; but by objective light let into the
understanding, and it may be produced before the spirit is received; but
spiritual knowledge cannot. And it is this speculative, divine knowledge of the
saving truths contained in divine revelation, that the Psalmist esteemed above
gold, yea above much fine gold. And the wise man commends so highly, in his
writings under the name of wisdom and understanding, and exhorts sinners to
seek to obtain, with the greatest vigor and perseverance. This is that
knowledge which the Apostle Paul prefers to all the wisdom of this world, and
all the knowledge of the learned Grecian and Heathen princes and philosophers.
This is not the knowledge which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy ghost
teaches, not in regeneration, but in divine revelation.

This knowledge is called life eternal, by our blessed Savior. And wherever
this speculative divine knowledge is received into the soul, by says and love,
eternal life is already begun in that soul. And for the neglect of the means of
obtaining this knowledge, God had a controversy with his people; and for lack
of this knowledge his people were destroyed; and for rejecting it, God rejected
his priests, See Hos. iv. This was all speculative knowledge of the scriptures,
for these things could not be predicated of spiritual knowledge or love of the
truth. And though this knowledge and conviction of revealed truths, by means of
which the spirit is at first received in its vital influences, is not in itself
saving to the sinner that obtains it, 'till embraced by faith and love; but may
be rejected by enmity and unbelief, and so increase his damnation: yet it is
essential to the existence, exercise, and increase of every saving grace and
virtue. There can be no saving conviction, repentance, faith, love or spiritual
knowledge, or well grounded hope, or joy, or happiness in time, or in eternity
without it. Without it, sinners cannot move one step toward heaven; nor can
saints grow in grace, or increase in happiness any faster than they grow in
this knowledge.

And all who have capacities, means and opportunities, may obtain this divine
knowledge before they receive the spirit in its regenerating influences, or
have any saving change of heart, if they will but only apply their minds to the
study of the gospel, as of any other book, and make use of those means and
advantages for instruction, that all may enjoy, who live in a land of gospel
light. And it needs no very great capacities or great degrees of learning and
knowledge, in other things, in order to obtain this saving knowledge, if the
mind be but free from error and prejudice. Not many wise men after the flesh
obtained this hnowledge, in the days of our Savior and his apostles; because
they were so conceited of their own knowledge and goodness, and prejudiced in
favor of error, that they would not attend to divine instruction. But babes
and sucklings and publicans and harlots and Peter's bearers, many of whom, it
is probable, could not read a word, and had but small natural capacities, but
free from prejudicies and errors, could obtain it in a short time, by attending
in earnest to the means of instruction. And by obtaining this knowledge, they
received the spirit, and were regenerated and converted by his preaching. And
the first step that you must take, in order to your being made partakers of
this salvation, is, to obtain this speculative knowledge of the truths
contained in divine revelation. This is the key, by means of which, sinners
enter into the kingdom of Christ; and till this is obtained, no sinner can
enter the strait gate; or go one step toward heaven, or ever see, receive or
enjoy any of the benefits of the gospel. But such as obtain this knowledge, are
not far from the kingdom of God, but are lifted up to heaven, though they may
be cast down to hell at last, for not receiving it with faith and love. But
none may expect to receive the spirit of truth, or any saving change of heart
by the influences of the spirit, or to receive the truth with faith and love,
'till they first obtain this speculative knowledge of the truth. And therefore,
when God designs to communicate his spirit, in its vital influences, he first
sends the means of this knowledge to that people, by the dispensers of the
gospel; and in this way, he is often found of them that sought him not, and
made manifest to them that asked not after him.

As in Ezekiel's vision, "whither the spirit was to go, there the living
creatures went." These living creatures are the dispensers of the gospel; and
these always go before the spirit of truth; that they may communicate the
truth, and make manifest the savor of the knowledge of Christ, in every place.
And where the teachers are essentially ignorant or erroneous in their
instructions, they take away the key of knowledge from the people that depend
upon their instructions. And they enter not into the kingdom of heaven
themselves, and those that are entering they hinder. And if sinners will
neglect to hear and read and attend to the gospel, where it is dispensed in the
power and purity of it, but will read corrupt books, and having itching ears,
will run after ignorant, enthusiastic erroneous, corrupt teachers, they must
perish for lack of saving knowledge, however learned and knowing they may be,
in other things. "For, if the blind lead the blind they will both fall into the
ditch." And though many may esteem this knowledge of salvation by the cross of
Christ, unintelligible or mysterious foolishness, and so may perish in their
sin, rather than attend to it, and seek to understand it; yet, it pleases God
by the preaching of this foolishness to save them that believe. And it is the
great business of the ministers of Christ to exhort, and stir up unregenerate,
christless sinners, to attend and seek with the greatest earnestness and
perseverance, to obtain this knowledge in the first place. Ministers cannot
produce regeneration, love of the truth, repentance, faith or any grace in the
hearts of sinners, by their instructions or exhortations; this is the sole work
of the spirit: but ministers can communicate this knowledge, and stir up
sinners to obtain it. -- But you will say, are not all these exercises and
endeavors of the unregenerate, christless sinner in obtaining this knowledge
sin? And does God require any such exercises and endeavors? To these
objections I answer, that these exercises are not sin, in themselves
considered. The sin of the unregenerate does not consist at all, in their
attending on means; hearing, and seeking, and praying, and crying for mercy,
and deliverance from hell, only from natural principles. Their sin does not
consist at all in the light or knowledge of the truth, which they obtain,
before regeneration, but only in that enmity and unbelief which attends these
exercises and endeavors; the strength of which increases, as their light and
knowledge of the truth increases. And more sin may attend the exercises of
repentance, faith and love, in true believers, than attends the hearing,
praying and seeking of the unregenerate; so that when we exhort unregenerate
sinners to exert these exercises and endeavors, while they have a wicked
heart, we no more exhort them to sin, than we exhort them to sin, when we
exhort them to repent and believe, etc. when we know that great enmity of heart
to God, and aggravated sins will attend these exercises. And it is no more for,
or on account of the moral goodness that there is in faith, that the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to the believer; than it is for, or on
account of the moral goodness that there is in the hearing, praying, and
seekings of the unregenerate, that the holy spirit is communicated to them. And
God can as consistently communicate the holy spirit, in its vital influences,
to the unregenerate sinner, in consequence of his obtaining this orthodox
knowledge of divine truth, and crying for mercy, as he can impute the
righteousness of Christ to the believer, in consequence of his faith in Christ.
In Psalm. cvii. 6.13.19.28. we have instances of remarkable temporal
deliverances granted to sinners in consequences of their prayers and cries to
God for mercy, when it does not appear that their cries or prayers, proceeded
from love or friendship to God; but purely from their sense of their own
danger, and conviction that there was no help for them but in God alone. And
though this is act a moral, yet it is a natural preparation in sinners to
receive mercy from God.

And God does require these exercises and endeavors of the unregenerate. For
this orthodox knowledge is as essential to saving repentance and faith as love
is. And therefore, when God requires repentance and faith, he necessarily
requires this knowledge, and every exercise and endeavor of obtaining it; and
every thing that is essential to these graces, as much as he does love, or the
exercises of the graces themselves. God never required a sinner to repent and
believe without this knowledge, for this would be a natural impossibility. And
the soul cannot be good without knowledge, or have any holy exercises. And for
any to say, they exhort sinners to repent and believe, but they do not exhort
them first to obtain that knowledge which is essential to repentance and faith,
is a solecism in speech. And moreover, God expressly commands sinners to exert
those exercises and endeavors, which they may exert before regeneration; and
which they must exert in order to obtain this knowledge, before they can
receive the spirit of truth, or have any saving change. God calls upon the
whole world to hear his word, Jer. xxii. 29. "Oh! earth, earth, earth, hear the
word of the Lord." -- And he expressly commands the worst of sinners to hearken
to him without any mention of their previously having a good heart. See Isa.
xlvi. 2. "Hearken unto me, ye stout hearted sinners that are far from
righteousness." And our blessed Savior exhorts the self-righteous Pharisees to
search the scriptures, in order to find eternal life. And numerous texts might
be quoted, in which such exercises are required, and enjoined by God himself,
as unregenerate sinners may perform without doing any duty acceptable to God.
And sinners are condemned, and deprived of great favors, for not exerting such
exercises and endeavors. But we cannot find one instance in the gospel where
God forbids these exercises, and commands sinners, first to obtain a good
heart, to love him, and a righteousness of their own, or any morally good
qualification, before they hear and understand the gospel -- and seek and pray
and cry for mercy. But sinners are expressly exhorted to come to this fountain
of knowledge and grace, without money and without price. Sinners should come
empty handed, deeply sensible that they have no righteousness, no good heart,
no moral qualification to bring with them; and utterly unable to change their
own heart, or exercise love, or any grace: sensible that they are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; and cry unclean, unclean -- God be
merciful to me a sinner! They must come to receive that which is freely given,
and not to earn or purchase it with their good heart or good works. To say, I
do not exhort you to come to hear the word, unless you come with a good heart,
is legal preaching; and exceeding dangerous to the souls of sinners: and tends
to discourage the use of means, and tends to banish the knowledge of the
gospel, and all true religion out of the world.

Supreme love to God, and perfect sinless obedience to his will, were required
in the covenant of works, as duties, and the condition of eternal life. But
hearing and obtaining the knowledge of of the gospel, conviction and repentance
of sin, and faith in the Mediator, or love to God, or any act of obedience, are
not required under the gospel as duties or conditions of obtaining the holy
spirit, in its vital influences, or of pardon, justification and eternal life,
but only as graces or the means of receiving these benefits. And shall we
exhort sinners first, in the neglect of these means, to wait 'till they receive
the holy spirit, and a good heart, and then to hear and use the means appointed
by God, in the use of which they are to receive them? Is not this to pervert
the order that God has established? Faith comes by hearing: but shall sinners
be exhorted to wait for faith before they hear? -- The spirit comes by hearing,
but shall sinners wait 'tilll they receive the spirit before they hear? or
shall sinners be told that there is no probability of receiving the spirit or
faith by hearing, unless they first have that good heart which the law requires?

But you will say, If unregenerate sinners may do that before regeneration, by
which the holy spirit is received in its vital influences, and so has a
connection with eternal life, will they not have reason to boast as making
themselves to differ from those who do not obtain salvation? -- To this I
answer, That the Apostle clears this objection -- See 1 Cor. iv. 7. "For who
makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not
receive? Now, if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had
not received it?" If we do not earn, procure, merit or purchase any favor, by
all we do, but only receive it, as a beggar does a free gift, what reason have
we to glory or boast as if we made ourselves to differ from others, who do not
receive it? If we procured, purchased or meritted it by what we do, then we
should have whereof to glory. The truth, the spirit, the Savior and his
righteousness, and pardon, justification and eternal life, are all procured by
God, and sent down from heaven in the gospel; and sinners have nothing to do
but to receive them as they are therein offered, by receiving the knowledge of
the truth; and this none can do for them. But their merely receiving them by
hearing and by faith, gives them no reason to boast or glory. It is by hearing
and by faith, that salvation is received, that it may be by grace; and thus the
Apostle argues, Ephesians. ii. 8.9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and
therefore not of yourselves; salvation is the gift of God. Not of works lest
any man should boast. We do not change our heart ourselves, nor work faith in
ourselves, nor work out any righteousness of our own, but they are all the gift
of God, and the work of his spirit.

Has a condemned rebel any reason to glory, when a pardon is offered to him
freely by his prince, and the prince inclines him to embrace it, (upon his
hearing it) merely because he received and heared it? It is true, if he never
had heard and understood it, he never could have felt the influence of the
truths contained in it; but this gives him no reason to boast.

But you will say, Is there not danger of promoting and encouraging a
self-righteous spirit by such exhortations? -- To this I answer, That such as
are directed, exhorted, and prevailed upon to attend, hear, and understand the
truths of the gospel, so as to obtain this speculative, orthodox knowledge, and
under the direction and influence of this, are praying, seeking, and crying for
mercy, are in no danger of entertaining a self-righteous spirit: but it is
those who cannot be prevailed upon to attend, hear and understand, so as to
obtain this knowledge of the truth, that are in danger of this. The reason why
the Pharisees, in our Savior's time, entertained such a spirit, was their
ignorance of the gospel method of salvation. And the reason why the Jews in the
Apostle's time indulged this spirit, was their lack of this knowledge; and they
could not be prevailed upon to hear and learn, so as to obtain it. The reason
why they went about to establish a righteousness of their own, and did not
submit to the righteousness of God, was because they were ignorant of God's
righteousness, as revealed in the gospel -- See Romans x. 3, Remove this
ignorance, by obtaining this orthodox knowledge, and a self-righteous spirit
will be soon cured; but it cannot be cured without this.

But you will say, Are there any promises made in scripture to these exercises
and endeavors of unregenerate, christless sinners? And if not, what
encouragement have they to exert them? -- To this I answer, That I grant there
are no absolute promises made to these exercises and endeavors, and there is
no indissoluble connection between sinners exerting these exercises and
endeavors, and their obtaining any saving benefit: yet there is such a
probable connection as gives them sufficient encouragement to exert them in the
most vigorous and persevering manner, in order to obtain this orthodox
knowledge of the truths of divine revelation, free from errors and prejudices;
since this is the only way in which salvation can be received by sinners. And
if they receive it not in this way, they must perish for the lack of this
knowledge. Do we not all exert our endeavors in worldly concerns upon such a
probability? Does not the farmer rise early, and set up late; till his land,
and plant and sow? Does not the merchant venture his whole interest to sea, and
the soldier face death in all its formidable shapes, upon a less probability?
And is not this accounted a part of wisdom in them? And is it not then a part
of wisdom in perishing sinners, to use those means, and improve those
opportunities, in the use of which alone, they can expect to receive the
salvation of their souls? When the probability of obtaining in this way is so
great, and the consequences of their obtaining or not obtaining are so very
important. If sinners watch daily at wisdom's gates, and wait at the posts of
her doors; if they attend to the holy scriptures, and incline their ear to
wisdom and apply their heart to understanding; if they seek her as silver and
search for her as for hid treasure; they need not fear but they will obtain
this orthodox knowledge: and if they obtain this knowledge of salvation, there
is a great probability that they will obtain the salvation itself. There is a
great probability (if not a certainty) that by obtaining this knowledge of the
truth, they will receive the spirit of truth; and so convictions, repentance,
faith and love, through the influences of the word and spirit of truth, and
then eternal life will be begun in their souls. And it is highly probable, that
not one in ten thousand, who have obtained this knowledge free from essential
errors, in this life, ever failed of eternal salvation: and, perhaps, none ever
fail but such, as through an inordinate love of the world, and of error and
sin, and out of enmity and malice to the truth itself, sin wilfully after they
have received the knowledge of it; and to them there remains no more sacrifice
for sin. And if any think they have obtained this knowledge, when they do not
feel these effects upon their souls, they deceive themselves: for our Savior
tells us expressly, "Every man, therefore, that has heard and learned of the
Father comes unto me." -- See John vi. 45.

But you will say, If this speculative knowledge of the truths contained in
divine revelation, must be obtained, before any one can receive the holy spirit
in its vital influences, so as to be regenerated, or exercise repentance,
faith, love, or any saving grace, what becomes of infants, who die before they
are capable of receiving this knowledge; and of heathen, who have not the means
of this knowledge? -- To this I answer, That we have an account in scripture,
of a certain supernatural, spiritual change, of which all the corrupt race of
Adam must be the subjects, before they enter heaven: all that die in the
moments of death, and all that shall be alive and remain, till the second
coming of Christ, at the sound of the last trumpet: and all who are the
subjects of this change, at death, in the moment in which the union between the
soul and body is dissolving, all moral corruption and evil shall be removed
from the soul, and it shall be made perfect in holiness, and prepared to pass
immediately into glory. And in order to the producing this change, no knowledge
of the truth in the understanding of the subject of it, is necessary; but it is
produced by the immediate almighty power of the spirit of God. And the believer
in Christ, who has by faith in his merit given up himself and offspring to
God, according to the covenant of grace, has as good a foundation, from the
declarations and promises of the covenant of grace to hope, that his infant
child, that dies before it is capable of receiving the knowledge of the truth,
may be the subject of this change as himself, who has received the knowledge
of the truth. But none have any warrant from scripture (that I can see) to
expect any other saving change will be produced in their own souls, or the
souls of their children that live to be capable of moral exercises, unless they
first attend to the truth, as it is in Jesus, and receive the speculative
knowledge of it, in some degree, so as to receive the spirit and exercise faith
in the atonement. I doubt not but God is able, before death, to rectify the
principle, and change the heart of those who have no degree of this knowledge
in their understanding: but I do not find that he has any where declared in
his word that he will; and I know of no instance in which he has done it: for
though it is said concerning Jeremiah, that, before he came forth put of his
mother's womb, God sanctified him, and ordained him to be a prophet unto the
nations. And concerning Paul, that God separated him from his mother's womb to
reveal his Son in him; yet these declarations do not imply that either of them
were regenerated in their infancy; but only that they were by divine
appointment separated, sanctified or set apart to office. But it appears
inconsistent with the method of divine operation, to produce a principle of
spiritual life in the soul long before provision is made for the support of it,
by the knowledge of the truth. And if this moral corruption is removed, by the
spirit of God in infancy, then such a child is free from original sin and moral
corruption, and different from the rest of mankind, none of whom are freed from
it till death.

But I think parents have no warrant from scripture to hope that any of their
children, that live to be capable of receiving this knowledge, will receive the
spirit, or be regenerated, till this knowledge of the truth is obtained by
hearing and learning instruction from the word of God.

And it is of the last importance, in this view of the matter, that parents
begin early to instruct their children, and indoctrinate them in the truths of
the gospel, as they value their souls; and use these best endeavors to prevent
their minds being corrupted by reading ^ad books, and hearkening to
instructions which tend to prejudice their minds against the truth, and the
orthodox ministers of the gospel. Parents should train up their children in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. "Whom shall he teach knowledge? (says the
prophet) Whom shall he make to understand doctrine? Them that are weaned from
the milk, and drawn from the breasts; for precept must be upon precept; precept
upon precept; line upon line; line upon line; here a little and there a
little." -- Isa. xxviii. 9.10. -- And if parents would thus train up their
children to attend, hear and learn the truth, which is the way in which they
should go, they have great reason to hope, that they will receive the Knowledge
of the truth, and the spirit of truth, and the love of the truth; and when they
are old they will not depart from it. Some children have obtained so much
knowledge of the truth at four years old, as hopefully to receive the spirit in
its saving influences; where their attention to the truth has been excited, in
such early life, by the conversation of those under convictions, and serious
impressions.

And children should consider of what importance it is, in this view, to attend
to religious instructions in early life; when their minds are most free from
prejudices and errors. And then it may be said of you that are young, to your
great honor and everlasting happiness, as it was of Timothy, That from
children you have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make you wise to
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. But if you will not attend
and obtain this knowledge now, you will mourn at the last, when your flesh and
body is consumed, saying, "How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my ear to
them that instructed me? (I was whispering, or laughing, or sleeping, or my
eyes and heart were wandering) and I was almost in all evil, in the midst of
the congregation and assembly." -- See Prove. v. 11 etc.

But to return from this digression. As to the heathen, or those who have not
the written word; though God is under no obligation to send the means of
knowledge to any people, yet, the apostle assures us, that the gospel has been
preached to every creature which is under heaven -- See Col. i. 23. "And have
not they all heard (says the apostle) their sound went unto all the earth, and
their word unto the ends of the world." -- See Romans x. 18. So that all nations
may have the means of knowledge, though they have not the written word. But
such as have not capacities, means or opportunities of obtaining this
knowledge, will not be condemned for not receiving the spirit, or not
repenting, or not believing in Christ; but for the want of that principle of
love to God, and obedience to his will, which is required in the moral law, or
in the law of nature, written on men's hearts. But all those who are favored
with the gospel, and have capacities to obtain this knowledge, and do not
improve the capacities, means and opportunities they have, will have this for
their aggravated condemnation; that light is come into the world, and they have
loved darkness rather than light, and would not come to the light.

But to conclude, We are all sensible that ignorance of the saving truths of
the gospel prevails at the present day; notwithstanding all the means of
knowledge we enjoy. And by reason of this ignorance and error is overspreading
the christian world like a flood: and iniquity abounds; and the love of many
waxes cold. And what method shall be taken for a remedy? The only probable
method is this; The ministers of the gospel, like the living creatures in
Ezekiel's vision, must take the lead in this affair. They must wake up, and
preach the law, and gospel distinctly; and not blend them together; but rightly
divide the word of truth, and exhort, and stir up the attention of sinners to
the truth, by the manifestation of it to every man's conscience; and by this
means remove the darkness, and ignorance and error that overvails their their
understandings, and communicate to them the true knowledge of the scriptures:
for this is not the work of the spirit, but of the word of truth. And withal
pray earnestly that the law may prove a ministration of condemnation and death
to their sins; and the gospel a ministration of the spirit, of righteousness
and life to their souls. And then exhort sinners under these blessed
influences, to repent of sin, believe in Christ, love God, and bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

Should we excite in sinners minds strong conditions of their sin and danger,
by setting before them the terrors of the law, and exhorting them to repent;
yet unless by obtaining this knowledge of the gospel method of salvation,
ignorance and error are removed from their understandings, they will be in
imminent danger of settling down on a false foundation; and receiving a false
hope and joy; notwithstanding any internal influences of the spirit that they
can receive by hearing the law. To attend to the gospel, and read it, and hear
it preached; and seek to have a right understanding of the truths contained in
it; is the first and principal direction to be be given to sinners, that are
under awakenings and convictions. For by the knowledge of the truth, the spirit
must be received, in its regenerating influences; and this knowledge must lay
the foundation for the exercise of every grace in the soul. And the hope and
joy of sinners, if not founded in the knowledge of the truth, will finally
leave them ashamed.

If we are wise preachers, we shall teach the people knowledge. And if we are
pastors according to God's heart, we shall feed them with knowledge and
understanding: and with Paul, we shall reason with them out of the scriptures.
And to arrest their attention, we are not first to address ourselves to their
love of the truth, but to their fears of hell; and endeavor to convince them
of the necessity and importance of their receiving the knowledge of the truth,
as the only means of preserving the life, and restoring the health of their
precious and immortal souls. And sinners must hear and seek to obtain the
knowledge of the truth with silent attention; and depend on the word, and
spirit of truth to move their affections; excite convictions, repentance, faith
and love in their hearts; and then they will be genuine.

And all sinners, who have capacity, means and opportunity of obtaining this
knowledge, are under infinite obligation to repent of sin, believe Christ
Jesus, and love God, and give themselves up to him with all their heart
immediately, and be baptized, and come to his table; and their want of this
knowledge does not excuse their neglect one moment. Jesus Christ and his
apostles exhorted sinners to repent, believe and love God, and become friends
to Christ immediately, and made no allowance for their want of knowledge;
though it is essential to the exercise of every grace. -- But instead of making
the want of it an excuse for their continuing impenitent and in unbelief, under
the light of the gospel, they consider it as the formal cause of their blame,
and most aggravated condemnation. -- And they exhort them to repent and believe
immediately, though at the same time they let them know that they cannot come
to Christ 'till they hear and learn of the Father. But their not hearing and
learning and obtaining this knowledge, where they have the means, is no excuse
for their impenitency and unbelief. -- And their hearing and learning and
obtaining this knowledge, will not save them in their impenitency and unbelief,
or be any alleviation of their condemnation; but will greatly aggravate it if
they finally perish.

The holy scriptures are a complete and perfect rule; and the only rule to
direct sinners to happiness; as you may see, 2 Timothy iii. 15.16.17. Let no man,
therefore, that desires to be a preacher of the gospel, depend on the light of
natural reason, or on human wisdom, or on the internal light or influences of
the holy spirit in regeneration, or on his spiritual knowledge or love of the
truth, or on any new revelation, to teach and instruct him what to say, in
order to excite affections in others: but first seek to obtain this orthodox
knowledge of the holy scriptures, which Timothy had before he was regenerated;
and keep up his attention to this, 'till he finds he has obtained a large
degree of it, and also received the holy spirit in its vital influences, and
the spiritual knowledge, or love of the truth, and saving faith in Jesus
Christ; before he begins to preach: for the light of natural reason, or human
wisdom, or this internal light or love of divine truth, qualifies no man to
preach the gospel, unless he first obtain a good degree of this orthodox
knowledge of the holy scriptures. "To the law and to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them." --
Isa. viii. 20. For ministers to tell their own experiences, or the experiences
of others, or dreams or visions, and impulses and feelings, to excite
affections in others, is not preaching the word of God, which is the only
infallible rule; but such preaching causes people to err and think light of the
word of God, and forget his name -- See Jer. xxiii. 26.27.28, "The prophet that
has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my
word faithfully: what is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord. Is not my word
like a fire? says the Lord; and like a hammer that breaks the rock in
pieces?" By this rule, every spirit must be tried, to know whether it be of God
or not. "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul -- Psalm. xix. 7.

By the law of the Lord here, we are not to understand the moral law exclusive
of the gospel; but the word of God including both: for the moral law is only a
ministration of condemnation and death, and all that this law can do, is to
convince and condemn the sinner: it cannot convert without the gospel, which is
the only ministration of the spirit, of righteousness and of life; and unless a
sinner has the knowledge of Christ, and faith in him, he never will be
converted from the love of sin to the love of holiness, by the preaching of the
moral law. It is only where the gospel comes that sinners are regenerated and
converted.

But if deists or infidels, arians, socinians, self-righteous moralists,
anti-nomians, universalists and enthusiasts, who are led away by such errors
and delusions at the present day, could but be prevailed upon, so to attend to
the gospel as to obtain an orthodox knowledge and understanding of it, what a
great alteration it would cause in their minds? How soon it would remove their
ignorance, errors and prejudices; humble their pride, overcome their enmity,
mortify their self-righteous spirit, convert their souls, and make them wise to
salvation? But if they cannot be prevailed upon to attend to the gospel, and
understand the truths of it, they must perish for lack of this knowledge and
conviction, though they have means in plenty, because they will not make use of
them!

And sinners, by turning a deaf ear to the truths of the gospel, shutting their
eyes against the light, and rejecting the means of knowledge, vex the holy
spirit of God, stifle his blessed motions on their hearts, quench his
influences, and send him away grieved; and so reject God and Christ, and his
gospel, and judge themselves unworthy of eternal life; and provoke God to say,
"My spirit shall no longer strive with them; but I will give them up to their
own hearts lusts, to walk in their own counsels." -- See Psalm. lxxxi. And God
will become their irreconcilable enemy, and fight against them; and swear in
his wrath, that they shall never enter into his rest. "And because they
received not the truth in the love of it, that they might be saved, God shall
send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all may be
damned who believe not the truth; but had pleasure in unrighteousness." And
when they go down to hell, their neglect of particular opportunities of
attending and seeking will haunt their guilty consciences for ever and ever.
And they will not be able then to relieve their minds by casting off any blame
from themselves upon the decrees of God, as the cause of their not being
regenerated and saved -- To say, the reason why they were not regenerated was,
because they were not elected, or because they were decreed from all eternity
to damnation; and therefore God could not regenerate them, would be blasphemy
against God; -- since the only cause will appear to be, their not improving
their capacities, means and opportunities of attending to the holy scriptures,
so as to obtain the knowledge of the saving truths therein contained, or
rejecting them with enmity and malice.

And how great must be the sin and guilt of those, who say any thing that tends
to discourage unregenerate sinners in using the means, or attending on a
preached gospel? Such are accessory to the great evil of destroying souls; by
causing them to provoke God to withdraw his holy spirit.

And what great reason have sinners to condemn themselves, and lament their
folly, that they have neglected so many means and opportunities of obtaining
the knowledge of these divine and saving truths! -- And for the time to come to
double their diligence!

And if you want evidence for faith, look into the word of God, and see how all
the types and prophecies are fullfilled in Christ. The types have a peculiar
respect to his being delivered up by his Father; and offering up himself, his
liberty, life and divine glory; to be conquered, slain and reproached by his
enemies, and so by them be made a victim and sacrifice. And the prophecies have
a peculiar reference to his conquering and slaying his enemies, by means of his
being thus conquered and slain by them; and so finally making them his victims
and sacrifice. And who could have pointed out this wonderful affair, in such a
clear manner, in such early ages, but a God of infinite wisdom? Attend to this
plan of salvation, and you will find it carries its own evidence with it.
Obtain the true knowledge and understanding of it, and see what a strange
effect this knowledge and conviction of divine truth will have upon your minds;
when attended with the spirit of truth! -- What a wonderful effect it had upon
the mind of Soame Jenyns, Esquire. He was once a strong deist, but he tells us,
that when he applied his mind to the study of the holy scripture, "on a candid
inquiry he soon found that its pretensions of a supernatural revelation from
God were founded on the most solid grounds." And what a wonderful effect has
this knowledge had upon the minds of ignorant, erroneous, self righteous and
stout hearted sinners, that were far from having a good heart, or any
righteousness that could save them, when they first attended to it?

And if you want power and strength to remove the moral corruption of your
hearts, and enable you to repent of sin, and believe in Christ, and work out
your own salvation: attend to the gospel; hear and understand the truths
therein contained. This is the only way to have the spirit of God work in you,
to will and to do, of his good pleasure. It is only through the knowledge of
the truths of the gospel that you can receive from God grace to pardon or
strength to help. You can derive no saving influences but in this way. -- O
prize divine revelation! Bless God for the gospel! give heed to it, as to a
light that shines in a dark place! On the word of God you must trust. On this
you must found all your hopes. From this the believer derives all his comforts
-- all his strength and all his joys! Improve the gospel, as you value your
souls eternal peace and happiness. Sell all to purchase this field, which
contains this treasure of great price! Love to the word is the best evidence of
love to God.

And if you want motive to repent and believe, attend to the truths of the
gospel. The gospel contains sufficient motives, and they will prove effectual
if you attend to them; and they are accompanied by the efficacious influences
of the spirit of God: and you cannot expect these efficacious influences in any
other way, but by obtaining this knowledge.

And will you neglect and misimprove all your present privileges and
opportunities of receiving this great salvation, upon a vain presumption that
you will have another state of probation, and time of trial, after this life is
ended? And that your punishment will not be eternal though you die under the
power and guilt of sin, in impenitency and unbelief. -- It is very evident that
the doctrine of universal salvation, or another state of probation for sinners
is not from God; and is not contained in divine revelation -- Christ and his
apostles never preached it; if they had, the contrary doctrine never could have
had such a spread in the world; nor would they have been persecuted as they
were; because this doctrine is so agreeable to the corrupt taste of mankind,
and gives them such a high security for another world; that they would have
held fast the doctrine upon so great an authority, and carressed the dispensers
of it. And if it had been true, undoubtedly our blessed Savior could and would
have taught it plainly, without any reserve, Jesus Christ taught the contrary.
He declares, that he that believes not shall be damned. But as the devil
contradicted the express declaration of God to our first parents; so he does
now the express declaration of our blessed Savior.

But if what has been said upon this subject is true, sin is an infinite evil,
and the sinner does deserve an endless punishment, and God cannot remit it
consistently with his righteousness, as moral Governor, unless the sinner is
united to Christ by faith and so interested in that infinite atonement and
satisfaction which he has made at such an infinite expense. And sinners may
receive this atonement new, if they will; and it is sufficient for all. And the
offer is made to all that hear the gospel. And all that have sufficient
capacities, means and opportunities to obtain the knowledge of it must be
without excuse, if they do not believe in Christ, and receive this salvation
immediately. And if they wilfully misimprove. all these now, what reason can
be given why they should have another state of probation; God has no where
revealed any other state of probation; and reason forbids there should be
another. And all the perfections of God stand opposed to it. God has declared
in his word, that whom this state is at an end with sinners, his spirit shall
no longer strive with them. He that is filthy must therefore remain so still.
And that sinners are exposed to eternal damnation; and that their punishment
shall be everlasting and have no end, cannot be expressed in any stronger
terms, of which we can conceive. The eternity of sinners torments are expressed
in the same words by which the eternity of God's existence, and the duration of
the saints happiness in heaven are expressed. And had God revealed another
state of probation for those who are disposed wilfully to neglect and
misimprove the present, he must future state the whole design of this state.
And you cannot expect any future state of probation, unless God should deny
himself, prove false to his threatening, and flexible in his justice, and
unkind to the loyal subjects of his kingdom; by destroying the very foundation
of moral government. But if you believe not, "God abides faithful, he cannot
deny himself."

And is it possible that Doctor Chauncy, with all his learning, and corrupt
criticism -- or that the deists, and universalists can persuade men, that have
the holy scriptures in their hands, and are endued with reason and
understanding, capable of judging and determining what is best, to believe that
they are acting a wise part, when they wilfully neglect and misimprove the
present glorious opportunities and advantages for securing to themselves a
blessed immortality; upon the presumption, that God will grant them another
state of probation; if they wilfully abuse this! -- But O look forward to the
great day -- when Christ shall be revealed from heaven to take vengeance on
them that now know not God and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who must be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power!

And do you not believe there will be such a day! when the heavens shall be on
fire, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth and all
things that are therein shall be burnt up. And the Judge shall descend, with
all his angels; and the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, and
all nations shall be gathered before his august tribunal; and the righteous
shall be placed on his right hand, and the wicked on his left -- and each one
hear his final and irreversible sentence proceed from his mouth!

And oh how happy will be your case then, if you shall be found to have so well
improved your present opportunities, and state of probation, as to receive the
knowledge and spirit of truth, and the Savior; and be clothed with his
infinite righteousness and merit, and adorned with the graces of his spirit?
Then will you lift up your herds with joy, at the prospect of your complete
redemption from all sin, sorrow and death! Then will you hear that
heart-reviving sentence, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world" And them you will be
admitted into the joy of your Lord; where you will spend an eternity in singing
anthems to Him, who has loved you and washed you in his own blood from all
your sins. To which blessed state and employment, may God of his infinite
mercy, in Jesus Christ, bring us all. AMEN.

ERRATA. Page 20, line 5, from the top, for moral read mortal enmity -- and
line 17, for subject read subjects -- Page 27, line 6, from the bottom, read
prototokos. -- Page 53, line 29, from the top, for consequences read in
consequence of.


