ORACLES OF REASON, As ^ormed by the Deists, are HUSKS for DEISTICAL and
HEATHEN SWINE: But the TRUTHS of the Gospel are BREAD for God's Children.

A Concise, but plain Answer, TO GENESIS ALLEN's ORACLES OF REASON: SHOWING THE
UNREASONABLENESS of them, and the Principles of the DEISTS, A^IANS, SOCINIANS
and UNIVERSALISTS, and the EXCELLENCY of the HOLY BIBLE; as containing a most
refined System of Morality; and the wisest, easiest and best Method for the
Salvation Sinners that can be devised or desired.

THE GREAT DOCTRINES OF SUBSTITUTION, VICARIOUS SUFFERINGS, AND ATONEMENT, ARE
HERE EXPLAINED.

By COMMONSENSE.

"Cast not your pearls before SWINE, lest they trample them under their feet
and turn again and ^end you."

Theanthropos. LITCHFIELD: Printed by T. COLLIER.

ADVERTISEMENT -- BY WAY OF APOLOGY.

I HOPE Genesis Allen will pardon any reproach, that may be supposable, in
comparing him to the Prodigal Son, sent by the Citizen (i. e. the Devil) into
his fields to feed swine with husks, when he considers what an infinitely
greater reproach he casts upon the holy oracles of GOD, and upon his prophets,
apostles and ministers; and upon the Lord of life and glory himself; the
Savior and Judge of the world; at whose solemn tribunal we must all shortly
appear; when he represents HIM as an impostor and cheat, and all the blessed
doctrines of his gospel, as falsehood and lies.

I have been informed, since this Sermon was first published, that Genesis Allen
does not think himself fairly treated in this way of answering him, because
particular sentences of his book have not been explicitly quoted and answered.
But in reply to this objection, it may be said -- that this must have been a
very expensive and laborious method, and of no advantage: For many things
contained in his book are not disputed, and need no answer: Others carry their
own refutation in them; such as his supposing there were as many pairs as
nations created, and all mankind were not made of one blood; for we have no
account of the creation but what is contained in divine revelation; and what he
affirms is in opposition to that, and hence he affirms without any authority.

And eternal creation is a perfect solecism; for it supposes an eternal effect,
and a cause before it; and so does eternal generation. And to deny the decrees
of God, is in effect to deny that God is possessed of infinite knowledge,
wisdom and benevolence. For if God is possessed of infinite knowledge, he must
comprehend in his understanding all things, and all possible plans of
government: And if he is possessed of infinite wisdom and benevolence, he must
necessarily determine in his own mind, of all possible plans which is the
wisest and best; and this is forming decrees: But this does not imply any
causality in them, or cause any fixed state of things; or render means useless
in producing effects, or destroy blame, or praise-worthiness, or human liberty,
etc. so that Genesis Allen must, with the greatest inconsequence, draw this
inference, That if God has decreed whatever comes to pass, ministers, and
means of instruction, are hereby rendered useless; -- and it is better to
purchase generous wine, and good old spirits, to cheer the heart, than to be at
the expense of purchasing bibles or supporting ministers. -- And would it not
be a useless expense of time and pains, ink and paper, to write answers to such
arguments as these -- with which his book abounds?

And his observations on the formation of Eve -- and on many things contained
in Solomon's songs -- only betray profound ignorance of divine things; and a
mind replenished with atheism and profaneness -- But, he has one objection to
the divine origin of the holy scriptures, that may have a tendency to
strengthen the prejudices of weak and wicked minds against them; which is to
this purpose, viz. How is the command given to Saul utterly to destroy the
Amalikites -- and the conduct of Samuel in hewing Agag in pieces -- and the
declaration made concerning Edom and Babylon -- "Happy shall he be, that takes
and dasheth thy little ones against the stones," -- consistent with
benevolence? Can that be a revelation from God that commands and approves such
cruelties, and many others recorded in the Old Testament, and yet enjoins the
forgiveness of injuries, and universal benevolence and charity to all men? --
To this I answer -- That these are fully justified by the law of retaliation,
practiced in all nations, and abundantly warranted in scripture. It is the
constant declaration of the great God himself, that he will reward every one
according to his works, and visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children. And this was only treating them as they had treated others; and this
is the reason assigned by the inspired writers in both these instances, for
their being treated in this manner. And thus was Adon-bezek treated. See Judges
1. 6. 7. And had not God a right to command them to be treated according to
their treatment of others? If so, then this can be no reasonable objection
against the divine original of the scriptures; but an argument in favor of it.

But I desire that Genesis Allen, and all the deists, before they reject and
villify the scriptures of inspiration, would read* 'A view of the internal
evidence of the christian religion' -- wrote by Soame Jenyns, Esquire. wherein he
frankly owns to the deists that he once believed as little of the christian
religion as themselves; but on a candid inquiry, he soon sound its pretentions
to a supernatural revelation were founded on the most solid grounds.

But the principle design of the following Sermon is, to convince Genesis Allen,
and the Deists, that they misapply and misconstrue, and speak evil of those
doctrines of scripture to which they have not properly attended, and do not
understand.

I beg the favor that none would be so foolish and rash as to judge, condemn,
or reject this Sermon, before they have read it through, and are convinced that
they well understand the sentiments it contains. If you do, you will affront
your humble servant,

COMMON SENSE.

ORACLES OF REASON ARE HUSKS FOR DEISTICAL AND HEATHEN SWINE, etc.
LUKE xv. 16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the
Swine did eat.


IN the beginning of this paragraph, our blessed Savior tells us, "A certain
man had two sons: And the younger said unto his father, Father, give me the
portion of goods that falls to me. And he divided unto them his living." By
these two sons, we understand the whole church of God, consisting of Jews and
Gentitles. By the elder son, we are to understand that part of the visible
church, which continued where divine revelation was supported. By the younger
son, we understand that part of the church that wandered off from God's house,
and the rest of the church, till they lost the means of the knowledge of divine
revelation. For by the goods the father divided to his sons, we are to
understand the truths contained in divine revelation, and the means of coming
to the knowledge of those truths -- and this was the substance the younger son
wasted. And the famine that arose in that land, was a famine of hearing the
word of God -- a want of divine revelation.

But yet it seems this younger son retained a great degree of the light of
natural reason, so that he was able to feed swine, i. e. to instruct others in
those truths which the light of nature dictated.

The Citizen to which he joined himself, is generally thought to be the Devil;
who may, with great propriety, be called a Citizen; as his kingdom is called
the great City -- that is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt -- where, also,
our Lord was crucified. Rev xi. 8

THE fields into which he sent him, were those parts of the devil's kingdom
which were overrun with darkness, error and wickedness. And he was to teach
them the oracles of reason, or direct them to happiness by the light of nature,
and cause them to rest easy without divine revelation. But the Prodigal was
convinced, that reason, or the light of nature, were not sufficient, without
divine revelation, to direct sinners in the way to future happiness, in the
favor of God. He therefore began to be in want of a better and more certain
rule: But yet he would fain consider reason, or the light of nature,
sufficient; and endeavored, by this means, to ease his conscience and support
his hopes -- this is implied in our text. -- But when he came to himself, to
set reason to work, he bethinks himself of his father's house, the church of
God, the pillar and ground of truth; and says, "How many hired servants of my
father have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger."

BY this bread in his father's house, we are to understand the truths contained
in divine revelation, in opposition to the dim light of nature: And by the
hired servants, we are to understand all those who are favored with divine
revelation, as a ministration of the spirit, but yet are not regenerated and
made true believers, and the sons of God, by the word and spirit of truth; but
are seeking to earn heaven by their obedience to the precepts of the gospel,
without depending upon the righteousness and grace of Christ alone for
salvation.

BUT the words being thus opened, I purpose, in ^^^ating upon them, to observe
the following method, 1st. CONSIDER the husks here mentioned. 2d. THE swine
that feed on these husks. 3d. WHAT is implied in eating them. LASTLY, make
improvement.


I MEAN to study brevity in every part, lest I should weary your patience, and
lose your attention.

FIRST, then, let me draw your attention to the husks here mentioned.

BY these husks (as we before observed) we are to understand the dictates of
the light of nature, or the oracles of reason, when substituted as a sufficient
rule to direct sinners to future happiness, in the room of divine revelation.

I WOULD by no means say any thing to depreciate the value of reason; for
unless we were endowed with the noble faculty of understanding, by which we are
rendered capable of reasoning, judging and determining in matters of religion,
divine revelation could be of no advantage to us: We could not be the subjects
of law, or be influenced by threatenings or promises, by rewards or punishments.
Reason gives us an elevation of mind above the beasts that perish.

BUT reason never was given for a rule in matters of religion: But the will of
God, our creator, is the only rule; and when known, every intelligent creature,
as he is imperfect in knowledge and wisdom, is under infinite obligations to
yield an implicit obedience to it, however inconsistent with reason the matter
of command may appear to them.

SOME have supposed that the imperfection of knowledge and wisdom, in created
intelligences, alleviates or excuses their sin, and diminishes their blame; but
it is evident, that their imperfection of knowledge and wisdom, which renders
them incapable of self-government, increases their obligation to put an
implicit confidence in the wisdom, an implicit faith in the word, and yield an
implicit obedience to the known command of their all-wise and benevolent
Creator. And this infinitely increases our sin and folly in leaning to our own
reason and understanding, or hearkening to the temptations of satan, or
trusting in our own heart, so as to reject the word, and transgress a known
command of our all-wise and benevolent Creator. In this consisted the infinite
evil of original sin in angels and men -- It was a rejecting the revealed word
of God and the divine government over us, and setting up the suggestions of the
devil, or our own reason, in the room of the known will of our Creator, and not
putting an implicit confidence in his wisdom and benevolence.

THE design of reason is not to be a rule itself, but only a mean to come to
the knowledge of the word or will of God; and not a rule by which to measure
them.

HAS God made a revelation of his will to us, and shall we dispute the
reasonableness or the righteousness of his commands, and refuse to believe and
obey, because they are not level to our reason? Shall we, who are so imperfect
in our knowledge and wisdom, reject the known laws of our all-wise Creator, and
set up for self-government? The light of nature, and oracles of reason, when
set up for a rule in opposition to the oracles of God, contained in divine
revelation, are husks, on which none but swine do feed.

BUT the truths contained in divine revelation are bread for the soul; yea,
angels food! and received by faith and love by sinners, they strengthen,
nourish and raise to eternal life! But consider ourselves as sinners, in a
state of rebellion to our Creator, and can all the oracles of reason discover
to us the will of God, or a way for our pardon and salvation? Who can know that
God will pardon men rather than devils, and on what terms he will pardon,
unless God himself makes it known to us by immediate revelation?

SECOND, Let us consider the Swine that feed on these husks.

AND these I take to be Pagans, Deists, Infidels, and all who deny the divine
original and authority of the holy scriptures, and substitute the light of
nature, and the oracles of reason, or the dictates of conscience, in the room
of them.

OF these we have a famous, or rather infamous Swine, in Julian the Apostate,
who had been a professed christian, but fell from christianity and turned Pagan
or Deist, and used his utmost endeavors to overthrow the christian church; and
became a most notorious persecutor of the ministers of the gospel, and the
christians; and as is thought, against his own light. He used to call Christ,
by way of reproach, the Galilean. The last words he uttered at his death were,
-- "Thou have overcome, O Galilean!" -- And he is commonly thought by divines,
to have committed the unpardonable sin.

AND of the same number are all Deists, who wholly cast off the christian
religion and are professed infidels, -- "They deny the whole christian
religion. Indeed they own the being of a God, but they deny that Christ was the
son of God; and say that he was a mere cheat; and so they say all the Prophets
and Apostles were; and they deny the whole scripture: They deny that any of it
is the word of God? They deny that there is any revealed religion, or any word
of God at all; and say that God has given mankind no other light to walk by,
but their own reason."

AND though it is manifest they are beholden to the light of divine revelation
for all their systems of moral philosophy, and all the sense that is contained
in their oracles of reason; yet they despise it, and declare it to be needless;
and insist upon the sufficiency of their own reason to direct them to happiness
without it. But in this they resemble the country clown, who said, "We should
be obliged to the sun if it would shine in the night, but we have light enough
in the day without it."

LET these men look for systems of moral philosophy, and oracles of reason,
among the Hottentots, the Africans, and the aboriginals of this land, w^^^e the
rays of divine revelation have never darted any light.

THIRD, We proceed to consider what is implied in eating these husks.

EATING, in the literal sense of the word, implies, or presupposes, that we
have the knowledge of the food -- that we have a taste and relish for it --
that we are delighted with it -- that we receive it so as to make it our own --
that it incorporates, and is rendered one with the body -- that it nourishes
and supports, and strengthens the body, and maintains its life, spirits and
vigor, and animates to action.

AND in this manner it may, with great propriety, be said, that intellectual
swine feed on these husks. They obtain the knowledge of these productions of
darkness, error and wickedness, formed in the devil's kingdom: They have a
taste and relish for them -- they are delighted with them -- they receive them
by faith and love, so as to make them their own -- they are incorporated and
rendered one with their souls -- they ease their consciences, nourish, support
and strenthen their delusive hopes, and maintain their life and vigor, in
infidelity and wickedness -- and animate them to action in building up the
devil's kingdom, and in blaspheming God, despising his word, transgressing his
laws, rebelling against his wise and righteous government; and privily bringing
in damnable heresies; even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction -- And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. See ii Pet. 2.1.

THIS prophecy being fulfilled at this day, is a strong argument for the divine
original and authority of the sacred scriptures.

Improvement.
AND this shall be by way of earnest exhortation to all my hearers, or readers,
not to seek to fill their bellies with the husks that the swine do eat, but
repair to their father's house, where they will find bread enough and to spare;
and by faith and love receive and feed on those heavenly dainties, those truths
which are good, and let their souls delight themselves in fatness.

GENESIS ETHAN ALLEN, has of late been at great pains and cost to write a book to
little good purpose, but to tell the world that he is a profane, prayerless,
graceless infidel. I once gave it a cursory reading; but as I have it not by me
at present, I purpose not to enter into any particular consideration of his
arguments, or the profane flouts he casts upon the sacred oracles of God. He
may hereafter find that he has done this to his eternal cost, unless true
repentance, and faith in that Savior which he despises, prevents.

BUT my design, in order to dissuade all men of sense from attending to these
husks, is to point out some of the foundation errors, which being obviated, the
superstructure must fall to the ground.

AND the first foundation error that I shall mention, in which he betrays a
swinish ignorance is, his not making a proper distinction between the essence
and will of God. Hence, in creation, he does not consider the Divine Being as
producing this great work, in which such infinite wisdom, power, benevolence
and design, is manifested, by the word of his power, or by the free act of his
will, under the influence of infinite wisdom, benevolence and counsel: But he
considers the creation as proceeding from the essence of God, without any
wisdom or design of his, by an eternal necessary emanation.

AND hence he makes the futile distinction between creation and formation, as
if the will of God, in a course of nature, produced the latter, but not the
former.

AND hence he considers the divine government as a fixed course of nature, not
under the direction of an all-wise, all-powerful benevolent Being! possessed of
perfect liberty, and able every moment to alter the course of nature as he
pleases, without increasing his own knowledge, or altering his mind or
purposes, but as under the influence of blind fatal necessity; so that
according to his idea, prayer, and all other means, are rendered useless in the
divine government, because the fates are inflexible; which seems to be his idea
of God.

AND his idea of the decrees of God is very gross. He makes no distinction
between forming and executing a decree. The blessed God, in forming his
decrees, had, in his infinite understanding, a clear ordination or arrangement
of all things, into all possible plans; and under the influence of infinite
wisdom and benevolence, he determined in eternity, in his own mind, of all
possible plans, which is the wisest and best. This I take to be forming a
decree.

BUT this determination, of all possible plans, which is the wisest and best,
does not execute any plan, create a world, or produce any effect, or make God
the Author of sin or any thing else.

GOD's forming decrees in his own eternal mind, in eternity, is very different
from the execution of them in time, and does by no means imply the eternal
existence of those things which were in eternity, ordained or arranged in the
divine knowledge and understanding -- if it does, then all created existences
are coeval with the divine existence; which must appear false and absurd at the
first blush.

NONE but God himself could form his decrees in eternity; but angels, men and
devils, execute many of them in time. And it is no impeachment of the divine
wisdom and power to say, that God never could execute the decrees he has
formed, according to his own plan, without angels, and men and devils, and
second causes; such as human ideas, perceptions, volitions, prayers, and other
actions that depend upon the free will of creatures; because these second
causes were considered in his plan in eternity; and these being left out in the
execution, it would not be the execution of God's eternal decrees, but some
other plan.

AND the eternal decrees of God, have not the least influence on the mind of
man, in forming his designs, or inclining him to action by way of efficiency or
motive, any more than if there were no decrees formed. They do not deprive man
of any liberty, or take away any blame. And in directing the course of nature,
and in overruling all things, God acts as a being perfectly free, without the
least necessity, but what is within himself -- his own wisdom and benevolence.

AND he determined from all eternity, to alter the course of things just as he
pleases, in answer to prayer; and he can alter the course of nature by
miracles, without increasing his knowledge, or changing his decrees. And
General Allen seems to deny that God is a free agent, but is under a fatal
necessity to act without any wisdom or design. And though he says some things
well, upon the free and moral agency of man; yet, in treating on that subject,
he discovers he is very deficient in philosophy: For he does not tell us what
constitutes a moral agent: He gives us no account of the three faculties of the
soul, understanding, principle and will, as distinct from its exercises. And
how the understanding differs from the other faculties, as it is the seat of
ideas and speculative knowledge, and not of moral perception or volition -- And
that the will cannot be the seat of speculative knowledge or moral taste, but
only of volition; but the power of perception, or moral taste, must be alone
seated in the principle; and this being right, lays a foundation for holy and
righteous exercises, but being corrupted, lays a foundation for sinful
exercises in the will; -- and sin consists radically in hating the true
character of God, and in loving or embracing a false or erroneous character of
God, when formed in the understanding -- and holiness or righteousness consists
in loving or embracing the truth, and acting in conformity to it.

IN speaking against the scripture doctrine of a trinity of persons, or agents
existing in the divine essence, he speaks evil of that which he understands not
any more than a swine.

THAT three distinct persons, or agents, should exist eternally and necessarily
in one infinite essence, and yet be distinct in their agency and operations, is
no more repugnant to reason, than that one agent should exist from eternity
infinite in his essence and perfections, and yet limited in his agency and
operations by his own wisdom and will -- for all must grant, that although God
is infinite in his essence and perfections, yet he limits himself in his agency
and operations -- his exertions of power are limited by his wisdom and will;
otherwise, God's works would be as infinite as God himself -- which is a
glaring absurdity.

AND why may not three distinct agents depend on one essence for their
existence and operations, as well as thousands of distinct agents depend on one
will (the will of God) for their existence and power of operation? The second
person in the sacred trinity does not depend on his own will or act, or on the
will or act of the first or third person for his existence -- nor do either of
them depend on the will or act of each other, or their own, for their
existence; but all exist necessarily, in one infinite eternal essence; and in
this they differ from creatures, who depend on the will and act of God for
their existence.

AND all he says about the eternal generation of the son is futile, and is in
direct opposition to the arguments he uses in favor of eternal creation. In
scripture, the second person in the sacred trinity is called the prototoros;
rendered, first born, or first begotten in our translation; but according to
the most judicious critics, should have been rendered, the first progenitor,
producer, or father of every creature. "For by him (says the inspired writer)
were all things created that are in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible
-- And he is before all things, and by him all things consist." See Col. i. 15,
16, 17.

AND the second person, or the eternal logos, being spoken of as a son, -- an
only begotten or first begotten son -- as one brought up with the father, and
daily his delight -- I take to be only figurative expressions, to set forth the
perfection of their happiness: For happiness lies not in solitude but society;
and the sacred trinity must have enjoyed infinite delight, communion,
complacency and happiness in themselves before any creature existed. See Prove.
8, 30.

AND the hypostatical union, when rightly understood, is perfectly consistent
with reason as well as scripture. For the second person in the trinity to
create a man with soul and body, and so cloth it with the moral perfections of
the divine nature, as to give it the character of a divine person, and one with
himself, so as to put the divine character, as moral Governor, into the power
of his enemies; and considers all their spite and enmity to truth and
righteousness, and all their reproaches and cruelties acted out against this
Theanthropos, as acted out against the character of God himself, as moral
Governor of the universe, is by no means repugnant to reason, is a wonderful
display of infinite wisdom and power, in giving opportunity to sinners to act
out the infinite evil of sin as opposed to God's moral character, law and
government -- and to convince them of the justice and righteousness of the
divine threatening.

AND all the doctrines our blessed Savior taught, and all the miracles he
wrought, show that God was with him, and that he did rise from the dead by his
own divine power. He had power to lay down his life and power to resume it
again; and no man had power to take it from him against his will. No truths can
come better attested than these. And to deny that there can be any miracles, is
to deny that God is possessed of infinite wisdom, power and liberty to alter
the course of nature as he pleases; but that the blessed God, and all his
volitions and operations, are subjected to a fatal necessity.

GENESIS Allen labors exceedingly to oppose the scripture doctrine of the
substitution of the innocent to suffer for the guilty, and the imputation of
merit and demerit. But how he came by his idea of this doctrine, does not
appear; for I am sure it is not contained in the bible: And to impute the
mistaken notions of fallible men, and their corrupt explanations of the
scriptures, to the scriptures themselves, and then vilify and reproach the
scriptures, as containing such absurd unreasonable doctrines, is very unfair.

IF I believed that many doctrines, as held by some we call orthodox divines,
were contained in the scriptures, I should scruple their divine original and
authority: For such doctrines as some hold them, are, in my opinion, unworthy
of a God of infinite wisdom and righteousness. But we must understand the
scriptures themselves, and the doctrines contained in them, before we reject
and vilify them.

THE holy scriptures no where, as I can find, suppose, that criminality can be
imputed or transferred from one to another -- nor can an innocent person be so
substituted as to become the object or victim of the divine wrath and
displeasure, or suffer the individual penalty or punishment threatened to the
guilty, consistent with reason or justice: But an innocent person may
undertake, and with his own consent be substituted, to answer for the guilty,
by paying the price of his redemption or ransom, by discharging a debt, or
making good the damages to the injured, so that the merit of the innocent
person may avail for the pardon and discharge of the guilty or criminal, from
the penalty or punishment, consistent with the honor of the character, law and
government of the injured prince or ruler. And this is common among men, that a
glorious, innocent, worthy person, should in such a case become a mediator, and
surety and advocate for the guilty, who has forfeited his liberty, life and
inheritance, and by his arduous services and great sufferings, bring that
honor to the injured prince, and that interest to his kingdom, as might
purchase a pardon and redemption for the guilty -- and this is vicarious
sufferings.

FOR instance, we will suppose, in the time of the late contest, that Genesis
Allen was a great and worthy friend of his country: He has a number of sons
that become enemies to his country, and join the Britons to conquer and destroy
it: According to a law of this empire they are condemned to death. Genesis Allen
has a great affection to his sons, and desires their salvation, if it can be
obtained consistent with the rights of government. At the appointment of
Congress, and with his own consent, he is substituted to undertake the war at
his own expense. He engages the enemies of his country, and is first made a
victim by them; and they sacrifice, for a time, his liberty, his ease and
honor, and all his wealth, and he faces death in all its formidable shapes --
and his sufferings are extremely great -- more bitter than death itself, and
his services arduous. But yet he, by this means, finally overcomes all his
enemies, and puts an end to the war. His sons are now convinced, that their
enmity and opposition to their worthy father, and the laws and government of
the empire, are unreasonable and vile; the punishment threatened just, and the
threatening ought to be verified, notwithstanding their repentance; because the
honor of government must be supported.

WHEN they are called before the tribunal to receive their sentence according
to law; the General, their worthy father, steps in as their mediator, surety
and advocate -- shows his wounds that he has received in the cause of his
country, and pleads his expense of honor, blood and treasure, and all his
humiliation, arduous services, and great sufferings, and the honor hereby
brought to the rulers, laws, and government, and good to the empire; and if by
all these he has merited any thing of his country, he may receive the pardon
of his penitent sons as his reward. -- The Congress pardon them freely of their
own grace, on account of the merit that is in their father; which is a proper
merit of condignity with the Congress. This I take to be the scripture sense of
substitution, vicarious sufferings, and the imputation of merit. Is this
repugnant to reason, justice, common sense, or the usages of nations?

BUT had Genesis Allen been substituted to bear the penalty, in order to redeem
his sons, and so been hanged, and his sons released from the threatened
punishment on the account of his suffering it; would this be consistent with
justice, reason or common sense? But Genesis Allen does not redeem his sons by
suffering the penalty, but by paying the price of their redemption, by his
services and sufferings. And though he does not purchase the benevolence or
grace of the Congress to his sons; yet he opens a way for them to exercise it
consistent with the rights of government; which they would not have done, had
it not have been for the merit of their father. But hanging Genesis Allen in his
sons stead, would not have supported the honor of the law and government, in
the same manner as they are supported by his services and sufferings in the
cause, and for the good of the empire.

AND as to the imputation of demerit, suppose a man of great wealth and honor,
and high in the favor of his country -- and having a numerous family of small
children, and many yet to be born with his wife -- turns enemy to his country,
and according to a law of the empire, his whole estate is confiscated, and they
with their families are banished their country, and deprived of all the
privileges and immunities of it. He removes with his family into another
kingdom, whose prince is a sworn enemy to the righteous laws and good
government of this empire, and trains up his children in enmity and opposition
to the righteous government of this land -- and there they live and die in
darkness, error and wickedness, and in extreme poverty, all in consequence of
their parents conduct. Will General Allen condemn the law of this empire, by
which this man and his family was banished, and his estate confiscated, as
unreasonable and unjust?

AND as to Genesis Allen's description of the objects of Faith, I understand he is
convinced himself that he has made such gross blunders, that there needs a
supplement to his Oracles of Reason, in order to correct them; and I leave him
and the swine he feeds to cook that dish.

I THINK I have said enough to dissuade all reasonable people, that would
consult their own honor and best interest, from seeking to fill their belly
with these husks.

I WOULD now endeavor to persuade all to leave these husks, and repair to
their father's house, where there is bread enough and to spare, lest they
perish with hunger, yea, perish to all eternity, in the land of darkness, error
and wickedness, in satan's kingdom; where they will be so destitute of all
relief as not to have a drop of water to cool their tongue.

AND O, be prevailed upon to attend to the oracles of divine truth without
prejudice, and seek first to obtain the knowledge of these truths, as contained
in divine revelation, and a right understanding of there, and then receive
them, and feed upon them with faith and love, and you will find the word of the
Lord will be unto you the joy and rejoicing of your heart -- The truths
contained in divine revelation are infinitely more precious than pearls. O be
not like the swine, who trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent
such as present them, for mocking them with pearls instead of husks. The Deists
would persuade you not to attend to the oracles of God, because there is danger
that they are corrupted by length of time, and being frequently translated and
transcribed. And they have many other objections; all which may be easily
answered, and have been answered a thousand times. But the principal objection
in their mind is, they do not love the truths therein contained: Their sore
eyes cannot bear the light, which condemns their heart and conduct. They hate
truth and righteousness, and the inflexible justice of God, and love darkness,
error and wickedness; and therefere will not come to the light of revealed
truth, lest their deeds should be reproved, and it be made manifest that they
are in the kingdom of the devil, and going down to hell, to suffer the just
penalty of disobedience.

BUT the principal truths contained in divine revelation, speak for themselves;
and it must appear to all that understand them, that they are not corrupted,
but afford clear evidence that they are from God. And were we to take only a
cursory view of the principal truths contained in divine revelation, we must be
convinced, that there is no essential corruption of those sacred volumes, but
that they now contain pure truths sufficient to guide every benighted soul to
happiness, who will but obtain the true knowledge and understanding of them,
receive them with faith and love, and make them the only rule of their faith
and manners, and conform their hearts and lives to them. And there is no book
on earth contains such a full and complete a system of theology. -- These
volumes contain in them a clear account of the eternal existence of one supreme
God, in three distinct persons united in one essence, independent on their own
will, or the will or act of each other, for their existence. And this God is
possessed of all possible perfections, both natural and moral -- and does from
eternity to eternity comprehend, in his infinite understanding, all things
possible -- and of all possible plans of government, his will, under the
influence of infinite wisdom and benevolence, determines which is the wisest
and best. And in the execution of this plan, he created the heavens and the
earth, and all their numerous hosts of creatures. Angels and men, he made free
moral agents, endowed with understanding, principle and will; capable of
thinking, perceiving, reasoning, judging and choosing -- and so subjects of
moral law and government, capable of knowing, loving and serving their Creator.
-- And the oracles of God contain a most compendious and complete system of
moral precepts, comprising our duty to God, ourselves, and one another -- and
both the first and second table summed up in love to God and our neighbor.

THE oracles of God do not place religion in abstruse speculation, and mere
metaphysical subtilties -- not in outward show and tedious ceremony -- not in
superstitious austerities, and in enthusiastic vision and impulses; -- but in
love to God and our neighbor, and purity of heart and holiness and
righteousness of life. -- Only consider what a system of morality is contained
in the decalogue. Where will you find one equal to it in all the Heathen
writers who were unacquainted with it? -- But divine revelation is not merely a
refined system of morality; but it contains a stupendous plan of providence,
designed for the recovery of mankind from a state of guilt and ruin to the
favor of God, and the hopes of a happy immortality through a Mediator. For
herein we are taught that some of the angels apostatised from God, and fell
under his displeasure and the penalty threatened to the disobedient, and were
doomed to hell, in a confirmed state of wickedness and misery, under the wrath
and curse of God for ever.

UPON this there commenced a grand moral contest between heaven and hell,
concerning the righteousness of God as moral Governor. The devil set himself to
oppose God, not by natural power or force, but in those things in which the
nature of virtue and vice, and the very essence of moral government require,
that moral agents should not be overruled and influenced by irresistible force
and divine efficiency, as God governs the material world; but by manifestation
of truth to their minds -- by instructions and motives -- by laws containing
promises and threatenings, rewards and punishments. This contest is of a moral
kind -- the devil does not contend with the Almighty for the natural kingdom or
dominion of the universe; but he opposes God by opposing his truth and
righteousness. And the kingdom of the devil is founded in darkness, error and
wickedness, in opposition to God's moral kingdom -- founded in light, truth and
righteousness. The devil cannot be conquered in a moral sense by natural force,
even by Omnipotence. The devil, by his erroneous reasonings concerning the
righteousness of God, deceived, and so induced our first parents to transgress
a plain, positive command of their Creator; and by this means brought them and
all their posterity into his kingdom.

ALL created intelligencies being imperfect in their knowledge and wisdom, are
unfit for self-government, and so must be under infinite obligation to put an
implicit confidence in the wisdom and benevolence, an implicit faith in the
word, and yield an implicit obedience to the known command of their Creator; as
they cannot but be rationally convinced that God is all-wise and infinitely
benevolent. And to transgress a command, is the breach of an infinite
obligation, and pregnant with infinite mischief to the divine government. But
the devil reasoning (as the Universalists do at this day) That it is
inconsistent with the infinite goodness and benevolence of God to his moral
kingdom, to execute his threatening upon transgressors according to truth and
justice, made our first parents believe, that if they did transgress, God would
violate his justice and truth, expressed in the threatening, to save them from
death. "Ye shall not surely die," says the devil. And this emboldened them to
partake of that fruit that they saw pleasant to the eyes, good for food, and to
be desired to make one wise; contrary to the known command of their all-wise
and infinitely benevolent Creator. They first, under the influence of the
devil's beguiling and deceiving them by his erroneous reasonings, disbelieve
the truth of the threatening, and then transgress the command; notwithstanding
their infinite obligation to put an implicit faith in God's word, and yield an
implicit obedience to his known command, and their love to his moral character.
This transgression of our first parents involved them in death, temporal and
spiritual, and eternal; which was the threatened penalty: by this transgression
they forfeited their own and their posterity's liberty, life and inheritance of
glory and felicity: For this they were banished the favorable presence of
their Creator, totally deprived of the vital influences of the holy spirit, and
the rectitude of their moral principle; and left of God to suffer all the
natural and moral consequences of their apostasy in the devil's kingdom, under
the power of darkness, ignorance and error and wickedness; under the wrath and
curse of God, the power of sin, and the tyranny of satan, forever.

BUT the second person in the adorable Trinity, engaged to be a mediator,
surety and advocate in behalf of man; and engaged to fulfill all righteousness,
and to procure such an infinite fountain of merit or righteousness with the
Deity, as should be abundantly sufficient to pay the price of man's redemption
from the penalty and curse of the divine law, and entitle them to eternal life
-- and at the same time, by the power of divine truth, to deliver some from the
power of darkness, error and wickedness, and vindicate them into his own
kingdom of light, truth and righteousness; and so from a state of misery to a
state of happiness. And in order to accomplish these ends, the son of God
engages in this grand moral contest concerning the righteousness of God as
moral governor, and he decided the controversy when he died on the cross and
rose again from the dead triumphing over all the powers of darkness. He then by
his perfect and sinless obedience and death, fully declared the righteousness
of God as moral governor. And it was by the intrinsic value of the dignity of
his person, his amazing humiliation, his arduous services and great sufferings
in obedience to the law of mediation, in order to declare God's righteousness,
that he procured an infinite fountain of merit with the Father, sufficient to
pay our debt, that we had contracted by sin, in reproaching the divine
character, transgressing his laws, and rebelling against his righteous
government; and thus, by a merit of condignity, he has paid the price of our
redemption, and purchased liberty, life and glory for all that believe in him.
And God the father has bestowed on him, as a reward of condignity, the honor
and glory of governing the whole universe. The reward is equal in value to the
services and sufferings. As a reward of his humiliation, services and
sufferings, he has all judgment committed into his hands -- and receives
homage and worship from angels and men -- and has pardoned, and justified and
saved, a numerous offspring given him by the Father -- and he is appointed to
be the judge of all, to pass the last sentence on his friends and on his
enemies. He will have the honor at the last day to say to his friends, and all
that believe in him -- "Come ye blessed of ^y Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you" -- And he will reward them with granting them an open and an
abundant entrance into his heavenly kingdom, where they shall live and reign
with Christ, with crowns of victory on their heads, and palms of victory in
their hands, for ever and ever. -- He will also have the honor to say to his
enemies, and all that rejected his gospel by enmity and unbelief -- "Go ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." And he
will say to all infidels in that day, "Those my enemies that would not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me." -- "And
they shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy
angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torments
ascends up for ever and ever." And this will be the day of the manifestation
of the righteous judgment of God. God declared to angels and man, If they
transgressed his command, they should surely die: And the righteousness of God
in this sentence, is witnessed by the law and the prophets. But sinners will
not believe God's word. They imagine that God will violate his justice and
truth, to save transgressors; -- and sinners have been ever since the fall,
disputing the justice and righteousness of God, in the eternal damnation of
transgressors. The eternal son of God, appeared by the appointment of the
Father, to decide this controversy, and put an end to this quarrel, and make
the righteousness of God as moral governor, i. e. the infinite benevolence, the
inflexible justice, and inviolable truth of God appear. To this end he
consented to become a victim in the devil's kingdom, and to be sacrificed in
that great city, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, by the hand of
his enemies. And this was according to the determinate counsel and fore
knowledge of God; as being a part of the wisest and best plan that could be
devised. And in all this sinners, with wicked hands, did nothing to him, but
what God's hand and counsel determined before to be done. And this moral
contest between the son of God and the devil, concerning the righteousness of
God's character as moral governor; especially concerning the inflexibleness of
his justice, and the inviolableness of his truth, expressed in the threatening;
and how it was decided by Christ on the cross, was foretold by all the prophets.

TO this, that most ancient prediction had reference, Genesis iii. 15. "And I will
put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: It
shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel." And Psalm. xlv. 3. etc.
"Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty! with thy glory and thy majesty.
And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth, meekness and
righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach the terrible things," etc. And
Isa. ix. 5.6. etc. "For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire,"
etc. See also Isa lxiii. from the first to the sixth verse. -- And all the
victims and sacrifices under the law, were types of the victim and sacrifice
that Christ was made in the devil's kingdom, not by God the father, but by his
enemies; by means of which he decided this moral controversy. And although this
was decreed, fore-known and predicted by God; yet sinners executed these
decrees, and fulfilled these predictions, in the exercise of their own free
agency, without any influence from the decrees, foreknowledge, or predictions
of God, as inclining them to form or execute these wicked designs of theirs.

GOD did not by his decrees or efficiency put Christ to death, or either form
or execute, by his creating power, the wicked designs of his crucifiers; if he
had, his sufferings and death would not have declared God's righteousness. For
what manifestation of righteousness is it for a righteous Governor to inflict
that punishment on the innocent, that is threatened only to the guilty. But God
in his wise and holy providence overruled what they meant for evil, and
naturally tended to evil, for great good. But because God was more than a match
for them, and prevented their design to dethrone him as moral governor, and
ruin his kingdom from producing its natural effects and consequences; this does
by no means exculpate the sinner, or remove the blame, or imply that God is in
any sense the Author of Sin. This proves their design to dethrone God, and ruin
his moral kingdom, in putting Christ to death, to be an infinite evil, in its
nature and tendency, and their own production; and that they deserve an
infinite or endless punishment for it. This proves that they were enemies to
God, and opposed to the righteousness of his government; and they would prevent
his justice taking place, and the truth of his threatening being verified, if
it was in their power. And they would make all intelligent creatures believe,
that for God to execute the threatening on transgressors, according to truth
and justice, is inconsistent with the exercise of infinite goodness, love and
benevolence and righteousness to his creatures.

AND this sin is not a created existence as the soul itself is, made by God;
nor is it an essential mode as activity or exercise is to a living soul; but a
contingent mode of exercise, produced or formed by the sinner in transgressing
the divine law. As crookedness is not an essential mode of a line as extention
is, but only a contingent mode.

THE controversy between God and devils, Christ and infidels, is this -- Is God
a righteous Governor? Is his law holy, just and good? Will God execute the
threatening in damning sinners to all eternity? -- And to decide this, Christ
Jesus submitted to be made a victim and sacrifice by devils and wicked men, to
give them opportunity to act out their enmity to the justice and righteousness
of God as moral Governor, that they might be convinced of the evil nature and
tendency of this enmity, and their own just desert of eternal damnation for it,
according to the threatening of the law.

AND this sacrifice of the son of God was infinite! For the Lord of life and
glory, a person of infinite dignity, freely to humble himself to take human
nature, and cloth it with the moral perfections of his divine, so as to make
it one with himself, on purpose that he might put his divine character, as heir
of the kingdom, into the power of his enemies, who denied the righteousness of
the divine government -- and had an inveterate enmity to it -- how wonderful!
Of this wonderful humiliation of the Son of God, the Apostle speaks, -- Phil.
ii. 6.7.8. -- "Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man,"
etc.

AND for a person of such infinite dignity to suffer himself to be conquered by
his enemies, and be as a helpless victim in the power of his creatures, and
give them opportunity to deny his divinity -- and challenge his veracity --
when he appeared unable to vindicate himself. And for God the Son to make such
representations to his holy benevolent soul, of the evil of sin -- the
displeasure of God against it -- the dreadful sufferings of the damned -- and
the awful scene of sufferings through which he had to pass in order to make
atonement, and forsake it and leave it in the power of the enemy -- and to
deliver up his body to poverty, pain and death, when clothed with the moral
character of his divine, must be an infinite sacrifice! -- But this was the
only way in which the grand controversy, concerning God's righteousness as
moral Governor, that commenced upon the apostasy of angels, could be decided;
for would a less expensive one answer, this would not have been wise.

BUT in this way God's righteousness was declared in every part of it, viz.
Benevolence, Justice and Truth. By the Son of God, thus being set forth to be a
propitiation, and made a curse by being crucified and slain, not by his Father,
but by his enemies; the infinite benevolence of God to his moral kingdom, is
manifested and declared in a manner in which it could be declared by no other
means. For God not to spare his own Son, but deliver him up to such sufferings
for the sake of redeeming sinners, how great the love! -- And for the Son of
God to offer his liberty, life and glory, a sacrifice to pay the price of our
ransom, what an infinite expression of benevolence!

AND the justice of God in the threatened penalty, and his disposition and
determination to execute it on the sinner, that is not interested in the
atonement by faith, is fully declared in this transaction.

THE Son of God in this way gave opportunity to sinners to act out their enmity
to the righteousness of God as moral Governor, in a manner in which it could by
no other means be expressed. For he puts the whole moral character of God, as
moral Governor, in their power, and gives them opportunity to dethrone him, and
put him to death, as the heir of the Crown. And if this is the tendency and
nature of sin -- it is an infinite evil -- and deserves eternal death -- the
threatening is just -- and the least degree of punishment cannot be remitted,
consistent with the righteousness of God as moral Governor, unless adequate
satisfaction be made; but the sinner being a creature, can neither do nor
suffer any thing by virtue of which he can be released from the threatened
penalty. And hence God insists upon the mediator and surety, being a person of
infinite dignity and merit; and that he do and suffer that which is of infinite
value; -- that, which shall bring infinite honor to his character as moral
Governor, and infinite good to his kingdom. And this our mediator and surety
did, when he declared God's righteousness, by being made a propitiation. He
then condemned sin as an infinite evil, broke the serpent's head, exposed all
his wicked designs against God's character and kingdom, and destroyed the
devil's power and dominion, that is supported by error and wickedness; and
established the kingdom of God by the manifestation of truth and righteousness.
-- As Sampson, by being conquered by his enemies conquered them; and by being
slain by them slew them; so Christ Jesus the Captain of our salvation, by being
made a curse, i. e. a victim by his enemies, and being sacrificed by them, has
conquered and destroyed them all in a moral sense. The curse which the Son of
God was made, was not the curse threatened to the sinner in the law, but the
substitute of it, and fully answered the penalty; for the curse threatened to
the sinner included in it spiritual and eternal death, and implies that the
sinner is the victim or object of the wrath and anger of God: But the Son of
God, in being made a curse for us, never was the object or victim of the divine
anger or wrath, nor did he suffer spiritual or eternal death. When it pleased
the Father to bruise him, and put him to grief, and make his holy soul an
offering for sin, God the Father was not himself the executioner, but he
delivers him up out of his bosom, into the power of the enemy, and says,
"Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, against the man that is my fellow." And
God laid on him the iniquities of us all, i. e. imputed to him the immense debt
we had contracted by our iniquities -- and were unable to discharge -- but
Christ paid it, by his services and sufferings, in declaring God's
righteousness, and so executing judgment on God's enemies.

THE sword which God waked up against Christ, must not be considered as a
passive weapon in the hand of God; but free distinct agents, capable to form
their own wicked designs, and execute them on Christ; and their enmity to him
was waked up by the manifestation of the truth and righteousness of God's
character to their consciences. But God's conduct in delivering him up, and
leaving him in the power of the enemy, to be treated by them as he was, gave
occasion to many to esteem him stricken and smitten of God, and afflicted: But
he was then paying our debt in this manner, and was the object of his Father's
love, and not the victim of his wrath. And God the Father's insisting on such
an adequate satisfaction being made, before he would pardon one sin, or release
the sinner from the threatened penalty, declares God's disposition and
determination to punish the devils, and every christless sinner, to all
eternity, as fully as if we had seen eternal damnation already executed on them.

AND how dreadful must be the case and condition of all such as neglect to
attend to this gospel plan of salvation, so as to obtain the knowledge of it,
and believe it, and cordially embrace it, and return to the knowledge, love and
service and enjoyment of God, in this way, which he has in infinite wisdom and
goodness provided? This way is not provided to save sinners in their sins, but
to save them from their sins. Without holiness of heart and life, no man can
see the Lord. Faith in Christ is not designed to make void the moral law, and
give us a low esteem of God's justice; but to establish it, and to support the
moral government of God. Christ Jesus is not the minister of sin. All that
preach up salvation for sinners, without their exercising faith in Christ's
merits and holiness, and a conformity to the moral law as a rule of life,
encourage rebellion in God's kingdom, and may expect to receive an aggravated
damnation. This is the only state of probation for sinners -- all that die
without faith in Christ, and holiness of heart, will remain under the guilt and
power of sin, and the tyranny of satan, and the wrath of God and the Lamb, to
all eternity! -- Do not dream of any other state of probation after this life
is ended, for God has expressly declared the contrary in his word; and it is
inconsistent with reason, and the design of the present state of probation,
that any other should be revealed to us in this state; for this would frustrate
the design of it. O then, our improvement of the present, will move an eternity
for or against us! -- But you will say, Then what will become of the heathen?
How can they believe in Christ, who have not the gospel? -- To this I answer,
That those who never had the means of knowledge in their power, and so never
could know that God had found a ransom, or provided an atonement, will never be
condemned for not believing the gospel; but they will be condemned for their
enmity to God and his righteousness, as manifested to them by the light of
nature or the moral law; for these afford light enough to convince and condemn
sinners, though not enough to save them. But the sacred scriptures declare,
that the gospel has been preached to all; and that all may have sufficient
means of knowledge of the atonement to save them, if they do not neglect to
hear and understand the saving truth. See Romans x. 17.18. Col. i. 23. Wherever
sacrifices were known, the gospel has been preached -- and it has been
communicated from one nation to another by tradition -- and inspired men have
been raised up formerly, and sent into all nations, to spread the gospel; --
and if any have not received sufficient knowledge of the atonement for
salvation, it will not be because they could not obtain sufficient means of
knowledge, but because they hated the light, and would not attend to it. Much
less knowledge of the gospel was sufficient for salvation, before Christ came,
and among the heathen, than is now required of us, who have the written word in
our hands, and have ministers to explain it to us, and use instructions and
motives with us. If we should not repent and believe the gospel, but remain
infidels, it will not be for want of means of knowledge, but our neglect to
attend and hear and understand the truth. We shall have no excuse, if we
neglect to hear, so as to obtain the saving knowledge of the truth, and the
influences of the holy spirit. God is inflexible in his justice, and would not
pardon or pass by one instance of transgression or disobedience, 'till adequate
satisfaction was made, sufficient to vindicate the honor of his justice,
expressed in the threatening. And he verifies the truth of this threatening in
that he does not pardon one sinner, 'till he is united to the Mediator by faith
in him, and so is interested in that infinite fountain of merit which he has
procured, and is lodged with the Father.

IT would be as inconsistent with the righteousness of God, as moral Governor,
and all the rights of his government, to pardon and save an infidel or
unbeliever, remaining such, as it would have been to save sinners, had Christ
never come, or any atonement been made. And God can as consistently pardon and
save devils as infidels, or any that finally reject the atonement or deny the
necessity of it. We must first own ourselves rebels justly condemned, and no
way to make satisfaction by any thing we can do or suffer -- and receive the
atonement Christ has made -- and own there is no other name by which we can be
saved -- or Christ will profit us nothing.

THUS has the Son of God, by his amazing humiliation, arduous services and
great sufferings, declared God's righteousness, and so decided this great moral
controversy between heaven and hell -- brought infinite honor to God, and good
to his moral kingdom -- executed judgment on God's implacable and incurable
enemies -- and so procured an infinite fountain of righteousness and merit,
sufficient to pay the price of man's redemption; -- the benefits of which will,
by the Father, be bestowed on what sinners he pleases, freely of his grace,
through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom he has set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness, that he
might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus." See Romans iii.
24.25.26.

PARDON and justification, and eternal life, are bestowed by God the Father on
the sinner, as much of free and sovereign grace, without any respect had (...)
any merit belonging to the sinner, as deserving them, as if Christ had merited
nothing of the Father. That benevolence and grace which God exercises freely,
in bestowing benefits on sinners, never was purchased by Christ. Christ Jesus
did not die to make God the Father benevolent -- the death of Christ was the
effect, and not the cause, of God's love and grace, manifested to sinners. "God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son," etc. What Christ did
and suffered, was only to open a way for God freely to exercise his love and
grace to sinners, in pardoning, justifying, and saving them, consistent with
his justice and truth, expressed in the threatening. And it is a grand
misrepresentation of this affair, which the Universalists make, when they tell
us, that because the merit of the Son of God was a proper merit of condignity,
equivalent in value to all the honors conferred on him, and benefits bestowed
on his friends, that therefore God is obliged to save all mankind on account of
the merit of the Redeemer: For the Son of God has, by a merit of condignity,
purchased of the Father the honor to damn his enemies, as much as to save his
friends; and therefore universal damnation may be as clearly inferred from the
merit of condignity, as universal salvation. The merit of Christ being a merit
of condignity and sufficient for the salvation of all, does not lay God under
obligation to pardon any. And if he does pardon and save any, it is free and
sovereign grace in the Father, to which the sinner can lay no claim, any more
for what Christ has done and suffered. -- Jesus Christ, in declaring God's
righteousness, obtains of God all the honors he receives himself, and all the
benefits men have through him, by a proper merit of condignity, and a true
purchase by an equivalent. See President Edwards -- Origl. Sin. p. 183.
And has hereby opened a way for God to appear faithful and just, in forgiving
the sins of penitent believers. And hereby Jesus Christ has purchased the gift
of the Holy Spirit to be the great agent in his kingdom, to accompany those
truths exhibited by his cross, by his power and efficacious influences to
rectify the moral principle, that was totally corrupted by the fall, and to
convince of sin, produce repentance, faith and love in the soul, and bring the
sinner into a state of union with Christ Jesus, in order to render it
consistent with the justice of God to pardon justify and save him. And the Holy
Spirit accompanying the truths of the gospel, which is the only ministration of
the Spirit, in its saving influences, brings the soul to the practice of
holiness and righteousness, and so carries on a work of sanctification, 'till
it becomes me^^ for the sight and enjoyment of God in heaven.

NOW it is evident, that the principal design of divine revelation is to
communicate these truths to mankind, and so minister the Holy Spirit to men.
And now, whatever alterations or corruptions the divine oracles may have
suffered as to any circumstantial parts of the history, yet this principal part
of divine revelation, it is evident, never has been corrupted, but is now
contained in the sacred scriptures pure and entire; and the Spirit does
accompany these truths: For as it is self-evident to every one who understands
it, that this plan could not have been devised at first by any created wisdom,
and never could be known but by immediate revelation from God; so if it had
been corrupted, it never could have been rectified by any creature, so as to
appear as it now does, with all the distinguishing marks of divine wisdom,
power and benevolence, and accompanied by the spirit of truth. How is it
possible for creatures to know that God is willing to pardon rebels, unless he
reveals it? Or how he can pardon such as have transgressed his laws, consistent
with his truth, and the righteousness of his government? Reason could not
discover this! And this doctrine of atonement by the Son of God, if rightly
understood, carries in it as plain marks of infinite wisdom, power and
benevolence, as are manifested in creation: And we can in the same manner prove
the divine original of the gospel, as we can that this world is of divine
original. We need not go to any external evidences to prove that the gospel is
from God, if we have but a right speculative understanding of the doctrines
therein contained. No created benevolence could conceive such mercy and grace
to enemies -- no created wisdom could devise such a method for the exercise of
it -- and no created power could accomplish such a plan in such an astonishing
way! The devil never invented it; for it is subversive of his kingdom and
interest: It is inconsistent with the character of any good creature to put
such a cheat upon mankind (if he was able) as to attribute that to God, of
which he himself was the author. But no created being was able to lay out such
a plan -- thus to display the perfections of God by occasion of sin, and even
to render them more illustrious than if sin had never entered into his moral
kingdom: And thus bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil!

HOW much does this plan of redemption by Christ exceed all created wisdom!
What a glorious display of the divine! You might as well set a created
understanding to lay out the plan of a world, as to devise such a plan as this!
Let any rational infidel attend to it, and understand it, and he must confess
that the gospel in which it is contained, is of divine original. And that all
the writings of heathen, and all the oracles of reason, are but husks for the
swine to feed upon in comparison of it. Who among them ever wrote concerning
this grand moral contest, and how it commenced -- and how it was decided -- and
the righteousness of God as moral Governor was declared, and atonement made,
and the spirit of truth in its supernatural influences, ministered, and a
foundation laid to convert sinners from sin to righteousness, and deliver them
from the power of darkness, and translate them into the kingdom of God's dear
Son -- and destroy and torment wicked men and devils by the manifestation of
divine truth and righteousness? These truths will be the entertainment of
heaven to all eternity. And, O! what an aggravated damnation will be their
portion who finally reject this gospel for the Oracles of Reason, and will not
come to the light of this sun of righteousness, but do all they can to
extinguish it, and so damn as many of mankind as they can. Should men and
devils strive to extinguish the influences of the natural sun, and deprive
mankind of the benefit of them; what a cruel and wicked design would this
discover: But this would be nothing in comparison of the attempt of the Deists,
who are seeking to extinguish the light, and deprive mankind of the blessed
influences of the Sun of Righteousness, who has arisen on this dark and
diseased world, with healing in his wings! On this Sun all depend for light,
righteousness and life; for grace and glory. O, then, attend to the light of
this Sun! study the scriptures -- come to your Father's house, and you will
find bread enough and to spare: But feed on husks and you will to all eternity
perish with hunger. Could I but draw your earnest attention to the truths of
the gospel, so that you would read, hear and meditate upon them, and improve
Sabbaths and other opportunities, seriously to attend to them, and seek to
understand them; I should have hope concerning the worst of you, though you had
been as bad as publicans and harlots -- that you will obtain the knowledge of
the truth, receive the spirit of truth, that accompanies it, be convinced,
repent of sin, believe in Christ Jesus, receive his righteousness, become holy,
and obtain salvation with eternal glory. But so long as you remain secure, and
do not wake up and earnestly attend to the truths of the gospel -- and do not
improve Sabbaths and other opportunities to read the gospel, or hear it
preached; I see no reason to entertain hope, that your eyes will be opened
'till they are opened in the flames of hell -- where your knowledge and
conviction of the truth will tend to torment you for ever and ever. But hear
now, and receive the truth with faith and love, and your souls shall live!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 16, line 23, from the top, read Prototokos. -- Page 17, line 12, raze s,
at the end of consider. -- Page 20th, line 2^, read could instead of would. --
Page 28th, line 16, from the top, read thee, instead of the terrible, etc.


