TO THE PRINTER.
SIR,
THE enclosed letter contains the reasons of his Excellency Governor Randolph
for refusing his signature to the proposed Foederal Constitution of Government
submitted to the several states by the late Convention at Philadelphia. The
manner in which we have obtained it, and the authority by which we convey it to
the Public, through the channel of your Press, will be explained by the letter
herewith sent to you, which, we request may precede his Excellency's letter to
the Speaker of the House of Delegates in your publication of them.

M. SMITH, CHARLES M. THRUSTON. JOHN H. BRIGGS. MANN PAGE, jun.


To his Excellency EDMUND RANDOLPH, Esquire.
SIR, December 2, 1787.
IT has been reported in various parts of the state, that the reasons which
governed you in your disapprobation of the proposed Foederal Constitution, no
longer exist; and many of the people of this Commonwealth have wished to know
what objections could induce you to refuse your signature to a measure so
flattering to many principal characters in America, and which is so generally
supposed to contain the seeds of prosperity and happiness to the United States.

We are satisfied, sir, that the time is passed, when you might with propriety
have been requested to communicate your sentiments to the General Assembly on
this subject; but, as you have been pleased to favor us wih your observations
in private, and we conceive they would not only afford satisfaction to the
public, but also be useful by the information and instruction they will convey,
we hope, you can have no objection to enable us to make them public through the
medium of the Press. We have the honor to be, with respectful esteem, Sir, your
most obedient servants,

M. SMITH, CHARLES M. THRUSTON, JOHN H. BRIGGS. MANN PAGE, jun.


To M. Smith, Charles M. Thruston, John H. Briggs, and Mann Page, jun. Esquires.
GENTLEMEN, December 10, 1787.
YOUR favor of the second instant, requesting permission to publish my letter
on the new Constitution, gives me an opportunity of making known my sentiments,
which, perhaps I ought not to decline. It has been written ever since its date,
and was intended for the General Assembly. But I have hitherto been restrained
from sending it to them, by motives of delicacy arising from two questions
depending before that body, the one respecting the Constitution, the other
myself. At this day too I feel an unwillingness to bring it before the
Legislature, lest in the diversity of opinion, I should excite a contest
unfavorable to that harmony with which I trust the great subject will be
discussed. I therefore submit the publication of the letter to your pleasure.

I beg leave however, to remind you, that I have only mentioned my objections
to the Constitution in general terms, thinking it improper, and too volumnious,
to explain them at full length. But it is my purpose to go at large into the
Constitution when a fit occasion shall present itself.

I am, Gentlemen, with the greatest respect, your most obedient servant,

EDMUND RANDOLPH.

A LETTER OF HIS EXCELLENCY EDMUND RANDOLPH, ESQUIRE, ON THE FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION.
RICHMOND, OCTOBER 10, 1787. SIR,
THE Constitution, which I enclosed to the General Assembly in a late official
letter, appears without my signature. This circumstance, although trivial in
its own nature, has been rendered rather important to myself at least, by being
misunderstood by some, and misrepresented by others -- As I disdain to conceal
the reasons for withholding my subscription, I have always been, still am, and
ever shall be, ready to proclaim them to the world. To the legislature
therefore, by whom I was deputed to the Foederal Convention, I beg leave now to
address them; affecting no indifference to public opinion, but resolved not to
court it by an unmanly sacrifice of my own judgment.

As this explanation will involve a summary, but general review of our foederal
situation, you will pardon me, I trust, although I should transgress the usual
bounds of a letter.

Before my departure for the Convention, I believed, that the confederation was
not so eminently defective, as it had been supposed. But after I had entered
into a free communication with those, who were best informed of the condition
and interest of each state; after I had compared the intelligence derived from
them, with the properties which ought to characterize the government of our
union, I became persuaded, that the confederation was destitute of every
energy, which a constitution of the United States ought to possess.

For the objects proposed by its institution were, that it should be a shield
against foreign hostility, and a firm resort against domestic commotion: that
it should cherish trade, and promote the prosperity of the states under its
care.

But these are not among the attributes of our present union. Severe experience
under the pressure of war -- a ruinous weakness, manifested since the return of
peace -- and the contemplation of those dangers, which darken the future
prospect, have condemned the hope of grandeur and of safety under the auspices
of the confederation.

In the exigencies of war indeed the history of its effects is short; the final
ratification having been delayed until the beginning of the year 1781. But
howsoever short, this period is distinguished by melancholy testimonies, of its
inability to maintain in harmony the social intercourse of the states, to
defend Congress against encroachments on their rights, and to obtain by
requisitions supplies to the foederal treasury or recruits to the foederal
armies. I shall not attempt an enumeration of the particular instances; but
leave to your own remembrance and the records of Congress, the support of these
assertions.

In the season of peace too not many years have elapsed; and yet each of them
has produced fatal examples of delinquency, and sometimes of pointed opposition
to foederal duties. To the various remonstrances of Congress I appeal for a
gloomy, but unexaggerated narrative of the injuries, which our faith, honor and
happiness have sustained by the failures of the states.

But these evils are past; and some may be lead by an honest zeal to conclude,
that they cannot be repeated. Yes, sir; they will be repeated as long as the
confederation exists, and will bring with them other mischiefs, springing from
the same source, which cannot be yet foreseen in their full array of terror.

If we examine the constitutions, and laws of the several states, it is
immediately discovered, that the law of nations is unprovided with sanctions in
many cases, which deeply affect public dignity and public justice. The letter,
however of the confederation does not permit Congress to remedy these defects,
and such an authority, although evidently deducible from its spirit, cannot,
without a violation of the second article, be assumed. Is it not a political
phenomenon, that the head of the confederacy should be doomed to be plunged
into war, from its wretched impotency to check offenses against this law? And
sentenced to witness in unavailing anguish the infraction of their engagements
to foreign sovereigns?

And yet this is not the only grievous point of weakness. After a war shall be
inevitable, the requisitions of Congress for quotas of men or money, will again
prove unproductive and fallacious. Two causes will always conspire to this
baneful consequence.

1. No government can be stable, which hangs on human inclination alone,
unbiassed by the fear of coercion; and 2. from the very connection between
states bound to proportionate contributions, -- jealousies and suspicions
naturally arise, which at least chill the ardor, if they do not excite the
murmurs of the whole. I do not forget indeed, that by one sudden impulse our
part of the American continent has both thrown into a military posture, and
that in the earlier annals of the war, our armies marched to the field on the
mere recommendations of Congress But ought we to argue from a contest, thus
signalized by the magnitude of its stake, that as often as a flame shall be
hereafter kindled, the same enthusiasm will fill our legions? or renew them, as
they may be thined by losses?

If not, where shall we find protection? Impressions, like those, which prevent
a compliance with requisitions of regular forces, will deprive the American
republic of the services of militia. But let us suppose, that they are
attainable, and acknowledge, as I always shall, that they are the natural
support of a free government. When it is remembered, that in their absence
agriculture must languish; that they are not habituated to military exposures
and the rigor of military discipline, and that the necessity of holding in
readiness successive detachments, carries the expense far beyond that of
inlistments -- this resource ought to be adopted with caution.

As strongly too am I persuaded, that requisitions for money will not be more
cordially received. For besides the distrust, which would prevail with respect
to them also; besides the opinion, entertained by each state of its own
liberality and unsatisfied demands against the United States, there is another
consideration, not less worthy of attention. The first rule for determining
each quota was the value of all land granted or surveyed, and of the buildings
and improvements thereon. It is no longer doubted, that an equitable, uniform
mode of estimating that value, is impracticable; and therefore twelve states
have substituted the number of inhabitants under certain limitations, as the
standard according to which money is to be furnished. But under the subsisting
articles of the union, the assent of the thirteenth state is necessary, and has
not yet been given. This (...) of itself lessen the hope of procuring a revenue
for foederal uses; and the miscarriage of the impost almost rivets our
despondency.

Amidst these disappointments, it would afford some consolation, if when
rebellion shall threaten any state, an ultimate asylum could be found under the
wing of Congress. But it is at least equivocal, whether they can intrude forces
into a state, rent asunder by civil discord, even with the purest solicitude
for our foederal welfare, and on the most urgen entreaties of the state itself.
Nay the very allowance of this power would be pageantry alone, from the want of
money and of men.

To these defects of Congressional power, the history of man has subjoined
others, not less alarming. I earnestly pray, that the recollection of common
sufferings, which terminated in common glory, may check the sallies of
violence, and perpetuate mutual friendship between the states. But I cannot
presume, that we are superior to those unsocial passions, which under like
circumstances have infested more ancient nations. I cannot presume, that
through all time, in the daily mixture of American citizens with each other, in
the conflicts for commercial advantages, in the discontents, which the
neighborhood of territory has been seen to engender in other quarters of the
globe, and in the efforts of faction and intrigue -- thirteen distinct
communities under no effective superintending control (as the United States
confessedly now are notwithstanding the bold terms of the confederation) will
avoid a hatred to each other deep and deadly.

In the prosecution of this inquiry we shall find the general prosperity to
decline under a system thus unnerved. No sooner is the merchant prepared for
foreign ports with the treasures, which this new world kindly offers to his
acceptance, than it is announced to him, that they are shut against American
shipping, or opened under oppressive regulations. He urges Congress to a
counter-policy, and is answered only by a condolence on the general misfortune.
He is immediately struck with the conviction, that until exclusion shall be
opposed to exclusion and restriction to restriction, the American flag will be
disgraced. For who can conceive, that thirteen legislatures, viewing commerce
under different relations, and fancying themselves, discharged from every
obligation to concede the smallest of their commercial advantages for the
benefit of the whole, will be wrought into a concert of action in defiance of
every prejudice? Nor is this all: -- Let the great improvements be recounted,
which have enriched and illustrated Europe: Let it be noted, how few those are,
which will be absolutely denied to the United States, comprehending within
their boundaries the choicest blessings of climate, soil and navigable waters;
then let the most sanguine patriot banish, if he can, the mortifying belief,
that all these must sleep, until they shall be roused by the vigor of a
national government.

I have not exemplified the preceding remarks by minute details; because they
are evidently fortified by truth, and the consciousness of United America. I
shall therefore no longer deplore the unfitness of the confederation to secure
our peace; but proceed, with a truly unaffected distrust of my own opinions, to
examine what order of powers the government of the United States ought to
enjoy? how they ought to be defended against incroachment? whether they can be
interwoven in the confederation without an alteration of its very essence? or
must be lodged in new hands? showing at the same time the convulsions, which
seem to await us from a dissolution of the union or partial confederacies.

To mark the kind and degree of authority, which ought to be confided to the
government of the United States is no more than to reverse the description,
which I have already given, of the defects of the confederation.

From thence it will follow, that the operations of peace and war will be
clogged without regular advances of money, and that these will be slow indeed,
if dependent on supplication alone. For what better name do requisitions
deserve, which may be evaded or opposed, without the fear of coercion? But
although coercion is an indispensable ingredient, it ought not to be directed
against a state, as a state; it being impossible to attempt it except by
blockading the trade of the delinquent, or carrying war into its bowels. Even
if these violent schemes were eligible, in other respects both of them might
perhaps be defeated by the scantiness of the public chest; would be tardy in
their complete effect, as the expense of the land and naval equipments must be
first reimbursed; and might drive the proscribed state into the desperate
resolve of inviting foreign alliances. Against each of them lie separate
unconquerable objections. A blockade is not equally applicable to all the
states, they being differently circumstanced in commerce and in ports; nay an
excommunication from the privileges of the union would be vain, because every
regulation or prohibition may be easily eluded under the rights of American
citizenship, or of foreign nations. But how shall we speak of the intrusion of
troops? shall we arm citizens against cititizens, and habituate them to shed
kindred blood? shall we risque the inflicting of wounds, which will generate a
rancour never to be subdued? would there be no room to fear, that an army
accustomed to sight, for the establishment of authority, would salute an
emperor of their own? Let us not bring these things into jeopardy. Let us
rather substitute the same process, by which individuals are compelled to
contribute to the government of their own states. Instead of making
requisitions to the legislatures, it would appear more proper, that taxes
should he imposed by the foederal head, under due modifications and guards:
that the collectors should demand from the citizens their respective quotas,
and be supported as in the collection of ordinary taxes.

It follows too, that, as the general government will be responsible to foreign
nations, it ought to he able to annul any offensive measure, or enforce any
public right. Perhaps among the topics on which they may be aggrieved or
complain, the commercial intercourse, and the manner, in which contracts are
discharged, may constitute the principal articles of clamor.

It follows too, that the general government ought to be the supreme arbiter
for adjusting every contention among the states. In all their connections
therefore with each other, and particularly in commerce, which will probably
create the greatest discord, it ought to hold the reins

It follows too, that the general government ought to protect each state
against domestic as well as external violence.

And lastly it follows, that through the general government alone can we ever
assume the rank, to which we are entitled by our resources and situation.

Should the people of America surrender these powers, they can be paramount to
the constitutions, and ordinary acts of legislation, only by being delegated by
them. I do not pretend to affirm, but I venture to believe, that if the
confederation had been solemnly questioned in opposition to our constitution or
even to one of our laws, posterior to it, it must have given way. For never did
it obtain with us a higher ratification, than a resolution of Assembly in the
daily form.

This will be one security against incroachment. But another not less effectual
is, to exclude the individual states from any agency in the national
government, as far as it may be safe, and their interposition may not be
absolutely necessary.

But now, fir, permit me to declare, that in my humble judgment the powers by
which alone the blessings of a general government can be accomplished, cannot
be interwoven in the confederation without a change of its very essence; or in
other words, that the confederation must be thrown aside. This is almost
demonstrable from the inefficacy of requisitions and from the necessity of
converting them into acts of authority. My suffrage, as a citizen, is also for
additional powers. But to whom shall we commit these acts of authority, these
additional powers? To Congress? -- When I formerly lamented the defects in the
jurisdiction of Congress, I had no view to indicate any other opinion, than
that the foederal head ought not to be so circumscribed. For free as I am at
all times to profess my reverence for that body, and the individuals, who
compose it, I am yet equally free to make known my aversion to repose such a
trust in a tribunal so constituted. My objections are not the visions of
theory, but the result of my own observation in America, and of the experience
of others abroad. 1. The legislative and executive are concentred in the same
persons. This, where real power exists, must eventuate in tyranny. 2. The
representation of the states bears no proportion to their importance. This is
an unreasonable subjection of the will of the majority to that of the minority.
3. The mode of election and the liability to be recalled may too often render
the delegates rather partisans of their own states, than representatives of the
union. 4. Cabal and intrigue must consequently gain an ascendancy in a course
of years. 5. A single house of legislation will some times be precipitate,
perhaps passionate. 6. As long as seven states are required for the smallest,
and nine for the greatest votes, may not foreign influence at some future day
insinuate itself, so as to interrupt every active exertion? 7. To crown the
whole, it is scarcely within the verge of possibility, that so numerous an
assembly should acquire that secrecy, dispatch, and vigor, which are the test
of excellence in the executive department.

My inference from these facts and principles is, that the new powers must be
deposited in a new body, growing out of a consolidation of the union, as far as
the circumstances of the states will allow. Perhaps, however, some may meditate
its dissolution, and others partial (...)

The first is an idea awful indeed and irreconcilable with a very early, and
hitherto uniform conviction, (...) without union we must be undone. For before
the voice of war was heard, the pulse of the then colonies was tried and found
to beat in unison. The (...) labor of our enemies was to divide, and the
policy of every Congress to bind us together. But in no example was this truth
more clearly displayed, than in the prudence, with which independence was
unfolded to the sight, and in the forbearance to declare it, until America
almost unanimously called for it. After we had thus launched into troubles,
never before explored, and in the hour of heavy distress, the remembrance of
our social strength not only forbade despair, but drew from Congress the most
illustrious repetition of their settled purpose to despise all terms, short of
independence.

Behold then, how successful and glorious we have been, while we acted in
fraternal concord. But let us discard the illusion, that by this success and
this glory the crest of danger has irrecoverably fallen. Our governments are
yet too youthful to have acquired stability from habit. Our very quiet depends
upon the duration of the union. Among the upright and intelligent, few can read
without emotion the future fate of the states, if severed from each other. Then
shall we learn the full weight of foreign intrigue -- Then shall we hear of
partitions of our country. If a prince, inflamed by the lust of conquest,
should use one state, as the instrument of enslaving others -- if every state
is to be wearied by perpetual alarms, and compelled to maintain large military
establishments -- if all questions are to be decided by an appeal to arms,
where a difference of opinion cannot be removed by negotiation -- in a word, if
all the direful misfortunes, which haunt the peace of rival nations, are to
triumph over the land -- for what have we contended? Why have we exhausted our
wealth? Why have we basely betrayed the heroic martyrs of the federal cause?

But dreadful as the total dissolution of the union is to my mind, I entertain
no less horror at the thought of partial confederacies. I have not the least
ground for supposing, that an overture of this kind would be listened to by a
single state; and the presumption is, that the politics of the greater part of
the states flow from the warmest attachment to an union of the whole. If
however a lesser confederacy could be obtained, by Virginia, let me conjure my
countrymen well to weigh the probable consequences, before they attempt to form
it.

On such an event, the strength of the union would be divided into two or
perhaps three parts. Has it so increased since the war as to be divisible? --
and yet remain sufficient for our happiness?

The utmost limit of any partial confederacy, which Virginia could expect to
form, would comprehend only the three southern states, and her nearest northern
neighbor. But they, like ourselves, are diminished in their real force, by the
mixture of an unhappy species of population.

Again may I ask, whether the opulence of the United States has been augmented
since the war? This is answered in the negative by a load of debt, and the
declension of trade.

At all times must a southern confederacy support ships of war, and soldiery.
As soon would a navy move from the forest, and an army spring from the earth,
as such a confederacy, indebted, impoverished in its commerce, and destitute of
men, could, for some years at least provide an ample defense for itself.

Let it not be forgotten, that nations, which can enforce their rights, have
large claims against the United States, and that the creditor may insist on
payment from any one of them. Which of them would probably be the victim? The
most productive and the most exposed. When vexed by reprisals or war, the
southern states will sue for alliances on this continent or beyond sea. If for
the former, the necessity of an union of the whole is decided. If for the
latter, America will, I fear, re-act the scenes of confusion and bloodshed,
exhibited among most of those nations, which have, too late, repented the folly
of relying on auxiliaries.

Two or more confederacies cannot but be competitors for power. The ancient
friendship between the citizens of America, being thus cut off, bitterness and
hostility will succeed in its place. In order to prepare against surrounding
danger, we shall be compelled to vest somewhere or other power approaching near
to a military government.

The annals of the world have abounded so much with instances of a divided
people, being a prey to foreign influence, that I shall not restrain my
apprehensions of it, should our union be torn asunder. The opportunity of
insinuating it will be multiplied in proportion to the parts, into which we may
be broken.

In short, sir, I am fatigued with summoning up to my imagination the miseries,
which will harrass the United States, if torn from each other, and which will
not end, until they are superseded by fresh mischiefs under the yoke of a
tyrant.

I come therefore to the last and perhaps only refuge in our difficulties, a
consolidation of the union, as far as circumstances will permit. To fulfill this
desirable object, the constitution was framed by the Foederal Convention. A
quorum of eleven states, and the only member from a twelfth have subscribed it;
Mr. MASON of Virginia, Mr. GERRY of Massachusetts and myself having refused to
subscribe.

Why I refused, would, I hope, be solved to the satisfaction of those, who know
me, by saying that a sense of duty commanded me thus to act. It commanded me,
sir, For believe me, that no event of my life ever occupied more of my
reflection. To subscribe seemed to offer no inconsiderable gratification; since
it would have presented me to the world, as a fellow laborer with the learned
and zealous statesmen of America. But it was far more interesting to my
feelings, that I was about to differ from three of my colleagues; one of whom
is, to the honor of the country, which he has saved, imbosomed in their
affections, and can receive no praise from the highest luster of language; the
other two of whom have been long enrolled among the wisest and best lovers of
the commonwealth; and the unshaken and intimate friendship of all of whom I
have ever prized, and still do prize, as among the happiest of all my
acquisitions. I was no stranger to the reigning partiality for the members, who
composed the convention; and had not the smallest doubt, that from this cause,
and from the ardor for a reform of government, the first applauses at least
would be loud, and profuse. I suspected too, that there was something in the
human breast, which for a time would be apt to construe a temperateness in
politics into an enmity to the union. Nay I plainly foresaw, that in the
dissensions of parties, a middle line would probably be interpreted into a want
of enterprise and decision. But these considerations, how seducing soever, were
feeble opponents to the suggestions of my conscience. I was sent to exercise my
judgment, and to exercise it was my fixed determination; being instructed by
even an imperfect acquaintance with mankind, that self approbation is the only
true reward, which a political career can bestow, and that popularity would
have been but another name for perfidy, if to secure it, I had given up the
freedom of thinking for myself.

It would have been a peculiar pleasure to me, to have ascertained, before I
left Virginia, the temper and genius of my fellow citizens, considered
relatively to a government, so substantially differing from the confederation,
as that, which is now submitted. But this was for many obvious reasons
impossible: and I was thereby deprived of what I thought the necessary guides.

I saw however that the confederation was tottering from its own weakness, and
that the fitting of the convention was a signal of its total insufficiency. I
was therefore ready to assent to a scheme of government, which was proposed,
and which went beyond the limits of the confederation, believing, that without
being too extensive it would have preserved our tranquillity, until that temper
and that genius should be collected.

But when the plan which is now before the General Assembly, was on its passage
through the convention, I moved, that the state-conventions should be at
liberty to amend, and that a second general Convention should be holden to
discuss the amendments, which should be suggested by them. This motion was in
some measure justified by the manner, in which the confederation was forwarded
originally, by Congress to the state-legislatures, in many of which amendments
were proposed, and those amendments were afterward examined in Congress. Such
a motion was doubly expedient here, as the delegation of so much more power was
sought for. But it was negatived. I then expressed my unwillingness to sign. My
reasons were the following.

1. It is said in the resolutions, which accompany the constitution, that it is
to be submitted to a convention of Delegates, chosen in each state by the
people there of, for their assent and ratification. The meaning of these terms
is allowed universally to be, that the Convention must either adopt the
constitution in the whole, or reject it in the whole, and is positively
forbidden to amend. If therefore I had signed, I should have felt myself bound
to be silent as to amendments, and to endeavor to support the constitution
without the correction of a letter. With this consequence before my eyes and
with a determination to attempt an amendment, I was taught by a regard for
consistency not to sign.

2. My opinion always was, and still is, that every citizen of America, let the
crisis be what it may, ought to have a full opportunity to propose through his
representatives any amendment, which in his apprehension tends to the public
welfare -- By signing I should have contradicted this sentiment.

3. A constitution ought to have the hearts of the people on its side. But if
at a future day it should be burdensome, after having been adopted in the
whole, and they should insinuate, that it was in some measure forced upon them,
by being confined to the single alternative of taking or rejecting it
altogether, under my impressions and with my opinions I should not be able to
justify myself had I signed.

4. I was always satisfied, as I have now experienced, that this great subject,
would be placed in new lights and attitudes by the criticism of the world, and
that no man can assure himself, how a constitution will work for a course of
years, until at least he shall have heard the observations of the people at
large. I also fear more from inaccuracies in a constitution, than from gross
errors in any other composition; because our dearest interests are to be
regulated by it, and power, if loosely given, especially where it will be
interpreted with great latitude, may bring sorrow in its execution. Had I
signed with these ideas, I should have virtually shut my ears against the
information, which I ardently desired.

5. I was afraid, that if the Constitution was to be submitted to the people,
to be wholly adopted or wholly rejected by them, they would not only reject it,
but bid a lasting farewell to the union. This formidable event I wished to
avert, by keeping myself free to propose amendments, and thus, if possible, to
remove the obstacles to an effectual government. But it will be asked, whether
all these arguments were not well weighed in Convention. They were, sir, and
with great candor. Nay, when I called to mind the respectability of those, with
whom I was associated, I almost lost confidence in these principles. On other
occasions I should cheerfully have yielded to a majority; on this the fate of
thousands, yet unborn, enjoined me not to yield, until I was convinced --

Again may I be asked, why the mode pointed out in the Constitution for its
amendment, may not be a sufficient security against its imperfections, without
now arresting it in its progress? -- My answers are, 1. that it is better to
amend, while we have the Constitution in our power, while the passions of
designing men are not yet enlisted and while a bare majority of the states may
amend, than to wait for the uncertain assent of three fourths of the states. 2.
That a bad feature in government becomes more and more fixed every day. 3. That
frequent changes of a Constitution even if practicable ought not (...) be
wished, but avoided as much as possible: and 4. That in the present case it may
by questionable, whether, after the particular advantages of its operation
shall be discerned, three fourths of the states can be induced to amend.

I confess, that it is no easy task, to devise a scheme which shall be suitable
to the views of all. Many expedients have occurred to me, but none of them
appear less exceptionable than this: that if our Convention should choose to
amend, another federal Convention be recommended: that in that federal
Convention the amendments proposed by this or any other state, be discussed;
and if incorporated in the constitution or rejected, or if a proper number of
the other states should be unwilling to accede to a second Convention, the
constitution be again laid before the same state-conventions, which shall again
assemble on the summons of the Executives, and it shall be either wholly
adopted, or wholly rejected, without a further power of amendment. I count such
a delay, as nothing in comparison with so grand an object; especially too as
the privilege of amending must terminate after the use of it once.

I should now conclude this letter, which is already too long, were it not
incumbent on me from having contended for amendments, to set forth the
particulars, which I conceive to require correction. I undertake this with
reluctance; because it is remote from my intentions to catch the prejudices or
prepossessions of any man. But as I mean only to manifest, that I have not been
actuated by caprice, and now to explain every objection at full length would be
an immense labor, I shall content myself with enumerating certain heads, in
which the constitution is most repugnant to my wishes

The two first points are the equality of suffrage in the Senate, and the
submission of commerce to a mere majority in the legislature, with no other
check than the revision of the President. I conjecture that neither of these
things can be corrected; and particularly the former; without which we must
have risen perhaps in disorder.

But I am sanguine in hoping, that in every other, justly obnoxious clause,
Virginia, will be seconded by a majority of the states. I hope, that she will
be seconded 1. in causing all ambiguities of expression to be precisely
explained: 2. in rendering the President ineligible after a given number of
years: 3. in taking from him either the power of nominating to the judiciary
offices, or of filling up vacancies which therein may happen during the recess
of the senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their
next session: 4. in taking from him the power of pardoning for treason, at
least before conviction: 5. in drawing a line between the powers of Congress
and individual states; and in defining the former; so as to leave no clashing
of jurisdictions not dangerous disputes: and to prevent the one from being
swallowed up by the other, under the cover of general words, and implication:
6. in abridging the power of the Senate to make treaties the supreme laws of
the land: 7. in providing a tribunal instead of the Senate for the impeachment
of Senators: 8. in incapacitating the Congress to determine their own salaries:
and (...) in limiting and defining the judicial power.

The proper remedy must be consigned to the wisdom of the convention: and the
final step, which Virginia shall pursue, if her overtures shall be discarded,
must also rest with them.

But as I affect neither mystery nor subtilty, in politics, I hesitate not to
say, that the most fervent prayer of my foul is the establishment of a firm,
energetic government; that the most inveterate curse, which can befall us, is a
dissolution of the union; and that the present moment, if suffered to pass away
unemployed, can never be recalled. These were my opinions, while I acted as a
Delegate; they sway me, while I speak as a private citizen. I shall therefore
cling to the union, as the rock of our salvation, and urge Virginia to finish
the salutary work, which she has begun. And if after our best efforts for
amendments they cannot be obtained, I scruple not to declare, (notwithstanding
the advantage, which such a declaration may give to the enemies of my
proposal,) that I will, as an individual citizen, accept the constitution;
because I would regulate myself by the spirit of America.

You will excuse me, sir, for having been thus tedious. My feelings and duty
demanded this exposition: for through no other channel could I rescue my
omission to sign from misrepresentation, and in no more effectual way could I
exhibit to the General Assembly an unreserved history of my conduct.

I have the honor, Sir, to be, with great respect, your most obedient servant,

EDMUND RANDOLPH.

The Honorable the Speaker of the House of Delegates.

