Mr. VIETS's SERMON ON GOOD FRIDAY.

A SERMON, PREACHED IN St. Andrew's Church, SIMSBURY, IN NEW ENGLAND, ON APRIL
9th, 1784. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE CRUCIFIXION OF CHRIST, COMMONLY CALLED
GOOD FRIDAY.

BY ROGER VIETS, LATE MISSIONARY AT SIMSBURY.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, M.DCC.LXXXVII.

TO THE REV. DR. THOMAS WHARTON, RECTOR OF ST. MICHAEL'S, BRIDGETOWN, AND THE
OTHER WORTHY CLERGY OF THE ISLAND OF BARBADOS, THIS SERMON, IS, WITH ALL
SUBMISSION, RESPECT AND GRATITUDE, DEDICATED, BY THEIR AFFECTIONATE, OBLIGED,
HUMBLE SERVANT, ROGER VIETS.

ISAIAH lxiii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Who is this that comes from Edom, with
dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel, traveling in
the greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him that
treads in the wine fat?

I have trodden the wine press alone; and of the people there was none with me*
for I will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their
blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.

And I looked, and there was none to help: and I wondered that there was none
to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it
upheld me.

And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my
fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.


ONCE more has the swift current of time produced the day, upon which our
church calls on her children to look up with a mixture of joy and melancholy to
the cross, whereon was accomplished the stupendous work of the salvation of the
world -- A day never to be forgotten, always to be respected by every one who
is not ashamed of the cross of Christ, by every one who glories in the name of
a christian.

THE holy prophet, being, by the spirit of God, brought forward through many ages
of futurity, beholds our Savior returning from his severe contest with his
spiritual foes -- his head crowned with never-fading laurels -- his garments
deeply stained with the crimson spots, which were the price of his victory. Who
art thou, cries the Prophet with awful surprise, coming from the land of blood,
from the fields of tribulation, with bloody raiment; who nevertheless art
clothed in glory, and put on majesty itself as a garment, and walk in
the height of superlative power? The blessed Conqueror answers, I, whose word
is the essence of truth, and who am able to save to the uttermost. Isaiah
further enquires, Wherefore is thine apparel so bloody and your garments red,
like the garments of him that treads in the wine-fat? "The wine press,"
replies the Messiah, indeed have I trodden; and have trodden it alone; of all
my friends and followers, there was none continued with me in that trying hour;
But as for mine enemies, they shall be made my footstool; my impenitent,
incorrigible adversaries will I trample under foot in my just indignation; my
garments shall be stained with their blood; I will break them with a rod of
iron; I will dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. For the day of
vengeance is come, the time, when I am to bruise the serpent's head -- to open
the prison doors and liberate the redeemed captives. In that tremendous crisis,
I looked round for assistance, but no man appeared to help me* Of my own chosen
disciples, one had betrayed me* another had denied me, and all had forsaken me.
-- Then, in my vast astonishment, and bitterness of grief, I cried out MY GOD,
MY GOD, WHY HAVE THOU FORSAKEN ME! -- But my God had not entirely forsaken me,
because he had promised, that when I should descend into hell (as I assuredly
must to complete my work of redemption) he would not leave my soul there. Then
had I recourse to the omnipotence of mine own arm; my fortitude and resolution
upheld me. Woe to all who oppose me, or obstruct the great business, that I am
performing. Woe to them that slander, despise or neglect the salvation which I
have purchased by this conflict; for I will trend them down in mine anger, I
will astonish them with my fury; their most aspiring pride, power and hopes I
will bring down to the earth: I will laugh at their calamity, I will mock when
their fear comes.

THIS is the wonderful achievement of that divine Hero, who has abolished
death, and has brought life and immortality to light* This is the narrative
thereof, as given by himself. This achievement, it is our business, our duty,
our honor to celebrate with admiration and gratitude: To this purpose the
present day of the year is especially dedicated; for this laudable purpose we
are now convened.

WHETHER we consider the greatness of the work of redemption, the dignity of
the Redeemer, the meanness and wretchedness of the persons to be redeemed, the
depth of misery from which they were to be raised, the bliss and glory to which
they were to be exalted, the condescension of our Savior, or the privileges
purchased for mankind by his blood -- Whichever of these points we consider, we
shall become lost in a labyrinth of wonder and amazement: We shall find a
mysterious complication of wisdom, grace and benevolence on the part of heaven;
but of folly and wickedness on the part of man. The most superficial
contemplation of these matters will convince us, that in the redemption of the
world, there are mysteries, to which the utmost perception of Archangels is
far from being adequate -- Mysteries, which Cherubim and Seraphim in vain
desire to comprehend; at which all the heavenly host stand astonished. What
operation then, should a survey of these things have on the children of men,
for whose benefit these mysteries originated, and who are principally
interested therein? The bare recollection of what our Savior has done and
suffered for us, ought (at least during the present anniversary) to banish
every other care from our minds. When we meditate on the bitterness of his
sufferings; when we view the nails piercing his hands and his feet, the spear
thrust into his side; the reproaches, the stripes and the agonies he endured,
our minds ought to be possessed by the deepest melancholy the sincerest grief;
but when we muse upon the heavenly treasures, the unspeakable felicity,
purchased for us, by the price of his cross and passion, then should our hearts
be enraptured with extatic joy, with the height of gratitude.

BEHOLD the wonders of redeeming love! Admire the strength, the height, the
depth, the extent of celestial grace! Stand astonished at the compassion and
affection of the Son of God toward mean worms of the dust! That divine Person*
who, in perfect equality with his Father, inhabiteth eternity, who in and of
himself is possessed of infinite wisdom, power and happiness, he condescended
to undertake a mean birth, a sorrowful life, and (what is still more
astonishing) to suffer the grievous, shameful, accursed death of the cross. --
And for whom was all this performed? For aliens and enemies; for us, who were
wretched, and miserable; and poor, and blind, and naked. Who can be found among
mankind, that would lay down his life for his dearest friend, his greatest
benefactor, or the best of the human race? much less for a stranger, or an
enemy? Our blessed Redeemer's affection soars as much above that of man, as his
thoughts are above our thoughts, and his ways above our ways. Well therefore
might the Apostle cry out, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he
loved us. Well therefore might our Savior graciously declare to his disciples,
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend.

As the sufferings and death of our gracious Redeemer are of the utmost
importance, and are, to the last degree, interesting to the world of mankind --
As none of Adam's posterity could have been saved without them, and by them
eternal salvation is purchased for, and offered to all men; so a great number
of the most plain and material predictions of the ancient, inspired prophets of
God point to these sufferings and center therein. Thus was it foretold that the
Messiah should be a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief: His afflictions
and oppressions, his bruises and wounds were mentioned in the book of Isaiah;
also his being numbered with transgressors, brought to the slaughter and cut
off from the land of the living. Another Prophet mentions the very price for
which he was betrayed, and their looking on him, whom they had pierced; the
piercing his hands and his feet; their parting his garments, and casting lots
upon his vesture; these and almost every other essential circumstance of his
close of life were manifestly foretold, whole centuries before their
accomplishment; and foretold in such a manner, that they cannot, with the least
color of probability, be applied to any other transaction.

IT may furthermore, with great propriety be observed, on the present occasion,
that almost innumerable (...) ordinances of the Jewish Church, typified this
great, precious sacrifice for sin; the sacrifice which the Son of God made of
his own body on the altar of the cross. Thus the Paschal Lamb, which under the
law, was offered for the sins of the people, was designed to represent the Lamb
of God, who was to atone for the sins of the world: Thus the lifting up of the
brazen serpent in the wilderness, was a lively type of the Savior on the
cross: Thus the solemn and memorable day of atonement prefigured the observable
day, we are now celebrating. For a parallel between the great day of atonement
or expiation under the law, and the valuable oblation performed on the present
anniversary by our great High Priest, I would refer you to the epistle directed
to the Hebrews. The author of that epistle has compared the business of these
two days, and has, in a great variety of instances, demonstrated how much
superior the sacrifice and the sacrificer of the gospel are to those of the
law: He makes it most evidently appear, that our High Priest has obtained a
more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of the better
covenant which was established upon better promises. The same author, under the
influence of the Holy Ghost has likewise proved beyond a possibility of
contradiction that Christ, being come an High Priest of good things to come, by
a greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say not
of this building; neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own
blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal
redemption for us.

IF we look into the intention, wherewith this great annual feast appointed,
and the purposes wherewith it has, through a long series of ages, been
observed; we shall find that whilst the devout and exemplary fathers of
christianity mourned for the agonies of their benevolent Redeemer expiring on
the cross; they at the same time lamented, with deep and serious penitence,
those detestable sins, that brought the precious life of Jesus Christ to such a
deplorable catastrophe. One essential branch of our business on this day is to
offer to God the sacrifice of broken hearts and contrite spirits -- of hearts
broken with grief for our wickedness, of spirits deeply contrite for our
offenses; this is an oblation more pleasing to God than ten thousand sacrificed
rams, and whole oceans of consecrated oil.

OUR sins brought the Son of God into a world of troubles and temptations; our
wickedness betrayed, mocked, buffeted and scourged him; our crimes insulted
him, crowned him with a crown of thorns, and finally crucified him. Shall we
not, then, humble ourselves to the very dust for those iniquities, which
brought our supreme benefactor to the death of a criminal? Shall we not bewail,
in tears of blood, those abominations, that wrung large drops of blood from the
face of the great captain of our salvation? Shall we not abhor, and utterly
forsake those execrable transgressions, that were the cause of our Savior's
agonies, and will, if persisted in, lead us into eternal misery of soul and
body?

IN the primitive ages of christianity, with what holy zeal, with what warm
devotion, was the annual humiliation of this day observed! How lengthy and
severe were their fastings! How deep and serious their repentance! How
conformable to the occasion and business of the day, were all their thoughts,
words and actions!

LET us, in humble imitation of their bright example, improve this whole day in
fasting, prayer and meditation, bewailing the agonies of our divine master,
whose affection induced him to die for us, and humbling ourselves for our sins,
as the cause of his crucifixion. For our assistance in this matter, the course
of this day's service is calculated as much as possible for the purposes of
humility, penitence and edification. What sacred melancholy, what sedate and
godly sorrow for sin, what salutary repentance, what purity of heart, what
pious temper of soul are excited by an attentive and devout use of the forms
provided for the worship of the present day! Is it a great matter, is it a
mighty burden to devote one day in the year to contemplate, in a particular
manner, the death of Christ, since he died for our sake? It is our reasonable
service, it is the least return we can desire to make him, it is an
acknowledgement very inadequate to the benefit received.

WHILST we are solemnizing the day of the great, universal oblation for sin,
let us do it in such a manner as to prepare us for the more cheerful, but no
less solemn offices of the third day from hence, called EASTER: That day will
disclose to our view scenes far different from those now before us; then will
be brought to our consideration a Savior conquering all the powers of sin and
satan, of death and darkness, bursting the adamantine chains of the tomb,
totally defeating the king of terrors, trampling under foot the infernal
potentates in their own territories, and leading captive captivity itself. Upon
that blessed, happy day, we are invited to a spiritual feast of fat things, a
feast of wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees
well refined. To this pleasing, glorious feast, I ask you in the name of God,
as his Ambassador, I call you in Christ's behalf, who died equally for you and
me, I exhort you, as ye love your own salvation. Our blessed Lord entreats and
commands us spiritually to eat his flesh and drink his blood, and to do this in
remembrance of him; these precious words he repeats; how gracious, how valuable
are these words, both in the holy scripture, and in our liturgy! -- DO THIS IN
REMEMBRANCE OF ME -- in remembrance of my sufferings, of my cross and passion,
of mine inestimable oblation and precious blood, of my descent into hell, my
return from thence, and resurrection from the dead, mine ascension into heaven,
and continual, potent intercession, and my coming ag^^^ to the final judgment.

MAY God Almighty, who sent his Son to die for the world -- May Jesus Christ,
who expired on the cross for us -- May the Holy Spirit, who applies the
benefits of Christ's death to us -- may all these divine persons assist us to
improve the present and all other occasions, times, places and offices of
religion, in such a manner as to gain knowledge, holiness, edification, faith,
repentance, charity and eternal felicity.

FINIS.

