THE CONSTITUTION OR FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, As
reported by the CONVENTION of DELEGATES, from the UNITED STATES, begun and held
at PHILADELPHIA, on the first Monday of May, 1787, and continued by
Adjournments to the seventeenth Day of September following. -- Which they
resolved, should be laid before the United States in Congress Assembled; and
afterward be submitted to a Convention of Delegates, chosen in each State, by
the People thereof, under the recommendation of its Legislature, for their
Assent and Ratification.

TOGETHER with the resolutions of the General Court of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, for calling said Convention, agreeable to the recommendation of
CONGRESS.

Published by Order of Government.

PRINTED at BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS, BY ADAMS and NOURSE. Printers to the
Honorable the GENERAL COURT. M, DCC, LXXXVII.

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE United States of America.
Frame of Government.
WE, the People of the UNITED STATES, in order to form a more perfect union,
establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United
States of AMERICA.

Legislative Power.
ARTICLE I.
The HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES.
SECTION I.
ALL Legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

SECTION II.
THE House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second
year by the people of the several States, and the electors in each State shall
have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of
the State Legislature.

No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age of
twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who
shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that State in which he shall be
chosen.

REPRESENTATIVES and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several States
which may be included within this Union, according to their respective numbers,
which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free persons,
including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding Indians not
taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration shall be made
within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the United
States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as they
shall by law direct. The number of Representatives shall not exceed one for
every thirty thousand, but each State shall have at least one Representative;
and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be
entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey four, Pennsylvania
eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five,
South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

WHEN vacancies happen in the representation from any State, the Executive
authority thereof, shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

THE House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and other officers; and
shall have the sole power of impeachment.

SENATE.
SECTION III.
THE Senate of the United States, shall be composed of two Senators from each
State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall
have one vote.

IMMEDIATELY after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The
seats of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year, of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year, and
of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year, so that one third may
be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by resignation, or
otherwise, during the recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive
thereof, may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
Legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

NO person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty
years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not,
when elected, be an inhabitant of that State, for which he shall be chosen.

THE Vice President of the United States, shall be President of the Senate, but
shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

THE Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro tempore,
in the absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the office of
President of the United States.

THE Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting for
that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the
United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the Members present.

JUDGMENT in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from
office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust, or
profit under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless be
liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to
law.

SECTION IV.
THE times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and
Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof;
but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such regulations, except
as to the places of choosing Senators.

The GENERAL CONGRESS.
THE Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

SECTION V.
EACH House shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of
its own Members, and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do
business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may be
authorized to compel the attendance of absent Members, in such manner, and
under such penalties, as each House may provide.

EACH House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its Members for
disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a Member.

EACH House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time
publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the Members of either House, on any question
shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

NEITHER House, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of
the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that,
in which the two Houses shall be sitting.

SECTION VI.
THE Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their
services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United
States. They shall in all cases, except treason, felony and breach of the
peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of
their respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for
any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

NO Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected,
be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been
increased during such time; and no person holding any office under the United
States, shall be a Member of either House, during his continuance in office.

The Powers of CONGRESS.
SECTION VII.
ALL bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives;
but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other bills.

Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President of the
United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it,
with his objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall
enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it.
If after such reconsideration, two-thirds of that House shall agree to pass the
bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other House, by
which it shall likewise be considered, and if approved by two-thirds of that
House, it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both Houses
shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for
and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each House
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the President within ten
days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same
shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by
their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

EVERY order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and
House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment)
shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the same
shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall
be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according
to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

SECTION VIII.
THE Congress shall have power -- To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and
excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general
welfare of the United States; but all duties, imposts and excises shall be
uniform throughout the United States; -- To borrow money on the credit of the
United States; -- To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the
several states, and with the Indian tribes; -- To establish an uniform rule of
naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of bankruptcies throughout the
United States; -- To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign
coin, and fix the standard of weights and measures; -- To provide for the
punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the United
States; -- To establish post-offices and post roads; -- To promote the progress
of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and
inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries; --
To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court; -- To define and punish
piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses against the law
of nations; -- To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make
rules concerning captures on land and water; -- To raise and support armies,
but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a longer term than two
years; -- To provide and maintain a navy; -- To make rules for the government
and regulation of the land and naval forces; -- To provide for calling forth
the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress insurrections and repel
invasions; -- To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the militia,
and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the
United States, reserving to the States respectively, the appointment of the
officers, and the authority of training the militia, according to the
discipline prescribed by Congress; -- To exercise exclusive legislation in all
cases whatsoever, over such district (not exceeding ten miles square) as may,
by cession of particular States, and the acceptance of Congress, become the
seat of government of the United States, and to exercise like authority over
all places purchased by the consent of the Legislature of the State in which
the same shall be, for the erection of sorts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards,
and other needful buildings; and to make all laws which shall be necessary and
proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers
vested by this constitution in the government of the United States, or in any
department or officer thereof.

Restrictions upon Congress.
SECTION IX.
THE migration or importation of such persons as any of the States now existing
shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to
the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may be imposed
on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

THE privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when
in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

No bill of attainder or ex post facto law shall be passed.

No capitation, or other direct tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to the
census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State. No
preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports
of one State over those of another: nor shall vessels bound to, or from, one
State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

No moneys shall be drawn from the Treasury but in consequence of
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: -- And no person
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
the Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

Restrictions upon respective States.
SECTION X.
NO State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant
letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any
thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or
grant any title of nobility. No State shall, without the consent of the
Congress, lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be
absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws; and the net produce of
all duties and imposts, laid by any State on imports or exports, shall be for
the use of the treasury of the United States; and all such laws shall be
subject to the revision and control of the Congress. No State shall, without
the consent of Congress, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war
in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another State, or
with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such
imminent danger as will not admit of delay.

Executive Power.
ARTICLE III.
PRESIDENT.
SECTION I.
THE executive power shall be vested in a PRESIDENT of the United States of
America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together
with the Vice President chosen for the same term, be elected as follows.

EACH State shall appoint, in such a manner as the Legislature thereof may
direct, a number of electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and
Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but no
Senator or Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under
the United States, shall be elector.

THE electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote by ballot for two
persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same State with
themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for and of the
number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit
sealed to the seat of government of the United States, directed to the
President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of
the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the certificates, and the
votes shall then be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes
shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of
electors appointed: and if there be more than one who have such majority, and
have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose by ballot one of them for President; and if no person have a
majority, then from the five highest on the list the said House shall in like
manner choose the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be
taken by States, the representation from each State having one vote; a quorum
for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the
States, and a majority of all the States shall be necessary to a choice. In
every case, after the choice of the President, the person having the greatest
number of votes of the electors, shall be the Vice President. But if there
shall remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from them
by ballot the Vice President.

THE Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on
which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the
United States.

NO person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States, at
the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the office
of President; neither shall any person be eligible to that office who shall not
have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a
resident within the United States.

IN case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President, and the Congress may by
law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability, both of
the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then act as
President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.

THE President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period
for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that
period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

BEFORE he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation:

"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect and defend the Constitution of the United States."

SECTION II.
THE President shall be Commander in Chief of the army and navy of the United
States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the actual
service of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the
principal officer in each of the Executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

HE shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall
nominate, and by with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the Supreme Court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may by law vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

THE President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during
the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end
of their next session.

SECTION III.
HE shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of
the union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge
necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both
Houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between them, with
respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he
shall think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers; he
shall take care that the laws be (...)ithfully executed, and shall commission
all the officers of the United States.

SECTION IV.
The President. Vice President and all civil officers of the United States,
shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason,
bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

ARTICLE III.
Judiciary Power.
SECTION I.
THE judicial power of the United States, shall be vested in one Supreme Court,
and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and
establish. The Judges, both of the Supreme and Inferior Court, shall hold their
offices during good behavior, and shall, at stated times, receive for their
services, a compensation, which shall not be diminished during their
continuance in office.

SECTION II.
THE Judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising under
this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which
shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting Ambassadors, other
public Ministers and Consuls; to all cases of admiralty and maritime
jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a party; to
controversies between two or more States, between a State and citizens of
another State, between citizens of different States, between citizens of the
same State claiming lands under grants of different States, and between a
State, or the citizens thereof, and foreign States, citizens or subjects.

IN all cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, and
those in which a State shall be party, the Supreme Court shall have original
jurisdiction. In all the other cases before mentioned, the Supreme Court shall
have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and
under such regulations as the Congress shall make.

THE trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and
such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any State, the trial shall be at such
place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.

SECTION III.
TREASON against the United States shall consist only in levying war against
them, or in adhearing to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No person
shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the
same overt act, or on confession in open court,

THE Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
SECTION II.
FULL faith and credit shall be given in each State to the public acts,
records, and judicial proceedings of every other State. And the Congress may by
general laws prescribe the manner in which such acts, records and proceedings
shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

SECTION II.
THE citizens of each State shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities
of citizens in the several States.

A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall
flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall, on demand of the
Executive authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
removed to the State having jurisdiction of the crime.

No person held to service or labor in one State, under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up, on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

General Regulations.
SECTION III.
NEW States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no new States
shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other State; nor any
State be formed by the junction of two or more States, or parts of States,
without the consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned, as well as of
the Congress.

THE Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed, as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular State.

SECTION IV.
THE United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican
form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and on
application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature
cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

Amendments Provided.
ARTICLE V.
THE Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary,
shall propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the
Legislatures of two-thirds of the several States, shall call a Convention for
proposing amendments, which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this Constitution, when ratified by the Legislatures of
three-fourths of the several States, or by Conventions in three-fourths
thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the
Congress; Provided, that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and
fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no State,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

General Regulations.
ARTICLE VI.
ALL debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the adoption of this
Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this
Constitution as under the Confederation.

THIS Constitution, and the laws of the United State which shall be made in
pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the
Judges in every State shall be bound thereby, any thing in the Constitution or
laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.

THE Senators and Representatives beforementioned, and the Members of the
several State Legislatures, and all Executive and Judicial officers, both of
the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by oath or
affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United
States,

ARTICLE VII.
THE ratification of the Conventions of nine States, shall be sufficient for
the establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the same.

Done in CONVENTION, by the unanimous consent of the States present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our LORD, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-seven, and of the INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES of
AMERICA, the twelfth.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto subscribed our names.
George Washington, President, And Deputy from VIRGINIA.

New Hampshire. John Langdon, New Hampshire. Nicholas Gilman. Massachusetts.
Nathaniel Gorham, Massachusetts. Rufus King. Connecticut. William Samuel
Johnson, Connecticut. Roger Sherman. New York. Alexander Hamilton. New Jersey.
William Livingston, New Jersey. David Brearley, New Jersey. William Patterson,
New Jersey. Jonathan Dayson. Pennsylvania. Benjamin Franklin, Pennsylvania.
Thomas Mifflin, Pennsylvania. Robert Morris, Pennsylvania. George Clymer,
Pennsylvania. Thomas Fitzsimons Pennsylvania. Jared Ingersoll, Pennsylvania.
James Wilson, Pennsylvania. Gouvernour Wilson, Delaware. George Read, Delaware.
Gunning Bedford, junior, Delaware. John Dickinson, Delaware. Richard Basset,
Delaware. Jacob Broom. Maryland. James Mc Henry, Maryland. Daniel of St. Thomas
Jenifer, Maryland. Daniel Carrol. Virginia. John Blair, Virginia. James
Madison, junior. North Carolina. William Blount, North Carolina. Richard Dobbs
Spaight, North Carolina. Hugh Williamson. South Carolina. John Rutledge,
South Carolina. Char. Contesworth Pinckney, South Carolina. Charles Pinckney,
South Carolina. Pierce Butler. Georgia. William Few, Georgia. Abraham Baldwin.
Attest. WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary.

In CONVENTION, Monday Sept. 17, 1787. PRESENT, The States of New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Connecticut, Mr. Hamilton from New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia:
RESOLVED,
THAT the preceding Constitution be laid before the United States in Congress
assembled, and that it is the opinion of this Convention, that it should
afterward be submitted to a Convention of Delegates, chosen in each State by
the People thereof, under the recommendation of its Legislature, for their
assent and ratification; and that each Convention assenting to, and ratifying
the same, should give notice thereof to the United States in Congress assembled.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Convention, that as soon as the
Conventions of nine States shall have ratified this Constitution, the United
States in Congress assembled should fix a day on which Electors should be
appointed by the States which shall have ratified the same, and a day on which
the Electors should assemble to vote for the President, and the time and place
for commencing proceedings under this Constitution. That after such publication
the Electors should be appointed, and the Senators and Representatives elected:
That the Electors should meet on the day fixed for the election of the
President, and should transmit their votes certified, signed, sealed and
directed, as the Constitution requires, to the Secretary of the United States
in Congress assembled, that the Senators and Representatives should convene at
the time and place assigned; that the Senators should appoint a President of
the Senate, for the sole purpose of receiving, opening and counting the votes
for President; and, that after he shall be chosen, the Congress, together with
the President, should without delay, proceed to execute this Constitution.

By the unanimous Order of the Convention, GEORGE WASHINGTON, President.
William Jackson, Secretary.

IN CONVENTION Sept. 17, 1787. SIR,
WE have now the honor to submit to the consideration of the United States in
Congress assembled, that constitution which has appeared to us the most
advisable. The friends of our Country have long seen and desired, that the
power of making war, peace and treaties, that of levying money and regulating
commerce, and the correspondent Executive and Judicial authorities, should be
fully and effectually vested in the general government of the Union; but the
impropriety of delegating such extensive trusts to one body of men is evident
-- Hence results the necessity of a different organization.

IT is obviously impracticable in the federal government of these States, to
secure all rights of independent sovereignty to each, and yet provide for the
interest and safety of all -- Individuals entering into society, must give up a
share of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude of the sacrifice must
depend as well on situation and circumstance, as on the object to be obtained.
It is at all times difficult to draw with precision the line between those
rights which must be surrendered, and those which may be reserved; and on the
present occasion this difficulty was increased by a difference among the
several States as to their situation, extent, habits, and particular interests.

IN all our deliberations on this subject, we kept steadily in our view, that
which appears to us the greatest interest of every true American, the
consolidation of our Union, in which is involved our prosperity, felicity,
safety, perhaps our national existence. This important consideration, seriously
and deeply impressed on our minds, led each State in the Convention to be less
rigid on points of inferior magnitude than might have been otherwise expected;
and thus the Constitution which we now present, is the result of a spirit of
amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of our
political situation rendered indispensible.

THAT it will meet the full and entire approbation of every State is not,
perhaps, to be expected; but each will doubtless consider, that had her
interests been alone consulted, the consequences might have been particularly
disagreeable or injurious to others; that it is liable to as few axceptions as
could reasonably have been expected, we hope and believe; that it may promote
the lasting welfare of that country so dear to us all, and secure her freedom
and happiness, is our most ardent wish.

With great respect. We have the honor to be, Sir, your Excellency's most
obedient, And humble servants, GEORGE WASHINGTON, President.
By unanimous Order of the Convention. His Excellency the President of Congress.

UNITED STATES in CONGRESS assembled FRIDAY, September 28, 1787.
Present, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia,
and from Maryland, Mr. Ross.
CONGRESS having received the Report of the Convention lately assembled in
Philadelphia:
RESOLVED unanimously, That the said Report, with the Resolutions and Letters
accompanying the same, be transmitted to the several Legislatures, in order to
be submitted to a Convention of Delegates chosen in each State by the People
thereof, in conformity to the Resolves of the Convention made and provided in
that case.

(Signed) CHARLES THOMPSON, Secretary.

COMMONWEALTH of Massachusetts. IN SENATE. October 20, 1787.
WHEREAS the Convention lately assembled at Philadelphia, have reported to
Congress a Constitution for the United States of America, in which Convention
were represented, the States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, which Constitution was unanimously
approved of by the said States in Convention assembled; and whereas that
Convention resolved that the said Constitution should be laid before the United
States in Congress assembled, and that it was their opinion, that it should be
submitted to a Convention of Delegates chosen in each State by the people
thereof under the recommendation of its Legslature, for their assent and
ratification; and that each Convention assenting to and ratifying the same
should give notice thereof to the United States in Congress assembled.

And whereas the United States in Congress assembled, by their resolution of
the twenty-eighth of September last, unanimously resolved, that the
Constitution so reported be transmitted to the several Legislatures in order to
be submitted to a Convention of Delegates, chosen in each State by the people
thereof, in conformity to the Resolves of the said Convention in that case made
and provided; and whereas the said Constitution has been transmitted to the
Legislature of this Commonwealth accordingly.

It is therefore Resolved, That it be, and it is hereby recommended to the
People of this Commonwealth, that a Convention of Delegates be chosen agreeably
to, and for the purposes mentioned in the Resolution of Congress aforesaid, to
meet at the State-House in Boston, on the second Wednesday of January next, and
that the Constitution so reported be submitted to the said Convention, for
their assent and ratification; and that the said Convention assenting to and
ratifying the same, give notice thereof to the United States in Congress
assembled, in conformity to the resolves of the said Convention in that case
made and provided.

And it is further Resolved, That the Selectmen of the several towns and
districts within this Commonwealth, be, and they are hereby directed, to
convene as soon as may be, the inhabitants of their several towns and
districts, qualified by law to vote in the election of Representatives, for the
purpose of choosing Delegates to represent them in said Convention.

And to preserve an equality to the people in their representation in the said
Convention, that the several towns and districts, elect respectively by ballot,
not exceeding the same number of Delegates, as by law they are entitled to send
Representatives to the General Court.

And it is further Resolved, That the Secretary immediately procure to be
printed a sufficient number of copies of these resolutions, as also of the said
Constitution, with the resolutions of the Convention, and their letter to the
President of Congress, accompanying the same; and also of the resolution of the
United States in Congress assembled, thereupon; and that he transmit three
copies of the same, as soon as may be, by expresses, to the Sheriffs of the
several counties within this Commonwealth, with positive directions to be by
them, or their Deputies, without delay, personally delivered to the Selectmen
of each town and district within their respective counties.

And it is further Resolved, That the Selectmen or the major part of the
Selectmen of each town or district, shall certify the election of such person
or persons, as may be appointed by their respective towns or districts, as a
Delegate or Delegates to the Convention aforesaid.

And it is further Resolved, That the several Delegates of the said Convention,
be allowed for their travel and attendance, out of the public treasury, the
same pay as will be allowed to the Representatives therefore this present
session, and that the same be defrayed at the public expense.

And it is further Resolved, That his Excellency the Governor be, and he
hereby is requested, with advice of Council, to issue his warrant upon the
Treasurer, directing him to discharge the pay-roll of the said Convention, out
of any moneys which will then be in the treasury, not appropriated.

And it is further Resolved, That if there shall not be sufficient moneys then
in the treasury for that purpose, the Treasurer is hereby authorized and
directed, to borrow sufficient moneys therefore, on such funds of the government
as are not appropriated.

Sent down for concurrence, SAMUEL ADAMS, President.
In the House of Representatives, October 25, 1787. Read and concurred, JAMES
WARREN, Speaker.
Approved, JOHN HANCOCK.
True Copies. -- Attest. JOHN AVERY, jun. Secretary.


