An ORDINANCE for the GOVERNMENT of the TERRITORY of the UNITED STATES,
North-West of the RIVER OHIO.
BE IT ORDAINED by the United States in Congress assembled, That the said
territory, for the purposes of temporary government, be one district; subject,
however, to be divided into two districts, as future circumstances may, in the
opinion of Congress, make it expedient.

Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the estates both of resident
and non-resident proprietors in the said territory, dying intestate, shall
descend to, and be distributed among their children, and the descendants of a
deceased child in equal parts; the descendants of a deceased child or
grandchild, to take the share of their deceased parent in equal parts among
them: And where there shall be no children or descendants, then in equal parts
to the next of kin, in equal degree; and among collaterals, the children of a
deceased brother or sister of the intestate, shall have in equal parts among
them their deceased parents share; and there shall in no case be a distinction
between kindred of the whole and half blood; saving in all cases to the widow
of the intestate, her third part of the real estate for life, and one third
part of the personal (...) law relative to descents and dower, shall remain in
full force until altered by the legislature of the (...) and judges shall adopt
laws as herein after mentioned, estates in the said territory (...) by wills in
writing, signed and sealed by him or her, in whom the estate may be, (being of
full age) and attested by three witnesses; -- and real estates may be conveyed
by lease and release, or bargain and sale, signed, sealed, and delivered by the
person being of full age, in whom the estate may be, and attested by two
witnesses, provided such wills be duly proved, and such conveyances be
acknowledged, or the execution thereof duly proved, and be recorded within one
year after proper magistrates, courts, and registers shall be appointed for
that purpose; and personal property may be transferred by delivery, saving,
however, to the French and Canadian inhabitants, and other settlers of the
Kaskaskies, Saint Vincent's, and the neighboring villages, who have heretofore
professed themselves citizens of Virginia, their laws and customs now in force
among them, relative to the descent and conveyance of property.

Be it ordained by the authority, aforesaid, That there shall be appointed from
time to time, by Congress, a governor, whose commission shall continue in force
for the term of three years, unless sooner revoked by Congress; he shall reside
in the district, and have a freehold estate therein, in one thousand acres of
land, while in the exercise of his office.

There shall be appointed from time to time, by Congress, a secretary, whose
commission shall continue in force for four years, unless sooner revoked, he
shall reside in the district, and have a freehold estate therein, in five
hundred acres of land, while in the exercise of his office; it shall be his
duty to keep and preserve the acts and laws passed by the legislature, and the
public records of the district, and the proceedings of the governor in his
executive department; and transmit authentic copies of such acts and
proceedings, every six months, to the secretary of Congress: There shall also
be appointed a court to consist of three judges, any two of whom to form a
court, who shall have a common law jurisdiction, and reside in the district,
and have each therein a freehold estate in five hundred acres of land, while in
the exercise of their offices; and their commissions shall continue in force
during good behavior.

The governor and judges, or a majority of them, shall adopt and publish in the
district, such laws of the original (...) and civil, as may be necessary, and
best suited to the circumstances of the district, and report them to (...) time
to time, which laws shall be in force in the district until the organization of
the general assembly (...) disapproved of by Congress; but afterward the
legislature shall have authority to alter them as they shall (...).

The governor for the time being, shall be commander in chief of the militia,
appoint and commission all officers in the same, below the rank of general
officers; all general officers shall be appointed and commissioned by Congress.

Previous to the organization of the general assembly, the governor shall
appoint such magistrates and other civil officers, in each county or township,
as he shall find necessary for the preservation of the peace and good order in
the same: (...) the general assembly shall be organized, the powers and duties
of magistrates and other civil officers shall be regulated and defined by the
said assembly; but all magistrates and other civil officers, not herein
otherwise directed, shall, during the continuance of this temporary government,
be appointed by the governor.

For the prevention of crimes and injuries, the laws to be adopted or made
shall have force in all parts of the district, and for the execution of
process, criminal and civil, the governor shall make proper divisions thereof
-- and he shall proceed from time to time, as circumstances may require, to lay
out the parts of the district in which the Indian titles shall have been
extinguished, into counties and townships, subject, however, to such
alterations as may thereafter be made by the legislature.

So soon as there shall be five thousand free male inhabitants, of full age, in
the district, upon giving proof thereof to the governor, they shall receive
authority, with time and place, to elect representatives from their counties or
townships, to represent them in the general assembly; provided that for every
five hundred free male inhabitants there shall be one representative, and so on
progressively with the number of free male inhabitants, shall the right of
representation increase, until the number of representatives shall amount to
twenty-five, after which the number and proportion of representatives shall be
regulated by the legislature; provided that no person be eligible or qualified
to act as a representative, unless he shall have been a citizen of one of the
United States three years and be a resident in the district, or unless he shall
have resided in the district three years, and in either case shall likewise
hold in his own right, in fee simple, two hundred acres of land within the
same: -- Provided also, that a freehold in fifty acres of land in the district,
(...), and being resident in the district; or the like freehold and two years
residence in the district shall be necessary to qualify a man as an elector of
a representative.

The representatives thus elected, shall serve for the term of two years, and
in case of the death of a representative, or removal from office, the governor
shall issue a writ to the county or township for which he was a member, to
elect another in his stead, to serve for the residue of the term.

The general assembly, or legislature, shall consist of the governor,
legislative council, and a house of representatives. The legislative council
shall consist of five members, to continue in office five years, unless sooner
removed by Congress, any three of whom to be a quorum, and the members of the
council shall be nominated and appointed in the following manner, to wit: As
soon as representatives shall be elected, the governor shall appoint a time and
place for them to meet together, and, when met, they shall nominate ten
persons, residents in the district, and each possessed of a freehold in five
hundred acres of land, and return their names to Congress; five of whom
Congress shall appoint and commission to serve as aforesaid; and (...) shall
happen in the council, by death or removal from office, the house of (...) as
aforesaid, for each vacancy, and return their names to Congress; (...) for the
residue of the term; and every five years, four months at least before the
expiration of the time of service of the members of council, the said house
shall nominate ten persons, qualified as aforesaid, and return their names to
Congress, five of whom Congress shall appoint and commission to serve as
members of the council five years, unless sooner removed. And the governor,
legislative council, and house of representatives, shall have authority to make
laws in all cases for the good government of the district, not repugnant to the
principles and articles in this ordinance established and declared. And all
bills having passed by a majority in the house, and by a majority in the
council, shall be referred to the governor for his assent; but no bill or
legislative act whatever, shall be of any force without his assent. The
governor shall have power to convene, prorogue and dissolve the general
assembly, when in his opinion it shall be expedient.

The governor, judges, legislative council, secretary, and such other officers
as Congress shall appoint in the district, shall take an oath or affirmation of
fidelity, and of office, the governor before the president of Congress, and all
other officers before the governor. As soon as a legislature shall be formed in
the district, the council and house, assembled in one room, shall have
authority by joint ballot to elect a delegate to Congress, who shall have a
seat in Congress, with a right of debating, but not of voting, during this
temporary government.

And for extending the fundamental principles of civil and religious liberty,
which form the basis whereon these republics, their laws and constitutions are
erected; to fix and establish those principles as the basis of all laws,
constitutions and governments, which forever hereafter shall be formed in the
said territory; -- to provide also for the establishment of states, and
permanent government therein, and for their admission to a share in the federal
councils on an equal footing with the original (...), at as early periods as
may be consistent with the general interest:

It is hereby ordained and declared by the authority aforesaid, That the
following articles shall be considered as articles of compact between the
original states and the people and states in the said territory, and forever
remain unalterable, unless by common consent, to wit:

(...) himself in a peaceable and orderly manner, shall never be molested on
account (...) in the said territory.

Article the Second. The inhabitants of the said territory shall always be
entitled to the benefits of the writ of habeas corpus, and of the trial by
jury; of a proportionate representation of the people in the legislature, and
of judicial proceedings according to the course of the common law; all persons
shall be bailable unless for capital offenses, where the proof shall be
evident, or the presumption great; all fines shall be moderate, and no cruel or
unusual punishments shall be inflicted; no man shall be deprived of his liberty
or property but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the land, and
should the public exigencies make it necessary for the common preservation to
take any person's property, or to demand his particular services, full
compensation shall be made for the same; -- and in the just preservation of
rights and property it is understood and declared, that no law ought ever to be
made, or have force in the said territory, that shall in any manner whatever
interfere with, or affect private contracts or engagements, bona fide and
without fraud previously formed.

Article the Third. Religion, morality and knowledge, being necessary to good
government and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of education
shall forever be encouraged. The utmost good faith shall always be observed
toward the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken from them
without their consent; and in their property, rights and liberty, they never
shall be invaded or disturbed, unless in just and lawful wars authorized by
Congress; but laws founded in justice and humanity shall from time to time be
made, for preventing wrongs being done to them, and for preserving peace and
friendship with them.

Article the Fourth. The said territory, and the states which may be formed
therein, shall forever remain a part of this confederacy of the United States
of America, subject to the articles of confederation, and to such alterations
therein as shall be constitutionally made; and to all the acts and ordinances
of the United states in Congress assembled, conformable thereto. The
inhabitants and settlers in the said territory, shall be subject to pay a part
of the federal debts contracted or to be contracted, and a proportional part of
the expenses of government, to be apportioned on them by Congress, according to
the same common rule and measure by which apportionments thereof shall be made
on the other states; and (...) for paying their proportion, shall be laid and
levied by the authority and direction of the legislatures of the district or
districts or new states, as in the original states, within the time agreed upon
by the United States in Congress assembled. The legislatures of those
districts, or new states, shall never interfere with the primary disposal of
the soil by the United States in Congress assembled, nor with any regulations
Congress may find necessary for securing the title in such soil to the bona
fide purchasers. No tax shall be imposed on lands the property of the United
States; and in no case shall non-resident proprietors be taxed higher than
residents. The navigable waters leading into the Missisippi and St. Lawrence,
and the carrying places between the same shall be common highways, and forever
free, as well to the inhabitants of the said territory, as to the citizens of
the United States, and those of any other states that may be admitted into the
confederacy, without any tax, impost or duty therefore.

Article the Fifth. There shall be formed in the said territory, not less than
three nor more than five states; and the boundaries of the states, as soon as
Virginia shall alter her act of cession and consent to the same, shall become
fixed and established as follows, to wit: The western state in the said
territory, shall be bounded by the Missisippi, the Ohio and Wabash rivers; a
direct line drawn from the Wabash and Post Vincent's due north to the
territorial line between the United States and Canada, and by the said
territorial line to the lake of the Woods and Missisippi. The middle state
shall be bounded by the said direct line, the Wabash from Post Vincent's to the
Ohio; by the Ohio, by a direct line drawn due north from the mouth of the Great
Miami to the said territorial line, and by the said territorial line. The
eastern state shall be bounded by the last mentioned direct line, the Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and the said territorial line: Provided however, and it is
further understood and declared, that the boundaries of these three states,
shall be subject so far to be altered, that if Congress shall hereafter find it
expedient, they shall have authority to form one or two states in that part of
the said territory which lies north of an east and west line drawn through the
southerly bend or extreme of lake Michigan: and whenever any of the said states
shall have sixty thousand free inhabitants therein, such state shall be
admitted by its delegates into the Congress of the United states, on an equal
footing with the original states in all respects whatever; and shall be at
liberty to form a permanent constitution and state government: Provided the
constitution and government so to be formed, shall be republican, and in
conformity to the principles contained in these articles; and so far as it can
be consistent with the general interest of the confederacy, such admission
shall be allowed at an earlier period, and when there may be a less number of
free inhabitants in the state than sixty thousand.

Article the Sixth. There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in
the said territory, otherwise than in punishment of crimes whereof the party
shall have been duly convicted: Provided always, that any person escaping into
the same, from whom labor or service is lawfully claimed in any one of the
original states, such fugitive may be lawfully reclaimed and conveyed to the
person claiming his or her labor or service as aforesaid.

Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the resolutions of the 23d of
April, 1784, relative to the subject of this ordinance, be, and the same are
hereby repealed and declared null and void.

DONE by the UNITED STATES in CONGRESS assembled, the 13th day of July, in the
year of our Lord 1787, and of their sovereignty and independence the 12th.

