LETTERS FROM SYLVIUS TO THE FREEMEN INHABITANTS OF THE UNITED STATES.
CONTAINING SOME REMARKS ON THE SCARCITY OF MONEY; PAPER CURRENCY; NATIONAL
DRESS; FOREIGN LUXURIES; THE FOEDERAL DEBT; AND PUBLIC TAXES.

NEW YORK: Printed by CARROLL and PATTERSON, No. 16, Water-street.
M,DCC,LXXXVII.

LETTERS, etc.
LETTER I.
IN every part of these states the great scarcity of money is become a common
subject of complaint. This does not seem to be an imaginary grievance, like
that of hard times, of which men have complained in all ages of the world; the
misfortune is general, and in many cases it is severely felt. The scarcity of
money is so great, or the difficulty of paying debts has been so common, that
riots and combinations have been formed in many places, and the operations of
civil government have been suspended: this is the more remarkable, because
three years have not passed since money was very plenty. A calamity of such
magnitude has deservedly drawn the attention of every legislature in the union.
In some of the states paper money has been coined as the best or the most
convenient remedy by which the sufferings of the people can be relieved. The
general assembly of the state of North Carolina has already had recourse to two
emissions of paper. Certainly when any article is scarce, the general remedy
is, to make more; and if it shall be found, when money is scarce, that private
and public debts can be honestly discharged by a new coinage of paper, the
expedient is admirable, for it is the most easy process by which debts were
ever paid. This however, is a subject on which many doubts have arisen. It is
not questioned whether there are means by which we may be enabled to discharge
our debts and become opulent and powerful, but there are many who believe that
our debts cannot be fairly discharged, nor our citizens relieved, much less can
they become rich by the manufacture of paper money. It has also been my lot to
entertain some doubts, whether the regulations have hitherto been adopted for
preserving justice, for relieving the oppressed, and for securing the
prosperity of the state; -- these doubts have given rise to the present address.

This is a question, my fellow citizens, that claims your utmost attention^ for
no subject of equal importance has been presented to your view since the
declaration of independence. We are going to consider whether the
administration of government, in these infant states, is to be a system of
patch-work, and a series of expedients -- Whether a youthful empire is to be
supported, like the walls of a tottering ancient palace by shores and temporary
props, or by measures which may prove effectual and lasting -- measures which
may improve by use, and strengthen by age. We are going to consider whether we
shall deserve to be the most poor, dishonest and contemptible, or the most
flourishing, independent and happy nation on the face of the earth.

The reader is not interested in knowing who the writer of this letter may be;
a bad argument is not mended by the supposed abilities of its author, and a
good argument does not require parental support. In the mean while he counts it
his duty to declare, and he does it with humble gratitude, that his complaints
are not occasioned by personal misfortunes; but he finds himself a member of a
great family; he interests himself as a brother in the happiness of his fellow
citizens, and he suffers when they are grieved.

The more I consider the progress of credit, and the increase of wealth in
foreign nations, the more fully am I convinced that paper money must prove
hurtful to this country; that we cannot be relieved from our debts except by
promoting domestic manufactures, and that during the prevailing scarcity of
money, the burdens of the poor may be relieved by altering the mode of
taxation. Here are three separate and distinct propositions; they shall be
considered apart, in order that each of them may fall or stand by its own
weakness or strength.

In public measures as in the conduct of private life, it will constantly be
found that "honesty is the best policy;" this maxim is somewhat old, but it is
not become useless. A paper currency, which is a legal tender, even when it may
have depreciated 20 or 30 per cent. is not generally considered as an honest
tender, and there are many reasons for believing that such a currency will not
finally prove useful to the states. I say it has not generally been considered
an honest tender. There are many people who say the money ought not to have
depreciated; they say that necessity justified the manufacture, and that we are
bound to receive such payment as the law prescribes: but I never have heard any
man say that it would be perfect justice to pass a law, by which every creditor
should be compelled to receive three fourths or two thirds of his debt instead
of the whole debt; and yet such a law would be perfectly similar to the tender
of depreciated paper, except that it would be a proof of more frugality and
plain dealing; for it would he calling things by the right name, and would save
the expense of paper coinage.

However convenient depreciated paper may appear to those who use it in the
discharge of debts, we have already discovered that the credit and finances of
This ^^ate (...) are injured by paper currency, and we shall certainly continue
to suffer, unless we can be relieved from it. There has ever been found much
difficulty in shaking off the prejudices of education. We have been accustomed
to the use of paper money while we continued a depending province; such a
currency was properly calculated to prevent the growth of manufactures, and to
continue our dependence and poverty. Surely under a change of circumstances
there should be a change of measures; we ought now to consult our own
prosperity, and not the emolument of Great Britain, or any other kingdom. If we
are willing to take a lesson from other governments, we shall find that money
is not to be made out of paper, for there is not an empire, kingdom or state
under the sun where debts may be legally discharged by paper money, except in
some of the united states of America. It is admitted that a paper medium, under
the form of bank notes or government securities, is circulated in France,
England, Holland, and most other commercial countries; but nobody is compelled
by law to receive the payment of any debt in such money; hence it is, that the
paper of those countries bears no resemblance to our's, except in name. Every
man receives a bank note or refuses it at pleasure; when he receives it, he
knows that on the next hour he may have it changed for gold or silver, as the
bank is obliged to make such payments on demand. For this reason bank notes,
being portable, are frequently preferred to coin of the weighty metals. But it
never was found that bank notes could be circulated at par, unless when it was
believed that they might be exchanged for solid money; nor could they be
circulated, if they were declared to be a legal tender. The reason is obvious
-- the whole value of paper is imaginary, and men do not believe by compulsion.
Every attempt to force a man to believe that paper is equal in value to silver,
implies a consciousness that it is not equal. It injures what it was intended
to save. Though the paper money which had been emitted in North Carolina in the
year 1783, had depreciated 20 per cent. arguments were invented on the last^
year for making more money. It was alleged that under the regal government a
greater sum of money had been circulated without much depreciation, and
consequently a second coinage might take place; it would not depreciate. This
argument was plausible, but not solid; for the value of paper is never found to
depend on the quantity in circulation, but on the security that appears for its
redemption. The bank of England, which belongs to a company of private
subjects, circulates notes to the amount of thirty two millions of dollars,
though it is not believed that they have above fourteen millions in specie at
any time on hands; but every man can get money for his note when he demands it.
In the year 1716, soon after the death of Lewis the XIVth, the celebrated John
Law, in company with some other gentlemen, obtained a patent for a banking
house at Paris. They issued notes in which they promised to pay the bearer, on
sight, a certain sum, in gold and silver of the weight and fineness then
established by law. As the late King had altered the weight or quality of the
current coin ten times during his reign, and the same thing might be done
again, Law's notes, which were not subject to depreciation, were preferred to
specie at one per cent. Such were the effects of a general confidence in good
payment. Within the space of four years, notes were issued by Law and company
to the amount of 225 millions of dollars, which was near twice as much as all
the specie in France; but the notes retained their credit, because the company
were thought to be honest and able to pay. On the twenty first of May, 1721,
the Duke of Orleans, regent of France, issued a proclamation, by which he
reduced the value of bank notes to half the nominal sum. They were depreciated
fifty per cent. This was a proof of the want of integrity, and it operated
accordingly; it destroyed public confidence. It did not merely diminish the
value of the notes, -- it annihilated them, and on the 22d of May one guinea in
gold could not have been purchased in Paris for one thousand guineas in notes.
The history of paper money in all ages is uniform. It Is value depends on the
confidence of the public. Let government give a single proof that they ought
not to be trusted -- Confidence vanishes, and "like the baseless fabric of a
vision, leaves not a trace behind." Let us compare this with the history of the
paper in some of our states, and consider whether it ought to have retained its
value. The first emission of the state of North Carolina in 1783, was to have
been redeemed by the sale of forfeited estates. That foundation was soon
removed, and those estates were converted to another use. The money
depreciated, and recourse was had to another coinage. This second structure was
raised, if possible, on a worse foundation, for it had not even the appearance
of stability; taxes are laid for calling in the money, and it is immediately
restored to circulation. Was it expected that such money should pass as gold or
silver? No, certainly. The legislature themselves do not seem to have expected
that it should be considered of equal value. Tobacco, a staple of
North Carolina, has been purchased by the public for two prices in this new
money, and creditors at the same time are compelled to receive it as specie, in
the payment of debts. Is this justice? Strangers will call it by a different
name.

I have attempted to show, according to the fate of paper in other countries,
that it was not to have been expected that our money should pass as gold or
silver. Every body knows that it is more or less depreciated in all the states
who have emitted it. It is therefore not a good payment, though it be a legal
o^^, (...) endeavor to show that it must finally prove hurtful to the states,
and that it could not have brought us substantial (...), though the whole of it
had passed as specie.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER II.
IT is painful in all cases to animadvert on public measures, lest we should
hurt the feelings of any citizen with whom such measures have originated. But
truth is the friend of every man, and the author of every public measure, if he
be a good man, treats it as other men do: he supports it while he believes it
to be good^ he forsakes it whenever he finds it to be hurtful. For this reason
I shall proceed freely in considering the effects of paper money. I have said
that paper money, which is a legal tender, must prove hurtful to this country;
when made, it must depreciate, and the effects of depreciation are unfriendly
to industry, injurious to the poor, and destructive of good morals. On the
supposition that the paper currency in some of the states has depreciated one
third, it will follow that the different citizens to whom this money was first
paid, in its depreciated state, must have lost 33 per cent. on every payment;
but as every bill of paper may have passed frequently from hand to hand, it
will follow, that the several citizens of that state may have suffered the loss
of ten times that sum by receiving bad money instead of solid coin to which
they were entitled. This must have been a very considerable tax, and
unfortunately it was a tax of the most pernicious kind, for it was a tax on the
frugal and temperate in favor of the idle, the profligate and luxurious. It
cannot be right in government to protect and encourage vice; it is a plant that
thrives sufficiently in every soil, without the help of legislative authority.
In support of a measure that agrees so little with the common ideas of justice,
we have been told, that money was wanted for the sake of the poor, that they
might have a medium wherewith to pay their debts and taxes. Whoever has
reflected on the circulation of paper money, will be apt to say, that the
honest poor man has not been the chief gainer by it. There is some difficulty
in discovering how the poor man should be profited by a coinage of money. If he
had been possessed of marketable property, before the money was made, he might
have sold it for the full value; for there has been no season in which produce
has not been sold for more than its worth; the exporters have been losers; if
the poor man had no property for sale, neither could he have got any of the new
money, unless it was to have been given away. There is doubtless some obscurity
in this business, unless we allege, that depreciation was intended, and this
we are not willing to suspect. Let us suppose that the poor man may have gained
a trifle by the depreciation of money; what is such a gain when compared with
his sufferings by the loss of credit? No man can expect to borrow money nor
obtain goods on credit, when government does not support the creditor against
dishonest payments by base money. When the rich are taught by government not to
give credit, the sufferings of the poor must be increased, and when credit is
destroyed, industry must languish; for they are constantly found to flourish in
proportion to the honesty of government and the stability of the legal money.
So lately as on the 43d year of Queen Elizabeth, the coin of England was
debased almost nine per cent. by parliament, and about that time the coin of
France was frequently altered. The commerce of those nations suffered greatly
by such instability. They have since profited by their good faith. There is no
country in which the value of money has been so perfectly stable as in Holland
for the last 200 years; and it is admitted that no country has prospered so
much by commerce, nor any in which the interest of money is so moderate.
Security of property has ever proved the spur to industry; hence we find that
arts and commerce have flourished most in republican governments; for in
absolute monarchies the value of money is not stable, and in despotic
governments the case is worse* in such government we seldom find much industry.
In republican governments he property of the citizen has generally been
perfectly safe. To this we ascribe the progress of arts and commerce, and the
consequent wealth of Athens, Carthage and Venice; of the Hans Towns and the
United Netherlands. In those republics the governments have not been used to
depreciate their coin; time will show how the experiment succeeds with us. The
chief advantage that appears to have arisen from depreciated money is, that
fraudulent debtors have been enabled to discharge their contracts on easy
terms. It is admitted that the debts of citizen to citi^en may be somewhat
lessened by this species of payment, but the foreign debt is not diminished by
such means; on the contrary, while we are using those desperate remedies
against one another, our foreign (...) have been increasing every year. Most of
our debts have been contracted since the spring of 1783; if our imports could
be compared with our exports, the balance against us would be the amount of our
debts; but it is difficult to determine what has been the amount of foreign
goods imported into these states since the peace. Our public accounts cast but
a faint light on this question. Generally speaking, without a boat or searcher
in any of our ports; the strictest attention not being paid to the revenue,
people are invited to smuggle goods: detection is not apprehended, and time has
nearly established the contempt of custom house oaths The amount of goods
imported into Pennsylvania since the peace and consumed there, appears to
exceed two millions of dollars a yea^* In fixing its quote of the national
debt, we find, that on the year 1783, Pennsylvania was supposed to contain
320,000 inhabitant^, and North Carolina to contain 170,000, which is more by
(...) thousand than half the number contained in the larger state. (...) is
true that negroes were taken into the estimation, but these negroes were
reckoned as two whites. According to this estimation, we should suppose that
the consumption of foreign goods in the state of North Carolina has been equal
to more than one million of dollars every year. It may be objected that winter
is more sever^^^ Pennsylvania than in North Carolina, and that three negroes
(...) not consume the same value of clothes as two whites; this objection is
more than balanced by observing, that near two thirds of the citizens of
Pennsylvania have originated in Germany, or the North of Ireland, and have
imported such habits of industry and dexterity in the mechanic arts, that they
make little use of foreign manufactures. Divide one million of dollars by
170,000 and (...) does not give quite six dollars for each person. Part of the
inhabitants, suppose one fourth part of them being slaves, and three slaves
being counted as two whites, there will not be four dollar for each slave. We
admit that the annual consumption of (...) slaves, in foreign goods, is below
four dollars, even when rum (...) included, and some white inhabitants do not
consume to the amount of six dollars; but there are many who consume ten times
that quantity. This computation was made on the supposition that no goods have
been smuggled in Pennsylvania, but some of the citizen^ of that state have also
calculated, that the account of perjury, like the tenor of their respective
wills, is not to be examined till after death. They have conducted themselves
accordingly. This inference is founded on a late association of merchants in
Philadelphia to prevent smuggling. We may fairly add 200,000 dollars for this
account.

We shall now consider what have been the annual exports of North Carolina, in
order to determine the amount of debts contracted since the peace. The produce
exported from Currituck, Edenton, (...) Newbern and Wilmington, on the last
year, (...) to be (...) too high (...) (...) has been (...) at 26 s. the
hundred: Pitch and (...) (...) slaves 8l. hhd. staves and heading 4l. (...) to
be paid in specie at the port where (...) Merchants know best whether they are
worth (...) various burd^^s with which our commerce at this time is (...).
when stated at 506,700 dollars. (...) rolled into Virginia, and produce
conveyed to South (...) may be stated at 400,000 dollars, and there will remain
(...) of L.117,320 not accounted for. According to this (...) North Carolina
has contracted a debt of 293,300 (...) to foreigners, or to people who live out
of the (...) foreigners. No part of this debt has been dis^^^^^ (...) of paper
money, the whole advantage (...) being a mere juggle, by which one citizen is
in^^^^^ for the convenience of another. Their extravagance, there^^^^ is the
sole (...) of this alarming scarcity of money; they (...) more than they pay
for; and, until they become more (...) and more industrious, the grievance must
increase, notwithstanding their little attempts to elude the burden, by
throwing it upon (...) another. If no debts were due in the state except (...)
which are due to merchants, or the importers and retailers of goods, they would
long since have discovered the true cause of the scarcity of money -- the
merchants books would have told the amount of their debts; but it is an
unfortunate circumstance, that a small share of those may be directly due to
the importers of (...) though the whole of them are occasioned by such
importations. In order to account for this, we are to consider, that merchants
have a better opportunity than other people to receive the payment of debts,
for, produce of all sorts will suit them instead of money.

Thus it may happen that A buys a horse from B, for which he is to pay 80
dollars as soon as he shall have sold his crop. B purchases cattle from C for
80 dollars, which he is to pay when he receives payment for his horse, and C
employs D to repair his house, for which he is to pay him out of the price of
his cattle. In the mean while A, tempted by the allurements of a neighboring
store^ bays foreign goods, silks, gauzes, rum, and such other necessaries, for
the use of his family, and he delivers the whole of his (...) payment, for be
is allowed a generous price. Thence it must (...) that B, C, and D, and every
other letter in the alphabet, are disappointed, each of them is in debt, and
they all without complain of the scarcity of money, without perceiving that all
those debts continue to be unpaid from the folly of A in buying foreign goods,
and yet the goods are paid for. Thus it is, that our citizens are universally
involved, many of the debts are due to merchants, but a much greater amount is
due to people who are not merchant^^ and we seem not to have discovered, that
we are nearly ruined by foreign luxuries. Let any man cast his eye on this
account, let him think of a state whose citizens are given up to indolence and
vanity, who, in the space of three years, have plunged themselves in debt, at
least three hundred thousand pounds. Let him observe how the property of our
citizens is daily mortgaged to strangers and foreigners, and the inheritance of
our children bartered away for fineries and fopperies. Let him observe the
desperate alternative to which we are reduced, merely to obtain a transient
relief. The dignity of government is wounded -- base money is declared to be a
legal tender -- the diligent man is plundered for the benefit of the indolent
and extravagant -- industry languishes, for property is not safe -- the orphan
is defrauded Some months ago, a young adventurer in North Carolina, married a
widow who had three children; she chanced to have near 3000 hard dollars in the
house. Two thirds of this sum belonged to the children. The guardians claimed
their share of the specie for the children, and the honest father is now buying
up paper at 12 or 15 s. for the dollar, and such money will be a legal payment
for the use of orphans. Is it strange that paper depreciates when such men are
profited by the change!
, and the most atrocious frauds are practiced under the sanction of law. Surely
it is high time that other measures were adopted.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER III.
IN all cases it is more easy to complain than to point out the means of
relief. It is also more easy to give wholesome advice than to adopt proper
remedies. It is a downward and an easy path that leads to ruin^ but it is a
rough and uphill road which leads to prosperity; every amendment is at first
unpalatable. -- For this reason, I shall recommend with difference, what is
like to be followed with reluctance.

We complain in general that money is scarce. We are mistakes about facts, for
the thing alleged is not altogether true. Pride or the force of habits prevent
us from discovering the truth. There is not any country in which money may be
acquired with more ease than in America, and every man has it, who has any
right to expect it, except in cases where government interferes; but most of us
ought not to have any money; we have not deserved it, for we have expended more
since the peace than we have gained, whence it is that we neither have money,
nor any kind of marketable property by which we can pay our debts: No man nor
body of men can have either, whose expenses exceed their income. There is a
plain and certain process by which our complaints may be relieved -- The bad
effects of indolence and luxury must be cured by diligence and economy, and
the whole of our debts may be discharged in a few years by industry and
frugality. When are we like to obtain money by such means? No man can attend to
the prevailing conduct of the Americans without expressing his fear that the
period is very distant. Instead of finding general proofs of industry,
economy, temperance, and other republican virtues, he sees a nation that is
more luxurious, more indolent and more extravagant, than any other people on
the face of the earth. In drawing this figure, I may be charged with high
coloring, but the reader is requested to examine the original, and if he finds
that we are the most luxurious and the most dissolute of all nations, he will
certainly admit that some restraints might help to increase the quantity of
money among us, or it might prevent the occasion for it.

Every empire under the sun is supposed to be independent of any other; that is
to say, the subjects of every empire are supposed to enjoy a natural as well as
a political independence. It is presumed that they cloth and feed themselves.
This, in former times, was obviously the case in all countries, but the
introduction of commerce has produced many seeming variations from the rule.
Industrious nations, who have more provisions or clothing of any particular
quality than are necessary for their own consumption, send them abroad to be
exchanged for money, or for some other kind of clothing or provisions which
they like better, or which they cannot prepare with the same ease; but still
their exports and imports are nearly equal, and the quantity of imported goods
consumed by every nation, bears a very small proportion to what they consume of
their own manufacture. This is true even of the Spaniards, though national
pride or indolence seems to furnish them as an exception to this general rule.
They depend on other nations for many important manufactures. The consequence
is obvious. Though the Spaniards possess the rich mines of Mexico and Peru, by
neglecting useful manufactures, they are become a poor nation, and they are
every year decreasing in numbers and strength.

We observe that most other nations maintain a kind of barter or exchange of
manufactures with one another, but still the great body of the inhabitants,
rich and poor, are clothed in the manufactures of their own country. Is this
the case in the United States? With us the master and his slave, the farmer,
the mechanic and merchant, are all clothed, from head to foot, in foreign
manufactures; this is not because we have not hemp, flax and cotton sufficient.
There is no country where those articles are produced with less trouble, nor is
there any difficulty in procuring wool; but our imports are not confined to
clothing: no small share of our furniture is of British manufacture. Saws,
hammers, hoes and axes, are also imported as though the wolf had made war
against our iron as well as against our sheep. In every small town we are
cherished with Irish butter and beef, and with British ale, porter and cheese,
as though the country did not produce hops, barley or black cattle. Lest
absurdity should not go on stilts, and folly ride on the great horse, we make
large importations of hazle and oak sprouts, under the name of walking canes.
Surely there is no scarcity of wood among us; but our sticks are not foreign.
In excuse for all those follies, we are told, that a man has a right to use any
of the comforts of life which he can pay for. This may be true, but he has no
right to use the luxuries of life which he cannot pay for; and perhaps it may
be questioned whether he has a right to give examples, and introduce follies
that may prove ruinous to his fellow citizens. Under the head of luxuries we
may fairly include every imported article, because this country certainly
produces all the necessaries of life. It is hardly requisite to visit a large
town in order to determine whether the luxury of dress is become an offense
against decency, as well as a sure road to bankruptcy. In this remark, no
particular reference is made to the dress of either sex, for they are equally
attentive to the privilege of being in fashion. It is true that some doubts
have arisen concerning the meaning of the word fashion. In most countries
fashion in dress is understood to mean the form and quality of clothing, which
is used by the most respectable inhabitants, or by the great majority of the
nation. From late observations, we are taught to suspect that the word has a
different meaning in the United States. Among us a person is understood to be
in perfect fashion, who is rigged off with something that has not been seen nor
heard of before in the state. On this principle it is that we have seen new
forms of head dress, like bullets in a pop-gun, kick one another out so fast,
that we could hardly learn their names as they passed in review. Perhaps we
shall be told that an American is not in fashion who dresses like other
Americans; he must dress a^ people do in London. If they change their clothes
once in the month so must we. If they wear buttons of the size of a saucer, in
the form of a hexagon or square, so must we. What a pity it is that fashions
should wear out in London, before they can arrive at New York or Philadelphia!
If there was a glass in the moon we might catch the fashions as they rise. How
does it fare with nations who have no change in the fashion of their clothes?
Have the women in those countries fewer charms, or have the men less discretion
than we have who are subject to weekly revolutions? Surely the whim of this day
has no more intrinsic beauty than the whim of yesterday.

In old nations, where manufactures flourish, and where wealth is unequally
distributed, some of the inhabitants being exceedingly rich, and the bulk of
them miserably poor, it is wise in the government to encourage luxury and
caprice in dress; by those means the wealth of the rich circulates through the
hands of the manufacturing poor. What is sound policy in those countries must
be folly and madness among us. When we encourage luxury, it is to enrich
another nation, and to make our own citizens poor. Can there be a greater
treason committed against the States! -- The Chinese and Japanese, great,
politic and wise nations, are distinguished by a national dress. The Dutch,
though they are surrounded by nations who are changeable as the moon, have
submitted to little change in dress for 200 years. Their commerce does not,
like the commerce of France and England, depend on their manufactures, and
nothing less than rigid economy could make them respectable. -- Nothing but
NECESSITY can justify us in the use of any foreign manufacture; doubtless the
word necessary is very ambiguous; most people contend that what they buy is
necessary, provided they can barely discover the use of it. We have seen the
daughter of a laboring mechanic perform her afternoon's visit, dressed out in
more lace, ribbons, gauze and silk than her father could have earned in twelve
months in any part of Europe. Were those things necessary! We have seen a young
Buck, the son of a planter, who scarcely sold one hogshead of tobacco in the
year, on his way to a quarter-race, fitted out, for the sake of propriety, with
white silk stockings under his boots, a pair of durable black silk breeches,
and more silver on his saddle and bridle, than the value of his father's
estate, if his debts were paid. Those were a few of his necessaries. It is very
observable that in other countries people who live by their industry* and are
obliged to pay their debts, do not find such things necessary. It is alleged
that in England the food, raiment, and other necessaries of a laboring man
cost him annually about 7l. 10s. sterling; deduct a moderate allowance for
food, fuel, and house-rent, how much will remain for clothes? The 'Mareschal de
Vauban, considering what taxes may be paid by a laboring man in France,
estimates his annual expense in clothing at somewhat less than 40 shillings of
our money; this includes the clothing for himself* wife, and two children. It
may be noted that half of the subjects both in France and England come within
the foregoing predicament, they are mechanics or day laborers. Compare their
expense with our's in the article of dress; and it must be admitted that an
epidemic madness has laid hold of us. It is alleged, that the citizens of the
United States have contracted debts within the last three years with the
subjects of Great Britain to the amount of near six millions of dollars;
consequently our estates are mortgaged for that sum. Painful sensations must
arise to every man who loves his country from the prospect of such beginnings.
Thus it was that Corsica was mortgaged to the more industrious citizens of
Genoa for silks and velvets, and it was afterward sold to a foreign power. We
shall be told in excuse for imported luxuries, that we buy goods cheaper than
we can make them, and a man earns more in his tobacco or corn field, than he
could earn at a loom, or by other manufactures. These positions are fallacious
and ill-founded. -- Both experiment and calculation prove them to be false.
During the late war goods were dear, and we did not run into debt, for we
bought few -- manufactured some -- and were frugal. Since the peace goods have
been cheap, and we have nearly become bankrupts. It appears that our earnings
in the field have not been equal to the price of the goods that we have
consumed. -- Every domestic manufacture is cheaper than a foreign one, for this
plain reason, by the first nothing is lost to the country, by the other the
whole value is lost -- it is carried away never to return. It is perfectly
indifferent to this state, or to the United States, what may be the price of
domestic manufactures, because that price remains in the country. Every man is
supposed to be employed in some profession -- he is a mechanic, or he is
employed in raising provisions for those who are. In Great Britain the farmers
are to the manufacturers as four to three; in this state, where provisions are
more easily raised, the number may be equal, because the labor of one man in
the field is more than sufficient for the nourishment of two. Let the
manufacturer demand what he pleases for the produce of his labor, the farmer
can easily settle the account by selling his provisions accordingly. The annual
consumption of goods in this state has been estimated at a million of dollars,
or rather at 1,200,000 dollars. What is the result! 1,200,000 dollars in
specie, or produce to that value, have been sent out of the state, or must be
sent, and we are so much the poorer. Suppose the whole of those goods had been
manufactured within the state, or a sufficient quantity for our consumption,
and that they had cost the consumers, or been valued at two millions of
dollars; would the citizens of this state have lost 800,000 dollars by this
difference in price! The very reverse would have happened. -- They would have
gained, or they would have saved, 1,200,000 dollars; for there was not a single
dollar to have been sent out of the country. No man is to say that a thing may
be good for individuals which is not good for the public, or that our citizens
may thrive by cheap bargains, while the nation is ruined by them. -- He is
neither a politician nor a patriot who would use such a cloak. Let us turn our
attention to manufactures, and the staple of our country will soon rise to its
proper value; for we have already glutted every foreign market. By this
expedient instead of using fictitious paper we shall soon obtain hard money
sufficient -- instead of toiling in the field, and becoming poor that we may
enrich the manufacturers of other countries, we shall prosper by our own
labor, and enrich our own citizens.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER IV.
IT has ever been found that speculative reasonings are weak and inconclusive
when opposed to the prejudices or passions of a nation. There is something so
bewitching in luxury and idleness, that nothing short of hard NECESSITY can
banish them; perhaps this great reformer is not far distant. When a man sees
his fellow citizens posting at full speed to destruction -- when he sees them
attempt to mortgage their whole estate for a whistle and bells, and the
legislatures of some of the states holding a candle to the prevailing folly, by
cherishing the idle at the expense of the industrious, he comforts himself that
the race is nearly run. It was not sufficient that the whole produce of our
country on the last three years has been exchanged for luxuries -- all the hard
money that could be collected was also exported, but there was still a remnant
of hard money in many of the states -- the people retained it for the necessary
purposes of exchange, and merchants could not get it out of their hands. In
order to banish this remnant of hard money, our legislatures are following one
another in making a paper tender. By this happy expedient people will be
enabled to ruin themselves, every farthing of specie, which seems to be
obnoxious, will be exported, and we shall be as poor and pennyless as Tartars.

When our merchants are involved in a general bankruptcy, and when the
officious friendship of foreign merchants is sufficiently punished, who tempted
us to run in debt, there will be an end to the importation of foreign goods,
and necessity will effect what prudence could not.

I have some times looked for those marks of political virtue, those proofs of
self denial which produced the revolution. I have expected to see associations
formed by gentlemen in the several states for promoting American manufactures.
For as soon as we can make our own clothes and our own arms, we shall be
perfectly independent. Surely the man who is clothed in American manufactures,
which he wears for the sake of enriching his native country, and relieving his
fellow citizens, may be allowed to have some claims to patriotism, which is the
most honorable garb that can be worn.

While we are considering of the various means by which our fellow citizens may
be relieved from a scarcity of money, the subject of dress claims our
particular attention. Our interest and our honor are united in recommending a
national dress, national prejudices are useful, they attach people to those of
their own country, and induce them to assist one another. In most cases a
national language answers the purpose of distinction; but we have the
misfortune of speaking the same language with a nation who, of all people in
Europe, have given, and continue to give us fewest proofs of love. We do not
count it an honor to imitate the forms of government that prevail in Europe --
why should we think it honorable to imitate the fashion of their coats? "O
imitatores, servile pecus!" Why should we imitate the dress of a man from
London, more than of a man from Ispahan, P^kin, or Constantinople? Surely we do
not mean this imitation as a mark of homage to a Briton -- nor do we pay it as
tribute, though it renders us tributary. We do not mean to acknowledge that
Britons are superior to ourselves in every thing, whence we should imitate and
strive to copy them. How then are we to account for this sycophantism? Though
it was profitable, we are placed thereby in a point of view so humiliating, and
so offensive to the common feelings of men, that we ought to break the fetters
and give another proof of our being free. But since the imitation of English
fashions cannot cost the United States less than five million of dollars per
annum; every argument from economy as well as pride would seem to recommend a
national dress. What would be the best form of a national dress from head to
foot -- a dress to be adopted and persevered in? This question may possibly be
answered by some person who shall attempt the change. If a few respectable
citizens in every state should undertake the change, beyond doubt it would soon
become universal. It is true that national dress, like their several forms of
government, has been established in most countries by a long process of time
and accidents; but the Americans have had the resolution to shake off a set of
prejudices, and at once to establish a new system of government. Such a nation
might easily shake off the trammels of English fashion in the hat or coat,
especially when it is considered that great savings and other solid advantages
would accrue from such a measure. If a national dress should be adopted, we
shall have nothing to apprehend from the effects of caprice. We are not to fear
lest every adventurer who arrives among us with a new figaro on his back or
head should eclipse our dress, and claim the greater attention of the ladies.
It will constantly be found that the national dress in every country, is more
decent and more pleasing to people at large, than any new adventitions o^
foreign dress. Every stranger who comes among us will think it best to assume
the dress of the country. If he affects to become a citizen he will find it
necessary. It is the privilege of a conquering nation to impose its dress upon
the conquered; this becomes a mark of subjection. There has been a notable
exception to this rule. When the Tartars conquered China, the Chinese had the
good fortune to preserve their dress, and the Tartars submitted to a change;
hence the Tartars in that very empire are considered as secondaries and
inferiors. Whether we shall submit to the perpetual rule and customs of
England, and acknowledge ourselves subordinate, is a question that is not like
to be determined speedily. The present appearances are against us. I have
mentioned the English, because it is certain that we do not copy French dress,
though that also would be folly.

The measures to which I have referred would certainly relieve us from a
scarcity of money, but they are rather to be effected by the spirit of the
nation, than by legislative interposition. They are rather to be effected by
voluntary patriotic association, than by express and particular statutes. It is
impossible to foretell where any salutary measure is to have its beginning; but
as the amendment in question will doubtless be produced by the combination of
sundry causes, I should naturally expect that some of the Eastern states would
give us the example. Not because the citizens of those states are at this time
distinguished by the frugality of their dress; for we believe that no people in
the united States have sought more greedily to ruin themselves, by the luxury
of dress, than some of the inhabitants of the Eastern States. Nor is it because
the tradesmen or mechanics in those states have any particular claim to
patriotism; for if it be true, that as soon as the legislature of Massachusetts
had imposed a heavy tax on certain imported goods, to encourage the manufacture
of similar article at home, the mechanics raised the price of those very
articles by the full amount of the tax. For instance, two dollars being the tax
that was laid on beaver hats, the hatters immediately added two dollars to the
eight dollars they had formerly demanded for a beaver, as if they wished by
extravagance to provoke a repeal of the law, or to promote smuggling. If such
reports are well founded, and if such instances of extortion are common among
the mechanic^ in the eastern states, we are not to look for proofs of signal
patriotism among them. The Eastern states are particularly circumstanced with
respect to foreign commerce; they produce nothing fit for exportation; the
fishery cannot be considered as theirs, for it is common, and the trifling
amount of lumber and live stock, the produce of the country, that is exported,
cannot be sufficient to cloth one-tenth of the inhabitants. In the mean while
it is very observable, that no people can be more conveniently situated for the
purpose of extending manufactures than the citizens of Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Connecticut, and Rhode Island. The climate is extremely healthy,
nor is it too warm for a white man to labor through the whole summer. Domestic
slavery, which has ever been found unfriendly to manufactures, does not prevail
among them. A great proportion of the inhabitants are contiguous to one another
in small towns, which are the proper nurseries of manufactures; and most of
those towns are situated on or near a water carriage. The citizens are
naturally industrious and tractable; whatever raw materials they want can
easily be procured from the southern states. As the number of citizens increase
in the manufacturing towns, provisions may become scarce, but the corn and rice
of the southern states must afford them a convenient and constant supply.
Vessels that are not employed by winter in the fishery, may be usefully engaged
in carrying provisions in exchange for manufactures; for in such a soil and
climate as the southern states, there must ever be a redundance of provisions.
Surely then it may be expected that the citizens of the eastern states will be
among the first manufacturers. There we see a people who cannot long persevere
in the course they have been running; a people who are persuaded by every
argument of prudence and sound policy to adopt other measures; are we not to
expect some useful, some great and patriotic examples from that quarter!

If other arguments are wanted to induce us to promote domestic manufactures,
and a national dress, we had best consider the question concerning imported
goods, as it affects our own revenue, compared with the revenue of a foreign
kingdom. When the subject is viewed in this light we must admit, that our
present measures are neither supported by patriotism, nor by any other civil or
political virtue. The amount of foreign goods annually consumed in N. Carolina
has been estimated at more than one million of dollars, perhaps we may fairly
state the amount of British goods at that sum, consequently the subjects of
Great Britain are enriched by our follies, to the amount of L.400,000 the year.
How much do we contribute toward the taxes of Great Britain by such a
consumption of her manufactures? This is a question that has not been fully
considered, but I think the amount may fairly be stated at seven hundred
thousand dollars by the year. To some Americans this computation may appear
very extravagant; but gentlemen who have seen the burdens that are borne in
foreign countries will not think it too large. It is generally alleged, that a
man pays fifteen shillings for the use of government out of every twenty
shillings that he spends in England. Some have stated the public tax at
seventeen shillings in the pound. Let us take an instance in the article of
beer. The land pays a tax; the barley which grows on it, when malted, pays an
excise of sixpence by the bushel; hops pay one penny by the pound; the beer,
when brewed* pays an excise, in some cases, greater than the original value;
and all the persons who labor in the premises, contribute toward the national
revenue by their sundry consumptions, to the amount of three-fourths of the
whole price of their labor; this also must be charged on the beer. Surely the
consumer of beer pays more than seventeen shillings to government for every
twenty shillings which he expends in that liquor. But I have taken fourteen
shillings in the pound, as a moderate estimate of the sum that a man in America
pays toward the support of government in Great Britain, who consumes British
manufactures. It follows of course, that we have for the last three years been
paying into the British treasury a tax, upwards of L.200,000 a year. Strange
liberality; while our own taxes are neglected, our government degraded, and our
private debts unpaid, we are freely giving up the last farthing for the support
of a foreign government. The (...) of our foreign debt would have been
discharged by a smaller (...) than we have already paid into the British
treasury; but our money is gone, and every part of the foreign loan remains
unpaid. While we are neither honest nor grateful to those who befriended us in
the hour of distress, we are extremely beneficent to those who stand in a
different predicament. A nation that takes so much pains to injure itself
cannot possibly prosper. If the genera use of British goods in these states
could be improved so as to bring a fifth-part of the sum into our treasury that
it brings into the treasury of Great Britain, our civil government would be
well supported, our foreign loans discharged, our national honor preserved, and
our citizens fully relieved from the burden of positive taxes. These are
objects devoutly to be wished for.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER V.
IN all governments the relief of the poor should be one of the chief objects
of legislative attention. Every citizen demands justice and protection from
government; these should not -- they cannot be refused; but the poor man has
other claims. His wants and his sufferings must be in proportion to his degree
of poverty; humanity requires that his sufferings be relieved or prevented so
far as may consist with the steady and impartial administration of justice. It
does not consist either with honesty or sound policy, that the rich should be
defrauded or plundered for the sake of the poor; but the fiscal and oeconomical
laws of every state should be so framed as to encourage and assist the poor in
their usual employments. The necessary burdens of civil government should be so
fashioned as to press on their shoulders in the most convenient and easy manner
that is possible. The general payment of taxes is absolutely necessary to the
support of any government, but when money is remarkably scarce, it must be
difficult for the poor man to pay his taxes, and in many cases he may find it
impossible to make the annual payments, without the public sale of some part of
his property. Every distress of this kind ought to be prevented, if possible.
Perhaps the most easy and most effectual method of preventing the poor man from
being distressed in the payment of taxes, is by altering the general form of
taxation, or by substituting an EXCISE in the place of a tax on property, which
is common in North Carolina.

That tax, or additional price, which in most countries is laid upon certain
goods when they are sold for consumption, is called Excise. Thus a retailer of
spirituous liquors may be required to pay for the support of government, one
shilling for every gall^ of rum that he sells; and the shopkeeper may be
obliged to pay half a crown for every yard of silk or cloth that he sells. This
tax is very different from the Customs, or duties that are usually paid on the
importation of foreign goods. It is a subsequent tax, and frequently much
heavier. In many cases it is laid on articles of domestic production. In
England several millions sterling are annually raised by an excise: in France
the revenue from an excise is larger; and in Holland almost the whole of the
national expenses are paid by different excises. Almost every thing in that
country, which a man eats or drinks, is subject to an excise: and in some cases
the excise is nearly equal to the prime cost. It has frequently been said, that
when the citizens of any state are obliged to raise a certain sum of money by
the means of taxation, there can be little difference by what name the tax is
called, or how it is laid; but this opinion is ill founded. The capitation tax
or land tax, such as are usual among us, are inevitable and positive taxes;
they are not to be averted. The industrious cannot elude them -- the
unfortunate cannot escape them: every citizen must take out his purse and pay
the amount. But the excise is a negative or indirect tax. When it is laid on
foreign goods, no man is obliged to pay any part of it; and when it is laid on
domestic luxuries, no prudent man will pay much of it. It will frequently
happen, that the most virtuous and industrious citizens are greatly distressed
by domestic sickness; and it will happen that whole counties are distressed by
intemperate seasons and short crops. In all such cases, the excise operates as
a relief to the citizen; for he buys no luxuries on that year, and consequently
he pays no taxes, provided luxuries only are excised. Let us suppose a very
frequent case: -- A poor man is possessed of 500 acres of poor land, hardly
worth 100 dollars. His land tax will be 25, and his poll or personal tax 15
shillings. Does it not frequently happen that the public officer, at the season
for collecting taxes, finds such a man without 40 shillings in his pocket?
Perhaps he is seldom possessed of so much money at a time. It would certainly
be strange if the poorest man in the state, who is not a cripple, could not
earn, in the course of the year, three times the sum that has been mentioned,
besides what is necessary for the support of his family; but economy and a
provident foresight are not the characteristics of the poor. In fact, the poor
in these states are generally poor because they want those qualities: wh^^ then
are we to suppose a man to have the thing which we ought rather to suspect he
has not? Or why shall we make it necessary for a man to treasure up money for
several months, who never cared for tomorrow? The land tax, or the personal
tax, may appear at first sight to be small burdens, but experience has taught
us that they are not easily borne. On the other hand, the most indolent or most
careless citizen cannot possibly be incommoded by an excise. If he should have
no money in the course of the year, nor any thing to sell, he will not be able
to buy any thing, and consequently will not pay any tax. Whenever he shall be
able to buy any foreign commodities he will pay his tax in buying the goods,
for the excise is added to the price of the goods: it is paid by the merchant.
-- Suppose the excise on rum to be one shilling the gallon* whoever buys one
gallon of rum must pay a tax of one shilling, for in this case the rum will
cost him six shillings instead of five. The same rule may be applied to every
article of foreign make. Prudence would dictate, that articles which are least
necessary, and articles which may soonest come to perfection in the state,
should bear the heaviest tax. The natural and constant operation of this tax in
favor of the poor, is twofold. It is a voluntary tax, and it is a spur to
industry. No man pays the tax, who is not able and willing to buy foreign
luxuries, therefore it is voluntary. The man who is diligent, and manufactures
for himself, has no occasion for those luxuries, therefore it is a spur to
industry. In a word, all taxes on property are burdens on the good citizen: --
they discourage industry. All excises, or taxes on consumption, are taxes on
luxury and dissipation: -- they punish idleness, and promote industry. Can we
hesitate in making our choice?

The opinions of men have been variously affected in different countries on the
question concerning an excise or a land tax, according to their passions or
their prejudices. In England the excise has been unpopular, because the
multitude who are poor suspect that they are chiefly affected by such taxes.
They continue to prefer a land tax, because none of themselves have any lands.
Doubtless a land tax is very proper in that country, because the owners are
wealthy; but in America the case is different, the poorest of our citizens
commonly possess a little land. In France a land tax is very obnoxious, because
it is thought to infringe upon the privileges of a num^^^ (...) nobility. Their
excise is chiefly on the necessaries of life, and is for that reason very
burdensome. The revenue of the Roman empire in its prosperous days, arose
chiefly from excise and customs. That jealous and wise nation did not readily
submit to a personal tax, nor a land tax. There was a very hurtful trade
carried on between Rome and the East Indies, by the way of Alexandria and the
Red Sea. By this trade a large balance of silver was exported from the empire;
frequently to the amount of three millions of dollars by the year. The returns
were chiefly in silks, jewels, and spices -- perfect luxuries; for which reason
their East India trade was charged with a heavy excise If we admit that the
excise on East India goods was equal, as we are told, to an eighth part of
their price, and if we also admit, as Pliny alleges, that East India goods
were sold in Rome at one hundred for one on the prime cost, and that 3,733,332
dollars and upwards, were annually transmitted to India for the payment of
those goods, the excise must have exceeded 46 million of dollars annually; but
though silk may have sold, as it is affirmed, for its weight in gold, the
general advance seems to have been stated too large; be this as it may, it was
very proper that a trade so destructive of money should be compelled to
contribute greatly to the public revenue.
. Augustus ventured to impose a tax of five per cent. on legacies and
inheritances, which was very productive, with the advantage of being a negative
tax. The land tax and poll tax had been long in use through the provinces, but
they do not appear to have been generally imposed on the Roman people before
the reign of Galeni^s who succeeded Diocl^fian: from that period direct or
positive taxes became universal. What was the condition of the Roman people
under the administration of customs, excises, and other negative taxes,
compared with the times in which the land tax, the poll tax, and other positive
taxes became universal! -- it was an age of gold compared to that of iron.
Humanity is shocked with the tales of woe that are told. Parents are said,
during the latter age, to have sold their children, and to have sold
themselves, into slavery, in order to shun the burden of taxes. All wise
governments have thought it their duty, on special occasions, to offer bounties
for the encouragement of domestic manufactures; but an excise on foreign goods
must operate as a bounty. Suppose that our annual imports into these states are
worth L. 4,000,000, an excise equal to a tenth part would bring 1,100,000
dollars into the treasuries; this would be a very respectable addition to the
revenues of these states, and would operate in proportion as a bounty for the
encouragement of domestic manufactures. It is true, that as our manufactures
increase, our revenue by excise must decrease; but our abilities to pay taxes
by some other means, must increase much faster than the excise decreases. Thus
an excise of 2s. may be paid in the purchase of a pair of imported shoes, which
are supposed to be worth 10s. the tax goes into the treasury, but ten
shillings, the cost of the shoes, is sent out of the country. On the next year
such a pair of shoes is made in the country; in that case, the two shillings is
sunk in the revenue, but ten shillings are saved in the state, and some of the
citizens are so much the richer.

When I say that an excise is more favorable to the poor than a poll tax, or a
land tax, or any other tax on property, and that it tends to promote industry
and wealth, I must constantly be supposed to mean an excise on luxuries, or
imported goods; and I would also be understood to mean an excise that is
impartially laid, and fairly collected. -- Our expectations on this head are
not sanguine; -- nor is the prospect very pleasing; for some of the laws that
we have hitherto made for collecting duties, are shamefully defaced by the want
of public spirit; they are full of ambiguities, through which the knavish and
the cunning may creep. In North Carolina it was enacted, that a merchant
importing goods by land, to the value of L. 5* should be obliged to pay duties
on the same; but a planter might import goods to the value of pound;. 20,
though he imported them for sale or merchandise, without paying any duty. The
author of such a clause must have forgot that he was bound to serve the public
rather than himself, and that the revenues of the state are not to be
sacrificed to the convenience of a few individuals.

The general advantage of a sumptuary law, or an excise upon imported goods, is
so obvious, that I question whether any objections can be made to it, besides
the expense of collecting the tax, and the probability of frauds being
committed in secreting the goods. -- Surely the expense of collecting any tax
cannot be an object when the happiness and prosperity of a state is contrasted
with discontent, poverty, and disgrace. If the expense of collecting the
revenue should amount to ten per cent. no part of that money would be lost to
the country, and the diligence of public officers might prove the means of
enriching the country. In all places, and at all times, it has been too common
for merchants to endeavor to defraud the revenue by smuggling goods. The
frequency of this offense seems at length to have altered men's ideas
concerning the turpitude of perjury, or the baseness of stealing; and there are
men who would steal from the nation, or defraud the revenue, who would not on
any account cheat a private citizen. Be this as it may, there are means by
which smuggling may be prevented Every merchant or vender of goods may be
required once in a month to settle his accounts, and pay up the public money or
excises he has collected; though he sells on credit, he is to account for the
excise. It may be required of every citizen, that he shall receive from the
seller a bill of parcels for every article of foreign goods he may buy in the
state or out of it. Once on every six months, every freeman or head of a
family, shall render an account to the revenue officer for the county of all
the goods he has purchased, by producing the bills, upon oath. And he shall
then pay the excise on all goods he may have bought out of the state. The
several bills for goods purhased from particular merchants, when compared
together, may prove a pretty (...) mode of detecting frauds.
; and when the people at large have discovered, that they must submit to
poverty and to oppressive taxes, or must support the faithful execution of the
revenue laws, they will presently admit, that it is both honorable and useful
to set a mark upon the man who violates the laws of the state. I have said,
that an excise is more favorable to the poor than a land or poll tax; I will
venture an additional sentiment -- There never was any government in which an
excise could be of so much use as in the United States of America. In all other
countries taxes are considered as grievances -- in the United States an excise
on foreign goods would not be a grievance -- like medicine to a sick man it
would give us strength. It would close that wasteful drain by which our honor
and our wealth are consumed. What though money was not wanted -- though we did
not owe a florin to any foreign nation -- though we had no domestic debt -- and
though the expenses of civil government could be supported for many years
without a tax -- still it may be questioned, whether an excise would not be
desirable. It is surely the best expedient by which we can promote domestic
manufactures, and the condition in which we now live -- our general dependence
on a foreign country for arms and clothing -- is dishonorable -- it is
extremely dangerous.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER VI.
IN all ages of the world, and in all governments in which people have been
oppressed, their chief complaints have arisen from the weight of their taxes,
or other impositions of a similar tendency. Some tyrants there have been, whose
cruelty has extended to life as well as property: But the common distinction
between tyrants has been, that one of them has imposed more grievous taxes, or
has laid them on with less regard to the convenience or to the abilities of the
subject. Hence it is that governments are preferred where the power of taxing
is in the hands of the people, because it is presumed that they will impose
such taxes as are most profitable, and most easily paid.

It may happen nevertheless, that in a republican government, the general
system of taxing, arising from prejudice or inattention, may not be of that
kind which is most conducive to the ease or prosperity of the people. This I
take to be the cause in many of the states; and as the subject is extremely
interesting, the reader will doubtless excuse me, though I detain him somewhat
longer in considering the particular equity, as well as the general operation
of an excise or impost, by which the whole of the national debt may be
discharged. Part of our taxes must be paid in specie, and some part of them may
be paid in paper. Interest and principal of our foreign debt -- the salaries of
our ministers in foreign and some departments -- and the pay of such troops as
are necessarily employed in the service of the United States, must be
discharged in hard money. We shall state the expenses of the federal government
at 400,000 dollars by the year; for we presume that great economy will be used
till we are able to pay our debts, and that we shall try to be just before we
are generous. The states have not hitherto been called upon for any thing more
than the interest of the foreign debt; but the principal of the French loan, as
well as that from Holland. is to be paid off by instalments, and the first of
those payments is to be made in the year 1787, from which time some part of the
principal is to be paid off every year. -- Within twelve years the debt is to
be reduced to a quarter of its present size, but in the mean while the payments
of the principal and interest will amount to near one million of dollars by the
year. This must be paid in specie, or in such payments as will command specie
to that value; but there is a considerable debt which may possibly be
discharged by paper. The annual tax that may be paid in this manner is very
uncertain: for though we should discover that some of the states have, by
assuming a considerable part of the continental debt, and by other means,
nearly paid their quota of the domestic debt contracted by the United States,
still it will follow, that the particular debts contracted by the states, or
those which they have assumed, must be paid. Certificates have been issued for
the amount of those debts* by one class of auditors or another; how is the
certificate debt of this state to be reduced? how is it to be discharged! These
are difficult questions -- they are beyond the powers of ordinary calculation
-- conjecture itself can hardly reach them. It has been alleged, that our
certificate debt bears some resemblance to that many headed monster of
antiquity which defied all danger; whenever one of its heads was cut off, two
other heads arose to supply the loss. -- Debts of this kind cannot be reduced
to the common rules of finance.

We have seen that a tax is to be collected annually for the use of the federal
treasury in specie, unless we are willing to forfeit our honor, and give up all
pretensions to national character. Is it probable that we shall be able to
raise half of this sum by all the various taxes on property? I think not. It is
certain that the whole of our ^^xes for the present year, after the civil list
of the state is paid off, will not produce half the sum in specie required for
the use of the federal treasury. Let the poll tax, or land tax, be increased to
three times the sum that is now demanded, and there would still be a
deficiency; but the consequence would be great distress to the poorer class of
citizens, and multitudes would be constrained to fly into the western
territory: thousands would complain of the scarcity of money; more paper must
be coined; that paper would again depreciate, and the taxes must again be
doubled. Thus we should for ever be climbing the hill, and for ever sinking to
the bottom. But we have other objections to taxes on property -- they are
extremely unequal -- they cannot be justified except by necessity, and such
necessity does not appear. Is it equal or just, that a citizen who lives near a
(...) settlement, or one who lives in the wilderness, should pay the same tax
for his land, his slave, or any other property which he possesses, as a citizen
pays who lives near the sea coast? The last mentioned takes his lumber, and
every thing that his farm produces, to a ready market; the other can get
nothing for his lumber; corn itself is of no use to him when money is wanted,
and there are few things his farm produces that will pay much more than the
expense of carrying them to market. Those people complain at present, and their
complaints are well founded, though our taxes are so small as hardly to deserve
the name; what would they say if the taxes were such as the honor and safety of
the nation requires? Let us consider, on the other hand, the effects of a
substantial tax on luxuries. As it would be an easy matter to raise the whole
sum that is wanted both for the federal treasury, and for our own civil list,
by an excise on foreign goods, I conceive that all other taxes might be given
up, except a small land tax. Under such an administration of the public
revenue, the whole of our paper money might be called in within the space of
three or four years; for in that time the industrious citizen may have
discharged his private debts; and as he will not be called on for the payment
of taxes, there can be no honest reason for making more paper. The immediate
and necessary consequence of such taxes will be the increase of domestic
manufactures, and the general circulation of hard money. Let us raise 1,000,000
dollars on the next year by imposts and excise, the consequence will be, that
on the following year we shall import less goods, by at least the amount of
500,000 dollars, and thus we shall become L. 200,000 the richer -- that is to
say, we shall have paid off so much of our debt, or being out of debt we shall
have laid up so much hard money; for whenever our exports exceed our imports,
the balance returns in specie. If any man has doubts concerning the effects of
large taxes on foreign manufactures, he should turn his eyes to the Eastern
states, and he will discover, that during the late war, sundry manufactures had
there been carried to considerable perfection. We had not been six months in
the enjoyment of peace, before those manufactures were all ruined. The mechanic
is generally the first who perceives the effects of a pernicious commerce, for
the support of his family depends on his daily labor. Hence it is that the
merchant may be profited by a particular branch of commerce, and may promote it
diligently, while his country is sinking into a deadly consumption. It is the
duty of the statesman, either to check or to promote the several streams of
commerce by taxes or bounties, so as to render them profitable to the nation.
Thus it happened in Massachusetts -- A tax of 25 per cent. was lately imposed
on nails, and the poor o^ Taunton were immediately restored to life and vigor.
If our informant is correct, there are at least 250 laborers employed at this
hour in the manufacture of nails in that little town. The effects of sumptuary
laws must be extremely favorable to the industrious citizen, who lives one or
two hundred miles from any navigable water. In those parts the land in general
is fertile, and provisions are cheap, for it cannot be sent to a foreign market
-- There it is that the manufactures of linen, woollen, and iron may flourish.
-- The citizen near the coast may possibly indulge in the ^se of foreign
luxuries, while he can get them in exchange for a piece of timber or a bushel
of corn; by such men our taxes must be paid: but the citizen, in the interior
country, will attend to his manufactures, which may readily be transported to
any part of the state, and within a few years we may expect to see the most
plentiful circulation of specie in those remote settlements, which are now
laboring under the unequal burden of taxes. By such a system of finance,
perfect justice will be rendered to every citizen, they will stand on equal
ground, and no man will have reason to complain, for every man will fix the
amount of his own taxes; they will be limited by his abilities, his caprice, or
his prudence.

In every regulation of finance we should have an eye to a vast unsettled
country (...) fertile soil, and happy climate invite the foot of the
adventurous citizen. The inhabitants of that country, whenever they are formed
into separate states, are bound by the present federal rule to pay their quota
of the national debt, according to the value of their lands and improvements;
or it may possibly be expected, in order to shun the impracticable estimation
of property, that their quota shall be as the number of citizens. Is it to be
expected, that men who live at such a distance from market will, for many
years, pay taxes to any amount? surely it is not! Though they should promise
they will not be able to pay. For this reason we should take care that the
operations of finance (...) any man into that country. Let the citizen have
(...) in his power to live on the sea coast, equally secure as in the Western
countries without the risque of troublesome visits from the (...) of taxes. In
the course of time manufactures must flourish in those settlements, and the
citizen on the sea coast who exp^^'s his produce, may find it his interest to
buy goods that are ^^^de in the Western countries. At such a time we may expect
that (...) ^^^thren there shall, without difficulty, contribute their (...) the
support of government. In the mean while little can (...) expected from them,
except that they may consume a small portion of the foreign goods which pay tax
when they are imported (...) of the original states. As our manufactures
increase, our imports must decrease in proportion, and before the foreign debt
is discharged or before thirteen years have revolved, our annual importations
may fall short of 2^0,000 dollars. In this case certainly the revenue on
consumption must be greatly diminished, but we are ^o ^^collect that many
articles which grow in these states must be in constant demand in other
countries, and that our (...) is very productive; whence our exports may be
near half of what they are at (...) after our imports are reduced to a fourth
or a fifth part of that sum. Such a change of circumstances must produce a
balance of specie in our favor, to the amount of 1,000,000l. every year* and
though it did not produce half of that sum, there would certainly be a large
supply of specie in circulation, and the balance of our quota might easily be
raised by sumptuary laws of another sort.

Such are the present advantages and future effects that may be expected to
spring from large and general taxes on foreign goods. Let us contrast this with
our present condition and system of finance. We have stated, in a former
letter* that by the consumption of British manufactures, to the value of one
million of dollars, we contribute at least 700,000 toward the revenues of that
nation, while our own are perishing; but there are other misfortunes and other
marks of servitude, to which we are subjected by our present arrangements, and
the general use of British goods. In the several states, to the southward of
Delaware, it is agreed, that three fourths of the produce is exported and a
similar share of the returns are made in British bottoms. It will be found that
for exporting lumber and bringing back the returns, at least, one half of the
property is paid to the carrier. Tobacco, our chief staple, is exported on
better terms. They who have shipped tobacco for London, have the satisfaction
to find, that after all charges are paid that is to say, freight, commissions,
brokerage, storage, and a variety of other expenses, real or imaginary, there
is frequently remaining two thirds of the value for which it was sold; in some
cases three fourths of the value have been saved. The freight of the returns
must be added, and we shall state the whole, though it is considerably below
the mark, at 32 per cent. Some part of those goods are carried in American
bottoms, by which something is saved to the country under all the present
burdens of that trade; for this reason, we shall state the average loss at 30l.
per cent. From this computation it appears, that when produce is shipped for
London in one of the Southern states, to the value of one million of dollars,
the British merchant draws from that sum at least 300,000 dollars, under the
name of freight, and other contingencies; this money is for ever lost to the
country, and the remaining 700,000 which are returned us in dry goods, must
have contributed to the revenues of Great Britain at least 490,000 dollars. We
take them burdened with that expense. Surely our present commerce is of the
most extraordinary kind. Poverty is not the most humiliating circumstance by
which it is attended; for under the name of freemen, we are little better than
slaves; degraded by national bankrupty; burdened by private debts, and
constantly laboring in the soil for the benefit of another empire. When good
and evil are before us, we prefer the latter. We have it in our power to
promote manufactures, to bring thousands of industrious tradesmen from foreign
countries, to discharge our debts, and become respectable rich and powerful: --
instead of that, we are fluttering about in foreign dress ^or which we cannot
pay; we are apeing the vices of other nations, while we neglect their virtues;
without patriotism and without pride, we are feeding other people, while our
own nation is sinking under weakness and poverty. Thus we have seen an idle and
thoughtless debauchee neglect the improvement of his farm, and spend his time
and his estate in a tavern, supporting the family of another man, while his own
family was perishing by cold and hunger.

SYLVIUS.

LETTER VII.
IN the course of these letters I have tried to explain the true cause of the
present scarcity of money, the surest and best method of obtaining a sufficient
supply of substantial coin, and the safest method of administering the public
revenue, so as to prevent the poor from being oppressed while money is scarce.
We are told by medical people, that in discovering the true cause of any
disease, a considerable progress is made toward its cure. It might appear
strange, that a fact so obvious as the true cause of the general scarcity of
money should have escaped the notice of any person; but it must be remembered,
that when troubles are occasioned by our own vices, we are generally dextrous
at evasions, and ingenious at fictions; for if we confessed our fault, it would
be expected that we should amend. Our farmers contend that the merchants are
the cause of all our troubles -- they export the specie and make it scarce. The
merchant will have it that our commercial system is bad, -- his profits are too
small, for which reason he cannot pay his debts; but all of them, who are in
debt, are agreed that it is hard living in this country. Strange positions! the
farmer buys fineries -- his family are idle -- all the crop that he can sell,
does not pay for half the goods he has bought; but he wants more fineries and
more rum. He can get no more credit, and he pulls out all the specie that lay
in his chest. Is the merchant to be blamed for shipping this specie, when the
extravagance or indolence of the planter could furnish him with nothing else to
ship? As for the merchants, or people who are so called, their complaints are
just as well founded as those of the planter. Thousands of adventurers from the
British dominion, have added to the thousands of our own citizens who are too
lazy to plow, or labor at any other calling, and for this good reason, are
become merchants, or more properly traders. This tribe increases much faster
than any other class of citizens; and this class we have to maintain, besides
the misfortune of paying for their goods; but when any of those gentlemen find
it inconvenient to pay their debts, they gravely complain of the scarcity of
money, because our commercial system is bad. Certainly part of our system is
bad; for by proper regulations, nine tenths of those merchants that are here
might be exchanged for ten times the number of mechanics, who would render much
more service to the public and to themselves. The general charge of its being
hard to live in America, has a worse foundation if possible than the other
complaints. There is not at this time a civilized country on the face of the
earth, in which a poor man may live with so much case as in the United States
of America. The modes of living are various in the different states; I shall
take an example from a Southern state; namely, North Carolina.

The necessaries of life are food and clothing. Three-fourths of the labor of
the human species is, doubtless, employed in procuring food. In the most
luxurious countries, where the greatest number of unnecessary things are used,
more than half of the laboring inhabitants are employed in agriculture. It is
observed that in England, the very nursery of manufactures, the farmers are to
the mechanics as ^our to three; the difference is greater in France and
Germany; but many people are to be fed in those countries who are neither
farmers nor mechanics. Let ^s suppose that half of the subjects employed in
farming would raise provisions sufficient for the whole nation, and for their
cattle; or that the labor of one family in the field is sufficient to maintain
two. The produce of our labor is greater, and the labor we employ is less.
Every man who has visited foreign countries, knows with what diligence farmers
and mechanics are obliged to labor through the year. In the winter their work
begins before day, and in summer it continues through the day. They have little
respite, nor time for spending money. If one of them is accosted, he seldom
stops to answer the question -- his work must go on. This is not the case in
North Carolina, nor have we any examples of what other people call industry. If
my calculations are right, and some of them are annexed, When the land is good,
a labourer, by the help of an ordinary horse, hardly worth 20 dollars, may
raise 750 bushels of corn in the season; he may ^end 2500^hills, which will
produce six barrels to the thousand. In ordinary land, he may raise 250
bushels, we may take 400 bushels for an average instead of 500. Two laborers,
when there are two in a family, may raise near twice the quantity, and one good
horse is sufficient for both. This corn is planted in May, and the care of it
is finished on July, except that it is pulled on November. One quart of corn by
the day is sufficient to make bread for a grown person; there are countries in
which the same quantity of wheat or rye is the whole allowance of a soldier;
and if we lived as three-fourths of the inhabitants of other countries are
obliged to live, this would be the end of our calculation; but one pound of
pork or beef is the daily attendant on our bread, else we complain of hard
fare. Our farmers plant pease among the corn, and each labourer may count on
the addition to his crop of 50 bushels of pease with very little trouble. The
planter, and his wife, and three children, may be supposed to eat 50 bushels of
corn in the year; fifty bushels more may be reserved for the occasional use of
his horse and his hogs; this is sufficient when we consider, that hogs not only
support but frequently fatten themselves in the woods. The assistance of pease
and potatoes is employed when necessary: the remaining three-fourths of the
planter's crop of corn may be sold and employed as prudence or folly shall
dictate. If any man shall cast his eye on this note, who is not acquainted with
the state of farming in the lower districts of North Carolina, he might wonder
that ^o allowance was made for the trouble of raising hay, oats, and such other
provisions as are usually made for horses, sheep, and black cattle; such a
reader may be informed, that the blades or fodder of Indian corn is all the
provision for this purpose that is commonly made by the farmers; for the reeds
which grow every where, and are green through the winter, serve as food for
cattle. Perhaps it may be noted, that the computation is made for a farmer who
has land of his own* but no allowance has been made for the payment of taxes,
nor for the rents which are to be paid by the miserable tenants. To this it may
be replied, that the present land tax is five shillings for the hundred acres,
and poll tax is fifteen shillings; such debts are soon discharged by an
industrious man in a country like th^^, where the Spanish dollar, being eight
shillings, a pair of shoes is sold at 16s. to 20s. The day's labor of a
carpenter or mason, brings him from eight to twelve shillings, clear of his
provisions, and corn is sold at three to four shillings the bushel. As for the
rents by which tenants are frequently grieved, no account is to be made of them
in a state where nineteen farmers out of twenty cultivate their own land.
Though there are few citizens who suffer under the hands of a landlord, there
are many who suffer by the indolence of living on poor and piney land. Like the
sloth they are too lazy to gather food, though they see where it is plenty.
Such people hardly claim our pity; every one of them knows that on (...) other
side of the mountains, on the western waters in this state, ^e may buy lands in
great quantities or in small, at twenty-five dollars for the hundred acres --
lands of such a quality, as will prod^ce 50 or 60 bushels of corn to the acre.
Complaints are not grievous that can so easily be removed. According to this
calculation the f^^^er has been employed three months in raising his corn, and
he has raised in that space four times as much as was required for the use of
his family. He raised in the same season, at the usual intervals, flax, cotton,
potatoes, pease and sundry other necessary or useful articles. How is he ^o be
exercised on the rest of the year? Some weeks must be employed in saving his
fodder, corn, potatoes, etc. and some weeks in repa^^ing his fences; but a
great portion of his time lies vacant, and is usually employed in
quarter-races, cock fights, sauntering in stores and ^ave^ns, drinking rum, and
spending the residue of his crop. The calculation has been made for the planter
laboring in the field, who maintains three children incapable of work; but in
general half the children of every family are capable of work; hence the
surplus-age of provisions by the labor of two hands will be greater. There
(...) have a planter laboring in the field, hardly six months in the year* who
in that space raises four times the food that is required for the support of
his family and cattle. In other countries the farmer, by constant labor
through the year, can hardly raise twice the quantity that is required for the
same purpose. Is it not pretty clear that provisions, the chief necessary of
life, are raised in this state with less than half the labor that is required
in France, England, or Germany? In the article of clothing the difference of
labor that may be required is not so great, but the difference is still in our
favor. The^^ winters being temperate, the inhabitants, require less clothing,
and the raw materials are procured with more ease, or with less expense, than
in the other countries that have been mentioned. Flax grows to great
perfection, and the land on which it is sown is cheap and easily cultivated.
Cotton is raised with very little trouble; and though the wolf continue to
prowl in some neighbourhoods, yet as sheep thrive well in this climate, and
require very little feeding, (...) cannot say that wool ought to be dear.
Skins, which are also used in clothing, ought to be cheap in a country where
black cattle maintain themselves through the winter, and where a man may kill a
deer when he pleases for his breakfast* Surely the scarcity of clothing cannot
arise from the difficulty of obtaining raw materials. There is a difficulty
remaining -- the raw materials must be made up, and the people are too lazy to
work. Nothing has been said concerning house-rent or fuel. For in a country
where a common labourer man in a fortnight build such a house, out of timber,
as is frequently used, and in a country where timber, the constant fuel, is
profitably cut down, that it may be destroyed, very little can be charged to
the account of house-rent or fuel, considerable articles in many other places.
If it should ^e asked, how is the industrious farmer in this country to spend
the balance of his time? Every citizen knows, that he may be profitably
employed in making ^ar, pitch, shingles, staves, boards, or some other species
of lumber, which come to a ready market. By such means, and by the sale of his
pork, or his corn, or other grain, every industrious and frugal planter may, in
a few years, double his stock. This cannot be said of farmers in other
countries.
the citizens of this state may live with half the labor that would support
them in France. England, or Germany; for the labor of one family in this state
is sufficient to raise food for the support of four families. Is the man candid
or honest -- is he not ungrateful to Heaven who complains of such a country, or
says, that his troubles are occasioned by the necessary difficulty of living --
by the difficulty of paying taxes -- or of providing food and raiment -- or by
any other cause than by his own vices -- his idleness and dissipation!

Our present commercial system, if we have any thing that deserves that name,
is certainly a bad one, but reason may teach us to be moderate in our
complaints. If the English ministry had not cut off all intercourse with their
West Indies, and distressed our direct intercourse with Britain and Ireland, we
should have continued a good while longer to take her manufactures and to pay
(...) them. By these means her mechanics would have thriven, and we should have
been insensibly settling down into inveterate and ruinous habits. Diseases
which are slowly contracted are said to be hard to remove. The measures of
Great Britain have in a short space prevented us from being able to pay our
debts, and they have at the same time prevented us from feeding her own
subjects. They have happily checked our folly, at a time when all are capable
of amendment, for we have not altogether forgot the little we knew of the
mechanic arts, nor the few habits of industry that we had formerly acquired. In
a few years we may be reduced to a new system by which we shall be more wealthy
and less dependent. Perhaps I deceive myself, but I think that I love my
country, and that no man living is more desirous to serve it, but I am not
grieved -- on the contrary I show it as a fortunate event, that our commercial
hopes have been disappointed, and a check given to the baneful spirit of
luxury, and the general use of British goods that was prevailing. Perhaps the
time is not very distant when we shall be a frugal and virtuous nation. We are
not to thank Great Britain for the favor she has done us, for she did not
intend those commercial restrictions for our good; let her continue to exclude
us from her West Indies, and contrary to good faith to withhold the Western
posts; the less we gain by commerce the fewer of manufactures we shall buy, and
the sooner we shall make our own clothing. A nation less wise might have
discovered long since, that liberal conduct is most profitable, but she refuses
to be reformed.

The commercial history of the United States is short. At the end of the war
our merchants, forsaking the trade of other nations by whom we had been well
trea^^^, rushed into the arms of Great Britain with a spirit that was not
honorable, and with haste that was not profitable. -- They did not wait for
terms. -- They have suffered as they deserved. -- Our shipping has been
oppressed. -- We have seen a vessel from these states to London, laden with
naval stores, bring back, as the whole produce of her cargo, five pounds worth
of chalk. The balance of the cargo was absorbed in charges. In consequence of
such treatment our merchants are become bankrupts a little the sooner. -- The
want of payment at home, and the want of profits abroad, have effectually
disabled them.

The history of our planters is rather more simple. Discarding their wheels and
looms, they used nothing but what was British. They bought more foreign goods
in one year, than they could pay for in two. Their produce is gone, and their
specie is chiefly gone, but they are still in debt. Let us be more frugal and
more industrious -- let us buy no more till we pay our debts. Such are the
dictates of honesty and patriotism. Is not this plan of paying our debts
preferable to the expedient of making money -- an expedient that substitutes a
shadow for a substance. It converts government, which was instituted for the
protection of property, into an engine for its destruction. After all, it is
the poor expedient of a day, which promises relief that it cannot give. The
whole process is such contemptible quackery, that while we are swallowing the
potion the disease increases It is vain to prophecy, but if the time shall ever
come, when the united states are to give up part of their liberty, as men
frequently have done for the greater security of property, the rage of
defrauding creditors by making paper money a legal tender, is like to produce
the dishonorable change. If it is true that men have not virtue enough to bear
a government that is perfectly free, the proof is like to come from this
quarter. If there was a state in this union, in which it was treason to attempt
the making of paper, such a state would become the asylum of honesty, arts and
industry; and if any of the new states in the Western country shall happily
provide this guard, as part of her constitution, that state will certainly
flourish with singular speed; it will give a new proof that men are most happy
when their property is safe* and that all men approve of virtue, whatever may
be their practice.

The reader is fully possessed of the plan that was proposed in the first of
these letters, for giving relief under the present scarcity of money. The
relief given by paper money is neither durable nor honest. Nothing but
frugality and industry can bring us substantial relief: but the operations of
industry, and the progress of manufactures are slow. Specie, which is banished,
cannot immediately return; and the poor man, in the mean while, may be
distressed for money to pay his taxes. In order to obviate this misfortune, it
is proposed that the expense of government be paid by an excise on all foreign
manufactures, or by sumptuary taxes which are equally intended to promote
domestic manufactures, and to give immediate relief to every industrious
family. By a steady perseverance in this plan, the poor would be relieved from
the burden of taxes -- our citizens would be enabled to discharge their debts
-- we should increase daily in wealth -- our country would be the resort of
ingenious artists -- public and private credit would re^ive -- and we should
become truly independent.

SYLVIUS.


