A SERIOUS ADDRESS AND FAREWELL CHARGE To the MEMBERS of the CHURCH of ENGLAND
In SIMSBURY and the adjacent parts. BY ROGER VIETS, Lately their MISSIONARY,
NOW MISSIONARY at DIGBY in NOVA SCOTIA.

HARTFORD; PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN M,DCC,LXXXVII.

My loving, and most tenderly beloved PARISHIONERS.
IT is almost needless to remind you of the anxious concern, generally
attending the final separation of friends, neighbors and acquaintance. This
concern is augmented by the uncommon warmth of friendship; the intimacy of
neighborhood, and the length of time, wherein the parties have been acquainted
with each other.

Though I have delivered two public discourses to you, upon the occasion of my
removal, still I could not depart without leaving with you somewhat further of
my sentiments and advice committed to paper, hoping they will be considered as
my last, and in some sense as my dying expressions.

Born as I have been and nurtured among you, having led your devotions almost
twenty-eight years, of which term, more than twenty-four years I have been in
holy orders, and have (within and without my mission) administered the holy
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, to a great number of devout and exemplary
communicants; have admitted into Christianity by Baptism no less than 122
persons of riper years, and 1749 infants; have joined in marriage 176 couple;
have committed to the silent grave in full hope of their rising again at the
last day, the bodies of 219 deceased persons; have received by profession, into
the bosom of our excellent church 215 heads of families. From the year 1759 to
the present time, the number of conformists to the church has increased from 75
to more than 280 families, exclusive of the many that have emigrated, and the
few that have apostatized: Within the before mentioned period, I have (upon a
moderate computation) traveled by land and by water, more than the extent of
three times the circumference of the terraqueous globe.

The perfect unanimity subsisting for such a length of time both among the
people, and between the people and their minister, has been extensively
observed and mentioned, to the great honor of my people, and satisfaction of
myself. You have indeed exhibited a laudable example of charity and concord; an
example, which has been admired by all, extolled by many imitated by few!

How shall I find words to express my gratitude for the numerous and estimable
favors that I have received at your hands! Your undissembled friendship --
your unremitted benevolence -- your unmerited candor -- your unlimited
approbation, has made impressions on my mind too deep to be erased by the
greatest change of circumstances -- too durable to be annihilated by the hand
of time: for every mark of your cordial love, unshaken fidelity and esteem,
candor and generosity, zeal for the service of God and his church, be pleased
to accept of my sincerest acknowledgments, my warmest gratitude. Whithersoever
Heaven shall guide my steps, the dear remembrance of my former parish will
never lose its place in my mind: a sense of your affection and beneficence,
will remain deeply engraves on the fleshy table of my heart.

Not is my gratitude confined to those of our own church only, many people of
other professions of religion have shown the most lively demonstrations of a
derential regard for me, and of courteous benevolence toward me: this regard
and benevolence, merit the warmest gratitude of which my heart is susceptible,
and shall not be forgotten as long as memory holds a seat in my brain.

Never, perhaps, was a minister and people separated with more reluctance on
both sides; never, perhaps, was their mutual regret more equally balanced. As
our esteem and affection have been reciprocal, so is the grief of our parting.
Nor was I ever sensible, till the present crisis, to what height your good will
and respect for me have arisen.

But having with much satisfaction and undeserved applause expended the prime
and best part of my life among you, and in your service; it can by no means be
expected, that we can much longer remain in the present life, reciprocally a
comfort and assistance to each other. Should my life, and the lives of such of
you as are nearly coeval with me, be so lengthened out as to complete a full
century, how swiftly would the remaining fifty years glide away! How soon would
the last half of the century expire! And even much the greater part of this
short remaining time, would be evil days and years, in which we should truly
say that we had no pleasure. Since then the short remaining space, that we can
expect or even wish for, must pass away and forever disappear like the wind, or
like the chaff which the wind drives away; since time itself is as vain and
fleeting as a shadow, a vapor or a dream, and the remaining part of our lives,
can be but as it were, "dream of a dream, and shadow of a shade." How can the
difference be thought very material, betwixt the parting of friends at the
present time, and their parting twenty or forty years hence? Nay, on some
accounts, it is more eligible to part from our friends at the middle stage of
life, when old age and infirmities but begin to oppress us, than to dwell with
them till we become (for reasons very obvious) a burden and vexation to each
other. But still it is grievous, it is melancholy, it is painful, for us to be
separated; and would it not be as much, or more painful, to be separated after
we have dwelt together twenty or forty years longer? Length of time endears
friends more closely to each other, and the interchange of benign offices,
strengthens the bands of amity, in some proportion to the time lent us by
indulgent Heaven, partly for the purposes of exercising those offices. The well
known brevity and uncertainty of life, teach us the most obvious lesson of
resignation, at bidding adieu to our dearest friends. For the shortness and
precariousness of life, clearly display to our sight, the vanity of all
temporal enjoyments, the insufficiency of all friendships and connexions on
this side of eternity, to satisfy a rational being, or to afford complete
happiness to a mind immortal. Therefore let us dry up our tears, and like
persons of sound reason, give all these arguments their proper weight, and bid
farewell to each other with entire submission to the will of Heaven, with a
decent cheerfulness, and a lively hope of meeting again in a better country, in
a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens.

As to the motives inducing me to a removal. There is a general accusation
thrown out against the ministers of all parties and religions (whether in jest
or earnest I know not) that they are wholly actuated by worldly interest, by an
insatiable desire of temporal gain. I hope ministers of the gospel do not in
general deserve such severe censure. The clergy of our Church I am well
convinced do not. To myself I know such an observation cannot be applied: and
hope I have demonstrated by many years conduct, and shall hereafter
demonstrate, that I am not chiefly guided by a motive so mean and sordid. And I
cannot but query, whether, laymen who are most liberal of such reflections on
the clergy do not judge us according to some avaricious principles lurking in
their own breasts? Whether they would not I say (in our situation) act from the
same sinister views, which they attribute to us? It is reasonable, and a duty
incumbent on every man to have regard to his worldly interest, in a certain
restricted degree, it is the will of God that we should by proper means make
provision for the decent and even creditable support of ourselves and our
families; and as far as is in our power by honest means, to leave somewhat
behind us for the benefit of our families after our decease. But this temporal
interest must not by any means be the sole or even the chief motive of our
actions. God forbid, that any man, much more that any minister of the gospel,
should set a greater value on this world than on Heaven! on time than eternity!
The whole world in competition with one soul, is as the small drop of the
bucket, the imperceptible dust of the balance.

A weighty inducement to my removal arose from gratitude to the pious and
venerable society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts, who have
been my principal and most constant supporters. Reason and gratitude bound me
to pay an high regard to their commands. They directed me to remove myself to
Digby in Nova Scotia.

What influence the difference of constitution between Connecticut and
Nova Scotia may have on me, is not proper for me to mention.

The people of my new mission, though earnestly desirous of enjoying the
benefits of public worship and sacraments, had no minister of any denomination
whatever of constant abode within the compass of eighteen miles* more than
three hundred families dispersed through a large extent of country, will
receive a supply of their spiritual necessities by my new appointment.
Insomuch, that there can be no doubt, of my being able to do more for the
advancement of God's glory, the kingdom of Christ, and prosperity of the church
in my new residence, than among you; how then can I be blamed for the measures
I have taken?

The situation of the place, and the disposition of the inhabitants, were
strong persuasions with me, to expend the remainder of my days here. Every one
has his particular opinion and humor. Let others think and speak as they
please of this place, I never saw a place or people more agreeable to me in all
points.

Nova Scotia is a peninsula, is situate in a happy climate, one of their best
towns is Annapolis, from which Digby is distant about eigteeen miles. Digby is
situate on a rising ground, upon the Basin and in the county of Annapolis
Royal; and contains perhaps about one hundred families. On one side of the town
is a most amiable prospect of the Basin, and a line of houses and farms, upon
the adjacent shore, around the whole; on the other side is an agreeable walk,
through pleasant woodlands, for about six miles to St. Mary's Bay; thence
continues an agreeable passage by land or water, upon the Bay of St. Mary, for
twelve miles further, till we come to Sissaboo, a fruitful village, possessed
by a courteous, well-disposed people. The situation, and air of Digby, is
exceeding healthy, and the soil is far from barren. I have seen some instances
of vegetable productions, in that place, surprising and almost incredible. The
harbor is good; with a very high tide, and a plentiful supply of fish of many
kinds.

But none of these circumstances recommend the country to my choice, so much as
the worthiness and good disposition of the Inhabitants. Gentle and amiable,
kind and hospitable, must every unprejudiced person allow them to be. Neither
are they addicted to such vice and profaneness, as the people of Nova Scotia
are throughout the states represented to be guilty of. During the whole time of
my residence at Digby, I have not heard one obscene word, and but very few
profane words. In paying regard to the times, places and institutions of
divine worship, they are equal, or superior, to the greatest part of the
seaport or populous towns of New England. To all this may be added, as a very
important benefit to the settlers, that much the greater part of the idle,
dissolute, litigious and helpless people, such as were in all probability
likely to become a public charge, such as would not labor, or were inclined to
more profligate morals, have emigrated to the states, chiefly to New York: and
there is great hope, that the few of this character remaining among us, will
shortly follow their example: In whose stead, honest, industrious people from
Europe, and from the states, charmed with the advantages of the place, and the
ingenuousness of the people, are coming in, and bid fair to be useful members
to the town, and the province.

The great and essential principles of christianity I have so constantly
inculcated in my administrations, that it is needless to repeat them; such as a
rational, firm, well established faith, an uniform holiness of life, purity of
heart, charity, mercy, meekness, patience, temperance, justice, and all other
fruits of the spirit. These general and well known subjects I will omit and
give you a few words of advice upon some more particular matters.

Let me beseech you then, by all our past friendship and present regret, to
attend constantly and devoutly on the public worship of God; when you cannot
have one in holy orders to officiate amongst you, still meet together, and read
the common prayer and some good printed sermons amongst yourselves. I have
found it an unexceptionable observation, that where ever a congregation make a
constant practice of celebrating God's worship upon every Lord's day, they have
more religious knowledge, a more active spirit of devotion, they have more
regard for God, his word, his ministers and his institutions, than is to be
found among other people. In small congregations who can but seldom have a man
in holy orders among them, the meeting together and worshipping God, is a
laudable and edifying practice; a practice which cannot be too much commended
or encouraged; and which has preserved an understanding of Christianity, and a
spirit of rational devotion amongst the episcopal people of Connecticut.

If my last words to you, and as it were my dying advice, can have influence
upon you, I entreat you never to admit of any material alterations in your form
of public devotion. -- Indeed to admit of no other alterations, than such small
ones, as revolutions may render absolutely necessary. Even small, unnecessary
or wanton innovations, are more dangerous, and more pernicious, than is
generally imagined. When a spirit of idle innovation is let loose, none can
foretell when or where it will cease. When a constitution in church or state
becomes dissolved or unhinged, it is no easy matter to resettle it. -- Your
safety and your honor, consists in a firm and steady adherence to the church
of England -- should you once loose that church, you will not easily find a
better.

The public has been already presented with three new books of common prayer,
the Methodist, the Socinian, and another without a particular name, and more
are daily expected. In all that I have seen, they appear to have rejected the
very best parts of the service of the church of England. Some have reprobated
two Creeds entirely, and an essential article of the Apostle's Creed; some have
expunged the Gloria Patri and have mended the Lord's Prayer -- some have
abolished all Holidays, because forsooth they have been abused; not considering
that the same argument would hold equally conclusive against the Lord's Day,
both the Sacraments, and all that is good.

Could the numerous authors of the new common Prayers agree in one, uniform
book for divine Worship, like that of the English Church; they could, with a
better face, invite you to comply with them: But should they agree in one form,
yet their best compilers could not produce a form, by any means, equal to the
liturgy of the church, which is the collected wisdom of ages and nations.

If any should care so little for God's worship, and be so void of the
christian temper, as to think the prayers of the church too lengthy, I should
think it absurd to enjoin a shorter form upon the Church to please them. The
person who thinks an hour and an half in the forenoon* and an hour and a
quarter in the afternoon, of one day in the seven, too much time for the
worship of God would be best satisfied with no worship at all.

If the liturgy of our church can be altered for the better, how comes it to
pass that the united councils of the church and state in England (the most
judicious nation in the world) have not found it out and made the requisite
alterations? When you shall be enticed to adopt a new form of worship, follow
the advice of the wisest of men: Meddle not with them that are given to change,
for their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them both?

Suffer me to exhort you to preserve unity and godly love among yourselves,
peace with your neighbors, and unity with all men. Finally, brethren, farewell
Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you.


