A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE MARQUIS de CHATELLUX's TRAVELS, IN NORTH
AMERICA, IN A LETTER ADDRESSED TO THE MARQUIS; PRINCIPALLY INTENDED AS A
REFUTATION OF HIS OPINIONS CONCERNING THE QUAKERS, THE NEGROES, THE PEOPLE, AND
MANKIND.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH OF J. P. BRISSOT DE WARVILLE, WITH ADDITIONS AND
CORRECTIONS OF THE AUTHOR.

Je suis toujours pour les persecutes.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH JAMES. IN CHESNUT-STREET, M,DCC,LXXXXIII.

A CRITICAL EXAMINATION OF THE MARQUIS DE CHATELLUX'S TRAVELS IN NORTH AMERICA.
SIR,
I TAKE the earliest opportunity of letting you know, how much I have suffered
by the perusal of your travels, and I think it necessary to make this
declaration public. I have a very cogent reason for so doing. They, in many
places, contain errors, and, I will venture to say, a poison, which, under your
name, will have a rapid circulation; and to which we cannot be too hasty in
applying an antidote.

A poison! You may start at the expression; but I can neither suppress or
soften it, as it is so precisely characteristic of your opinions respecting the
Quakers, the Negroes, and the People.

In vilifying the Quakers, you may prevent the good effects of their pious
example. In refusing the name of men to the Negroes, you give your sanction to
the treating them like beasts of burden, if not to the spilling of their
blood; and you hinder the effects of that philosophical commotion, which will
no doubt procure their general emancipation. In making the People contemptible,
you invite their oppressors to rivet their chains. These are matters of great
importance. -- They will justify me to the public, for having taken up my pen
in so precipitate a manner; they will justify me, even in your eyes, for having
used it against yourself: your reason will undoubtedly plead for me, in
opposition to your feelings, and you will pardon me for having published
truths, perhaps disagreeable ones for you, when I shall have convinced you,
that they are of public utility, and not to be suppressed. Amicus Plato sed
magis ami^a veritas. This should be the motto of every writer who has really
the public good at heart.

I do not mean, in this place, to criticize your book throughout. -- Let the
journalists point out the beauties of your style. -- My business is to obviate
the mischievous tendency of your work, without paying any attention to the
elegance of the language. I should, indeed, have been better pleased, if you
had not shown so much uneasiness about getting a bad supper, or so muc h
pleasure from having made a good one; and could have dispensed with the exact
detail you have given us of every dish; for it is not the journal of an
Apicius, but that of a philosopher and statesman which we expect to read, when
we see the name of the author of La Felicite Public An excellent treatise,
(allowing for a few errors.) attributed to the MARQUIS de CHATELLUX, and which
I have commended in several of my writings.
in the title page. -- I should have been better pleased if your observations
had not been confined to taverns, and if you had not sacrificed our American
friends to the pleasure of making jests. -- Alas! what will be the opinion of
those whom you have thus offended, when they read your book -- and how can we
expect a friendly reception from them, when they find their secrets betrayed,
and the unreserved effusions of the heart ridiculed by a man decorated with so
many titles? What confidence will they now place in an obscure Frenchman? On
his first approach, the Amecan will exclaim -- are you also come to spy out our
follies, and publish them to Europe?

It would have been satisfactory to have seen more penetration in your
enquiries concerning the effects of the different political constitutions of
America. -- I could have wished for some account of the number of criminals; of
the crimes which are most frequent; of the difference of morals in the cities,
in the country, and in the newly settled parts; of the state of the finances,
etc. and I should also have been better pleased, if, instead of railing at
democracies, you had summed up grievances and well attested facts. -- But this
is not a proper place for the discussion of these interesting subjects.

The principal charges, I bring against you, may be reduced to three:

I. You have calumniated and ridiculed the respectable sect of Quakers.

II. You have vilified the Negroes.

III. You have vilified Mankind and the People.

These are the three general charges against you, which I now lay before the
tribunal of the Public. -- After having discussed them, I shall add some
reflections on several other subjects you have treated of, which appear to me
equally susceptible of censure.

In making this examination, I shall, first of all, quote your opinions and
assertions, and then endeavor to refute them.

I begin with the article concerning the Quakers.

VINDICATION of the QUAKERS.
Instead of their company, we had that of Mr. Benezet, an old Quaker, whose
short stature, and low, mean figure, formed a perfect contrast to Mr.
Pendleton's. This Mr. Benezet may be looked on rather as a model of what the
Quakers ought to be than as a specimen of what they are. -- As his only object
was the good of others, his charity and generosity made him greatly respected
in those more happy times, when a citizen derived all his honor from his
virtues. Now the din of arms has drowned the sighs of charity, and the love of
our fellow creatures yields to patriotism. Yet Mr. Benezet still continues in
the practice of doing good. He came to get some information from me, on the
means lately found out in France, of restoring drowned persons to life. I
promised, not only to send him an account of the methods used in those cases,
when I returned to Newport, but also to procure him one of the boxes which our
government has ordered to be placed at every seaport town. We soon got better
acquainted; and, speaking of the misfortunes of war, he said to me, -- My
Friend, I know thou art a man of letters, and a member of the French academy.
Several good things have lately been written by men of letters; they have
attacked errors and prejudices, and especially intolerance: Will not they try
to give men a distaste for war, and make them live together like friends and
brethren? Thou art right, said I, in expecting something from the progress of
philosophical knowledge. Several active hands are now at work upon the great
edifice of public good; but it will be to no purpose for them to finish any
part of it, while the foundation is wanting, and this foundation is, as thou
have said, a general peace. As to intolerance and persecution, it is true, that
those two enemies of mankind are not yet sufficiently chained down; but let me
whisper a word in thy ear, the full meaning of which thou will not perhaps
comprehend, though thou art well acquainted with the French language. They are
no longer fashionable; and, I should even think, they were nearly out of date,
were it not for some little matters thou art unacquainted with: which is, that
those who attack them are sometimes imprisoned, while their defenders are
rewarded with livings of an hundred thousand livres a year. An hundred thousand
livres a year! cries Benezet, why, with that they might build hospitals, and
set up manufactories; and, to be sure, that is what they do with their money.
No, my friend, said I, persecution must be paid for; and yet, I must say, the
pay is but mean, and the highest price given by the richest persecutor, is no
more than one thousand, or twelve hundred livres a year, to some satirical
poets, or writers of journals, who are enemies to literature, and whose works
are much read, though they have but a dull sale. Friend, says the Quaker to me,
this persecution is a strange thing; I can hardly believe what has happened to
myself. My father was a Frenchman born, and so am I. It is now about sixty
years since he was obliged to seek an asylum in England, carrying with him his
children, the only treasures which he could save in his misfortunes. Justice,
or what is called so in thy country, had him hung in effigy, because he
explained the Gospel in a different way from your priests. The English clergy
gave my father but little more satisfaction, so that he wished to get away from
all hierarchy, and came to settle in this country, where I have lived very
happily until the breaking out of the war. I have long since forgotten all the
persecutions my family have undergone. I love thy nation, because it is a mild
and a feeling one; and for thee, my friend, I know thou do every thing in thy
power to serve thy fellow creatures. When thou returnest to Europe, get thy
brethren to assist thee: -- and let me now recommend our friends in
Rhode Island to thy attention. He then named all the Quakers who live in that
state, and are pretty numerous; and recommended them to my care. At parting, he
asked leave to send me some pamphlets of his own manufacturing, written chiefly
in defense of his sect. I assured him, it would give me great pleasure to read
them; and he did not fail to send them next morning.

Of whatever sect a man, glowing with zeal and love for his fellow creatures,
may be, he is most undoubtedly a respectable being; but, I confess, I cannot
bestow on this sect in general, the esteem which some individuals of it are
entitled to. The law, which many of them follow, of not saying you, nor sir, is
far from giving them an air of plainness or candor. It is perhaps to make up
for this clownishness, that they often speak in a whining, insinuating tone,
which is perfectly jesuitical. Their conduct too, is quite of a piece with
their language. Concealing their indifference for the public good, under the
appearance of religion, they are sparing of blood, it is true, and especially
of their own; they are mere sharpers at cheating both parties out of their
money, and that without a blush, or the least regard to what may be thought of
them. It is a received maxim in trade, that they are not to be trusted. This
opinion is a just one, and time will more and more show the propriety of it.

Indeed, nothing can be more dangerous than enthusiasm in its decline; for
hypocrisy is the only substitute that can be found for it. This monster, so
well known in Europe, gains but too much ground in every religious sect.

On Sunday, the 10th, I determined to take a turn through the churches, and study
the different modes of worship. Unfortunately for me, the several sects, who
agree in nothing else, have fixed on the same hour for assembling their
congregations; so that I could only go to the Quaker's meeting house in the
morning, and to the church of England in the afternoon. The Quaker's meeting is
a square room, in every part of which, and parallel to the four walls, are
benches and desks, so that they sit opposite to one another; without altar or
pulpit to fix their attention. When they are met, some one of their elders
makes an extempore prayer, just what comes into his head; they are then silent,
'till some man or woman is inspired, and gets up to speak. Travelers must be
believed on their words, let the account they give be ever so extraordinary.
Like Ariosto, I shall relate prodigies -- diro maraviglia. It is nevertheless
true, that a woman held her tongue just as I came in. A man took her place, and
spoke like a blockhead on internal grace, the illumination of the Spirit, and
all the other tenets of his sect, which he had over and over again, without
attempting to explain any thing. He at length got to the end of his sermon, to
the great joy of his brethren and sisters, who all appeared absent and tired
out. After seven or eight minutes silence, an old man got on his knees, and
retailed us out of a very insipid prayer, after which they broke up the
meeting.

On leaving this gloomy and clownish meeting, the service of the church of
England, with the music and ornaments, seemed like an opera. An handsome
pulpit, placed before a fine organ, a well-dressed minister in the pulpit,
reading, speaking, and singing, with a grace perfectly theatrical; the young
women, from the pit and boxes, joining him with their melodious voices; a soft
and agreeable singing, interrupted by some excellent airs on the organ; all
this, compared to the worship of the Quakers, Anabaptists, and Presbyterians,
seemed rather a little Paradise, than the road to Paradise. However, by
reflecting on so many different sects, some of whom are rigid, and some
trifling, but every one imperious and narrow, one is lead to believe, that all
mankind read the great book of nature, as Montauciel is the name of an ignorant
soldier, one of the characters in the Deserter, a comic opera. He engages the
Deserter to teach him to read. He gets a bit of paper in his hand, on which the
words, vous etes un blanc be, are written, and on spelling the letters, he
makes out trompette blessee. The Deserter shows him his mistake, and the word
blanc be (simpleton) becomes the source of altercation.
Montauciel read his own; where, for "vous etes un blanc be" -- he always
read, "trompette blessee." It is a thousand to one that he guesses the meaning
of a single line, as he cannot even spell; but should such an one come to you
for assistance, give him none. You had better leave him to enjoy his mistake,
than cut one another's throats.

This is the most violent attack in your travels against the Quakers. In other
parts you have several things against them, but none worth mentioning.

Before entering into the particulars which the examination of your satire
requires, I shall make bold to ask you, Sir, what facts, books, or men, have
authorized you to condemn this sect so hastily? Have you known a great number,
or the generality of Quakers? Have you lived a long time in habits of intimacy
with them? Can you form a judgment of them all, and know the worth of the whole
society, from having been at one or two of their meetings? or from having
conversed with one or two of them in a hasty manner? or from having been
introduced to one who did not think fit to look at you? When you went into that
religious meeting, where you formed a judgment of the discourse, or prayer
which you heard, were you in a proper state of mind for the sincere
investigation of truth? Had you no prejudices against the Quakers? and your
theatrical knowledge too, which brought ridicule into your head, this ridicule
which is so powerful an argument for a French Man; did not this same knowledge
spread a veil over your mind -- Have you not been prejudiced against the
Quakers by Voltaire, who has by turns, praised them and endeavored to make
them appear ridiculous, though he knew but little of them? And indeed, who
would not at first sight, regard your testimony as suspicious, and your
judgment as partial, on considering your moral and religious opinions, your
character of academician, soldier and man of quality, that three fold
character, which this society so justly detest.

And why have you, in forming a judgment of them, abandoned those principles by
which our judgment should ever be directed -- We have no right to censure any
one, unless we have either ourselves detected him violating the laws of honor
and probity, or upon the authentic and impartial testimony of others on his
crime. Vague reports ought never to have any weight.

To condemn a whole body of men at once, a society of long standing, to accuse
them of cheating, of selfishness, and hypocrisy, requires a series of well
attested facts, the truth of which is of the greater consequence, as the
charges are serious, and involve so many people in them.

Thus, should any one charge the Catholics with having been persecutors, they
might prove it by their Autosda-fe, their inquisition, Saint Bartholomew's day,
the Irish massacre, etc. To prove that the Puritans of former times were
persecutors, we need only mention the tragical scenes which were acted during
the revolution of 1650 in England, and the persecutions they excited in the new
world. -- To prove the ambitious, intriguing and persecuting spirit of the
Jesuits, we have only to refer to their unceasing maneuvers in England and
France, the destruction of Port Royal, and the many lettres de cachet, which
they have made use of to destroy, in secret prisons, a crowd of victims, whose
only fault was a different way of thinking -- These are facts well attested.

But have you, Sir, any such facts to allege against the Quakers? not a single
one -- So far from that, you produce none but what are in their favor -- For I
shall now and then have the satisfaction of making use of your own words to
refute you.

But it is because you bring no positive charge of any crime against the
Quakers; it is because you judge them only by hearsay and vague reports, that
I conclude you have no proof of the vices and crimes you reproach them with;
and that your judgment of them is unjust.

I will not, however, confine myself to this general method of reasoning, but
will follow you step by step -- I believe your reflections on the Quakers may
be reduced to three principle heads; they affect

Either their moral and private conduct,

Their religious tenets,

Or their civil principles --

I shall now proceed to show how unjustly you have treated them in these three
different respects.

Of the MORAL and PRIVATE CONDUCT of the QUAKERS.
I have been acquainted with many Quakers in London -- I have endeavored to
become acquainted with their principles, and have looked on it as my duty to
pay them the following public tribute of esteem, in a work, See Vol. 2nd. No 4,
Page 196, of the Journal du Licee de Londres, ou Tableau des Sciences and des
Arts, a Work published in England in 1784, by the Author of this book.
written at a time when I wished to serve my countrymen, by giving them a
faithful account of that Island, which deserves our imitation, rather than our
jealousy; in a work, wherein, as a writer of a foreign journal has well
observed, my design was to introduce good principles in an English dress. See
No. 11, of the Correspondence Literaire Secrette, for 1785, a foreign
Publication, which is not spoilt by the Pen of the Censor Royal, and contains
many interesting anecdotes and striking Articles, favorable to the cause of
humanity.


Simplicity, candor and honesty, characterized their words and actions; they
were not full of professions, but sincere; they were not polished, but humane;
they had no wit -- none of that wit so essential in France, and which there
supplies the place of every thing else; but they possessed good sense, sound
judgments, upright hearts and honest souls; in a word, if I were to seek for
society, it should be amongst the Quakers; if I sought for amusement, I would
have recourse to my own countrymen -- And their women too, I shall be asked,
what can be said of them? They are just what women should be every where,
faithful to their husbands, affectionate to their children, careful and frugal
in their domestic economy, plain in their dress, I should have added, well
informed in the principles of morality and religion. I knew a young woman of
this society, who possessed a wonderful solidity of thought, and firmness of
character; I have seen few countenances in which morality was so strongly
marked. It was owing in her, to an internal convincement; to that convincement,
which is the effect of the most serious enquiry.
and above all, they are neither solicitous to please any other individual, nor
to attract the public attention. As they make no outward show, they pay a
greater regard to the cultivation of their minds -- This simplicity of manners
is yet observable in some other countries; the Arabs, for example, even now,
follow the same wandering lives as the first Patriarchs. It cannot be too often
repeated, that such manners as these are productive of domestic economy, the
happiness of families, and public virtues -- But we have renounced them,
diseased unhappy wretches as we are, with all our civilization and politeness
-- And yet what man amongst us is happy, but he who has the courage to live as
nature directs, as the good of past ages have lived, who are so politely
ridiculed by the wits of the present day -- Si ad naturam vives, says Seneca,
nunquam eris pauper, si ad opinionem nunquam dives -- If thy life is regulated
by nature, says Seneca, thou will never be poor, if by the opinions of others,
thou will never be rich.

I have not the presumption to suppose that my single testimony will be
preferred to yours -- But how many others See l' History de l' Establissement
des Europiens dans les Indes, at the article Pennsylvania.

See also the translation of the Pennsylvania Farmer's letters to the
inhabitants of North America; an excellent work (of a different nature from St.
John de Crevecoeur's) which was published the beginning of the troubles in
America by Mr. Dickinson, who was a principal character in the revolution, and
lately President of the Council of Pennsylvania. We owe the translation of this
work to the celebrated Turgot, who had a high opinion of it: It was published
at Paris in 1769, and although it contained many important political truths,
yet no impression was made by it.

See further on this subject, the following works.

A small Pamphlet by Anthony Benezet, on the settlement of the Quakers in
America. A Sermon preached by Dr. Priestly, on the abolition of the Slave trade.

Several of the articles in Voltaire's Questions on the Encyclopedia.

Some considerations on the Test-Law of Pennsylvania, by an Author of great
merit, who is no Quaker.


could I bring in support of my own. I shall select one, which is striking and
decisive; it is that of the sentimental author of the American farmer's letters
-- You as well as myself, are personally acquainted with him, and you know too,
that his candor, goodness of heart, and disposition, entitle him to our
confidence; I am united to him by the tenderest ties of friendship, and a great
similarity of sentiment; but, I mean not to be swayed by friendship, while I am
considering the weight which is due to his testimony. He lived for a long time
in America, and lived with Quakers; he has been intimate with them, has
attended to, and maturely considered their behavior in civil life, and his
opinion of them is wholly different from yours See the American Farmer's
Letters, Vol. 1st. from page 137, to 197, and the anecdote in the Preface.
-- With what warmth does he praise the simple and cordial hospitality he met
with in their houses, and the peace and happiness which reigned there -- "Every
thing there is done in silence, and with cheerfulness" How does he praise the
good sense, the sagacity, the temperance, the softness and the education of
their women. They are generally, says he, shining without being showy, solid
without pedantry, the enemies of levity, trifles and affectation; from reading
good books in their early youth, their conversation is more interesting than is
often met with, and they acquire a foundation of solid learning, which has
often surprised me -- They are remarkable, not only for the simplicity of their
dress, but also for the extreme neatness of their houses, and of every thing
about them -- Silence and modesty, a peculiar manner of ordering their servants
and inferiors, an uniform, tranquil behavior, seem to constitute the general
character of these good people.

And who has not read his interesting visit to the botanist Bartram, the
affecting anecdote of the emancipation of Warner Mifflin's Negro, and the
account of his bold errand to general How? who has not eagerly seized on all
those recitals which paint so well the very soul of the Quakers, and lay open
their principles to us? What reader so frozen-hearted as not to be moved,
affected, transported into America, in raptures with the patriarchal life? What
reader but will indulge himself in these delightful reveries, and wish to
become, like them, good, simple, and the child of nature? What reader, in a
word, but has felt himself inclined to respect them as the most moral, edifying
and pious, of all religious sects?

And you, Sir, wish to destroy this enchantment -- By your silence you
contradict all I have said. Cruel man! If it was an illusion, how could you
wish to undeceive us? It was dear to us, as it served to increase the
consolation of the good, and the remorse of the wicked -- But no, it is no
illusion -- they are truths, they are facts, which you are combating; you who
have seen America only in her camps, amidst the din of arms, and in one of
those violent revolutions, where man, thrown out of his sphere, is no longer
himself, and can neither form a right judgment of things, nor is he a proper
subject for the judgment of others; you who have obtained your knowledge of
America only by flying through it, by stopping at taverns, and perhaps now and
then going to a ball, or tea-party; you, to contradict a native of America, a
farmer who gives his opinion, after twenty-five years of observations, made at
his leisure in the midst of peace, confidence and friendship!

And what are the weapons you make use of? European and national prejudices.
You have no facts on your side, and this respectable man has many; they are
well authenticated, and the names he mentions well known. He quotes a Benezet,
a Mifflin, a Bartram, and you, with all your talking of hypocrites and cheats,
you name nobody. How then can we give credit to your assertions?

In my opinion you deserve a very severe reproof for such conduct -- When one
author attacks the sentiments of another, he should quote him, name him, and
appeal to the public decision: Nothing but the despicable character of our
opponent can excuse such an omission -- Now, you have published opinions and
assertions, directly in contradiction to those of St. John de Crevecoeur, and
you have not said a single syllable of him, nor of his book; a book too which
has engaged the public attention, and yet you have read it. -- You well know
how much the author is esteemed in America, and you yourself have expressed
your personal esteem for him. Since you attack, not merely his opinions, but
his narrations and his facts; common politeness, attention and respect for the
public, did then, and still do, require, that you give your reasons for not
mentioning him, and for differing from him in sentiment.

Who then shall we give credit to, concerning the Quakers? to St. John de
Crevecoeur, or to the Marquis de Chatellux? one praises, the other traduces
them: these are questions I have often heard, and which you ought to have
prevented; but by not mentioning this author's name, nor his book, you have
thrown the public into a state of uncertainty on these points.

I know very well, that this treacherous, jesuitical silence, which
Academicians and men of the world are so well acquainted with, is honored with
the name of consideration and respect. The means of ruining a public character,
by general remarks, or by not saying any thing at all of him, is a secret many
are well acquainted with; but believe me, this cowardly practice of our
literary aristocracy, in no-wise becomes you. The motto of every honest writer
should be, When I attack any one, I do it from motives of duty, and do it
openly.

The public cannot long remain in the state of uncertainty you have thrown them
into, if they will but attend to the arguments I have already brought to
controvert your opinions, and to those I shall hereafter produce. The
difference in your manner of writing is against you. If I were even
unacquainted with St. John de Crevecoeur, if I had not been on the most
intimate footing with him, I could give my judgment after having read over both
your books; his is a work of the heart, yours shows that you have a great deal
of wit; but republicans, pure moralists, such as the Quakers, must be judged by
the heart; their reputation will receive no shock from all the art you have
made use of to injure them.

I shall now begin to follow you step by step.

The law which you say, many of them observe, of saying neither You, nor Sir,
is far from giving them an air of simplicity and candor. This is not the custom
of many, but of all the society.

You speak of an air, as if the Quakers assumed any airs; as if their plainness
was but affectation. They are much above it; the plainness of their language
consists in renouncing those empty forms, those ridiculous compliments and
fashionable falsehoods which French politeness requires; it is on this plainness
the Quakers value themselves; they do not tell a stranger that they are charmed
to see him; they keep silence at the first interview, and wait for an
opportunity of forming a judgment; they do not squeeze the hand of a man whom
they despise; they do not bow to a fine suit of clothes, a cross, or a red or
blue ribband; they do not pay court to a minister, who is detested by the
nation -- If they thee and thou every body, it is because they believe all men
are equal; are not these sufficient reasons for a Philosopher?

The undaunted manner in which they have supported this custom at court, and at
the bar; that boldness which has constrained those in authority to give way to
them, will not even this entitle them to your praise? For admitting with you,
that it is a matter of indifference to say you or thou to a single person, yet
it must be of importance, to have a character, and to possess a degree of
firmness, of that unshaken firmness, which is so hateful to oppressors, because
they dread the consequences of it; and, it matters not, that this firmness
appears in small things, and trifling circumstances; for there is no doubt, but
it will be called forth with greater energy, on more important occasions. Now,
the persecutions which the Quakers have undergone, for not giving up their Thee
and Thou, show a greatness of character, and of consequence a superiority over
the rest of mankind, which they have ever sustained, when their civil or
religious principles have been attacked by government. But after all, as to
this custom of theirs, which you find so much fault with, let us see whether
they or the men of the world are in the right: since You takes in several
persons, why make use of it to one only? adulation first invented this corrupt
practice, and pride and baseness of soul have brought it into general use: The
Quakers wish to restore the customs of propriety, and what objections can you
make to them? must they limp because you are not strong enough to walk upright?

If our self-conceited literati, and would-be philosophers, had really any
philosophy about them, would not they imitate the Quakers? Would they not
renounce those mean ceremonies, which show the slavishness and falsehood of
mankind? Would they not instead of ridicuiling the Quakers, endeavor, like
them to exalt human nature, and compel the great to believe that the lowest of
their fellow creatures is their equal: This was the conduct of Diogenes, the
hero of our Academicians, whose example however they will not follow; Diogenes
in this respect acted like a true Quaker, that is to say, like a wise man, who
knew the dignity of man, and the insignificancy of those distinctions which we
meet with in civil life.

And I would be glad to know too, what meaning you affix to the word candor,
which you say the Quakers make use of as a blind? To have candor, is to speak
unreservedly from the very heart, which must be pure for such a purpose -- To
have candor is to speak what you think, and to pay the strictest attention to
truth. This is the general character of the Quakers, and it is a character they
have obtained by the sacrifice of their lives.

But you think very differently; for you charge them with a whining,
insinuating tone, which is perfectly jesuitical; you say too, that their
conduct is quite of a piece. Horrid and false comparison! what do we mean by a
Jesuit? a deceiver, with the air of candor, an artful hypocrite, one who is
ambitious and plotting, under the appearance of renouncing honors and riches; a
tyrant with an air of softness, subjection and politeness, and one who pretends
to be humane, and yet is wholly given to selfishness.

The Jesuits were inflamed with a desire of domineering over the the
consciences of men, that they might rule kingdoms, open prisons by their nod,
and bury alive their rivals and their enemies -- this was their reason for
affecting a whining insinuating tone, which hurts no one's vanity, but flatters
and misleads it.

The Jesuits raged with the desire of making proselytes, they besieged the
growing talents of the youth, and bent them to their own purposes; they
overreached great and small; they had spies at court, and at the bar; they had
their puffers and partisans in pay. In short they were for attempting and
subduing every thing.

I would ask any one, who knows any thing of the Quakers, who has lived ever so
short a time amongst them, whether any part of this character suits this plain
people? can they, who renounce all places and honors, be charged with the lust
of power? can they, who have no ambition, be called plotters? should they be
supposed deceitful, without any motives for being so? does not the whole world
know, that they do not attempt to make proselytes! that they do not seek for
praise, either by writing or flattery! every body knows that they detest
intolerance, and, of consequence, those horrid methods which are practiced on
persons in confinement, those private tortures and inquisitions which the
Jesuits made use of to overthrow the doctrine of the efficacy of grace. The
Quakers have been often derided, mutilated, and imprisoned; they have never
treated their enemies in such a manner; can the same be said of the Jesuits?

Is there any thing extraordinary in this softness of their manners? does it
not naturally accompany their love of humanity, and principles of universal
toleration? there is nothing in it characteristic of the insinuating sharper;
his schemes are for the acquisition of power, riches, fame or titles; but the
true Quaker seeks not for power, he is of all men the least desirous of wealth,
he cares little for a name, and despises all marks of distinction.

But you are not satisfied with denying them all pretensions to plainness and
candor; you are not satisfied with comparing them to one of the most ambitious,
plotting, and tyrannical sects that ever existed -- but you will not even allow
them to possess common honesty. You tell us, that during the American war, they
cheated both parties out of their money, without a blush, and careless of what
might be thought of their conduct.

And yet you bring no proof in support of so severe an accusation: an
accusation which affects the whole society; which affects their Benezets and
Mifflins: men whom you praise, and whom the lovers of virtue will admire. How
could you, thus in a moment, endeavor to disgrace so many respectable
characters? And even admitting, what I neither can nor will believe, till you
prove it by well-attested facts -- admitting, I say, that there were some
Quakers who took advantage of the times, to sell at exorbitant prices, or, as
you express it, to cheat both parties out of their money, was it well done in
you, to throw the odium on the whole society? If any amongst them are culpable,
name them; it is your duty to do so. You, yourself are culpable if you do not;
for, indeed, by your silence, you involve both the innocent and guilty in the
charge.

But as you never could have known the Quaker's methods of dealing; as you
never could, nor ever will be able to prove, that they are all cheats, without
exception, it follows that your assertions are downright defamation; for which
you ought to make amends at the public tribunal, where you have unfairly
traduced them. At this tribunal, I now impeach you. I, who have been well
acquainted with some Quakers, and am fully convinced of the general probity of
their society, and observing, that they are accused by a man of rank and
quality, and member of several academies -- considerations which might lead the
public to doubt of the honesty of the Quakers, I summons you to produce your
charges, and your proofs before the public; and if you are still silent, let me
once more repeat it, I shall think myself authorized to treat your assertions
as mere defamation.

This word will shock you, sir; I use it with regret; but I do not use it
without having sufficiently attended to the meaning of it. A defamatory work,
is one which is made public, in which an avowed or anonymous author, injures
one or more persons, by accusing them, falsely, of crimes, meannesses or vices;
or, in a word, strives to injure their character. Now, do not you accuse the
Quakers of being sharpers, cheats, hypocrites, and men careless of the public
good?

We will suppose the Quakers may have furnished the English, as well as the
Americans, with provisions. Do you call that a crime? You should recollect that
the Quakers look on all men as their brethren, and that no one is their enemy,
not even their persecutors. In this point of view, English and Americans were
the same to them. The greatest part of them thought that England was carrying
on an unjust war. But the Quakers did not look on the Hessians as partners in
this act of injustice, they thought them equally entitled to their assistance
with their American brethren.

According to my present sentiments that the only justifiable war, is that
which is carried on to resist oppression, and that the American war was of this
kind, I must confess I should have been better pleased if the Quakers had
joined the Americans, that they might the sooner have got rid of the destroyers
of their country.

But since they have not done so, since they have scrupulously adhered to their
principles, of not shedding blood, I cannot accuse them of any thing criminal;
and the less so, because their principles and conduct were known before hand,
to both parties The Author of his work, proposes, in a future publication on
the the Quakers, to examine into the truth of this charge. And at the same
time, to take notice of the fresh complaints, made against them, by M. Mazzei,
Author of Recherches sur les Etats Unis, which he has engaged to do, in his
Answer to this Writer, already published.
.

And we will suppose also that they may have sold their goods at a high price
to both parties. But do you call this cheating? In discussing this charge, I
should be glad of well stated facts. But, as there are none, for you have not
furnished me with any, I must suppose, that you have been led away, by the
common prejudice, against the merchant who takes the benefit of circumstances,
to sell at an advanced price.

When any trade is free, not in the hands of individuals, when the buyer is not
forced to give whatever price may be demanded, there can be no cheating, not
even if they sold at the most extravagant rates.

The natural consequence of a war, is to raise the price of goods very high,
because produce is lessened, and goods become scarce. The seller is then no
more culpable for raising the price on account of the scarcity, than the buyer
would be for offering a small price in plentiful times. But the common people,
who are used to fixed prices, and whose resources are diminished in time of
war; this common people, who are then forced to buy every thing at a high
price, exclaim that they are cheated. And I dare say, that a great many of our
French officers, in their travels through the United States, have, as well as
you, met with poor inns, and bad fare; and yet were obliged to pay a high
price, for a mean lodging, and a wretched supper. These, I have no doubt, often
thought themselves imposed upon, and looked upon all the American innkeepers
as cheats. And you, yourself, seem to insinuate as much in several places In
one place amongst many others, when speaking of one BESSONET, (whom you mistake
for a brother of BENEZET's.) you say, that he retained none of his Quaker
principles, but that of selling at an extravagant price.
. But you and your brother officers were all wrong; For you paid, first, for
the scarcity of hands, and excessive price of labor; secondly, for the
scarcity of provisions; thirdly, for the scarcity of travelers; and fourthly,
for the scarcity of taverns; and, on these four different accounts, it is no
wonder, if you paid four times as much as in France.

I do not mean to lay before you, in this place, all my opinions on high prices
See my Sentiments on this subject, in the Chapter sur l' Etat civil des Juiss,
in the second Volume of the Journal du Licee ou Tableau des Sciences and des
Arts en Angleterre. I have there said, that selling at a high price is often
considered as a want of principle, at least, by ignorant people.
. I shall only say, that this can never be called cheating, as long as the
buyer knows the quality of the goods, and the conditions of sale: secondly
where there are many sellers, the buyer is at liberty to purchase, or leave it
alone.

The Quakers have the name of selling at high rates, I suppose, because their
merchandise is always of a good quality. But since you are at liberty to
provide yourself elsewhere, you cannot complain of their selling dear; and if
you give them the preference, it must be because you esteem their goods, though
of a higher price, yet of a superior quality, to those which are sold at a
lower rate.

It is, besides, very well known, that the Quakers in general sell nearly at a
fixed price. Now, such a custom admits of no cheating, which can only be
practiced by those who vary their charges, and who, by taking advantage of the
ignorance and credulity of the purchaser, ask much more than the market price.
These are the men who are to be mistrusted, and not the Quakers, who sell at a
fixed rate.

There is then very little probability in your slanderous assertion, that it is
a received maxim in trade, that they are not to be trusted.

But I maintain that it is a false assertion. I have heard quite a different
account of them at London -- a city, wherein, if they were much inclined to
cheating and corruption, they would much sooner become cheats, and be
corrupted, than at Philadelphia. Now, this is far from being the case, and it
may be looked on as one of the greatest prodigies of the age, that they have
preserved their virtue in such a sink of vice.

I dare say, you may have heard such an account in America. But would it not
have been right for you to have traced out the foundation of this tale? Should
you not have sought for its origin in the wickedness and envy They have been
reproached, says Mr. St. John de Crevecoeur. vol. 1, page 169, with their
fondness for trade; but such charges originate from envy, excited by their
riches. The Quakers are for this reason the object of public envy in America,
and consequently we need not be surprised at the many reports concerning them.
Have we not seen, in the last centuries, the poor, proud and envious Christians
accusing the Jews of the most horrid crimes, merely because they became rich by
trade?
of others? Should not you yourself have been sure of the truth of it? And
instead of only saying that the maxim is well founded, should you not have
shown that it was so, by well-attested facts? Once more, sir; when a citizen is
accused of a crime, the proofs and facts must be brought forward at the same
time. Otherwise, an accusation is but calumny, and as such will yours be
regarded, unless you particularise those heavy charges you accuse the Quakers
with, and the whole society at once, for you have slandered them all
indiscriminately.

RELIGIOUS TENETS of the QUAKERS.
I shall now go on to treat of the ridicule you throw on the Quakers, when
speaking of their mode of worship and religious tenets; and here too, I shall
follow you, step by step.

On Sunday the 10th, say you, I determined to take a turn through the churches,
and study the different modes of worship.

It must be confessed, that yours was a laughable way of studying; to go and
hear a single prayer or sermon, and catch at hazard few expressions, in a
language and religion you were a stranger to. Since all sects have their
peculiar idioms, and make use of common words in a different way from other
people* the wit, who is for making so superficial a course of studies, runs a
risk of understanding nothing, and of forming erroneous sentiments of every
thing he hears.

But, what could you mean by taking this strange turn through the churches? Was
it to become acquainted with their ceremonies? The Presbyterians have but few
-- and the Quakers none at all. Was it to become acquainted with the principles
and spirit of each sect? This would have been a more reasonable and important
object: But let a man be ever so penetrating, how can he flatter himself with
fully understanding, in a single hour, at a single opportunity, the principles
and practice of any sect? The first is to be learnt from books, the second by
frequent and long continued intercourse.

We are but too much addicted to this mania of judging of objects from
superficial views, without going to the bottom of any thing. This is the case
with respect to all the sciences. A man will suppose himself very knowing in
natural philosophy, and quite a master of chemistry, when he has attended a few
lectures. This error has been already much complained of; but it does and will
keep its ground, because it is favorable to the quackery of teachers, and the
laziness and vanity of scholars.

"Unfortunately, say you, the several sects, who agree in nothing else, have
fixed on the same hour to assemble their congregations."

How can you affirm, that the religious sects in England, and in the United
States, do not agree in any one point; when, all, to bring but a single
instance, look upon the Gospel as a divine book; when, all, except the
Unitarians, regard Christ as the Son of God, and all admit the necessity of
prayer, etc. You know too much to be ignorant of these facts; but you have
sacrificed the truth, to the pitiful pleasure of making an antithesis. It is
rather singular too, that for the accommodation of the curious, you would wish
to subject all the sects to different hours, for the performance of their
worship. Alas, why did not you make your tour of worships, as the petits
maitres of Paris do their tour of play houses? A song at the Italian -- a scene
at the French theater -- a dance at the Opera -- and a turn at Vauxhall -- they
have seen every thing, and know every thing, for they have shown themselves
every where, and all in the space of two hours.

When you made use of this expression, if you had but recollected, that the
man, whose soul is raised to God from a feeling sense of duty, has his
attention but little turned to strangers, but is wholly fixed on one object; if
you had remembered too, the pernicious consequences, which, I shall hereafter
show, attend this way of degrading religious subjects, treating them in a light
manner, and putting them on a level with play houses, you would not have formed
a judgment so superficially of the Quakers, and Presbyterians, nor even of the
members of the church of England.

If you had recollected too, that there is no distinction of sex in the sight
of God, you would certainly have spared that sorry jest upon the women, which
no one expected to see from the pen of an admirer of the fair sex, and an
academician: "Like Ariosto, I shall relate prodigies, diro maraviglia, just as
I entered, a woman held her tongue."

How could this trifling and hacknied piece of wit escape you, especially with
all the air of importance with which you make the quotation? You who are so
warm in the praise of our French ladies -- have you, then, never been
acquainted with any who knew how to be still, or whose conversation was
agreeable? Have you never lived with English and American ladies? Have you not
observed that they are modest and silent, never in haste to speak, although
well-informed? Yes, well-informed, and well qualified to teach even men of
learning and academicians. I shall mention but one -- Mrs. Macaulay: Her
history of the Stuarts is certainly more useful than all the French academy has
ever produced.

And besides, why would you lessen the women? By undervaluing any one, you make
him become despicable. The Quakers have done that justice to their women which
we refused them. They have shown they were not unworthy of it; for Quakerism
has had its Porcias.

You seem determined to find fault with every thing the Quakers do, whether
they speak or are silent. For you go on to say, "A man took the woman's place,
and spoke like a block-head on internal grace, the illumination of the spirit,
and all the other tenets of his sect, which he had over and over again, but
without explaining any thing.

I shall here, sir, make bold to ask you if you were sufficiently acquainted
with the language of the sect, to understand this Quaker, and to form a
judgment of his discourse? A foreigner may understand the eloquent Burke in the
house of commons, or Miss Young at the theater, without being always able to
comprehend the preacher of any society. The Quakers, of all others, have a
language of their own, which cannot be easily understood, without having read
some of their books, such as Barclay's Apology, with a great deal of attention.
Now, I should suspect, from a word you have made use of, that you were not
perfectly acquainted with the idiom and doctrine of the Quakers. It is when you
find fault with the preacher for not explaining their religious tenets. Most
probably he was clear enough for his brethren who understood his language,
while to you who did not comprehend it, he was obscrue. Now on the same
principles, what would you think of a man, who, having learned the Indostan
language, only in the grammar of Halhed, should tell us of a Bramin's speaking
very stupidly about Vistnou? What would you think of a wit, who, from his
ignorance of the new doctrine of magnetism, should call your reflections on
motion A pamphlet of the Marquis de Chatellux's, published at the end of Mons.
Bergasse's reflections on magnetism. This pamphlet has been generally
complained of as obscure and unintelligible.
, a collection of riddles? And what would you say, if an Englishman, ignorant
of the many hundred revolutions which have happened in the Nomenclator of
French chemistry, should call the Oxigine of Messrs. Fourcroy and Lavoisier, a
stupid and obscure term?

It is no difficult matter to accuse a sect, or ridicule their tenets. I have
seen some of those jesters, who could not even tell you the meaning of the
technical terms which they had picked up -- I have heard many of them quote the
doctrines of Jansenius with a sneer, who would have been greatly puzzled if any
one had asked them to explain the very first article.

The ignorant are led away by words, and I make no doubt, that most persons who
read your book, and know nothing of the Quakers, will form their judgment of
them, from the caricatura you have drawn; from these single words "inward
grace, illumination which proceeds from the spirit," and more especially from
the beautiful turn about saying over and over again. They will exclaim -- Where
are these creatures from? -- They are surely born in the last age -- or
inhabitants of some other world -- poor ignorant mortals!

I know nothing of the discourse made by the Quaker you heard preach, but I
will confess that the tenets he should have supported, the tenets of his sect,
do not appear to me to be so stupid as they did to you. I shall now give a
short account of them, not for your information, for you must certainly have
read Benezet before you ridiculed him, but for those who have no other
knowledge of the Quakers but what they get from the stage.

The Quakers believe in one almighty, eternal and unchangeable God.

They believe in the divinity and mission of Christ.

They believe that all men may be saved.

They admit of grace and universal light. That is to say, that God, of his
grace, makes himself known, and discloses the truth, to all those who sincerely
desire to know it, and seek after it.

They believe that this grace was given to Socrates, Epictetus and Seneca, and
to all those ancient Philosophers, who joined the practice of virtue to their
search after truth. By the inward light, which they follow as their guide, they
mean the Holy Spirit.

Whoever, says Benezet See a short account of the People called Quakers; their
rise, religious principles, and settlement in America, by Anthony Benezet.
, retires seriously into himself, with a sincere desire to know, and to do his
duty, will never fail to find there a sure guide, a ray from the fountain of
light, which will enlighten his understanding, and teach him, with certainty,
to distinguish good from evil. Those who are obedient to this light, this
divine guide, whatever religion they profess, soon arrive at the enjoyment of
purity, holiness, etc.

The Bible is the principal book which they read, or have recourse to, for
council and direction. They cannot, however, says Benezet, regard it as the
word of God, because this title belongs to Christ alone; because its contents
admit of different interpretations, and because men are apt to think that
nothing further is necessary to their salvation.

Concerning worship, they have neither ceremonies nor sacraments, because they
say these terms are not found in the holy scriptures.

They do not believe in elementary baptism, nor the use of bread and wine, as a
sacrament, to be essential; they look upon them as types and images; and think
a good life is the certain way to salvation.

They believe in the necessity of prayer, but that it should always proceed
from inspiration.

They keep meetings, because God has promised, that where two or three persons
are gathered in his name, there he is in the midst of them.

They undertake not to ordain either priests, bishops or ministers, according
to the hierarchy maintained in other Christian churches.

They think any man presumptuous who would pretend to the exclusive privilege
of communion with God. Every believer may become a priest and minister. Every
Quaker is a preacher, when he feels himself authorized thereto by divine
inspiration. They therefore refuse paying tithes. It is, according to their
principles, degrading religion, to make it a matter of commerce; it is
disobeying the Supreme Being, who has said, freely ye have received, freely
give.

For the same reason, they reject the science, called theology, as commonly
taught in the schools, believing that it serves only to produce pride and
disputation.

I shall in another place speak of their sentiments concerning war.

It is well known that they never swear, according to the command of Jesus
Christ, swear not at all, but let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: for
whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil.

The internal police of this sect is very strict and rational. They have their
monthly meetings, which are made up of the members of such meetings as lie
contiguous; their quarterly meetings, which are composed of the several monthly
meetings, which are nearest to each other; and in like manner, their yearly
meetings, composed of the several adjacent quarterly meetings. If a brother
behaves amiss, the elders caution him repeatedly, and get others to do the
same. If he is irreclaimable, they lay his case before the monthly meeting,
where it is judged. He may, if dissatisfied with their decision, appeal from
this meeting to the quarterly meeting, where he has another hearing, and from
thence, if still discontented, to the yearly meeting, where it is finally
adjudged. They are careful to avoid law suits; if any Quaker is poor, or
unfortunate, the society assists him. I was told, at London, of a Quaker
Merchant, who whs thrice relieved by his friends; but failing a fourth time, he
was persuaded to decline trade, and had a pension settled on him.


They look on it as a duty to contribute to general charities.

They hold no places of office in the magistracy; but in Pennsylvania they were
for some time in those offices. Perceiving, however, that it was hardly
possible to adhere to their principles, amongst the temptations that occurred
there, they at length resolved to give them up entirely.

Such are the civil and religious tenets of the Quakers; and to their praise be
it spoken, they could never be compelled to abandon them, even in those
countries where they were without power, and persecuted; and they obliged no
one to embrace them, where they had the power in their own hands. To prove
this, I shall quote two striking passages, from Barclay and Penn, in their own
words: --

"But of this excellent patience and sufferings, the witnesses of God, in scorn
called Quakers, have given a manifest proof: for so soon as God revealed his
truth among them, without regard to any opposisition whatsoever, or what they
might meet with, they went up and down, as they were moved of the Lord,
preaching and propagating the truth in marketplaces, highways, streets, and
public temples, though daily beaten, whipped, bruised, haled, and imprisoned
therefore. And when there was any where a church or assembly gathered, they
taught them to keep their meetings openly, and not to shut the door, nor do it
by stealth, that all might know it, and those who would might enter. And as
hereby all just occasion of fear of plotting against the government was fully
removed, so this their courage and faithfulness in not giving over their
meeting together (but more especially the presence and glory of God manifested
in the meeting being terrible to the consciences of the persecutors) did so
weary out the malice of their adversaries, that oftentimes they were forced to
leave their work undone. For when they came to break up a meeting, they During
the reign of the infamous Charles IId who made a mockery of every religious
sect, and to procure money, persecuted and protected them all by turns; a most
bloody persecution was excited against the Quakers. The King's guards, says
Mrs. Macaulay, were set upon them; they were abused, wounded, and some were
killed. Hays and Jenilt were arrested for offering money to the constables, who
were carrying their friends to prison. They were each of them condemned to pay
a fine of L5000 Sterling, or suffer imprisonment. Penn and Mead, two
respectable Quakers, were tried and fined forty marks, for having kept their
hats on, etc. History of the Stuares, Vol. 6, Page 309, of the Quarto Edition.
were obliged to take every individual out by force, they not being free to
give up their liberty by dissolving at their command: and when they were haled
out, unless they were kept forth by violence, they presently returned peaceably
to their place. Yea, when sometimes the magistrates have pulled down their
meeting houses, they have met the next day openly upon the rubbish; and so by
innocence kept their possession and ground, being properly their own, and their
right to meet and worship God, being not forfeited to any. So that when armed
men have come to dissolve them, it was impossible for them to do it, unless
they had killed every one; for they stood so close together, that no force
could move any one to stir, until violently pulled thence: so that when the
malice of their opposers stirred them to take shovels, and throw the rubbish
upon them, there they stood unmoved, being willing, if the Lord should so
permit, to have been there buried alive, witnessing for him. As this patient
but yet courageous way of suffering made the persecutors work very heavy and
wearisome unto them, so the courage and patience of the sufferers, using no
resistance, nor bringing any weapons to defend themselves, nor seeking any ways
of revenge upon such occasions, did secretly smite the hearts of the
persecutors, and made their chariot-wheels go on heavily. Thus, after much and
many kind of sufferings, thus patiently borne, which to rehearse, would make a
volume Charles IId. who trafficked in crimes, and invented them for the sake of
imposing fines, made a law against Dissenter's Meetings of every kind. If the
meeting consisted of five persons, each was fined five shillings for the first
offense, ten for the second, etc. And it was enacted that if any doubt arose
concerning the meaning of the Act, the Judges were always to decide against the
defendents. And this was the Tyrant that Louis XIV. wished to invest with
absolute power. Mrs. Macaulay's history, Vol. 6, Page 284, of the Quarto
Edition.
of itself, which may in due time be published to the nations (for we have them
upon record) a kind of negative liberty has been obtained; so that at present,
for the most part, we meet together without disturbance from the magistrate.
But on the contrary, most Protestants, when they have not the allowance and
toleration of the magistrate, meet only in secret, and hide their testimony?"
etc. Barclay's Apology, Page 508.


Barclay relates their sufferings also in his spirited dedication to Charles
IId, in which he affirms, that no Quaker was ever discovered to have been
concerned in the many plots laid against him; and finishes this singular
dedication with the following bold expressions.

"Thou have tasted of prosperity and adversity; thou know what it is to be
banished thy native country; to be overruled, as well as to rule, and to sit
upon the throne; and being oppressed, thou have reason to know how hateful the
oppressor is, both to God and man: If after all these warnings and
advertisements thou do not turn unto the Lord, with all thy heart; but forget
him who remembered thee in thy distress, and give up thyself to follow lust and
vanity, surely great will be thy condemnation, etc."

These passages, Sir, are a sufficient proof of the steadiness and constancy of
the Quakers, in the midst of persecutions; and the spirited language of Barclay
to Charles the IId, has always been maintained by them. The following passage
will also show their toleration, in a country where they had the power in their
own hands.

The immortal Penn, in the charter of privileges, which he granted to the
inhabitants of Pennsylvania, on the 28th October 1701, inserted the following
clause.

"Because no people can be truly happy, though under the greatest enjoyment of
civil liberties, if abridged of the freedom of their consciences, as to their
religious profession and worship: And almighty God being the only Lord of
conscience, father of lights and spirits; and the author, as well as the object
of all divine knowledge, faith and worship, who only does enlighten the minds,
and persuade and convince the understandings of people, I do bereby grant and
declare, that no person or persons, inhabiting in this province or territories,
who shall confess and acknowledge one almighty God, the creator, upholder and
ruler of the world; and profess him or themselves obliged to live quietly under
the civil government, shall be in any case molested or prejudiced, in his, or
their person or estate, because of his or their conscientious persuasion or
practice, nor be compelled to frequent or maintain any religious worship, place
or ministry, contrary to his or their mind, or to do or suffer any other act or
thing, contrary to their religious persuasion. And that all persons who also
profess to believe in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the world, shall be capable
(notwithstanding their other persuasions and practices in point of conscience
and religion) to serve this government in any capacity, both legislatively and
executively."

And now, sir, forget that you have written against the Quakers, lay aside your
prejudices and witticisms, retire within, and after reading the account I have
just given, ask yourself whether the tenets and worship of the Quakers are so
very stupid as you would suppose them.

But you will say, what is the meaning of that mysterious farrago about inward
grace, illumination and the spirit? I understand you, and might answer your
question by referring to the belief and tenets of the Catholics and
Protestants, whom your censure involves equally with the Quakers; but a
philosopher, an academician, must be answered in a different manner, and I
shall now attempt it.

The words illumination, inward grace, extacy, enthusiasm, express the same
spiritual state of man, that state in which he is plunged, when absorbed, and
entirely taken up in a profound meditation on his relation to God and man. Were
you never in this situation? If not, I pity you; for it is certainly the
highest source of happiness, I had almost said, of enjoyment on earth. I will
not attempt to describe the effects of it -- they are beyond description. Those
delightful reveries in which the soul wanders, when escaped from the wretched
coverings which confine her; that sublime and consolatory glimpse of things
beyond herself, beyond the globe and in a better world, is fled and gone, when
we attempt to describe it.

This state is to be arrived at, solely, by a perfect inward retirement, and a
solitary By a remarkable peculiarity, it happens that enthusiasts and
illuminated Persons are oftenest found in despotic governments The reason is
plain, for men are there forced to live a solitary life; and when we are
unhappy at home, we seek for a retreat elsewhere; when the earth is but a place
of torment, the wretched look to heaven for relief, and become enthusiasts,
because it is unsafe to be citizens. There are additional reasons for
respecting enthusiasm.
and innocent life; and can only be relished by those pure souls who are lifted
above the vain pleasures and trifling objects of worldly ambition.

This state is the direct road to the knowledge of God, of real happiness, and
of the proper objects of man's pursuit. It leads us naturally to the true means
of obtaining it. These means are the public and social virtues. From whence it
follows, that the man who is continually employed in self-meditation, becomes
of course, good, tolerant, just and beneficent -- for he endeavors to approach
the Divinity, and to resemble him; and it is virtue alone that can fill up the
intermediate space which separates them.

Illumination, inward grace, the holy spirit of the Quakers, is nothing else
but this state of knowledge, which is to be attained by meditation. They never
pray without meditating -- they never preach without being inspired, which is
always the fruit of meditation.

I have then proved to you, that the man who is continually employed in
meditation on himself, on the Divinity, and on his own duty, will naturally
become a virtuous man; and, of course, the illumination of the Quakers directs
them naturally to virtue; which conclusion is supported by facts; of
consequence their system is a respectable one, and making a jest of it, shows
an ignorance of it is principles and effects -- It is an offense against virtue.

It seems to me that these conclusions cannot be denied, however, I challenge
you to do it.

I well know that our wits, even some of the celebrated ones, have been very
ingenious in their sarcasms on this state of illumination. But what do sarcasms
prove? What absurdity may not a wit be guilty of? What virtue is safe from
their ridicule? Let us leave irony apart, and come to facts and reasoning --
Turn over Voltaire from beginning to end, the man who has, above all others,
brought into repute this rage of substituting ridicule for reasoning, and who
has carried it even to the scaffold. In all his writings, you will not find one
solid argument against illumination: To do justice to Voltaire, it must be
acknowledged, that he sometimes speaks well of the Quakers, though in a
ludicrous manner. See the words Quakers, and Eglise primitive in the questions
sur l' Encyclopedie.
His only weapons are puns and epigrams.

It is with regret I mention it, but these too, are the weapons most frequently
made use of by the Count de Mirabeau, in the book which he has just published
against the celebrated Lavater Comte de Mirebeau's Letter, on Messrs.
Cagliostro and Lavater, Berlin. 1786.
and his followers, whom he calls the enlightened, and against illumination in
general.

But there is a distinction to be made which has escaped this writer, and those
who have wrote on the same subject before him, The famous Lord Shaftsbury has
published a letter against enthusiasm. I have not read the Letter; but by
sketches of it which I have seen, it appears that his principal design was to
prevent the mischief threatened by some false prophets, who wished to spread
desolation through the country, by subjecting the minds of the people. His letter
should have been entitled, on false enthusiasm.
and which is daily escaping the vulgar who are so ready to condemn every thing
above their reach -- He has confounded the pretended, with the real enlightened
man.

I agree that the pretended are the most numerous; for whenever there appears
in the world characters strongly marked, who announce important truths and fix
the attention of mankind, they are soon surrounded and followed by a crowd of
intriguing persons, who take advantage of their discoveries, and who, aping
their appearance, hope to dupe the credulous public, and too often are
successful.

The real philosopher ought to make the most vigorous effors to detect these
infamous cheats; he ought to inveigh against hypocrisy and illumination, when
made a trade of, but not against real illumination: For by ridiculing this last
only, they are disappointed in their aims, they traduce what is respectable,
and treat with respect, or pass over in silence, those things which should be
condemned. They give encouragement to the hypocrite, who is put on a footing
with the virtuous man, and finds a shelter under his protection.

But there is, in this case, an infallible method of distinguishing the false
from the true. Whenever one of these enlightened persons has ambitious,
interested, or worldly views, you may be certain that he is only a pretender to
illumination, and you should never hesitate to detect the cheat.

Philosophy too, has been the instrument of cheating in the hands of the
sophists. But as it would be absurd to throw on real philosophers that odium
which belongs only to the cheats who have usurped this title to acquire riches
or reputation, so it would be unjust to confound George Fox, Penn, Benezet and
the rest of the true Quakers, with the false, if there are any, who, as you
tell us, make use of this covering to conceal their vices and interested views.
It would be unjust to confound the honest Lavater with the adventurers who make
a trade of illumination and ecstasies.

What I now say, is equally applicable to the enlightened Catholics -- I have
no doubt but Fenelon was of this number -- That sweet anointing virtue which
runs through his letters, could only be produced by continued ecstasies -- And
who is there so devoid of reason and feeling as to say that Fenelon was a cheat
or a fool?

Such a man would at once condemn almost every true philosopher, and especially
Rousseau. Read this author's dialogues with himself; they seem to be written in
another world: And a man who exists in this world only, and has never been
beyond it, could not have written two words of them.

Were I to run over the catalogue of ancient and modern philosophers, there is
scarce one of them who has not been enlightened, and consequently been looked
upon as a fool by his cotemporaries; this was Plato's case; and did not
Descartes appear as a madman, when, in the public church, and presence of the
divinity, he consecrated himself by an oath to the defense of truth. And his
pupil, the famous Mallebranche, do not all his works bear the wonderful stamp
of illumination? He was the child, the man of meditation.

The example of these great men will be another proof, sir, of what I have
already demonstrated, that this state, far from being dangerous to society, is
on the contrary, favorable to virtue. For where shall we find a more
disinterested character than Mallebranche, where a more sublime one than
Rousseau, where one more beneficent, or more resembling the divinity, than
Fenelon?

And let it be observed too, that this disinterestedness, this sublimity, this
beneficence, were the natural fruits of that habit of spiritual contemplation,
in which man becomes ex-organised, and ex-humanised, if I may use the
expressions.

In forming a judgment of extraordinary men, I believe we do not pay a
sufficient attention to their private characters; I do not mean, that this
should always influence us with regard to their opinions; but it should at
least teach us to be careful in passing our judgment, and above all things, not
to blacken their characters: Their virtue should apologize for their mistakes,
but genius can never be an excuse for vice.

I am further of opinion, that we are too apt to condemn whatever is foreign to
us, and to our way of thinking. The courage of those who dare to strike out new
paths, is not held in the estimation it deserves. The good consequences of
enthusiasm, excited by new ideas, is not sufficiently felt.

Every kind of enthusiasm is attended with a movement, a displacing of the
human mind, a flight beyond the ordinary bounds. This is the natural
consequence of the elements of our spiritual princiciple, of it is restless
activity, of it is curiosity to know what is true, and to enjoy the best. This
active disposition, often leads the soul astray into errors and chimeras; but
on the other hand, it often leads to the discovery of useful truths. To stop
the course of enthusiasm then, by ridicule, is to limit the number of truths,
and to circumscribe human perfection.

But further, the cause of tyranny is served by this kind of ridicule; for
since there are amongst these truths which have been, or may be discovered,
some that might prove fatal to it; it is the interest of tyrants to oppose that
enthusiasm which causes them to be discovered, spread and adopted. Tyrants, by
pursuing this system, would make man a mere machine. A Nero, were he now alive,
would look with terror upon the present state of mens' minds. He would regard
them with horror, agitated by a secret ferment, continually seeking to change
their situation, tormented with the weight they feel, and endeavoring to free
themselves from it. He would see, with horror, some launching into the regions
of metaphysics, and there boldly hovering between heaven and earth; others
penetrated with a sense of the dignity of man, are shocked at the attempts of
individuals, to degrade it, all moving with the same enthusiasm, boldly
maintaining their doctrines, and giving rise to discussions which tend to the
public improvement.

As tyranny is continually obstructing the progress of knowledge, the simple
and obscure individual who resists it, must have a support, and none so certain
as enthusiasm -- Armed with the inward conviction that he is the defender of
truth, raised above all fear, because he is continually raised above all
earthly things; the enthusiast gives a shock to the mind, while he himself
remains immovable. Do you think, sir, that truth would long maintain it is
ground against tyranny, in a person of an indifferent turn of mind? If Phalaris
had ordered a Geometrician to say that two and two made five, he would
certainly have been obeyed. But instead of Geometry, let us suppose the matter
in question, to have been of a nature, more closely connected with the dignity
of man, and more susceptible of enthusiasm, the tyrant would then have found
his mistake.


His existence is a real benefit to the community that possesses him; he in
time makes them partakers of his exalted state. And indeed, enthusiasm,
transporting the minds of men into a more exalted sphere, habituates them to a
certain elevation, which they preserve when they descend into the common circle
of things. The enthusiast, the enlightened man, have not the same language nor
the same physiognomy as common men. Theirs is an heavenly language, a noble
countenance, which most forcibly electrines those who look upon it. Observe the
man who has frequent communion with himself and with his God -- Serenity reigns
on his vissage and happiness in his life; there is a something commanding in
his looks, which seems to make you feel your inferiority -- In his presence
vanity shrinks, vice blushes, and feeble virtue grows strong. Thus, the real
and virtuous enthusiast, governs a whole community by his presence, and by a
firm and steady resolution.

You, sir, who have studied the secrets of magnetism, and who have boldly
ranked yourself amongst it is defenders, in spite of the academic confederacy,
you must be well acquainted with the singular effects of this resolution, this
beneficent enthusiasm, in which the whole system of magnetism consists. Be no
longer, then, the enemy of enthusiasts and enlightened persons; make a jest of
them no longer. I have but one word more to say on this head: If the progress
of George Fox and William Penn had been checked by ridicule, what a misfortune
would it have been for mankind! The American Indians would still be massacred;
the Negroes would still be slaves; the principles of equality and their
consequence, democracy, would not have been so well known, and the American
revolution would not have been effected: And all this is owing to the spirit of
illumination and enthusiasm.

No longer vilify the worship of the Quakers, because you think it gloomy and
clownish. It is simple, and of consequence more respectful to the Deity. It
turns the minds of men from idolatry, and by confining them to a state of
meditation, fixes their serious attention on the supreme being, which is of
much greater importance than singing his praises by rote.

No longer speak so highly of the Church of England's mode of worship, for the
resemblance you saw in it to an opera; for the fine pulpit, beautiful organ,
handsome minister, and elegant women; or for the agreeable sonatas you heard
sung there. Good heavens! compare a church to a playhouse; and the ejaculations
of the devout man to the Divinity, to Italian songs! How could you descend to
such puerile and indecent comparisons? It is excusable in a child to be
captivated by fine play-things, but how mean an opinion must we entertain of
the judgment and metaphysics of a man grown, an academician too, who calls
himself a philosopher, to see him looking after and admiring nothing else in
divine worship, but the dress of the ladies and the elegant theatrical grace of
a surplused Petit-maitre. For what must be your idea of the Divinity, if you
suppose that the prayers and homage of a handsome minister and well-dressed
women, are more acceptable to him, than those of virtuous men, with plain
clothes; or that charming songs are more acceptable than good works? At any
rate, this sensual taste, can only belong to the indolent and voluptuous
deities of Epicurus, but the God of the philosopher is the source of all truth
and virtue. Does he not receive a more acceptable homage from those who seek
truth by meditation, and practice virtue, than from singing and dancing. And is
it not uttering blasphemy against him, if it were possible to do so, thus to
suppose he can be worshipped by stage players and buffoons?

I by no means charge you with making such conclusions, but would-be-wits, and
weak minds, will draw them from your jests -- How diverted they will be with
your curious quotation from the Deserter, and that comparison between the
ignorant sectary and Montauciel, who finds in his book, words that were never
there. But this is the true academic turn of mind. -- Unhappy disposition,
which gives us puns and jests for reasons, which lessens every thing that is
great This disposition is to be met with, in many parts of your travels.
Another passage of the same kind is quoted, when you are speaking of the
Negroes. I have just laid my hands on a third; it is where you are describing
the famous natural Bridge, in which you see nothing but nature endeavoring to
imitate art. This is giving much the same idea of nature, as the Poet, who in
describing the sublime Meteors of the Alps, tells us that the clouds rose like
the curtain at the Theater. And this to be sure is wit! We cannot lessen or
degrade Nature more than by comparing her operations to the feeble works of
men. We cannot more certainly destroy the interesting effect, produced in
feeling minds, by the sight of a fine landscape, a magnificent sky, or a
frightful cataract, than by comparing them to the productions of art.
by the mere touch, which shrivels up the soul, shortens the sight, and
disfigures every object! I must again lament that the author of la Felicite
public, should be corrupted by this epidemic rage for wit.

And you suppose, then, that you have proved to a demonstration, that all
religious sects are in an error, by comparing them to Montauciel, who could not
spell, and by saying, that it was a million to one, that he guessed right.

Which is as much as to say, that because Montauciel, who did not know his
letters, could not read, so we have no method of becoming versed in the
sciences; and consequently, that we are not possessed of reason, inward feeling
or conscience, those three guides of knowledge and conduct. That, in religious
matters, it is a million to one, that the truth is yet concealed, that the true
religion is yet unknown, and like to be so, for there is a million of chances
against it. Now is such a system as this defensible? Do you suppose that there
is no such thing as a religious truth? such a supposition would make the
greatest part of mankind unhappy, and place oppressors wholly at their ease.

Is there any more appearance of reason, in your traducing the Quakers, by
charging them with bloody disputes, and by saying that it is better to leave
them in their error than to go to cutting throats with them? How is this? do
the Quakers endeavor to convince or gain over any one? And do they, when
resisted, wield the sword, or light the faggot? You do not believe it; or if
you did, history would undeceive you, and yet, when casting your jokes on all
the sects, you charge them as well as the others, with this enormity.

There appears throughout this paragraph, an air of ridiculing every religious
sect, as well as of the worship of the Deity, which weak minds will extend to
the Deity himself. Oh sir, blame not a society for any thing but for their
intolerance, and for professing principles which produce hatred: But let us
commend them for resembling one another in believing in God, and in the
necessity of divine worship.

Philosophers, by being too warm in their opposition to certain religious
prejudices, have not yet sufficiently considered the extensive influence which
a belief in God and a future state, would have on political constitutions: He
who believes in God, can fear nobody: He who believes in God, will speak the
truth boldly, he will despise torments and death itself: He who believes in
God, will love and cherish all mankind, he will, if possible, revenge them when
oppressed: He who believes in God, may become a Cato, a Sidney, a Benezet, the
greatest and most respectable of human beings, but he can never become a Caesar
or a Sejancus.

How strong is man when supported, on one hand by the truth, and on the other
by the Deity! He is then irresistible -- Power vanishes before him, and the
sword menaces in vain The History of England abounds with facts, in support of
this assertion. I shall quote but one. Toward the latter part of the reign, or
rather the oppressive government, of Charles IId. the sect of independents
appeared, who gave out* that this Prince ought to be dethroned, because he had
violated his promise made to the nation, who had given him the Crown; had
pillaged them in every way he could devise; had protected the Papists,
persecuted the Protestants; received a pension from France, etc These
complaints were well founded, but Charles chose rather to send a regiment of
men against these sectarians than to change his own conduct. They fought like
Enthusiasts, and Desperadoes; part of them were killed outright, and the
remainder taken prisoners. -- Their leaders were executed according to custom;
the others were promised pardon, on condition of their crying. God save the
King. About fifty men remained, and not one of them would condescend to do so.
They said they would rather die than tell an untruth. or bless a man, whom they
dete^^ed -- and they did die. History of the Stuarts, by Mrs. Macaulay, Vol. 6,
Quarto Edition.
.

You smile -- but look at the Quakers; defenseless they have triumphed over
their armed persecutors -- and these are the fruits of enthusiasm.

On the POLITICAL PRINCIPLES of the QUAKERS.
Have you been more successful or just, sir, in your attack upon the political
or civil principles of the Quakers? I think not. One of them claims the favor
and encouragement of all sovereigns. They are every where respectful and
obedient to government, and never revolt, or have recourse to arms, whatever
impositions they suffer. You do not reproach them for this principle of
forbearance, which, perhaps singly, prevents crowds of virtuous, but brave men,
from embracing their system; but you are offended, because in consequence of
it, they proscribe war, and that military art you so ardently admire.

"Concealing, say you, their indifference for the public good, under the
appearance of religion, they are sparing of blood, especially their own, etc."

Thus, sir, you misapply words, which ill understood, beget absurd and bloody
contests. If the disputes of princes, or the respective national pretensions,
often supported with the unnecessary effusion of blood, constitute what you
denominate public good; it must be confessed that the Quakers are indifferent
to such follies, and refuse to contribute to them. But in respect to the
general benefit of society, that is to say, the relief of distressed
individuals, the assistance of the indigent, zeal and liberality in the
promotion of useful institutions, the Quakers, far from being indifferent, are
among the first to comfort and assist the unfortunate. For proof, I oppose you
to yourself, I quote you for all you allow them to have done for the public
good at Philadelphia, where they have principally planned and supported many
useful and necessary institutions. For, notwithstanding they discourage public
spectacles, you will allow that they may promote the welfare of their
fellow-citizens, without entertaining them with an opera or a stage play. I
quote that Benezet, whom you cannot but esteem, that Mifflin, of whom M. St.
John de Crevecoeur gives us such an amiable character, that Fothergill, whose
life was one continued scene of great and good actions, in a word, I quote
their general emancipation of the Negroes. Where shall we meet with such
another sublime instance of regard for the public good! Can you suppose that
the restoration of millions of wretched beings to life, to virtue, and to
society; and the abolition of the most detestable trade that ever was
undertaken, a trade in human blood! Can you suppose, I say, that these are
objects of less importance to the public welfare than the massacre of thousands
of Englishmen out of patriotism?

Confess, sir, that this kind of public spirit deserves the preference, and no
doubt you will be convinced upon serious reflection, that the Quakers have
shown themselves friends to the public good, by taking no part as a body in the
civil commotions which have laid waste and dismembered the British empire in
the last and present centuries. What! would you blame them because they did not
pray for the success of that tyrant Charles II, uncorrected by the misfortunes
of his father, whose wars only served him for a pretense to rob his subjects of
money to lavish upon his mistresses? For the ambitious William, who cast the
first link of that oppressive chain of national debt, whose weight becomes at
present too heavy to be borne? For Ann successively governed by ambitious or
obscure favorites, uninformed, intriguing, and a stranger to her subjects? For
the absurd dispute about the Spanish succession, or that of the empire no less
absurd and expensive? In short, would you blame them for not having joined with
Clive to assassinate Nabobs, who had been the benefactors of his country, with
Verelst, to hurry three millions of Indians into eternity by the cruel death of
famine, with Hastings, to exterminate a hundred thousand Rohillas; in short,
with all the ravages of India, to rob, fetter, massacre the most mild, virtuous
and friendly people upon earth.

If this mass of national enormities, is what you call public good, it is not
only a virtue not to stain our hands with it; it is a duty to avoid it --
confess, sir, that such public good is merely that of a few individuals, of the
ministry, of the military, who for amusement or promotion, charitably set
people to cut each other's throats. But such public good is a general evil, an
evil for all nations, and especially to the people, who are always oppressed,
whether conquering or conquered. Let us then commend the Quakers for their
indifference to such nominal public good; let us commend them for weeping over
its calamitous consequences, though they never contribute to them, and thus
uniting religion and humanity.

They are sparing of blood -- so much the better -- Are there not enough who
lavish it? Are not a million of bayonets at our breasts from one end of Europe
to the other, sufficient? Are there not murderers enough? Must it be counted a
crime in the Quakers, not to be found in this list of destroyers of the human
race.

These enlightened men, fully convinced that the basis of universal happiness
is universal peace, and that war must be utterly renounced to introduce it.
Convinced that preaching would be ineffectual, if not seconded by example, and
that princes would find the means of perpetuating war as long as men could be
hired to cut each others throats, determined never to use arms or contribute to
the support of any war. They have been robbed, imprisoned, tortured, martyred;
they endured it all, and at length, overcome by their constancy, tyranny has
exempted them from military services, and is obliged to use force in obtaining
contributions from them. And indeed what should the Quakers pay for? To hire
soldiers? They would there were none. Priests? they do not want any; they are
all priests. Magistrates? they need none, they have no lawsuits.

What would become of our hero's, if every sect had imbibed this anti-military
spirit; if all anathematized war; if no Automaton would suffer himself to be
trained up for the infernal task of murdering his brother? -- What would become
of the ambition of conquerors, if all men, turned Quakers, should firmly, and
with one consent, refuse to second their pretensions with a musket? O then! if
we love the public good, let us pray that this exalted sect may increase and
spread over the earth, or at least, that its humane principles may be every
where received, then would that peace become universal Men who are prejudiced
or interested in the existence of reigning evils, stigmatize those who preach
the doctrine of universal peace, and oppose war with the title of declaimers.
Notwithstanding, the world improves under their sermons, in the act of
ridiculing them. Let the partisans for war, inform us, whether the passion for
it is so general, so unbridled in the present age, as it was, for instance, in
the time of the crusades. War is no longer a raging fever, it is a mere matter
of speculation. Now to have changed he rage to computation, is a great step
gained; and we have only to prove that war is a bad speculation for all
parties. To whom is this change of ideas owing, if not to the philosophers who
are called declaimers? The word declaimer, like that of visionary is used to
turn the man of genius into ridicule* who speaks highly of the rights of men,
and boldly opposes those errors which the world agreed to laugh at, and
continue.
, which the Quakers have already realised, in those countries where they are
most numerous. Let the ambitious who sigh for ribbands and crosses, detest this
idea; let them ridicule us, suspect us of cowardice, and proclaim to the world,
that we are sparing of our own blood; it is better to be ridiculous, if this is
so, than to become the murderers of our brethren.

It is thus, sir, you are pleased to banter the Quakers; you say they shun war,
particularly to spare their own blood; as if the Quaker, who uses no weapons of
defense, were not more exposed to danger than he who carries them and defends
himself; as if the angry savage would respect his scalp, or the European
conqueror his existence.

No, the Quakers do not avoid fighting to spare their own blood, but to spare
that of their fellowmen. Can you doubt it, you who have seen them during the
late war boldly venturing to succor their brethren, their countrymen, their
enemies themselves?

If you still doubt their courage, look back to the persecutions they have
suffered, read their martyrology; behold them tranquil and serene in dungeons,
undaunted before their judges, mounting the gallows without terror; behold even
their women, possessed of equal resolution, braving torture and defying the
executioner I will relate one instance -- Mary Dyar, one of those persons who
returned to Boston, after their unjust banishment upon pain of death, when the
sentence was passed upon her, undauntedly replied, "the will of the Lord be
done;" whereupon, the judge ordered her to be taken away, and she answered
again, "yea, joyfully I go." At the foot of the ladder, where her two
companions suffered martyrdom, she cried out, "this is to me an hour of the
greatest joy; nobody can conceive the sweet and refreshing influences of the
Lord's spirit, which I now feel." Ready to meet her dissolution, she was
respited and taken back to prison, from whence she wrote a letter to the
general court, charging them with the guilt of innocent blood, in which she
said she looked upon their mercy as cruelty. She was banished a second time,
but returning to Boston, was again condemned to die -- When the judge repeated
her sentence, she said, "this is no more than what thou said before." I am
come to warn you to repeal your unrighteous laws: If thou condemnest me, the
Lord will send others of his servants to witness against them A pardon was
offered her if she would go away and desist from preaching; she refused to do
so, and suffered death.

See the before quoted article upon the Quakers, in my journal.


. Such courage, sir, is very different from that of the soldier in the day of
battle, chiefly inspired by the adventitious circumstances which surround him,
and possess every faculty of his soul. The confused discharge of musketry, and
the report of cannon, sounds which banish all reflection, the necessity to kill
or be killed, the chance of escape, the looks of his comrades and of his
general, the hope of laurels, and crosses, every thing supports, every thing
animates, and impels him to what is called heroism; but all this is foreign to
it.

How different is the fortitude of the individual, who ascends the scaffold a
martyr to his religious or political opinions! every thing around is against
him, or at least indifferent; the image of certain death before him, and the
apparatus of his execution. He has no escape, no honors, no ribbands to expect
-- death advances, and he meets him without terror.

Behold the man of true courage! behold the hero! His courage is innate, it
springs from his own breast; he dies alone, sensible of the approach of death.
Such were Russel, Sydney, Barnevelt, De Wit, etc. and all those Quakers who
have suffered imprisonment and death in defense of their faith. Now will you
venture to make a jest of their courage, their singularities, or the plainness
of their language?

If the witty, following your example, cannot be satisfied without disparaging
this respectable sect by their sarcastic sneers -- I repeat what I have said
elsewhere, I will forgive them their epigrams, if they can say on their
deathbeds, with a descendant of the celebrated Penn, "I never did a wicked
thing knowingly." I will forgive them, if they can quit life and its enjoyments
in the bloom of youth without regret, if they have the resolution, like most
Quakers, to comfort their weeping friends -- I will forgive them, if they
practiced through life, the meekness, probity, and other good qualities of the
Quakers. Though they may appear ridiculous in the eyes of a Frenchman, and
their language may seem emphatic, and enigmatical, even though they should hold
immaterial errors, or insist too strenuously upon minutiae; what matter if they
are virtuous? Let us shun their weaknesses, but imitate their good qualities,
or if we cannot accomplish both, let us sacrifice our vanity to virtue, and be
very careful how we blame. Hitherto, the Quakers have been represented in a
ridiculous point of view; both at Paris and London, they have been indecently
exhibited upon the stage. An Aristophanes, has been found to sacrifice Socrates
to the public. Let the public lay aside their prejudices, let them study, let
them scrutinize the Quakers, they will find their doctrines plain, their morals
pure, and the simplicity of their manners perfectly consistent; they will find
energy and sublimity in their character, in the midst of general seduction and
the most shocking depravity. Even selfishness, that universal poison, is a vice
unknown to the true Quaker. All Quakers are his friends, his brethren -- He
rejoices in their joy, he weeps for their misfortunes, he supports them in
their distress; his friendship extends to the whole human race, it is his
family, and he delights in doing good to all its members. May such principles
spread and be imitated, and practiced by all. But they will find no imitators
until men shall boldly adopt the simplicity of the Quakers, for luxury cannot
be humane. The income of a Croesus will always be exceeded by his expenses; the
man who sacrifices to pleasure, rarely enjoys the luxury of doing good.

Three great vices, or rather crimes, have introduced all the evils that
afflict the earth; such as despotism, war, and public or private injustice:
They are ambition, covetousness, and luxury -- Are not the Quakers, who
renounce power, free from Ambition? What object could inspire covetousness
amongst people who despise luxury Si luxuriae temperares, avaritiam non
timeres, said Tacitus.
? This then is the sect for those States which would banish despotism, and all
other political crimes. It is the sect for republics; Doctor Franklin, in his
observations on population, published in 1751, justly observes, that those
sects which unite regularity and economy with simplicity of manners, increase
the most rapidly, because they furnish them with the means of providing for a
numerous offspring. This is the reason why the Quakers are so numerous in
Pennsylvania.
It is the sect for monarchies; In a word, it is the sect for humanity. Since
if Quakerism were universal, all mankind would form but one loving and
harmonious family.

And yet this is the people you calumniate! but I am not surprised at it; the
Quakers detest the military art, and you are a soldier. They undervalue what we
call wit, and you have displayed your pretensions to it; you are a member of
the royal academy! They preach equality of men and ranks, and you are a man of
quality Will it be believed, that these observations upon the Quakers, as well
as those upon the Negroes, to be remarked directly, are particularly noticed in
the Journal de Paris, May 21. 1786, as two excellent passages. I must say, to
the credit of its respectable compiler, Mr. Sautreau, that this article cannot
have proceeded from his pen. He is too well acquainted with history, and is
besides a man of too much veracity, to have written such a panegyric. Nothing
but ignorance, or the most abejct flattery, could have induced any person to
praise so many things, that deserve nothing but blame.
.

While I was concluding this article, in defense of the Quakers, and when it
was almost printed off, a Pennsylvanian, who sincerely esteems, because he is
well acquainted with them, and who is much concerned at your reflections upon
them, sent me the following observations -- I shall translate them in their own
simple strength, without a comment; they alone would have been sufficient to
refute your assertions.

"The reputation of this sect is founded upon a mul of claims upon an austerity
of manners, and steadiness of principle, unequalled by any other, and
particularly upon the good they have done within this century in America."

"The British act of Parliament, which allows the simple affirmation of the
Quakers in civil cases, exempting them from the oath which is required of all
other sects, is the fullest eulogium upon their principles, their morals, and
their constancy."

"Upon an attentive examination of the constitutions of their churches,
schools, hospitals and other charitable institutions, there appears a degree of
philanthrophy that should disarm envy and ridicule."

"What father, acquainted with their manner of educating the youth, would not
prefer it to that of every other sect."

"I know of no sect, which has so many intelligent, and even learned members of
both sexes. The enfranchisement of the Negroes, now a part of their religious
discipline, is one of the noblest monuments ever erected to humanity."

"Beneficence, a general characteristic of the Quakers, shone with peculiar
luster in the good John Fothergill, who spent his life in healing the sick, in
assisting and comforting the miserable. This was the first man who thought of
teaching the wretched inhabitants of the coast of Guinea to plant the
sugarcane, instead of cultivating it for the whites in a strange land. The
following Anecdotes will exhibit the character of this benefactor of mankind.
He had a friend at London, who depended upon a small curacy of fifty guineas a
year, for the support of a wife and numerous family. The mother and five
children were seized at once by an epidemic distemper. In this distressing
situation, the Curate would not apply to Fothergill, because he had nothing to
fee him with. Mentioning his situation to one of his friends, he offered to pay
the fees. They went together to the Doctor, who refused a fee, but visited the
distressed family, till he had effected a cure.

The Curate knew not how to express his gratitude; but what was (...) surprise,
when Fothergill, instead of receiving any pecuniary compensation presented him
with ten guineas, and desired him to apply to him when he wanted more.

The other Anecdote* concerning the School at Ackworth. it is too long to
relate here; but I will give the outlines of it. This foundation is now very
flourishing. Fothergill set a subscription on foot, and was himself a principal
subscriber, for the purchase of the land, the buildings, and eighty acres of
ground for its support. There are now three hundred Scholars upon this
foundation; all properly boarded, clothed and educated, for the several
professions they are intended to follow. They are taught morality, decency,
regularity, subordination to their superiors, forbearance toward each other,
and especially that habit of silence and meditation so much recommended in the
ancient schools of philosophy, and which are absolutely necessary for the
attainment of real science. See the life of Fothergill, by the Doctors, Hird
and Elliot.


"

"But surely calumny should cease to persecute the Quakers, at the appearance
of Anthony Benezet, whose whole life was consecrated to the service of his
fellow creatures; humble, plain, unostentatious, regardless of ridicule,
danger, or prejudice, he was continually employed in serving others, rarely
himself."

"He died universally regretted, in 1784. The citizens of Philadelphia attended
his funeral; and upwards of four hundred Negroes, who owed him their liberty,
and whom he had instructed himself, bedewed his coffin with their tears. This
benefactor of the blacks, desirous to serve them even after his death, left his
whole fortune for the support of the schools he had established for their
instruction, with a view to make them more worthy of that freedom which had
been granted them by the excellent law of 1780."

"It is also to his zeal in part, that we are indebted for the existence of the
society lately instituted for facilitating the manumission of the blacks, and
protecting those who are, or may become free."

You knew, Sir, you conversed with this wonderful person, this angelic
benefactor of mankind, and yet you ventured to traduce the Quakers! Did not his
spirit confuse your imagination, while your pen was falsifying his brethren,
those whom he cherished and led by the hand; did not your own heart ask you,
can Benezet belong to a band of rogues and hypocrites? Is it possible that his
noble reply on your telling him of our rich livings, of an hundred thousand
livres a year "that would build a great many hospitals." Is it possible I say
that this itself could not disarm your rigor? It does not indicate the warm
benevolence of one man only, it breathes the spirit of his brethren. Such
fervency is not to be found in a declining sect; it no longer inspires it.
Benezet could not have been the member of a corrupted body. His fervent charity
would form too striking a contrast to the selfishness of hypocrisy.

VINDICATION of the NEGROES.
First let me repeat your longest section relative to that people.

Below this class of inhabitants, (the whites of no property, in Virginia,) we
must rank the Negroes, who would be still more to be pitied, if their natural
insensibility did not in some measure alleviate the wretchedness inseparable
from slavery. Seeing them ill lodged, ill clothed, and often overcome with
labor, I concluded that their treatment had been as rigorous as it is
elsewhere. Notwithstanding I have been assured that it is very mild, compared
to what they suffer in the Sugar Colonies. And indeed one does not hear
habitually, as at Jamaica and St. Domingo, the sound of whips, and the outcries
of the wretched beings, whose bodies are torn piece meal by their strokes. It
is because the people of Virginia are commonly milder than those of the Sugar
Colonies, which consist chiefly of rapacious men, eager to amass fortunes, as
soon as possible, and return to Europe. The produce of their labors being also
less valuable, their tasks are not so rigorously exacted, and in justice to
both, it must be allowed that the Negroes themselves are less treacherous and
thievish, than they are in the Islands: for the propagation of the black
speices being very considerable here, most of them are born in the country, and
it is remarked that these are in general less depraved than those imported from
Africa. Besides, we must do the Virginians the justice to remark, that many of
them treat their Negroes with a great deal of humanity, and what is still more
to their honor, they appear sorry there are any among them, and are forever
talking of abolishing slavery, and falling upon some other mode of improving
their lands, etc.

However this may be, it is fortunate that different motives concur to deter
mankind from exercising such tyranny, at least upon their own species, if we
cannot say, strictly speaking, their equals; for the more we observe the
Negroes, the more we are convinced that the difference between us does not lie
in the color alone, etc.

Enough upon this subject, which has not escaped the attention of the
politicians and philosophers of the present age: I have only to apologize for
treating it without declaimation; but I have always thought, that eloquence can
only influence the resolutions of the moment, and that every thing which
requires time, must be the work of reason. And besides, it will be an easy
matter to add ten or twelve pages to these few reflections, which may be
considered as a concert composed only of principal parts, con corni ad libitum.

Upon reading this passage attentively, I was surprised to find it contain a
singular mixture of contradictory principles, and in the same breath, the
sentitiments of a philosopher and of a colonist; of an advocate for the
Negroes, and of their enemy.

It is evident that as a philosopher, and a friend to humanity, you are
inclined to alleviate the lot of the Negroes, and commend those who do so; but
this tenderness itself conceals a subtle venom that ought to be exposed. For
you only bestow your pity upon the Negroes, while you owe them, if you are a
philosopher, vindication and defense; you wish their masters to be humane; they
ought to be just. Instead of praising such humanity, you ought to have blamed
them for stopping there, in short, such a contempt for the Negroes pervades
this whole article, as will necessarily encourage their tormentors to rivet
their chains. Is not this contempt observable, for instance, in the very first
period?

"Below this class of inhabitants (the meanest whites of Virginia) we must rank
the Negroes, who would be still more to be pitied, if their natural
insensibility did not in some measure alleviate the wretchedness inseparable
from slavery."

And who told you, Sir, that nature had created the Negroes with less feeling
than other men? do you judge so because they have vegetated for three centuries
in European fetters, and at this day have not altogether shaken off the horrid
yoke? But do not their frequent risings, and the cruelties they from time to
time retaliate upon their masters, give the lie to this natural insensibility?
for an insensible being has no resentment. If he does not feel, how should he
remember? Do you think the wretched Indians, who, since the discovery of the
new world, are buried in the mines of Peru, are also naturally insensible,
because they suffer patiently?

You calumniate nature in making her grant favors to particulars; in giving
her a system of inequality among her offspring. All men are cast in the same
mould -- The varieties which distinguish individuals, are the sports of chance,
or the result of different circumstances; but the black comes into the the
world with as much sensibility as the white, the Peruvian, as the European.

What then degrades this natural and moral sensibility? The greater or less
privation of liberty; in proportion as man loses it, he loses the powers of
sensation; he looses the man; he sickens or becomes a brute. It is slavery
alone which can reduce a man to a level with the brute creation, and sometimes
deprives him of all sensibility; but you blame nature, that kind parent, who
would have us all equal, free and happy, for the crime of social barbarity, and
you pass by this crime, to extenuate another, to extenuate the horrid torments
of slavery! Not satisfied with violating nature, by abusing her offspring, even
in her name, you encourage slave-holders to torment them.

Do you not arm their tyrants, when you tell them, the insensibility of the
Negroes alleviates their torments?

What! because greatness of soul raised Sidney above the terrors of death, the
infernal Jefferies This Jefferies was the most infamous Chief Justice that ever
existed in England. Charles IId. and James IId. well acquainted with his
talents for chicane, his debauchery and blood-thirstiness, his baseness and his
crimes, made use of him to exterminate, with the sword of law, all those worthy
men who defended the constitution from their tyranny.

I often quote the History of England; unhappily for us it is too little known
in France.


who caused his execution, was less guilty! because the Quakers appeared
insensible to insults, blows, or punishments, they are less to be pitied, and
it was right to martyr them! A dangerous notion, whose consequences I am sure
you would disapprove. If this insensibility with which you reproach the Negroes
mitigated the cruelty of their masters, it were well: but their tormentors do
not wish them not to feel; they would have them all feeling, for the pleasure
of torturing them; and their punishments are increased in proportion to their
insensibility.

"Seeing the Negroes, say you, "ill lodged, ill clothed, and often overcome
with labor, I concluded that their treatment had been as rigorous as it is
elsewhere. Notwithstanding I have been assured that it is very mild, compared
to what they suffer in the Sugar Colonies."

Why this comparison, which seems to insinuate a justification of the
Virginians? does a misfortune cease to be such, because there is a greater
elsewhere? Was Cartouche less detestable because Brinvilliers had existed
before him? Let us not weaken by comparisons the idea of criminality, nor
lessen the attention due to the miserable, this were to countenance the crime.
The Negroes are ill lodged, ill clothed, oppressed with labor in Virginia:
this is the fact, this is the offense. It matters not whether they are worse
treated elsewhere; in whatever degree they are so in Virginia, it is still
outrage and injustice.

And again, why are the Negroes of Virginia less cruelly treated? Humanity is
not the motive, it is because covetousness cannot obtain so much from their
labors, as in the Sugar Islands. Was it otherwise, they would be sacrificed to
it here, as well as there; how can we praise such forced humanity? how, on the
contrary, not give vent to all the indignation, which must naturally arise in
every feeling mind?

"And to do justice to both, you add, if the Virginians are not so severe, it
is because the Negroes themselves are less treacherous and thievish than in the
islands, because the propagation of the black species being very considerable
here, most of the Negroes are born in the country, and it is remarked, that
these are in general less depraved than those imported from Africa."

Here is a strange confusion of causes and effects, and a strange abuse of
words. First let us clear up the facts. Here are some valuable ones for the
cause of the Negroes.

You say they are not so thievish in Virginia, propagate faster, and are less
depraved: Why? Because they are less cruelly treated -- Here is the cause and
the effect, you have mistaken one for the other.

We must conclude from this fact, that if the Virginians were no longer severe,
and should treat the blacks like fellow-creutures, they would not be more
vicious than their white servants.

The degree of oppression is the measure of what is improperly called the
viciousness of the slaves. -- The more cruel their tyrants, the more
treacherous, villainous and cruel are the slaves in return -- Can we wonder
that Macronius should assassinate his master Tiberius? This viciousness is a
punishment that heaven inflicts upon tyranny.

Can the efforts of a slave for the recovery of his liberty, be denominated
vicious or criminal? From the moment you violate the laws of nature, in regard
to them, why should not they shake them off in their relative duties to you?
You rob them of their liberty, and you would not have them steal your gold! You
whip and cruelly torment them, and expect them not to struggle for deliverance!
You assassinate them every day, and expect them not to assassinate you once!
You call your outrages, rights, and the courage which repulses them, a crime!
What a confusion of ideas! what horrid logic!

And you, sir, a humane philosopher! are accessory to this injustice, by
describing the blacks in the style of a dealer in human flesh! You call what
are no more than natural consequences of the compression of the spring of
liberty -- treachery, theft and depravation Most authors who have not deeply
studied the rights of men, fall into this error. I have remarked elsewhere
[Vol. II. of the Journ. du Licee, no. 4, page 222.) that a writer, who
notwithstanding. deserves our esteem, for having written against the despotism
of the Turkish government, has suffered himself to be drawn into it. M. le
Baron de Tott says, that the Moldavians are thievish, mean, and faithless. To
translate these words into the language of truth, we must say, the Turks, the
masters of the Moldavians, are unjust, robbers, villains, and tyrants; and that
the Moldavians revenge themselves by opposing deceit to oppression, etc. Thus,
the people are almost every where wrongfully accused.
. But can a natural consequence be criminal? Remove the cause, or is it not the
only crime?

For my part, sir, I firmly believe, that the barbarities committed by the
Negroes, not merely against their masters, but even against others, will be
attributed at the bar of eternal justice, to the slave-holders, and those
infamous persons employed in the Guinea trade. I firmly believe, that no human
justice has the right of putting a Negro slave to death for any crime whatever,
because not being free, he is not sui juris, and should be regarded as a child
or an idiot, being almost always under the lash. I believe that the real
criminal, the cause of the crime, is the man who first seized him, sold him, or
enslaved him -- And if ever I should fall under the knife of an unhappy
runaway, I would not resent it upon him, but upon those white men who keep
blacks in slavery. I would tell them, your cruelty toward your Negroes, has
endangered my life -- they execrate you, they take me for a tyrant because I am
white like you, and the vengeance due to your crimes has fallen upon me.

God forbid, however, that I should undertake to encourage the blacks to take
up arms against their masters! God forbid, however, that I should undertake to
justify the excesses to which their resentments have sometimes hurried them,
and which have often fallen on persons who were not accessory to their
wretchedness! The slavery under which they groan, must be abolished by
peaceable means; and thanks to the active spirit of benevolence which animates
the Quakers, the prious undertaking is already begun. In most of the United
States of America, the yoke has been taken from their necks; in others the
Guinea-trade has been prohibited. Societies have been formed both at Paris and
London, to collect and circulate information upon this interesting subject, to
induce the European governments to put a stop to the Negro trade, and provide
for their gradual emancipation in the West India islands: No doubt success will
crown their views, and the friends of liberty will enjoy the satisfaction of
communicating its blessings to the blacks.

But the blacks must wait for the happy moment that shall restore them to civil
life, in silence and in peace; they must rely upon the unwearied diligence and
zeal of the numerous writers who advocate their cause, and the efforts of the
humane to second their endeavors; they must strive to justify and support the
arguments that are adduced in their favor, by displaying virtue in the very
bosom of slavery; they must endeavor, in a word, to render themselves worthy
of liberty, that they may know how to use it when it shall be restored to them;
for liberty itself is sometimes a burden, when slavery has stupefied the soul.

Such blacks, therefore, as are so inconsiderate as to be concerned in
insurrections, are guilty of retarding the execution of the general plan for
their emancipation; for the question is not, at the present day, whether a
million of slaves ought to be set at liberty, but whether they can when free,
be put into a capacity of providing for the subsistence of themselves and their
families. Insurrections, far from effecting this purpose, would destroy the
means. Regard, therefore, to their own interests, if there were no other
motive, should therefore engage the blacks to patient submission, and no doubt
but they will yield it, if their masters and the ministers of the gospel in
particular, to whom the task of comforting and instructing them, is committed,
endeavor to prepare them for approaching freedom.

You sir, have adopted the vulgar notion, that the Negroes born in Virginia,
are less depraved than those imported from Africa. You call the firmness which
is common in the early stages of their slavery, greater degeneracy; they are
depraved, that is, in your language -- they are wicked and treacherous to those
who have purchased them, or brought them from their own country -- But in my
mind, they are not depraved, because the acts of violence their genius inspires
them to revenge themselves upon their tyrants, are justified by the rights of
nature.

And why are those imported, more wicked in your opinion? In mine, more quick,
more ardent in their resentments? because, not having forgotten their former
situation, they feel their loss the more sensibly; and having strong ideas,
their resolutions are more firm and their actions more violent, they not having
yet contracted the habits of slavery.

They soon fall into that degree of apathy and insensibility, which you
unjustly believe to be natural to them; that is, in your language, they become
less depraved; but I would say that their depravity begins with this apathy and
weakness -- For depravity is the loss of nature, and the want of those virtues
inherent in man, courage and the love of liberty. Our readers may judge from
this article, how strangely writers have wrested words to condemn these unhappy
Negroes, and the unfortunate in general.

I do not, however, pretend to say, that the Negroes of Africa are all good, or
even that many of them are not depraved. But is this fact to be imputed to them
as a personal crime? Ought you not rather to have ascribed it to the foreign
source by which they are corrupted. Alike in them and in the whites, the
depravity of man is a consequence of his wretchedness, and the usurpation of
his rights, Wherever he is free and at ease, he is good; wherever the contrary,
he is wicked. Neither his nature nor the climate corrupt him, but the
government of his country. Now that of the Negroes is almost universally
despotic, such as must necessarily debase and corrupt the Negro.

How much is the depravity, occasioned by the government of his country,
increased by his second slavery, far worse than the first -- for he is no
longer among friends in his native land -- surrounded by the pleasing scenes of
his childhood, he is among monsters who are going to live by, and trade in his
blood, and has nothing before his eyes but death, or oppression equivalent to
an endless punishment.

How is it possible such horrid prospects should not fire his soul? How, if
chance should present him with arms and liberty, should he resist using them,
to put an end to his own existence, or that of his tormentors? What white man
would be less cruel in his situation? Truly I think myself of a humane
disposition, that I love my fellow creatures and detest the effusion of blood;
but if ever a villain, white or black, should snatch me from my freedom, my
family, and my friends; should overwhelm me with outrages and blows, to gratify
his caprice, should extend his barbarities to my wife and children -- My blood
boils at the thought -- perhaps in a transport of revenge * * * * * * * If such
vengeance would be lawful in me, what makes the Negro more guilty? Why should
that be called wickedness and depravity in him, which would be styled virtue in
me, in you, in every white man? Are not my rights the same as his? Is not
nature our common parent? God his father as well as mine? His conscience an
infallible guide as well as mine? Let us then no longer make other laws for the
blacks than those we are bound by ourselves, since Heaven has placed them on a
level with us, has made them like us, since they are our brethren and our
fellow creatures.

Here you stop me, you say that the Negro is not our fellow creature, that he
is below the white.

How could so shocking an opinion escape the pen of a member of the Royal
Academy, a writer who would be thought a friend of mankind!

Do not you see the tormentors of St. Domingo, avail themselves of it already,
redoubling their strokes, and regarding their slaves as mere machines, like the
Cartesians do the brutes? They are not our fellow creatures will they say: a
philosopher of Paris has proved it.

What! the blacks not our equals! Have not they eyes, ears, a shape, and organs
like ours? Does nature follow another order, other laws for them? -- Have not
they speech, that peculiar characteristic of humanity? But then the color!
What of that? Are the pale white Albinos, the olive or copper colored Indians
also of different species! Who does not know that color is accidental. They
are not our equals! Have not they the same faculties -- reason, memory,
imagination? Yes, you reply, but they have written no books. Who told you so?
Who told you there were no learned blacks? And supposing it were so, if none
but authors are men, the whole human race is different from us.

Shall I tell you why there are no authors or men of learning among the
Negroes? What has made you what you are? Education and circumstances! -- Now
where are the Negroes favored by either? Consider them wherever they are to be
found -- In Africa, wretchedly enslaved by domestic tyrants; in our islands
perpetual martyrs; in the southern United States, the meanest of slaves; in the
northern, domestics; in Europe, universally contemned, every where proscribed,
like the Jews; in a word, every where in a state of debasement.

I have been told that there are blacks of property, in the northern parts of
America; but these, like the other settlers, are no more than sensible farmers
or traders -- There are no authors among them, because there are few rich and
idle people in America There was however, a Negro author at London, whose
productions are not without merit, and were lately published in two volumes --
His name was Ignatius Sancho -- He wrote in the manner of Stern.
.

What spring of action could raise a Negro from his debased condition? the road
to glory and honor is impassible to him: What then should he write for?
Besides, the blacks have reason to detest the sciences, for their oppressors
cultivate them but they do not make them better.

Shall we say that the Indians or Arabs are not our equals, because they
despise both our arts and our sciences? or the Quakers, because they neither
respect academies nor wits?

In short, if you will deny the Negroes souls, energy, sensibility, gratitude
or beneficence, I oppose you to yourself, I might quote your own anecdote of
Mr. Langdon's Negro, and abundance of other well known facts in favor of the
blacks. You may find some striking ones in the Abbe Raynals' philosophical
history. One of them would have been sufficient. The Negroe who killed himself
when his master who had injured him was in his power, was superior to
Epictetus, and the existence of a single Negro of so sublime a character,
ennobles all his kind.

But how could you judge whether the blacks were different from the whites, who
saw them only in a state of slavery and wretchedness? Do we estimate beauty by
the figure of a Laplander? magnanimity by the soul of a courtier? or
intelligence by the stupidity of an Esquimaux?

If the traces of humanity were so much weakened and effaced in the Negroes,
that you did not recognize them, I conclude not that they do not belong to our
species, but that they must have been cruelly tormented to reduce them to this
state of degeneracy. I do not conclude that they are not men, but that the
Europeans who kidnap the blacks, are not worthy of the name.

You consider what precautions it may be necessary to take to avoid the danger
which might attend a general emancipation of the Negroes.

I shall not now enter into a discussion of this nice question, but reserve it
for another work: yet I must say in a word, that the Negroes will never be our
friends, will never be men, until they are possessed of all our rights, until
we are upon an equality. Civil liberty is the boundary between good and evil,
order and disorder, happiness and misery, ignorance and knowledge. If we would
make the Negroes worthy of us, we must raise them to our level by giving them
this liberty.

Thus, the chief inconvenience you expect will follow the emancipation of the
Negroes, may be avoided; that although free, they will remain a distinct
species, a distinct and dangerous body.

This objection will vanish when we intermix with them, and boldly efface every
distinction. Unless this is the case, I foresee torrents of blood spilt and the
earth disputed between the whites and blacks, as America was between the
Europeans and Savages.

Perhaps, and it is no extravagant idea -- perhaps it might be more prudent,
more humane, to send the blacks back again to their native country, settle them
there, encourage their industry, and assist them to form connections with
Europe and America. The celebrated doctor Fothergill conceived this plan, and
the society for the abolition of slavery, at London, have carried it into
exccution at Sierra Leona. Time and perseverance, will discover the policy and
utility of this settlement. If it should succeed, the blacks will quit America
insensibly, and Sierra Leona become the center from whence general civilization
will spread over all Africa.

Perhaps, sir, you will place these thoughts upon the Negroes with those
declamations you are pleased to ridicule: But what is the epithet of declaimer
to me, if I am right, if I make an impression upon my readers, if I dart
remorse into the breast of a single slave-holder; in a word, if I contribute to
accelerate the general impulse toward liberty.

You disapprove the application of eloquence to this subject; you think nothing
can affect it but the exertions of cool reason. What is eloquence but the
language of reason and sensibility? When man is oppressed, he struggles, he
complains, he moves our passions, and bears down all opposition. Such eloquence
can perform wonders, and should be employed by those who undertake to plead the
cause of the unfortunate who spend their days in continual agony, or he will
make no impression -- I do not conceive how any man can display wit instead of
feeling, upon this distracting subject, amuse with an antithesis, instead of
forcible reasoning, and only dazzle where he ought to warm. I have no
conception how a sensible and thinking being, can see a fellow creature
tortured and torn to pieces, perhaps his poor wife bathe in tears, with a
wretched infant sucking her shriveled breast at his side; I say I have no
conception how he can behold such a sight, with indifference; how, unagonized
and unconvulsed with rage and indignation, he can have the barbarity to descend
to jesting! Notwithstanding, your observations upon the Negroes, conclude with
a jest.

"It will be an easy matter, say you, to add ten or twelve pages to these few
reflections, which may be considered as a concert, composed only of principal
parts, "con corni ad libitum."

I hope there is nothing cruel, because there is nothing studied in this
connection, this inconsiderate manner: but how could such a comparison come
into the head of a man of feeling? It is the sad effect of wit, as I said
before; it contracts the soul. Ever glancing over agreeable objects, it is
unfeeling when intruded upon by wretchedness -- uneasy to obliterate the
shocking idea, and elude the groans of nature, it rids itself of both by a
jest. The humane Benezet would never have connected this idea of harmony with
the sound of a Negro driver's whip.

Having proved that you have wronged the Quakers and the Negroes, I shall
proceed to show that you have equally injured mankind and the people.

VINDICATION of MANKIND, and of the PEOPLE.
I might quote several passages on this subject, but the following, which is
one of the most striking, will be sufficient. After giving a description of an
Irishman, who had treated you with a good dinner, you proceed.

He was polite and attentive, and his wife, a delicate, pretty woman, had
nothing of the peasant in her air or manners; for the Virginian, though in the
midst of the woods, and cares of a country life, bears no resemblance to the
European Peasant -- He is universally a free man, who has his share in the
government, and possesses some Negro slaves; so that he enjoys the double title
of Citizen and Master; in which respect he is quite on a footing with the
generality of those who composed that order which was called the People in the
ancient republics, a People very different from those of the present day; but
who have been very improperly confounded in all those trifling declamations,
wherein our would-be philosophical writers, by not making a proper distinction
between ancient and modern times, have mistaken the word People for Mankind in
general; and have really been liberal in their praises to tyrants, when they
meant to defend the cause of humanity: numberless are the opinions which
require correction! numberless are the words, whose proper meaning is yet
undefined! The favorite phrase of the dignity of man, has long been made use
of; and yet this dignity of man is merely comparative; if applied to
individuals, it depends on the rank they hold in life. Thus, the inferior
station of the common people, gives dignity to the nobility, that of the slave
to the freeman, and that of the blacks to the whites.

If we apply it in a general sense, it will make men tyrannical and cruel to
the animal creation; and thus, by destroying universal beneficence, will
counteract the order and designs of nature -- On what foundation then shall
reason, freed from sophistry and declamation, fix her seat? On an equality of
rights, on the general good, which is to predominate over every thing else; on
the good of individuals as united with the good of the whole; and on that order
in society, as absolutely necessary as the symmetry of a bee-hive, etc. -- If
these sentiments are unfavourable to eloquence, we shall lose nothing by it;
for a good system of morality is certainly preferable to an elegant one Voyage
en Amerique, Vol. 2, Page 46.
.

And so, sir, you think the people of the present day, are a very different set
of beings from the people of old times, and of consequence, more disposed to
and fit for slavery -- And you blame our philosophers too, for putting the
people of our day more on a level with those of antiquity, and for asserting,
that the only difference between them, is owing to the government they live
under -- Your conclusions, though not avowed, are, that the people of the
present day are to be kept in a state of the severest thraldom -- for you
assert that their vices and follies are more numerous, and that their depravity
is irremediable.

Now, I maintain, that these sentiments are false and detrimental to the
people, whom you have thus traduced. You have already had my creed on this
head. I believe that men receive their character, almost entirely from the
nature of the government they live under -- And that liberty exalts them, while
the want of it hastens their degeneracy. I believe that the ignorant Barbarian
slave, who receives his existence on the banks of the Bosphorus, would have
been an enlightened republican, had he been born at Philadelphia. I shall not
affront you by bringing proofs in support of my assertions: They are proved by
the history of every nation in the world, and who can be supposed better
acquainted with history than the author of la Felicite Public?

We may conclude then, that there is no more natural distinction between the
ancients and moderns, than there is between the whites and the blacks; and that
those which do exist, are merely accidental -- Transport the government of
Athens to Constantinople, and those very Turks who now appear so like
barbarians, would equal the Athenians in valor, patriotism and knowledge.
Liberty would animate these machines. The mine is prepared, the combustibles
are all ready, nothing but the spark is wanting.

Cease then to vilify the people of the present day; drive them not to a state
of desperation; but rather try to encourage them, by showing them that their
state of degradation is owing to a cause which may be removed; and that when it
is removed, they will become men.

I must confess, I do not rightly understand your meaning, when you say, that
the defenders of the People of our days, have been liberal of their praises to
tyrants; this is saying, that Lock, Sidney, Price, Rousseau, Helvetius and
Raynal, have commended them; for these writers too, have unfortunately been of
opinion, that the People of modern times will be quite on a footing with the
ancients, when they shall be placed in the same situation.

But I can clearly see, that your system is far more favorable to the real
oppressors of mankind; for by teaching them to consider the people of the
present times as unworthy of liberty, and incapable of enjoying it; that the
people, and mankind in general are daily degenerating, and will continue to do
so, even if the cause of their degeneracy were removed -- I say, by teaching
such pretended truths as these, you encourage their oppressors to continue
their servitude.

But your system is utterly false; the revolution of America has clearly proved
it to be so: for the chief actors of this revolution, are the descendants of
Englishmen, (who were oppressed by the Stuarts,) or of German slaves.

You think to exalt the Americans by putting them on a level with the Greeks
and Romans: for my part, I think them vastly superior to those ancient nations;
But I do not mean to prove my assertion at present -- I shall now content
myself with just mentioning my sentiments on this head; and on a future
occasion demonstrate, that the men of the present age, so far from having
degenerated, will be superior to their predecessors, when placed in a more
favorable situation.

After having decried the people of the present age, you go on to vilify
mankind, and the dignity of man, which you look upon as merely comparative, and
of course, you reckon up the different degrees of the dignity of man. According
to your ideas on this subject, we have one or two hundred kinds of dignity in
Europe, such as the dignity of a Duke, of a Baron, of a Marquis, of a Bailly,
etc. etc. What abuse of words! and what an abominable system is here concealed
-- How can you, who are a philosopher, believe in the natural dignity of a
nobleman above a plebeian, of a freeman above a slave, or of a white-man above
a black? How could it escape you, that these different degrees of dignity, were
but so many degrees of injustice and usurpation? How could you maintain the
first, after having read in the different constitutions of America, that all
men are born free, equal, and independent Rumbold had declared on the Scaffold,
in 1684. before the time of the American Legislators, that unless providence
had created some men, with saddles on their backs, and others with boots and
spurs to ride them, he would never believe in inequality. Mrs. Macaulay's
history. Vol. 7.
; and after having offered to shed your blood in defense of such principles?
You will scarcely maintain that they are not universally true; for surely no
magic can make any principle true, on the banks of the Delaware, and false on
the borders of the Seine. I know that these prejudices about distinctions still
subsist in Europe; but how very unbecoming is it for a philosopher to be led
away by prejudices, and to go so far, as to add new force to them by his
writings.

And how could you make mention of the names of Plebeian and Patrician -- those
fatal distinctions, which brought on all the misfortunes and commotions of the
Roman republic; distinctions, which involved Rome in perpetual wars, that were
favorable to aristocratic power; which inspired her with the lust of conquest,
and hurried her on to a despotic government? If Rome had been acquainted with,
and had adopted that natural and sacred equality which the Americans have made
one of the pillars of their constitutions, her existence would certainly have
been of a much longer duration. It was with a view to these principles, that I
just now said, the Americans were superior to the Romans.

The dignity of the freeman, compared with that of the slave, has at first
sight, something more plausible in it; and yet it is a mere chimera: For by
nature they both possess an equal degree of dignity; their natural rights are
the same -- Slavery may deprive a man of the use of his rights and dignity, but
it cannot deprive him of his title to them. The freeman should esteem himself
happy in being free, but he should at the same time, sympathize with his
fellow creatures who are in slavery, and not entertain any ideas of
self-superiority. The mean slave who glories in his situation, is the only
proper object of contempt.

But what can you mean by that strange kind of dignity which you have invented
to raise the whites above the blacks? What title is there to be found for this
dignity and superiority? What author has mentioned it? Have not the blacks on
the coast of Guinea, who are robbed of their gold dust, their gums, and their
children, by European pilferers, as good a reason for arrogating to themselves
a dignity and a superiority over the whites?

Away, sir, with these contracted ideas of dignity and inequality; they are far
more likely than that general or specific dignity which you find fault with, to
inspire men with sentiments of tyranny and cruelty toward their
fellow creatures. These answer no other end, but that of perpetuating
continental, national, civil and personal animosities; and of rendering the
earth the scene of eternal discord and bloodshed. For the antiquity of this
inequality, can be of no force in depriving us of our rights or of our
sentiments. It prevents no one from being sensible, that he is, by birth, equal
to the man who enjoys the most elevated station; it prevents no one from
detesting, according to his feelings, the man who violates this equality, by
ruining or debasing his fellow creatures.

This is no new doctrine -- Rousseau had taught it, and Lock and Sidney had
taught it before him: It was their opinion also, that the wars and crimes of
mankind were owing to this inequality, this comparative dignity which you are
so liberal in your praises of, which you cherish and deify, under the
appellation of order and symmetry -- you, the champion for equality amongst the
Americans! And yet, you who have drawn your sword in support of the dignity of
man, are ignorant of the meaning of the term! read over, once more, the first
section of the constitution of Pennsylvania; you will there find a clear and
sublime definition of this term, which now appears to you so obscure and
indeterminate; and which you blame the philosophers for having made an improper
use of. The dignity of man consists in his liberty, in his equality of rights,
in his independence, in being subject to no laws, but those which are made by
his own consent; in the control whith he exercises over those to whom he has
delegated authority. The dignity of man consists, moreover, in the perfect
developement of his moral and intellectual faculties, in his efforts to
discover, and promulgate truth -- It consists, in a word, in great ideas, in a
steady and determined resolution. The mere man of the world, who is from his
very infancy surrounded by narrow prejudices, and appearances, which he is
continually obliged to give up to, who is always conversant with men of
confined sentiments, and void of resolution; the mere man of the world, I say,
possesses not this dignity; I do not mean to affirm that this principle has not
been implanted in his breast, or that it cannot expand itself when a favorable
opportunity offers; but when suppressed, it languishes and withers -- It is
revivified by meditation, by the electrifying power of vigorous minds, by
holding converse with the mighty dead, by continually studying those histories,
which afford the noble spectacle of an individual opposing a tyrant. All these
supports afforded to man, fill his mind with exalted sentiments, impel him to
the pursuit of noble objects, and determine him boldly to resolve on performing
every thing that is good and sublime. Having thus explained to you the theory
of what I mean by the dignity of man, I shall show you, by a few examples,
where it has been realized. -- A Hampden, suffering imprisonment, rather than
pay an illegal tax; A Sidney, ascending the scaffold I have frequently quoted
this celebrated writer; to form a just idea of his merits, it will be necessary
to study his works with care, and to read Mrs. Macaulay's account of his death.
with composure; A Lock, unfolding his ideas on civil government; A Rousseau,
writing his social compact; A Franklin, undergoing his examination with wisdom
and firmness, before the British Parliament; A Warren, breathing his last in
the cause of liberty, at Bunker's Hill; A Burke, prosecuting the destroyer of
the Rohillas, and Tyrant of the Indies -- These are great examples, and
illustrious monuments, of the dignity of man; if you cannot perceive it in such
examples, I pity you -- There are those who will readily discover it, men, who
have not lost the sense of their native greatness, and of their rights. The
English nation, but more certainly the Americans, will easily discover it;
numbers of them undoubtedly will sigh on reading this inconsiderate attack of
yours against the dignity of man: They will naturally enquire, why you went to
America, since you do not believe in the dignity of man; since you are only for
comparative dignities, which they are either unacquainted with, or hold in
contempt; and finally, since you are for an inequality of rank, which they have
excluded, from a belief of its being the source of all political evils.

This is not the only passage, wherein you discover your contempt for the
People; it is manifest elsewhere. For instance, you describe the People of
Pennsylvania, as being more inclined to anarchy, than democracy. I shall not
now attempt to discuss the motives which dictated this reflection upon the
inhabitants of Pennsylvania, who appear to me, to have in part realized the
idea of as perfect a democracy, as it is possible to conceive, although perhaps
it is too refined for the present state of things. This is certain, that the
word anarchy, has been hitherto greatly abused. But I reserve my sentiments on
this abuse of words, for another work.

I have now finished the unpleasing task I imposed myself, in the beginning of
this letter. I think I have proved, that you have calumniated the Quakers, the
Negroes, the People and Mankind.

I ought perhaps to extend my observations to upon the other numerous errors
contained in your travels; they must be dangerous under the sanction of your
name. None of them are uninteresting: but I was not made for a critic, it is
too painful an occupation for me. I shall therefore confine myself to a few
remarks upon some of your sentiments, and such anecdotes as appeared most
striking.

To begin with your opinion on the art of war. You have principally applied
yourself to a description of the different engagements which have effected the
American revolution. You think these descriptions useful for military men, that
they will be particularly so to those of America; and by the complacence with
which you treat the subject, we perceive that it is your favorite art, and
that you believe it very necessary to society, especially in a republic.

I am entirely of a different opinion, and independent of the uncertainty, and
inutility of such descriptions, Marshal Villars held such plans and
descriptions very cheap. To form a perfect judgment. he would say. we must see
with our own eyes. On being advised at court, to overflow the country, to
secure the fort of Kell* he expressed himself as follows: It looks very well
upon paper, where we may lay what we please under water with a stroke of the
pencil. Vie da Marshall de Villars, Vol. 1.
I seriously believe that the military art tends to the advancement of
aristocracy, and consequently ought to be banished from republics. I will not
enter into those declamations, with which philosophers are reproached, when
they write upon it, and shall advance nothing but well attested facts.

The moment you make war a profession, you constitute a body of men who are
constantly engaged in it, study it, teach it, and consequently forsake commerce
and agriculture; they must therefore be maintained by their fellow citizens.

Those who possess this art, will employ it to acquire fame or wealth, they
consequently desire, and foment hostilities: but republics ought to shun war,
and especially the spirit of it.

If this art is not employed abroad, it will be at home.

As the military form a distinct body, they think themselves superior to their
fellow-citizens, especially those who are peaceable. The prejudice increases;
it renders some insolent, and debases others.

The military art diminishes true courage. It is to nations what fencing is to
individuals. It supplies the place of true courage, but does not inspire it.
But it is with courage only that republics must defend themselves from foreign
attacks.

When men shall be thoroughly inspired with the love of liberty, and accustomed
to exercise it in its full extent, they will possess a spirit no military art
can subdue. The man who exclaims I will die or be free, has no master; the
nation that repeats it, is no longer enslaved. A conqueror might massacre them
all, but he could not make himself master of a single individual. Such courage
does not need the support of art or fortifications See an excellent letter of M
de la Clos, upon the boasted utility of fortifications, addressed to the
academy, on occasion of the eulogium of Vauban.
. It can support itself.

The real strength of a republic, depends upon the insuperable attachment of
its members to liberty and their rights. Possessing this, the republican repels
every attack, he soon learns the military art, he harrasses and overcomes all
his enemies: Witness many of the American generals, whose virtues and abilities
you acknowledge. The greatest part of them had never handled a musket; they
had been merchants, farmers, physicians, booksellers. Witness Warren, Knox,
Morgan, Green, and the infamous Arnold, whose talents should have ornamented
the soul of a patriot. And no wonder that republicans so speedily acquire
military skill. The preservation of their liberties engages every faculty; a
more powerful incentive than the pay of mercenaries, or even the distinctions
of European armies. This is the reason that one or two years experience, and
two or three defeats, instruct republicans more than twenty or thirty years
spent in the service of other governments While we praise the Americans for
their gallant defense of liberty; we must not forget to pay the same tribute to
the patriotic ardour of our own countrymen.
.

Animated by the love of liberty, republican soldiers are more patient, and
bear fatigue better than hired troops. Witness your own commendations of the
American soldiers, who always fought bravely, although ill paid, ill provided
for, ill clothed, and unaccustomed to the business. You allow that they soon
learned to serve the artillery, that their barracks were of the best
construction, that they were brave, etc. etc. etc. What produced these wonders?
The love of liberty. While they preserve it, they will have nothing to fear,
and the military art will be useless to them.

They will do well to remember the battles you describe, not to study the plans
or circumstances of them, but as splendid monuments erected to liberty. If they
are ever obliged to reassume their arms, the same genius will inspire them
without this study.

In a word, every individual of a republic, should be brave, should be a
soldier, by birth the defender of his country; but none should be so by
profession.

Republics have no more need of standing armies, than of magistrates, or
representatives for life; which introduce war and corruption, with despotism in
their train.

You, Sir, no doubt think differently, you love war, and boast that it is the
passion of our countrymen: We love war, you cry with an air of triumph; so much
the worse; I see no reason to boast of disease: The real prosperity of France
will depend upon the abatement of this passion for war.

You also compliment us on another account, less fatal perhaps, but of
dangerous influence upon our manners and constitutions; I mean the taste for
ridicule, for which you are a warm advocate, and lavish it upon every thing:
You think good epigrams are made no where but in France, and a Frenchman never
suffers himself to be outdone in this point, so much the worse; Asia has
produced the best fabulists.

All our great wits have repeated from Horace, that ridicule is an excellent
weapon. Ridiculum acre magnas plerumque secat res. But Horace wrote under
Augustus -- Let me give you my reasons for hating and proscribing ridicule:

Ridicule accustoms us to laugh at abuses which ought to excite indignation; it
produces nothing but a volatile sensation, which passes off without any durable
exertions to remove the evil: The epigram is soon forgotten, but the complaint
remains.

It is otherwise with a grave people, accustomed to reflection in forming a
judgment of things: When a writer has demonstrated to such a people, the
existence and effects of a public evil; convinced and alarmed, they interest
themselves in it, and the government perceives and corrects its error To
perceive the difference between the effects of ridicule and rational
enthusiasm, we need only compare the times of la Ligue and la Fronde, in our
own country, with the revolutions of 1650 and 1688, in England. Our satires
were excellent. La Menipee appeared, and Blot and Marigny entertained all
France, at the expense of Mazarine: but Mazarine maintained his ground. The
English less facetious, obtained the famous Bill of Rights which secured
personal liberty, the freedom of the press, the right of representation, etc.
.

To reform a people therefore, they must be reclaimed from the rage for
ridicule, and brought back to cool reasoning. Ridicule is a rattle to amuse
children.

What is a nation in a state of infancy? Nothing: For shame, let us no longer
compliment ourselves upon our songs and our ballads.

You seem to regret that the taste for these things abates, that we are no
longer so jocose, so epigramatic. This is to regret that the empire of reason
has commenced.

You regret that our conversation begins to grow dull from being too rational;
for you think we are the only people who know how to converse. Why this insult
to all nations and to truth? Can it be said that we know how to converse in
France, where it is customary to listen to nothing, and men of parts
especially, thinking themselves above instruction, indulge their own ideas,
without attending to yours? What is conversation? It ought to be a means of
connecting mankind, of informing the judgment and humanizing the heart. But are
these the objects of a French conversation? Do we instruct, nay do we even
amuse one another? We merely glance upon our subjects. From the weather to a
criticism upon the opera, from the opera to a battle, from the battle to a cap,
etc. If you regret that this sublime style of amusing and instructive
conversation declines, you must pardon me for not joining you. But do not think
me less a friend to my countrymen than yourself, who appear to flatter them. I
believe that they possess the seeds of every virtue, and that their expansion
depends upon themselves; while you give them nothing but the art of punning: It
is aparently to prove yourself a good Frenchman, that you have dealt out puns
and witicisms with such a liberal hand; informing us for instance that our
Physicians are no Grecians; that Simitiere (which for the sake of a pun, you
mispell Cimetiere) is rather the name of a Doctor than a Painter; and describe
a conversation with the popular chief, Adams, in the contemptuous light of
private assignation. etc.
which of us honors them most? In like manner intending to compliment our
French women you traduce them in the following description; Vol. 2, Page 97.
not a motion without grace, no grace without expression -- The wish to please
perfects and perpetuates the means of pleasing, and nature is rather assisted
than thwarted by art, not being abandoned to the cares of domestic life, nor
wasted by continual childbearing. That is to say plainly, that you compliment
our countrywomen, upon being no longer good mothers or good housewives, and not
scrupling to destroy their posterity for the sake of preserving an elegant
shape, and pleasing their unmarried gallants. Shocking thought! what must the
Americans think of our morals and of our women, at least in Paris (for this is
only a view of the capital) when they read your travels, should any of them be
weak enough to be seduced by this licentious language, or tempted to sacrifice
to the same desires? Heaven preserve those republicans from such depravity!

Perhaps, and it is to be hoped, that the satires upon the Americans, and their
chaste partners, with which your book abounds, will operate as an antidote to
the pleasing venom it contains. Satires, you will say. Yes, cast your eye over
the following list, which comprehends but a very small part of them.

You represent the American women, as being little accustomed to give
themselves any trouble, and indifferent about every thing, except sipping their
tea, and keeping the house clean. Let the reader compare this picture, with
that of their virtues, drawn by St. John de Crevecoeur, who has lived so long
in America, and he may judge how much you wrong them.

Your informing them in another place, that you did not think any of them
handsome, or that they danced ill, is a piece of rudeness that French urbanity
should have forbidden.

But your satiric vein flows most freely, when you bring an old or homely woman
upon the stage. With what glaring colors you paint Mrs. -- and the lady you
openly expose by a sarcasm, upon her taste for liberty, not even suppressing
the initials of her name, least the blow should miss: Could you suppose that
such affected mystery could conceal her in a city of but twenty thousand
inhabitants, in which the circle of ladies who use white and red, must be very
contracted.

You praise none of them, except it is for imitating the levity and
frivolousness of our French women, or because she intends to introduce the
fashions at Philadelphia, and produce a revolution in the taste of the
toilette, of greater importance you say, than that already effected in politics.

You treat the men with as little ceremony: you charge them openly with
formality, pedantry, ingratitude, hypocrisy, and even roguery. Their slightest
defects could not escape your observing eye. Here a scholar addresses you in
French, and you do not answer him in English, not to rob him of the pleasure of
displaying what he knows. There you ridicule the director of a ball, upon the
solemn air, with which he exercises his office; or a respectable governor, to
whom you give all the pedantry of a republican, a Barnevelt, or a Heinsius.
Heaven grant our petit maitres such pedantry and such virtues, and they will at
least resemble men. In another place, you sow the seeds of discord between the
different citizens, by representing, that some of the Americans call the Dutch
thick-skulls, and make them the butt of their ridicule.

Thus perhaps your book will give rise to jealousy and ill will.

Nor must I forget the ridicule you cast upon some of those religious
republicans for saying grace.

Why make a jest of religion, before people who reverence it? Recollect, that
the settlement of America was owing to religious enthusiasm, which has given
her the character of firmness that still exists, and to which her present
liberty is to be ascribed. Recollect, that the Atheists sided with Charles IId.
I do not mean to infer however that all Atheists are partisans of despotism.
and flattered him; while the Puritans did honor to human nature, but their
voluntary exile.

What must we think of those dissolute princiciples, which you endeavor to
excuse, by apologizing for yourself, in the affair of the American Girl, a tale
you should have suppressed in respect to morality, and the peace of the unhappy
woman. But the pen drops from my hand, and I can follow you no longer, for it
seems to me that your epigrammatic conceits have caused you to forget the
respect due to strangers, to allies, to friends, to good people who gave you a
friendly welcome, and vied with each other to entertain you.

If your travels contained information, let them be made public: But must it be
published to the whole universe if you chanced to meet with an inkeeper who had
lost an eye or was hump-backed? Have you forgotten that every thing which may
tend to humble an individual unnecessarily and undeservedly, ought to be
concealed, and this is always the case with natural defects? that silence is a
duty in strangers, whose ridicule may make a lasting impression? Have you
forgotten the respect that every writer owes to his readers? Can the faults or
vices of private individuals interest the public? or the intelligence that such
a one loves grog, is very tedious, or a great boaster? and that such a woman is
old or ugly, etc.? What conclusions can be drawn from such wretched anecdotes?
Shall we conclude like the German, who described all the women of Blois to be
red haired and ill-tempered, because his hostess was so.

If such circumstances cannot be generalized they are not worth notice: for
every private fact, which will not admit of general inferences relating to
history, manners or customs, is useless, and ought to be suppressed. Before a
traveller publishes his observations, he ought to be fully impressed with the
thought which Phedrus has expressed in the following adage, nisi utile est quod
facimus stulta est gloria: Thus after riding over a vast extent of country,
This appears to have been the sole object of your Travels. You say no less
yourself, Vol II. page 1. True to the resolution I had formed in my childhood
to neglect no opportunity of seeing as much of the world as I possibly could.
etc.
and seeing a great many men and a great many things. To form an interesting
picture of them, we must represent what may be useful to the public. Travelers
are not so cautious as they should be, in the publishing their observations:
For one that is just, there are often one hundred false. Indeed, it is
impossible to examine a nation at a single glance. Long acquaintance is
necessary to qualify for a faithful description. To catch a feature in riding
post, is to run a risk of drawing a portrait without a trace of the original.
On this principle two thirds of your travels might be retrenched, and the
remainder would be less imperfect. In justice to such of my countrymen who have
read your travels I must say, that your book has made the same impressions upon
them that it has upon myself, and no doubt the Americans will be pleased to
hear it: I therefore protest in their names against those inferences, which
might be drawn from it upon our national character. The Americans may believe
me when I assure them that many of the brave Frenchmen who have defend-their
cause, have the highest esteem for their constitutions, their manners and their
customs; that they are generally esteemed in France; and that our different
habits have not prevented us from perceiving the full value of their simplicity
and innocence. They may rest assured, that many of our countrymen who may have
the satisfaction of visiting them in future, will be very capable of studying
their constitution, and improving by their manners, without betraying the
confidence of hospitality.

Perhaps, sir, you will complain of the severity of my censure, and the
apparent harshness of this examination. It is severe I allow: but such is my
disposition that I can neither disguise I do not love disguises even in
delicate points -- There are some authors who have gained the reputation of
boldness, by slipping a few political truths into their works, which have
escaped censure, by passing unobserved. But it seems to me that these direct
methods betray their pusillanimity, and are at once a disgrace to the writer,
who sacrifices truth to fear, the age and the country, which are thought not to
be ripe enough to have it, and the administration, which has not virtue enough
to suffer it; they tend to inspire other writers with timidity; and the effect
of recent and striking facts is destroyed by these means. In the present age,
when Rousseau, Price, and Helvetius are in every body's hands, there is no
necessity for disguising truths which shine in every page of their writings.
my feelings nor express them with indifference.

I know that severity is reckoned a sort of crime among us in the present age,
wherein false politeness is substituted in the place of honest freedom, that is
to say a shadow for the substance. I must therefore justify my bluntness. It
may possibly tend to remove those prejudices which discourage the investigation
and retard the progress of truth in our country.

When one writer has attacked another with warmth, we are apt to exclaim: Why
so severe? He might have been treated with decency at least.

This national dislike to severity is a proof that vice preponderates and
character is lost. Every individual capitulates more or less with the duties of
his station, and barters his moral obligations for titles or pensions, and
every one, conscious of his own misconduct, and recognizing some features of
himself in the portrait of the weak or the guilty man, exposed to public view,
inclines to indulgence, because he stands in need of it himself; and joins to
persecute the nervous writer because he is a stranger to the spirit by which he
is actuated; for innocence itself is an offense to the guilty.

I make no doubt that when Cicero uttered his thundering orations against
Catiline, there were some senators weak enough to advise him to moderation;
perhaps in the pusillanimous adage, we must not give offense. False maxim!
Gentleness has ever been the ruin of individuals as well as communities. Bad
men have made but too much advantage of the indulgence of virtue: For which
reason I think that a virtuous man ought to be uniformly severe, that his
character should be strongly marked, and boldly expressed, that he should never
weaken his sentiments, or affect a dangerous moderation: truth demands, and the
general good requires it.

Writers, above all men, should observe this line of conduct, to render
themselves worthy of the task of instructing mankind; for how can they expect
the confidence of their fellow-citizens, if they condescend to accommodate
their principles to circumstances, or compromise with the enemies of the
community? They cannot, their influence is justly forfeited. It is said they
only play their parts, and the wicked remain as before.

This decided character, now quite lost among our writers, was universal,
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The civil dissentions, which
then divided the citizens into parties, and impressed them with peculiar
characters, influenced the writers of those times: Each was attached to a
party, and treated its opponents with rigor. And this was not without its use:
for the apprehension of a severe censure, obliged them to be just and accurate.
The present gentleness of censure, has been the ruin of science.

In this respect I confess myself much better pleased with the manner in which
Saumaise and Petau, Bail and Jurieu, treated each other, than with the
inoffensive satires and hypocritical compliments* so common in our academies,
and modern pamphlets.

It may be objected that abuse proves nothing. I grant it; but it serves to
unmask a character. What is proved by our perfidious compliments, our
cutting-ironies, and our Italics especially? Mere malice without any of that
frankness which might palliate its malignity.

Besides, abuse is too often applied to that boldness of feature, wherein the
man of virtue is obliged to paint the villain. What! shall Lock or Sidney,
refuting the doctrines of the detestable Filmer, be required to treat him with
delicacy and tenderness? No: living or dead, let infamy brand the villain.

Such a character as these two great men possessed, can never be concealed; it
will appear in the physiognomy, the gestures, the speech, the writings of its
possessor Men of cooler tempers, strive to discourage it, by starting
difficulties in its way, and the friends of the party second their endeavors
from prudential considerations; but if it is deeply rooted, opposition only
forces it to expand itself, which is a happiness for the public, as well as for
the individual who is so strongly organized. He possesses in himself an ample
recompense for every inconvenience to which it may subject him. Such a one,
like the philosophers of antiquity, ought to consult his secret genius upon
every occasion. It is the nymph of Numa, the demon of Socrates, and the
spiritual light of the Quakers. He ought to listen to it, with unceasing
attention, and speak when it inspires. Great men who are invariably animated by
a spirit of this kind, have always had cause to repent, when they have
neglected to pay implicit obedience to its impulses. Hampden. the friend of
Sidney, being accused of the same crime, at first chose to share his fate; but
impelled by the pressing solicitations of his friends, he consented to cast
himself upon the king's mercy, and saved his life at the expense of a
punishment worse than death itself: for he reproached himself for his weakness,
all the rest of his life, and at last put an end to his misery by suicide.
Its inspirations never decieve those whose primary object is the public good,
nor can they fail of general utility.

With such a character, it is impossible to be a cool spectator of scenes that
shock every feeling of humanity, or remain unmoved at the sight of general
calamity and injustice.

The generality of our writers preserve their moderation amidst these shocking
scenes: They treat even criminals and oppressors, with civility and tenderness,
because they have neither spirit, nor character. Notwithstanding, we must do
justice to some late writers who have boldly defended the rights of mankind.
This generous zeal has penetrated even to the bar, and the present year has
given rise to spirited memorials, in favor of oppressed innocence. Their
authors not confining themselves to the defense of their clients, have extended
their observations to general liberty, the social compact, the duties of
government, the faults of ministers and the misconduct of inferiors, who are
always more obdurate and oppressive, than their masters. Some of the most
remarkable of these memorials are those of M. Thilorier, that just published by
M. Lacretelle, in favor of the unfortunate Comte de Sanvis, and those in
particular, written by my resolute and intrepid friend, M. Bergasse, against
the villains who have so long persecuted M. Kor^mann.
Shall I tell you the reason of this? Independent of other general causes, it
may be attributed to their way of life. Consider how a great character is
formed, and then cast your eye upon the life of one of our writers.

A nervous character, is the result of a natural elevation of sentiment, an
habitual indignation at the sight of oppression, and frequent meditation, which
tends to preserve the soul from the external causes of general lethargy and
decay; in a word, it is the result of a man's constant communion with his own
heart or with superior objects.

But how rare are these habits! can such meditation be enjoyed amidst the hurry
and dissipation of a metropolis: yet here our geniuses are sent to receive that
polish which is often fatal to every bold and original quality. Here they
connect themselves in societies, communicate indiscriminately with each other,
or with men of weaker minds, and thus debase themselves. Interest or habit,
accustom them to praise whatever they meet with in these societies, and so the
public is deceived. Is it worth while to undeceive it? All must live -- and to
live in peace, must avoid giving offense. Upon this principle, liberty,
character, and independence, are soon lost, and the cause of truth is served
only as it suits convenience.

Perhaps you will say that all this has been in print twenty times before --
granted; it has been twenty times true, is now so for the twenty-first time,
and is still necessary to be repeated, for the evil remains unreformed. It may
also be affirmed, that truth, virtue and reformation, are only to be expected
from the man who devotes himself to solitude and obscurity. Elevated ideas,
bold resolutions, in a word, great characters are formed in solitude; and what
can be expected from such a man, but severity of censure, which,
notwithstanding, is by no means incompatible with kindness or urbanity. Authors
should be friendly when they meet, should cherish and assist each other in
cases of necessity, and bestow their applauses when merited; but they should
also openly, heartily and vigorously, oppose each other, when wrong. Thus Price
and Priestly, Kirwan and Cavendish, now treat each other in England. They are
friends as far as is consistent with truth. Thus the patriot Jebb, treated the
celebrated Charles Fox. Although intimately connected with him in private life,
he warmly opposed him in his writings, and in all public assemblies.

These are the examples I proposed to myself for imitation. Whenever
opportunity offered, I have paid a just tribute of esteem to your useful
treatise de la Felicite Public; I cannot therefore be suspected of prejudice
in this reply to your satires upon the Quakers, the Negroes, and the dignity of
man. They excited concern and indignation in my breast: I have expressed what I
felt; if the warmth of my feelings has sometimes hurried me too far, ascribe it
to the importance of the object; but do not suspect me of a wish to offend you:
it always was and always will be far from my intention.

Notwithstanding, I have freely censured such parts of your travels as appeared
to me to deserve blame, or lead to destructive consequences, I am not the less
inclined to do justice to your interesting enquiries, and your just encomiums
upon those celebrated characters who have contributed to restore the freedom of
America. Is there a single Frenchman, or American, who will not review with
satisfaction the portraits of Washington Yet I am sorry to remark, even in this
passage, something so studied and formal, that it must damp the enthusiasm
which it ought to inspire.
, the learned Jefferson, and that gallant youth whom you so justly describe as
the hope of our nation, spes altera Romae, whose name will never be separated
from that of his friend and father Washington, in the annals of the United
States. These passages and some others almost equally interesting which relate
to the American generals, together with your anecdotes of the revolution,
stripped of the idle tales, scandalous stories, epigrams, puns, and mistaken
notions, would form a volume of valuable materials for the history of the
United States. No doubt the friends of liberty and humanity will join me in
encouraging you to present them with such a work: Ex fumo dare lucem -- this is
now incumbent upon you, and would be useful to the public, as well as honorable
to yourself.

PARIS, July 1 st, 1786.
POSTCRIPT.
I HAD just finished this letter, when a friend handed me the review of your
travels, which appeared in the Mercure of the first of July.

The following passage in which the Quakers are mentioned, struck me
particularly: "A conversation with one Mr. Benezet leads the author to speak of
the Quakers. Some think he has not done them justice. We also doubt whether his
reproaches may be generally deserved by them. The religious principles of these
people do not inspire them with bad morals, besides it appears improbable that
theirs should differ from those of their fellow-citizens, etc. etc."

I do not know the writer of this article. Whoever he was, it is astonishing
that he should take the liberty to speak in this contemptuous style of Mr.
Benezet and the Quakers. He could not be ignorant that the article one before a
proper name is never so applied in our language but to men of contemptible
characters: he could not be ignorant, that the expression those people, is
insulting and blends a body of valuable men with what we call the vulgar: If he
was not ignorant, how dared this journalist to make use of such expressions, to
describe an individual and a society who are equally respectable? Where is the
man in all Europe, of whatever rank or birth, who is equal to Benezet? who is
not obliged to respect him? How long will authors suffer themselves to be
shackled by the prejudices of society? Will they never perceive that nature has
created all men equal -- that wisdom and virtue are the only real criterion of
superiority? Now who was more virtuous than Benezet? who more useful to
society, to mankind? What author, what great man, will ever be followed to his
grave by four hundred Negroes, snatched, by his own assiduity, his own
generosity, from ignorance, wretchedness, and slavery? Who, then, has a right
to speak haughtily of this benefactor of men?

With respect to the Quakers, after having considered the abstract here given,
of their religious, moral and political principles, it must excite indignation,
to hear them described under the contemptuous appellation of those people.
Shall nothing be honored but titles, rank, or splendour? and will authors always
conspire with the favorers of aristocracy, to place the modest and simple
virtues below titles, to which they are infinitely superior? On looking over
what you say against the Quakers, I see with concern that you have not only
used a like expression of contempt yourself when speaking of Benezet, but that
you have even affected to thee and thou him in conversation. Permit me to make
a remark upon this subject, which escaped me before: It is a principle of the
Quakers, to reject those ceremonious expressions, which have been invented by
vanity or meanness. They cannot see any natural difference in their
fellow creatures, sufficient to authorize a distinction in their address or
deportment toward each other. The practice of saying you to a single person,
appears to them false and absurd. Whether they are right or wrong, in this
respect, it is equally certain, that plain language cannot be rude in them.
They use it among themselves, whatever relation they bear to each other: they
use it to every body. But it does not follow, that those who are not of their
sect, who have not their principles, or way of thinking, should speak in the
same style to them. It would not only be very impolite to do so, but a
misplaced familiarity: yet plain language is not a mark of familiarity in the
Quakers. Without departing from their thee and thou, they are careful to
acknowledge the respect due to merit, to age, and to authority; and are
decently reserved in their address to strangers. They know what good breeding
requires, and are pleased with respectful treatment as well as the rest of the
world: for they are at no loss to account for the affected plainness of those
whose manners and principles are not consistent with such behavior. It must
appear to them either a misplaced familiarity or the mistake of ignorance,
which being unable to comprehend the motive of their customs, thinks to flatter
them by a conformity to one of the least importance. Or indeed (as is most
commonly the cafe) from that contracted self-love which is mortified by such
bluntness, although it is universal and without respect of persons. In a word,
they are sensible that plainness of speech is not contemptuous in them, but
that it is so in other people, unless dictated by friendship or consanguinity.
There is another absurdity, sir, in this review: its author doubts the justice
of your charges against the Quakers, because, says he, their religious
principles do not inspire them with bad morals. As if any religious principles
inspired bad morals! -- as if all the members of a sect must necessarily be
honest men, because its principles are good! -- as if there had never been any
Protestant or Catholic rogues, because Protestant or Catholic principles do not
inculcate roguery! Contemptible argument! weak defense! only calculated to
confirm the public in the idea you give of the Quakers, which it is evident
that the fawning or cowardly author of this article did not care to oppose.

Such criticism is a disgrace to the man who undertakes to give the public the
true character of a book. He should be perfectly master of the subject it is
written upon. And, to return to the Quakers: if this writer must give his
opinion between you, he should have been well acquainted with Barclay's
Apology, and every other publication in their favor, but especially the
letters of M. St. John de Crevecoeur; or if he had never read them, he might
have confessed his ignorance, and kept his judgment to himself.

If I were inclined to discuss most of the other articles in this review, it
would be easy to demonstrate that almost all of them are stamped with the same
marks of frivolousness, ignorance, and adulation.

Every thing is praised down to the very table of contents, perhaps, because
your dinners and suppers are faithfully registered there, and not a single fact
is criticized, not a single idea I am astonished that he should suffer your
contemptuous expressions so liberally, and often unjustly bestowed, to pass
entirely unnoticed. For instance, I meet with the word 'babbler,' in three
different places, and it is misapplied in them all. A brave hatter is
stigmatized with it, who had forsaken every thing to defend the liberties of
his country, and after traveling four hundred miles on foot to join the
American forces, had distinguished himself by a gallant action. He relates it
to you very ingenuously, and you reward his civility with the opprobrious
epithets of babbler and braggart. It is applied in another place to a
respectable officer, who had taken care of a poor old man that was bitten by a
mad dog, and whose good qualities might have apologized for the failing if he
had been guilty of it, which does not appear to have been the case, And lastly,
you apply it to the good woman who sheltered the unhappy girl, whose story
ought not to have been exposed to the world, although this babbler, as you call
her, had prudence enough to answer your enquiries by replying that it would be
too tedious to relate. How many more such remarks might I have made! But they
were necessarily sacrificed to the important truths which I had pledged myself
to defend.
.

We must both agree, that people of quality and men of established reputation
have a sad privilege in France; it is that of receiving nothing but incense. As
criticism is never wholly free with respect to them, this incense is never
pure; and the disgrace of their works, so pompously announced, shows them
sooner or later, that encomiums obtained from meanness, by prudential
considerations, will not entitle them to the esteem of their own age, much less
to descend to posterity.

I must give you one instance, sir, of the pusillanimity of writers of the
lower class toward privileged authors: it relates to yourself.

I was lately in company, when the conversation turning upon your travels, an
author related, that not long since he could not help conceiting you frowned
upon him, at table, and asked the person who sat next him, what could be the
reason of it, who answered, M. Le Marquis de Chatellux believes you to be the
author of the article against his travels, in the Correspondence Litteraire
Secrette: he has been told that you write for it. For Heaven's sake undeceive
him directly; I have no hand in it; I did not write that article. Why need you
deny it so warmly? replied I; the work may deserve criticism. That may be,
rejoins my gentleman; but I would not attack M. de Chastellux; he has the ear
of M. de Montesquieu, who is in favor with Monsieur the King's brother: it
would be the ruin of me; I have a wife and children to provide for. Well, sir,
replied I, I am a father and a husband as well as you, but I will criticize
these travels, and that openly: for I have too good an opinion of M. le Marquis
de Chatellux not to believe, that if I should be persecuted for it (which but
to suppose, were absurd and injurious to the persons you mention) he would
himself be the first to defend me. Indeed it appears to me, that every
judicious man, who regards his own interest, should be of the opinion of
Lycurgus upon public discussions. This passage of Plutarch is so striking, and
you are so great a lover of antiquity, that I am tempted to transcribe it
entire.

The Spartan legislator, carefully strewed the seeds of ambition and jealousy
among the citizens of his commonwealth, to whom the administration of the
public affairs was entrusted, as an incentive to virtue -- choosing that such
men should always have something to canvass and controvert, among themselves;
being convinced that the slugglish, unmanly courtesy, with which men mutually
concede to, and pardon one another, is falsely called harmony: and some think
that Homer must have been of this opinion, or he would never have made
Agamemnon pleased to see Ulysses and Achilles quarrelling, if he had not
thought that strise and emulation among the principal men, caused them to have
a watchful eye upon each other, and tended to the public advantage. etc. etc.
Plutarch's Life of Agesilaus.

PARIS, July 20, 1786.

