AN APOLOGY FOR THE BAPTISTS IN WHICH THEY ARE VINDICATED FROM THE IMPUTATION
OF LAYING AN UNWARRANTABLE ST^^^^ ON THE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM, AND AGAINST THE
CHARGE OF BIGOTRY IN REFUSING COMMUNION AT THE LORD's TABLE TO PAEDOBAPTISTS.

BY ABRAHAM BOOTH.

There is -- on^ Baptism.

EPHESIANS. iv. They who are not rightly baptized, are, doubtless, not baptized at
all

TERTULLIAN. No unbaptized person communicates at the Lord's Table.

THEOPHYLACT. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE, IN
SECOND STREET. MDCCLXXXVIII.

THE PREFACE.
IT was not a fondness for controversy, but a desire to vindicate the honor of
Christ, as lawgiver in his own kingdom; to assert the scriptural importance of
a positive institution in the house of God; and to exculpate himself, together
with a great majority of his brethren of the Baptist persuasion, from charges
of an odious kind, that excited the author to compose and publish the following
pages. If these designs be answered, the writer obtains his end; and if not, he
has the testimony of his own conscience to the uprightness of his intentions.

As we are expressly commande^ to contend our ^estly for the Faith once
delivered to the saints; it can hardly be questioned, whether a sincere concern
for the purity and permanence of our Lord's appointments in the gospel church,
be not an indispensable duty. For they are no less the expressions of his
dominion over us, th^n of his love to (...) ^^less intended as means of his own
glory, than of our ^^ppiness. The subject, therefore, that is here-presented to
the reader's notice, though not of the greatest, yet is far from being of
little importance in the Christian religion.

It is entirely on the defensive that the author takes up his pen; for had not
the principles and practice of those professors who are invidiously called,
Strict Baptists, been severely censured, by many that maintain, and by some who
deny, the divine authority of Infant Baptism, these pages would never have seen
the light.

That He ^ho is King in Zion may reign in the hearts and regulate the worship
of all his professing people; that the Spirit of wisdom, of holiness, and of
peace, may dwell in all the churches of Christ; and that the same divine Agent
may direct the reader's inquiries after truth, engage his affections in the
performance of duty, and enable him to walk in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless; is the sincere desire and fervent prayer of
his willing servant in the gospel of Christ,

A. BOOTH.
GOODMAN'S FIELDS, March 3, 1778.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE BAPTISTS.
SECTION I. The Baptists not chargeable with laying an unwarrantable Stress on
the Ordinance of Baptism.
MANY reflections are cast on the Baptists, the various charges are laid
against them; reflections and charges of such a kind, as greatly impeach the
truth of their doctrinal principles, and the candor of their christian temper.
They are frequently represented by their Paedobaptist brethren, as uncharitably
rigid, as incorrigible bigots to a favorite opinion, and as putting baptism in
the place of our Lord's atoning blood and the sanctifying agency of the divine
Spirit. -- To give them epithets and load them with charges of this kind, the
generality of their opponents agree; whether they be members of our National
Establishment, or in the number of Protestant Dissenters.

But why such unfriendly surmises and bold accusations? What is there in our
principles or conduct that lays a foundation for such hard suspicions and such
severity of sen^^re? As to making baptism a substitute for a ^^^tonement of
Jesus Christ, and the sanctifying ^gency of the Holy Spirit, it is manife^tly
contrary to our avowed sentiments; so contrary, that all the world, one would
have thought, must agree to acquit us of such a charge. I speak of the
Particular Baptists. How far any of those who are called General Baptists, may
have given occasion for such imputations, I neither take upon me to affirm nor
deny.
For it is too notorious to admit a plea of ignorance in any of our opponents,
that we consider no one as a proper subject of that institution, who does not
profess repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; who does
not, in other words, appear to be in a state of salvation. Nay, so far from
making baptism a saving ordinance, we do not, we cannot consider any one as a
proper subject of it, who looks upon it in that light.

Yet were an imputation of this kind as just and pertinent, as it is groundless
and ungenerous; did we really ascribe a regenerating efficacy and saving
effects to that sacred appointment; we should hardly forbear concluding, that
these complaints and charges came with an ill grace from our brethren of the
Establishment; especially from the clergy, who have solemnly declared their
assent and consent to all that is contained in the book of Common Prayer. For
they, immediately after baptizing an infant, address first the people, and then
the omniscient God, in the following remarkable words; Seeing dearly beloved
brethren, that this child IS REGENERATE and grafted into the body of Christ's
church, let us give thanks to Almighty God for these benefits -- We yield thee
hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee to REGENERATE
this infant with thy Holy Spirit, to receive him for THINE OWN CHILD by
adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy church -- Thus the clergy most
solemnly profess to believe, when they administer baptism to infants. And, when
giving catechetical instructions to children, they inculcate on their tender
minds the same things, as truths and facts of great importance. For thus they
interrogate each young catechumen, and thus they teach him to answer. Who gave
you this name? My Godfathers and Godmothers in my baptism, WHEREIN I WAS MADE a
member of Christ, a child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven.
How many sacraments has Christ ordained in his church? Two only, as GENERALLY
NECESSARY TO SALVATION, that is to say; baptism and the supper of the Lord.
What is the inward and spiri^^al grace? [i. e. of baptism^] A death unto sin,
and a new birth unto righteousness; for, being by nature born in sin, and the
children of wrath, we are HERDBY MADE the children of grace See the (...) for
Public Baptism, of Infants, and the Catechism. Wh^^ (...) the doctrine here
advanced be consistent with the ^^^timents of Protestant Paedobaptists in
general, or calculated to instruct the ignorant and edify believers, I must
leave the reader to judge. I will take the liberty however, of subjoining a
quotation from the celebrated WITSIUS, and another from the no less excellent
Dr. OWEN, relating to this point. The former thus expresses himself: Communio
cum Christo et corpore ipsius mystico in electis infantibus baptismum
antecedere videtur; saltem judicio charitatis. Paedobaptismo enim UTI
FUNDAMENTUM substruitur. Hoc quippe argumento passim pugnatur ab orthodoxis: ad
quos pertinet foedus gratiae, et commun^^ Christi, atque ecclesiae, et quorum
est regnum coelorum, eos oportet baptizari. Atqui haec omnia infantibus
electis, et ^o^der^^^e competunt. -- BODIUS Roman^e ecclesiae doctores in
gravissimo errore versarl ^u^tmat, qu^^^ statount baptizandos, priusquam ho^
signac^^^ obsigneatur. Christi membra no^ esse, ad o^^s corpas et communionem
non pertinere, sed tum demum e potestate diaboli liberari, inque Christi
familiam tran^^e. Mise^ Sac. Tom. II. Exercit. XIX. * XXI. -- The latter thus:
Neque fane dogma pernitiosius, a^^ quod peccat^^un animis praesentius veneaum
propinaret, facile excogitaret ipse-mendaciorum pa^er. Dum c^m miseri homines
mortui peccatis sibi adblandiuntur quod in baptismo renati suerint, atque in
utranique aurem ^tio^e dormiant; nece^^itatem absoluta^^ et indispensabile^
spiritualis totius hominis renovationis susque deque habeates, statum suum
miserri^um aghosot ae, et ad gratium Christi vivisteantem confug^^^e negligunt
atque ita: pernitiosissima secu^it (...) sop^ti* aeter^^^^ pereunt. Th^ol^g^^m.
l. vi^. c. v. p. 179^ 478.
Thus children are taught by the parish minister; and in the firm persuasion of
these t^ings they are confirmed by the bishop. For, immediately before he lays
upon them his episcopal hand, he recognizes, in a solemn address to God, the
great blessings supposed to be conferred and received by them at the time of
their baptism. Thus he prays; Almighty and ever living God, who have vouchsafed
to REGENERATE THESE THY SERVANTS by water and the Holy Ghost, and have given
unto them FORGIVENESS OF ALL THEIR SINS' --.And, after imposition of hands; We
make our humble supplications unto thee [the divine Majesty] for these thy
servants, upon whom (after the example of thy holy apostles) we have now laid
our hands, to CERTIFY THEM (by this sign) OF THY FAVOR AND ORACIOUS GOODNESS
TOWARD THEM. Once more; As the church of England suggests a painful doubt,
relating to the final happiness of such infants as die without baptism; so she
absolutely forbids her Burial Service to be read over any who die unbaptized;
placing them, in this respect, on a level with those that die under a sentence
of excommunication for the most enormous crimes, or are guilty of felo de se.
For thus she instructs her members, and thus she directs her ministers: It is
certain by God's word, ^^at children which are baptized, dying before they
commit actual sin, are undoubtely sa^^^ -- Here it is to be NOTED, that the
office ensuing [i. e. the burial office] is not to be used for any that die
UNBAPTIZED, (...) EXCOMMUNICATE, OR HAVE LAID VIOLENT HAND^ UPON THEMSELVES.
Order for Cons^^^ation Ru^^^c, at the conclusion of the office for Public
^^^^ism of Infants, and R^^ri^ prefixed to Order for Burial of the Dead.
Nay, so confident is our National Church of these things being agreeable to
the word of God, that she boldly pronounce^ the following sentence on all who
^^^e to call them in question: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the form
of God's worship contained in the book of Common Prayer, and administration of
the sacraments, contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the scriptures,
let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the bishop of the
place, or archbishop, after his repentance and public revocation of such his
wicked errors. Constit^^ions and Cononi^ No. IV. -- While hearing the thunder
of this Canon Ecclesiastical I am reminded of that an ^^hematizing decree
established by the Council of Trent: Si quis dixerit baptismum liberum esse,
hoc est no^ ^^cessa^^^m ad salutem mathema sit. Sess. VII. Can. V. That is, If
any one ^^all assert, that baptism is free, (...) not necessa^^ (...)
salvation, let him be accursed.
Thus our National Church teaches, and thus her clergy profess, most solemnly
profess to believe. Consequently, were we really chargeable with representing
baptism as a saving ordinance, our brethren of the establishment could not,
consistently, lodge a complaint against us on that account.

If we consult the writings of the most eminent preachers among the Methodists
we shall find, that their sentiments harmonize with the doctrine of the
National Church, in regard to the efficacy and absolute necessity of baptism.
The late pious and extensively useful Mr. George Whitefield, thus expresses his
views of the subject before us; Does not this verse [ John iii. 5] urge the
absolute necessity of water baptism? Yes, when it may be had; but how God will
deal wi^^ persons unbaptized we cannot tell. What have we to do to judge those
that are without. Works, Vol. iv. p. 355, 356.
-- Our ministering brethren of the Tabernacle have sometimes taken the liberty
of making reflections upon us, as if our opinion relating to baptism greatly
entrenched on the offices and honor of Jesus Christ. Had they met with
language and sentiments like these in any of our publications, especially in
those of the late Dr. Gill; they would, undoubtedly, have thought themselves
fully warranted in using their utmost efforts to expose the dangerous error,
and to guard their hearers against us, as making a savior of baptism. But
while some of them, being Conformists, have solemnly professed their cordial
consent to the various articles contained in the book of Common Prayer and
administration of the sacraments, and while they all unite in revering the
character of the late Mr. Whitefield; they could not be either candid or
consistent in condemning us, were we really chargeable with representing
baptism as necessary to salvation. What, then, must we think of their conduct,
when there is no proof, nor the least shadow of proof, that we have ever done
any such thing? -- As I have a sincere and high regard for many who preach the
gospel and unite in public worship at the Tabernacle, and as it is my earnest
prayer that a divine blessing may attend them; so it would give me real
pleasure to find, that they who fill the pulpit in that place, are more
cautious in censuring the Baptists, and more consistent with their loud
professions of candor and a catholic spirit; lest, through a mistake, they be
still culpable of bearing false witness against their brethren.

Mr. John Wesley, enumerating the benefits we receive by being baptized, speaks
in the following language: By baptism we enter into covenant with God, into
that everlasting covenant, which he has commanded for ever. By baptism we are
admitted into the church, and consequently made members of Christ, its head. --
By baptism we, who were by nature children of wrath, are made the children of
God. And this regeneration is more than barely being admitted into the church.
-- By water, then, as a means, the water of baptism, we are regenerated or born
again. Baptism does now save us, if we live answerable thereto; if we repent,
believe, and obey the gospel. Supposing this, as it admits us into the church
bore, so into glory hereafter -- If infants are guilty of original sin, in the
ordinary way, they cannot be saved, unless this be washed away by baptism.
Preservative, p. 146 -- 150.
So Mr. Wesley teaches; so, says a learned cardinal, the church has always
believed Semper Ecclesia credidit, infantes perire, si a^sque Baptismo de hac
vita recedant. Bellarm. apud Amesium, Bell. Enervat. Tom. III. p. 64.
; and the Council of Trent confirms the whole. In the firm persuasion of this
doctrine, Mr. Wesle^ is also desirous of settling the members of his very
numerous societies. For these positions are contained in a book, professedly
intended to preserve the reader from unsettled notions in religion. Now, as I
cannot suppose this author imagines, with Dodwell, that infants who are without
baptism, are not immortal; I know not whether he chooses to lodge them in the
limbus puerorum of the Papislo Forbesii Instruct. Hist. Theolog, p. 493.
; or whether, with Austin, he consigns them over to eternal damnation; though
the one or the other must be the case. For, that millions die without baptism,
is an undoubted fact; and that God in favor of such, should be frequently
departing from the ordinary method of his divine procedure, much oftener
departing from, than acting according to it, is hard to conceive; is absolutely
incredible, as it involves a contradiction. Yet, on Mr Wesley's principles, it
must be so, if the generality of those that have died, since baptism was
instituted, be not excluded the kingdom of heaven. For he who considers what
multitudes of Jews and Heathens have peopled the earth, ever since the
Christian dispensation commenced; what an extensive spread Mahomet's imposture
has had for more than eleven hundred years; and what numbers of infants die
without baptism, even in Christian countries, cannot but conclude, even
admitting Paedobaptism to have been practiced by the apostles, that a vast
majority of deceased infants have left the world without being baptized. Mr.
Wesley, it is well known, is a very warm defender of general redemption. He
must. consequently, believe, that those infants who die without baptism, were
as really redeemed by the death of Christ, as those that have the ordinance
administered to them. In regard, therefore, to all that perish for want of
baptism, it should seem, on his principles, as if our divine Lord we^^^^cis
careful to provide an administrator to confer an ordinance, than to offer a
propitiatory sacrifice; and more sparing of a little water, than of his owm
blood: even though he knew the latter would be of no avail, in millions of
instances, without the former. But whether such sentiments be agreeable to the
scriptures, or honorable to our Lord's atonement, the reader will be at no
loss to determine.
Now who could suppose an author and a preacher, that asserts the efficacy and
exalts the importance of baptism at this extravagant rate, should charge the
Baptists with placing an unlawful dependence on that ordinance? Yet, that he
has frequently done so, in his pulpit discourses, if not in his numerous
publications, is beyond a doubt; is known to thousand^. Where, then, are his
consistency, his candor, his catholic spirit!

Nor are we conscious of attributing any degree of importance to Baptism, which
our Paedobaptist Dissenting brethren do not allow, and for which they do not
plead. Do we consider it as a divine appointment, as an institution of Christ,
the administration and use of which are to continue to the end of the world? So
do they. Do they consider it as an ordinance which, when once rightly
administered to a proper subject, is never to be repeated? So do we. Do we look
upon it as indispensably necessary to communion at the Lord's table? So do
they. Do we actually refuse communion to such whom we consider as unbaptized?
So do they. No man, I presume, if considered by them as not baptized, would be
admitted to break bread at the Lord's table, in any of their churches; however
amiable his character, or how much soever they might esteem him in other
respects.

Nor is this a new opinion, or a novel practice* for such has been the
sentiment and such the conduct of the Christian church in every age. Before the
grand Romish apostasy, in the very depth of that apostasy, and since the
Reformation, both at home and abroad; the general practice has been, to receive
none but baptized persons to communion at the Lord's table. The following
quotations from ancient and modern writers, relating to this point, may not be
improper. Justin Martyr, for instance, when speaking of the Lord's supper,
says; This food is called by us, the Eucharist; of which it is not lawful for
any to partake, but such as believe the things that are taught by us to be
true, and have been baptized. Apolog. II. p. 162. Apud Suicerum, These. Ecclesi.
Tom. II. col. 1135.
-- Jerome; "Catechumens cannot communicate" i. e. at the Lord's table, they
being unbaptized. Catechumeni -- communicare non possunt. In cap. VII. Epist.
II. ad Corinth.
-- Austin, when asserting the absolute necessity of infants receiving the
Lord's supper, says; 'Of which, certainly, they cannot partake, unless they be
baptized.' Quod nisi baptizati non utique possunt. Epis^ ad Bonifacium, Epist.
CVI.
-- B^de informs us, that three young princes among the eastern Saxons, seeing
a bishop administer the sacred supper, desired to partake of it, as their
deceased and royal father had done. To whom the bishop answered; If ye will be
washed, or baptized, in the salutary fountain, as your father was, ye may also
partake of the Lord's supper, as he did: but If you despise the former, ye
cannot in any wise receive the latter. They replied, We will not enter into the
fountain, or be baptized; nor have we any need of it; but yet we desire to be
refreshed with that bread. After which the historian tells us, that they
importunately requesting, and the bishop resolutely refusing them admission to
the holy table, they were so exasperated, as to banish both him and his out of
their kingdom. Si vultis ablui font illo salutari, quo pater vester, ablutus
est, potestis etiam panis sancti, [quem] participabat, esse participes. Sin
autem lavacrum vitae contemnitis, nullatenus va^^tis panem vitae participare.
At illi nolumus, inquiunt, fontem intrare, qui nec illo opus no^ habere
novimus, sed tamen pane illo refiei volumus. Cumque diligenter ac saepe ab illo
essent admoniti, ^equaquam fieri posse, ut absque purgatione sacrosancta quis
oblationi sacrosanctae communicet, ad ultimum furore commoti aiebant; Si non
vis assentire nobis in tam facili caufa quam petimus, non poteris jam in nostra
provincia demorari. Et expulerunt cum, ac de suo regno cum suis abire
juss^runt. Hist. Eceles. lib. II. cap. V. p. 63.
-- Theophylact; 'No unbaptized person partakes of the Lord's supper'. (...).
In cap. XIV. Matt. p. 83.
-- Bonaventure; Faith, indeed, is necessary to all the sacraments, but
especially to the reception of baptism: because baptism is the first among the
sacraments, and the door of the sacraments. Fidem quidem esse necessariam
omnibus sacramentis, sed specialiter appropriari baptismo: quoniam baptismus
est primum inter sacramenta et janua sacramentorum. Apud Forbesium, Instruct.
Historic. Theolog. lib. X. cap. IV. 9.


Quotations of this kind might, no doubt, be greatly multiplied: but that none
were admitted to the sacred supper in the first ages of the Christian church,
before they were baptized, we are assured by various learned writers, well
versed in ecclesiastical antiquity. For instance: Erid. Spanheimius asserts,
That none but baptized persons were admitted to the Lord's table'. Subjecta ad
eucharistiam admissa, soli baptizati. Hist. Christian. col. 623.
Lord Chancellor King; 'Baptism was always precedent to the Lord's supper; and
none were admitted to receive the eucharist, till they were baptized. This is
so obvious to every man, that it needs no proof.' Enquiry, Part II. p. 44.
-- Dr. Wall; 'No church ever gave the communion to any persons before they
were baptized -- Among all the absurdities that ever were held, none ever
mantained that, that any person should partake of the communion before he was
baptized. Hist. Infant Bap. part II. chap. IX.
-- Dr. Doddrige; It is certain that Christians in general have always been
spoken of, by the most ancient Fathers, as baptized persons: -- and it is also
certain, that as far a^^^ur knowledge of primitive antiquity reaches, no
unbaptized person received the Lord's supper. Lectures, p. 511.


That the Protestant churches in general have always agreed in the same
sentiment and conduct, is equally evident. Out of many eminent writers that
might be mentioned, the following quotations may su^^ce. Ursinus, for instance,
asserts; That they who are not yet baptized, should not be admitted to the
sacred supper. Nondum baptizati, ad coenam non sunt admittendi. Corp. Doct.
Christ. p. 566.
-- Ravenellius, when speaking of the Lord's supper, says; Baptism ought to
precede; nor is the holy supper to be administered to any, except they be
baptized'. Baptismus debet praecedere; coena vero nonnisi baptizatis est danda.
Bibliotheca Sacra, Tom. I. p. 301.
-- Zanchius; 'We believe that Baptism, as a sacrament appointed by Christ, is
absolutely necessary in the church'. Credimus baptismum in ecclesia omnino
necessarium esse tanquam sacramentum a Christo institutum. Opera. Tom. VIII.
col. 516.
-- Hoornbeekius; 'No one is admitted to the sacred supper, unless be is
baptized. Nemo ad coenam admittitur, nisi baptizatus. Socin. Confut. Tom. III.
p. 416.
-- Turrettinus; 'It is one thing to have a right to those external ordinances
of the church, which belong to a profession; and it is another to be interested
in the internal blessings of says. Unbaptized believers have actually a right
to these, because they are already partakers of Christ and his benefits; though
they have not yet a right to those, except in observing the appointed order, by
baptism'. Aliud jus habere ad sacra ecclesiae, quae ad professionem referuntur:
Aliud ad interna fidei. Catechumeni credeutes actu jus habent ad ista, quia jam
participes sunt Christi et beneficiorum ejus; licet nondum habaent jus ad illa,
nisi ordine sevato et posito baptismo. Institut. Theolog. Tom. III. Loc. XVIII.
Quaest. IV.. 10.
Mastricht; 'As no uncircumcised male was admitted to the typical supper, that
is the passover; so, under the New Testament, no unbaptized person is admitted
to the Lord's table. Ad coenam typicam, h. e. ad pascha, non admittebatur ullus
-- praeputiatus, Exodus xii. 40. sicut sub N. T. non admittitur non-baptizatus,
Act. ii. 41, 42. Theolog. lib. VII. cap. V.. 29.
-- Leydecker; Baptism is necessary, not only in a way of expediency, but by
virtue of a divine precept. They, therefore, who reject it, reject the counsel
of God against themselves'. Baptismus necessarius est necessitate praecepti,
non solum expedientiae. Quare, qui cum rejiciunt, concilium Dei adversus se
ipsos rejiciunt. Idea Theolog. p. 225.
-- Benedict. Pictetus; The supper of our Lord ought not to be administered to
persons that are unbaptized: for before baptism, men are not considered as
members of the visible church.' Non debet administrari coena -- non baptizatis;
nam ante baptismum non censentur homines esse in ecclesia. Theolog. Christiana,
p. 959, 960.
-- Mar^^ius; 'The dying, and the unbaptized, are not to be admitted to
communion'. Ad communionem hanc admittendi sunt, non -- expirantes, aut non
baptizati. Christ. Theolog. Medulla, p. 406.
-- Dr. Manton; In foro ecclesiae, before the church, none but baptized persons
have a right to the Lord's table. Sapplem. Morn. Exercis. p. 199.
-- Mr. Baxter; If any should be so impudent as to say, it is not the meaning
of Christ, that baptizing should immediately, without dela^, follow discipling,
they are confuted by the constant example of scripture. So that I dare say,
that this will be out of doubt with all rational, considerate, impartial
Christans. Plain Scripture Proof. p. 126.
-- Once more: Dr. Doddridge, thus expresses his views of the subject. The law
of Christ requires that all who believe the gospel should be baptized -- For
any to abstain from baptism, when he knows it is an institution of Christ, and
that it is the will of Christ that he should subject himself to it, is such an
act of disobedience to his authority, as is inconsistent with true faith. --
How excellent soever any man's character is, he must be baptized before he can
be looked upon as completely a member of the church of Christ. Lectures, p.
508, 512. Discourses on Regen. Postscript to Pref. p. 12, 13.


Perfectly conformable to these testimonies, are the Catechisms and Confession
of faith, that have been published at any time, or by any denomination of
Christians: for if the positive in^^itutions of Christ be not entirely omitted,
baptism is not only always mentioned first; but generally mentioned in such a
way, as intimates that it is a prerequisite to the Lord's table. And so, even
in our common forms of speaking, if we have occasion to mention both those
solemn appointments of our Lord, baptism still has the priority. Thus
generally, thus universally, is it allowed, that baptism is necessary to
communion at the Lord's table. -- Nay, many of our Protestant Dissenting
brethren consider the ordinance in a more important light than we. For they
frequently represent it, as a seal of the covenant of grace; as a mean of
bringing their infant offspring into covenant with God; and some of them
severely censure us, for leaving our children to the uncovenanted mercies of
the Most High, merely because we do not baptize them. Expressions and
sentiments these, which we neither adopt nor approve; because they seem to
attribute more to the ordinance, than the sacred scriptures, in our opinion,
will warrant.

It appears, then, to be a fact, a stubborn, incontestable fact, that our
judgment and conduct, relating to the necessity of baptism in order to
communion, perfectly coincide with the sentiments and practice of our National
Church, and with all Paedobaptist churches in these kingdoms. Nor have I heard
of any such church now upon earth, with which we do not, in this respect,
agree: for none, of whom I have any intelligence, be their sentiments or modes
of worship whatever they may, in rega^d to other things, admit any to the
sacred supper (...) have not, in their opinion, been baptized. -- A^^^on the
other hand, when the importance of baptism co^^^ under consideration between us
and them, it is manifest, that both Conformist and Nonconformist Paedobaptists
in general, ascribe more to it than we, and place a greater dependence upon it.
Consequently, neither candor, nor reason, nor justice will admit that we
should be charged, as we have frequently been, with laying an unwarrantable
stress upon it.

The point controverted between us and our Paedobaptist brethren is not,
Whether unbaptized believers may, according to the laws of Christ, be admitted
to communion; for here we have no dispute; but, What is baptism, and who are
the proper subjects of it? In the discussion of these questions there is,
indeed, a wide and a very material difference; but in regard to the former we
are entirely agreed. -- Why, then, do our brethren censure us as uncharitably
rigid, and incorrigible bigots? The principal reason seems to be this: They, in
general, admit, that immersion in the name of the triune God, on a profession
of faith in Jesus Christ, is baptism, real baptism* while our fixed and avowed
persuasion will not permit us to allow, that infant sprinkling, The reader is
desired to observe, that when I make use of the phrase ^nfant sprinkling, or
any expression of a similar import, it is merely by way of distinction without
annexing any secondary, or obnoxious idea to it.
though performed with the greatest solemnity, is worthy of the name.
Consequently, though they, consistently with their own principles, may receive
us to communion among them, yet we cannot admit them to fellowship with us at
the Lord's table, without contradicting our professed sentiments. For it
appears to us, on the most deliberate inquiry, that immersion is not a mere
circumstance, or a mode of baptism, but essential to the ordinance: so that, in
our judgment, he wh^^ (...) immersed, is not baptized. This is the prin^^^^^
which we proceed, in refusing communion to our P^^debaptist brethren; whom, in
other respects, we highly esteem, and toward whom we think it our duty to
cultivate the most cordial affection. -- Nor can we suppose but they would act
a similar part, were they in our situation. Were they fully persuaded, for
instance, that the great Head of the church had not commanded, nor any way
authorized, his ministering servants to require a profession of faith prior to
baptism; and were they equally certain that the ordinance never was
administered by the apostles to any but infants, nor in any other way than that
of aspersion, or pouring; would they not look upon the immersion of professing
believers as a quite different thing from baptism? And, were this the case,
would they not consider us as unbaptized, and refuse to have communion with us
on that account? I am persuaded they would, notwithstanding their affection for
any of us, as believers in Jesus Christ. Consequently, if we be really culpable
in the eyes of our brethren, it is for denying the validity of infant baptism;
not because we refuse communion to Paedobaptists -- for an error in our
judgment, which misleads the conscience; not for perverseness of temper, or a
want of love to the disciples of Christ.

Nor was the Lord's supper appointed to be a test of brotherly love among the
people of God; though several objections that are made against us, seem to
proceed on that supposition. It must, indeed, be allowed, that as it is a
sacred feast and an ordinance of divine worship, mutual Christian affection,
among communicants at the same table, is very becoming and highly necessary;
and so it is in all other branches of social religion. But that sitting down at
the holy supper should be considered as the criterion of my love to
individuals, or to any Christian community, does not appear from the word of
God. No, the supper of our Lord was designed for other and greater purposes. It
was intended to teach and exhibit the most interesting of all truths, and the
most wonderful of all transactions. The design of the Great Institutor was,
that it should be a memorial of God's love to us, and of Immanuel's death for
us: that, the most astonishing favor ever displayed; this, the most stupendous
fact that angels ever beheld. Yes, the love of God, in giving his dear, his
only Son; and the death of Christ, as our divine substitute and propitiatory
sacrifice, are the grand objects we are called to contemplate at the Lord's
table. -- As to a proof, a substantial proof of our love to the children of
God, it is not given at so cheap and easy a rate, as that of sitting down with
them, either accasionally or statedly, at the holy table. Numbers do that, who
are very far from loving the disciples of Christ, for the truth's sake. To give
real evidence of that heavenly affection, there must be the exercise of such
tempers, and the performance of such actions, as require much self-denial; and
without which, were we to commune with them ever so often, or talk ever so
loudly of candor and a catholic spirit; -- we should, after all, be destitute
of that charity, without which we are "nothing". The reader, therefore, will do
well to remember, that the true test of his love to the disciples of Christ,
is, not a submission to any particular ordinance of public worship; for that is
rather an evidence of his love to God and reverence for his authority; but
sympathizing with them in their afflictions; feeding the hungry, clothing the
naked, and taking pleasure in doing them good, whatever their necessities may
be. For this I have the authority of our final Judge, who will say o his
people; Come, ye blessed of my Father, for -- what? Ye have manifested your
love to the saints and your faith in me, by holding free communion at my table
with believers of all denominations? No such thing. But, I was an hungered, and
ye gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and ye
took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me.. Matt. xxv. 34 -- 40. Luke xiii. 25, 26, 27.


Our opponents often insinuate, that we are more zealous to establish a
favorite mode and make proselytes to our own opinion and party, than to
promote the honor of Jesus Christ and the happiness of immortal souls. Were
this the case, we should, indeed, be much to blame and greatly disgrace our
Christian character. But why are the Baptists to be thus represented? Do they
affirm that the kingdom of Christ is confined to them? that they only have the
true religion among them? and that, unless men are of their party, they will
not be saved? Do they wish success to none that are employed in the vineyard,
but themselves? or say of others, engaged in the same common cause, Master
forbid them, because they follow not with us? On the contrary, do they not
profess a warm esteem and affection for all those of whatever communion, who
love the Lord Jesus Christ, and aim to promote his cause in the world? and do
they not give proof of this, by holding a friendly correspondence with them as
opportunities offer; and by cordially joining them in occasional exercises of
public worship? It is not the distinguishing tenet of Baptism, how much soever
they wish it to prevail, that is the main band that knits them in affection to
one another: it is the infinitely nobler consideration of the relation they
stand in to Christ as his disciples. They hope therefore to be believed when
they declare, that they most cordially embrace in the arms of Christian love
the friends of Jesus, who differ from them in this point; and to be further
believed when they add, that they hold the temper and conduct of the furious
zealot for Baptism, who fails in his allegiance to Christ, and in the charity
he owes his fellow Christians, in sovereign contempt. Dr. Stennett's Answer to
Mr. Addington, Part II. p. 284. 285.


Nor are they who plead for infant baptism the only persons under whose censure
the generality of us have the unhappiness to fall. So very peculiar is our
situation, that some even of our Baptist brethren, charge us with being too
strict and rigid, because we do not receive Paedobaptists into communion; a
practice which they have adopted and warmly defend. Nay, some of them have
boldly declared, that our conduct by refusing so to do, is greatly prejudicial
to the honor and interest of ^rue religion, and not a little contributing to
the cause of infidelity. Candidus and Pacificus, in their Modest Plea for free
Communion.
This, it must be allowed, is a home thrust. We have need, consequently, to be
provided with armor of proof; with Robar et ^^s triplex. Especially,
considering, that this charge is laid against us, by two of our brethren, under
those respectable characters, The Candid, and The Peaceful. For when such
amiable and venerable personages as Candor and Peace, unite in preferring a
bill of indictment against a supposed offender, the grand jury can hardly
forbear prejudging the cause, by finding it a true bill, before they have
examined so much as one witness on either side. -- Mr. Bunyan also, who
zealously pleaded the cause of free communion, when it was yet in its infancy,
and who entitled one of his publications in defense of his favorite
hypothesis, Peaceable principles and true; did not fail to charge his Baptist
brethren, who differed from him in that particular, in a similar way. Yes,
notwithstanding Mr. Bunyan's candid, catholic, peaceable principles; and though
he was, at that very time, pleading for candor, catholicism, and peace, in the
churches of Christ; he draws up a long list of hateful consequences, and
charges them to the account of his brethren's conduct, merely because they did
not admit Paedobaptists into communion with them. The design of the following
pages, therefore, is to show, That we cannot receive Paedobaptists into
communion at the Lord's table, without doing violence to our professed
sentiments, as Baptists; and to answer the principal objections which these our
brethren have started against us. In doing of which, I shall argue with them on
their own principles, as Protestant Dissenters and Antipaedobaptists; which
kind of argumentation is always esteemed both fair and forcible, when rightly
applied.

My reader will not here expect a discussion of the mode and subject of
Baptism; for it is not that ordinance considered in itself, or as detached from
other appointments of Jesus Christ; but the order in which it is placed, and
the ^ennection in which it stands with the Lord's supper, that are the subject
of our enquiry. Nor will my Paedobaptist bre^^ren be offended, if I assume, as
truths and facts, things which are controverted between them and us: because I
do not here dispute with them, but with such as profess themselves Baptists,
yet practice free communion. And though I look upon the former as under a
mistake, in regard to baptism; I consider them as acting, not only
conscientiously but consistently with their own principles, in respect to that
ordinance: while I view the conduct of the latter, not only as contrary to the
order of the primitive Christian churches, but as inconsistent with their own
avowed sentiments; which disorder and inconsistency I shall now endeavor to
prove.

SECTION II. The general grounds on which we proceed, in refusing Communion at
the Lord's Table, to Paedobaptist believers -- Novelty of the Sentiment and
Practice of our Brethren, who plead for Free Communion: and the Inconsistency
of such a Conduct with their Baptist Principles.
THE following positions are so evidently true, and so generally admitted by
Protestant Dissenters, that they will not be disputed by those of our brethren
who plead for free communion.

Our divine Lord, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, is
perfectly well qualified to j^^^e, what ordinances are proper to be appointed,
and what measures are necessary to be pursued, in order to obtain the great
design of religion among mankind -- Being head over all things to the church,
he possesses the highest authority to appoint such ordinances of divine
worship, and to enact such laws for the government of his house, as are
agreeable to his unerring wisdom, and calculated to promote the important
objects he has in view; which appointments and laws must bind the subjects of
his government in the strictest manner -- Having loved the church to the most
astonishing degree, even so as to give himself a ransom for her; he must be
considered, as having made the wisest and the best appointments, as having
given the most salutary and perfect laws, with a view to promote her happiness,
and as means of his own glory -- These laws and ordinances are committed to
writing and contained in the Bible: which heavenly volume is the rule of our
faith and practice, in things pertaining to religion; our complete and only
rule, in all things relating to the instituted worship of God and the order of
his house. So that we should not receive any thing, as an article of our creed,
which is not contained in it: do nothing as a^part of divine worship, not
commanded by it; neither omit, nor alter any thing that has the sanction of our
Lord's appointment -- Nor have we any reason to expect, that our divine
Lawgiver and sovereign, Judge will accept our solemn services, any further than
we follow those directions which he has given, without addition, alteration, or
diminution. What thing soever I command you, observes to do it: thou shall not
add thereto, nor diminish from it; were the injunctions of Jehovah to the
an^^ent Israelitish church. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you; is the requisition of Jesus Christ, to all his ministering
servants Deuteronomy. xii. 32. Matt. xxviii. 20. -- Smith's Compend. Acc. of the Form
and Order of the Church, p, ^5, 16.


In the worship of God there cannot be either obedience or faith, unless we
regard the divine appointments. Not obedience; for that supposes a precept, or
what is equivalent to it. Not faith; for that requires a promise, or some
divine declaration. If, then, we act without a command, we have reason to
apprehend that God will say to us, as he did to Israel of old, "Who has
required this at your hand?" And, on the contrary, when our divine Sovereign
enjoins the performance of any duty, to deliberate is disloyalty; to dispute is
rebellion. -- Believers, who really attend to communion with Jesus Christ, says
a judicious author, do labor to keep their hearts chaste to him in his
ordinances, institutions, and worship. They will receive nothing, practice
nothing, own nothing, in his worship, but what is of his appointment. They know
that from the foundation of the world he never did allow, nor ever will, that
in any thing the will of the creatures should be the measure of his honor, or
the principle of his worship, either as to matter or manner. It was a witty and
true sense that one gave of the second commandment; Non imago, non simulachrum
prohib^tur; sed, non facies tibi. It is a making to ourselves, an inventing, a
finding out ways of worship or means of honoring God, not by him appointed,
that is so severely ^^^bidden'. -- Dr. Owen on Sommunion with God, p. 170.
To serve God otherwise than he requires, says another learned writer, is not
to worship, but to rob and mock him. In God's service, it is a greater sin to
do that which we are not to do, than not to do that which we are commanded.
This is but a sin of omission; but that a sin of sacrilege and high contempt.
In this we charge the law only with difficulty; but in that with folly. In this
we discover our weakness to do the will, but in that we declare our impudence
and arrogance to control the wisdom of God. In this we acknowledge our own
insufficiency; in that we deny the all sufficiency and plenitude of God's own
law -- We see the absurdity and wickedness of will worship, when the same man
who is to perform the obedience, shall dare to appoint the laws; implying a
peremptory purpose of no further observance than may consist with the allowance
of his own judgment. Whereas true obedience must be grounded on the majesty of
that power that commands, not on the judgment of the subject, or benefit of the
precept imposed. Divine laws require obedience, not so much from the quality of
the things commanded (though they be ever holy and good) as from the authority
of him that institutes them. Bp. Reynold's Works, p. 163, 422.


That the gospel should be preached in all nations for the obedience of faith;
and that, under certain restrictions, they who receive the truth, should be
formed into a church state, few can doubt: and it is equally clear, from the
foregoing positions, that it belongs to the supreme, royal prerogative of Jesus
Christ, to appoint the terms and conditions on which his people shall have a
place in his house and a seat at his table. For we cannot suppose, with any
appearance of reason, that these conditions are arbitrary; or such as every
distinct community may think fit to impose. No; a gospel church has no more
power to fix the terms of communion, or to set aside those prescribed by Jesus
Christ, than to make a rule of faith, or to settle ordinances of divine
worship. This is one characteristic of a church, a^ distinguished from a civil
society; the terms of admission into the latter are discretional; provided they
do not interfere with any divine law; but those of the former are fixed by him
who is King in Zion. No congregation of religious professors, therefore, has
any authority to make the door of admission into their communion, either
straiter, or wider, than Christ himself has made it Dr Ridgley's Body of
Divinity, p. 343. Glasgow Edition.
. -- The original form of this house, [i. e. the church of Christ] was not
precarious and uncertain; to be altered, and changed, and broke in upon by man,
or by any set of men, at pleasure. This would reflect on the wisdom and care,
as well as on the steadiness of Christ; who is in his house, as well as in the
highest heavens, the steady and the faithful Jesus; the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever, and not in the least given to change: but its form is fixed,
particularly in the New Testament. Had not Moses, nor any of the elders of
Israel, so much power over the tabernacle a^^ot to alter or change a pin
thereof? and with what face can man pretend to a power to model and alter at
pleasure gospel churches? As if Christ, the true Moses, had forgot, or
neglected, to leave with us the pattern of the house. Mr. Brag, (...) Church
Discipline, p. 9.


Baptism and the Lord's supper are positive appointments in the Christian
church, about which we cannot know any thing, relating to their mode of
administration, subject, or design, except from the revealed will of their
Great Institutor. For, as a learned writer observes, All positive duties, or
duties made such by institution alone, depend entirely upon the will and
declaration of the person, who institutes and ordains them, with respect to the
real design and end of them; and consequently, to the due (...) of performing
them. It behooves us, ther^^ (...) ^ell to consider the rule which our Lord ha^
given relating to these ordinances. Because we can have no other direction in
this so^ of duties; unless we will have recourse to mere invention, which makes
them our own institutions and not the institutions of those who first appointed
them. Bp. H^^dley's Pl^^n^^^cco^^^^, p. 3.


That there is a connection between the two positive institutions of the New
Testament, is manifest from the word of God; and that one of them must be prior
to the other, in order of administration, is evident from the nature of things:
for a person cannot be baptized and receive the sacred supper at the same
instant. Here, then, the question is, (if a doubt may be moved on a point so
evident, without affronting common sense) which of them has the previous claim
on a real convert's obedience? Baptism, or the Lord's supper? If we appeal to
the persu^^ (...) and practice of Christians in all nations and in every age,
it will clearly appear, that the former was univerfally considered, by the
churches of Christ That there were people of different denominations in the
second and third centuries, who pretended a regard to the name of Jesus Christ,
and yet rejected baptism, is readily allowed; but then, it may be observed,
that many of them had as little esteem for the Lord's supper. Nay, as a learned
writer asserts, the generality of them renounced the scriptures themselves. Nor
am I ignorant that Socinus, in the latter end of the sixteenth century,
considered baptism as an indifferent thing, except in reference to such as are
^^^^verted fro^^^ Judaism, Paganism, or Manome^^nism (...) but our brethren
with whom I am now concerned will hardly allow, that societies formed on the
principles of those ancient corrupters of Christianity, (...) yet on those of
S^inus, are worthy to be called, Churches of Christ. Vid. Suicerum, Thesour
Eccles. sub voce Ba^^io^d; and Dr. Wall's Hist, Inf. Bap. Part. II. Chap. V.
as a divinely appointed prerequisite for fellowship in the latter, till about
the middle of the last century, here in England; when some few of the Baptists
began to call it in question, and practically to deny it. This our brethren now
do, who defend and practice free communion. For they admit Paedobaptists to the
Lord's table; though, on their own principles, infant sprinkling is not baptism.

This appears from hence. That only is baptism which Christ appointed as such.
That, therefore, which essentially differs from what he appointed, cannot be
baptism. But they believe, as well as we, that Paedobaptism, as now practiced,
essentially differs from the appointment of Christ, both as to mode and
subject: yet a mode of administration, and a subject to whom it should be
administered, are necessary to the existence of baptism, as an ordinance of
Christ; for without these it is only an abstract notion. If, then, the proper
subject be a professing believer, and the appointed mode immersion in water,
which they maintain as well as we; it is not real baptism where these are
wanting. Agreeable to that saying, of an ancient writer: They who are not
rightly baptized, are, doubtless, not baptized at all Baptismum quum rite non
habeant, ^ine dubio non habent. Tertull. de Baptismo, cap. xv. page 230.
. -- But that our brethren do not consider infant sprinkling as having the
essentials of Christian baptism in it, is put beyond a doubt by their own
conduct. For they no more scruple to baptize professing believers, who have
been sprinkled in their infancy, than we do: and yet, I presume, they are not
very fond of being considered, or called, Anabaptists; which, notwithstanding,
is their proper character, if they allow that the aspersion of infants has the
essentials of baptism in it.

This, then, is a fact, a notorious, undeniable fact, that our brethren
practically deny the necessity of baptism in order to communion at the sacred
supper: for they do not, they cannot believe the aspersion of infants to be
Christian baptism, without rendering themselves obnoxious to the charge of
Anabaptism. A sentiment so peculiar, and a conduct so uncommon as theirs are,
in regard to this institution, require to be well supported by the testimony of
the Holy Ghost. For were all the Christian churches now in the world asked,
except those few that plead for free communion; whether they thought it lawful
to admit unbaptized believers to fellowship at the Lord's table? there is
reason to conclude they would readily unite in that declaration of Paul; We
have no such custom, neither the churches of God that were before us. Yes,
considering the novelty of their sentiment and conduct, and what a
contradiction they are to the faith and order of the whole Christian church; --
considering that it never was disputed, so far as I can learn, prior to the
sixteenth century, by orthodox or heterodox, by Papists or Protestants, whether
unbaptized believers should be admitted to the Lord's table; they all agreeing
in the contrary practice, however much they differed in matters of equal
importance; it may be reasonably expected, and is by us justly demanded, that
the, truth of their sentiment, and the rectitude of their conduct, should be
proved, really proved from the records of inspiration. A man may easily show
his fondness for novelty, and the deference he pays to his own understanding,
by boldly controverting the opinions and resolutely opposing the practice of
the wisest and the best of men in every age; but, if he would avoid the
imputation of arrogance, he must demonstrate, that the things he opposes are
vulgar errors, which have nothing to recommend them but great antiquity and
general custom. Our persuasion, therefore, concerning the necessity of baptism
as a term of communion, having had the sanction of universal belief and
universal practice for almost sixteen hundred years, it lies on our brethren to
prove that it is false and unscriptural; and to show, from the New Testament,
that theirs has the stamp of divine authority.

But is it not strange, strange to astonishment, if the scriptures contain
their sentiment, and vindicate their conduct, that it never was discovered by
any who acknowledged the proper Deity, the eternal dominion, and the complete
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, till the latter end of the last century? seeing,
long before then, almost every principle of the Christian faith, almost every
branch of Christian worship, had been the subject, either of learned, or
unlearned controversy, among such as thought themselves the disciples of Jesus
Christ. The Quakers arose, it is well known, about the time when this new
sentiment was first adopted in England; and they entirely renounced baptism, as
well as the Lord's supper. But, so far as appears, the people of that
denomination never supposed, that they who thought it their duty to celebrate
the sacred supper, were at liberty to do it before they were baptized. -- Here
I cannot but remark, with how little affection and reverence the positive
institutions and the authority of Christ were treated, in this island, in the
last century. The ingenious author of the Pilgrim's Progress was one of the
first, in this kingdom, who dared to assert, that the want of baptism is no bar
to communion, and acted accordingly. The Quakers arising a little before him,
proceeded a step further, and entirely cashiered both baptism and the Supper of
our Lord; looking upon them, as low, carnal, temporary appointments. Much
respect, I allow, is due to the character of Bunyan. He was an eminent servant
of Jesus Christ, and patiently suffered in his Master's cause. Many of his
writings have been greatly useful to the church of God, and some of them, it is
probable, will transmit his name, with honor, to future ages. But yet I cannot
persuade myself, that either his judgment or piety appeared in this bold
innovation. The disciples of George Fox, though less conformable to the word of
God, acted more consistently with their own principles, than did the justly
celebrated Dreamer then, or our brethren who practice free communion now.

But I forgot myself. The last century was the grand era of improvement in
this nation; of prodigious improvement in light and liberty. In light; as well
divine, as philosophical. In real philosophical science, by the labors of a
Bacon, a Boil, and a Newton. In pretended theological knowledge, by those of a
Jessey and a Bunyan. Did the former, by deep researches into the system of
nature, surprise and instruct the world by discoveries, of which mankind had
never before conceived? The latter, penetrating into the gospel system, amused
mankind, by casting new light on the positive institutions of Jesus Christ, and
by placing baptism among things of little importance in the Christian religion;
of which no ancient theologue had ever dreamed -- none, we have reason to
think, that loved the Lord Redeemer. In liberty; not less religious than civil;
in the church as well as the state. Did the struggles of real patriotism, and
the abdication of a Popish Prince, make way for true liberty in the latter? The
repealing of Christ's positive laws by Fox and Barclay, and the practical claim
of a dispensing power by Jessey and Bunyan, made way for the inglorious liberty
of treating positive institutions in the house of God just as professors please.

Some of the Popish missionaries among the Indians have been charged, by
respectable authorities, with concealing the doctrine of the cross from their
hearers, lest they should be tempted to despise the great Founder of the
Christian religion, because he made his exit on a gibbet; and with making it
their principal aim, to persuade the poor ignorant creatures to be baptized;
imagining that they would be sufficiently christianized, by a submission to
that ordinance. As if being baptized, and conversion to Jesus Christ, were one
and the same thing! What a destructive delusion this! What an impious
exaltation of a positive institution, into the place of redeeming blood, and
the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit! -- But were one of our ministering
brethren, who plead for free communion, to be sent as a missionary into those
parts of the world; he, I presume, would not be in the least danger of thus
over-rating baptism, and of depreciating its great institutor. No; he would
boldly preach a crucified and risen Jesus, as the only foundation of hope for
his hearers; and, if the energy of God attended his labors with considerable
success, he would think it his duty to lay before such as believed in Christ,
what he had learned from the New Testament, relating to a gospel church -- its
nature and ordinances, its privileges, duties, and great utility. In doing of
which, he could hardly forbear to mention baptism, as an appointment of his
divine Master: but though he might mention it, yet, on his hypothesis, he could
not require a submission to it, as previously necessary to their incorporating
as a church, and their having communion together at the Lord's table. He might,
indeed, recommend it to his young converts, as having something agreeable in
it; but if they did not see its propriety; or if, on any other account unknown
to him, they did not choose to comply, and yet were desirous of being formed
into a church state, and of having communion at the Lord's table; he could not
refuse, though not one of them was, or would be baptized. For if it be lawful
to admit the believer to communion, purely as a believer, and without baptism;
it cannot be criminal to admit all such, if they desire it: that which is
proper and right for one, being so to a million, if they be in the same
circumstances. Thus he would gather a church in perfect contrast with those
formed by his fellow missionaries. For, while they put baptism in the place of
the Savior, he would reject his command, and lay the ordinance entirely aside:
they make it all and he make it nothing. -- And were a narrative of such
proceedings to fall into the hands of a Paedobaptist, who had never heard of
any that practiced, or pleaded, for free communion, what a singular figure it
would make in his view! A minister of Jesus Christ, he would say, gathering a
church among the Indians, and administering the sacred supper, yet all his
communicants unbaptized! Strange, indeed! -- A Christian minister, called a
Baptist, entirely omitting that very ordinance from which he takes his
denomination! This is stranger still! For the Baptists, of all men, are said to
love water and to be fond of baptism. It exceeds the bounds of credibility:
but, if it be a fact, he is the oddest mortal and the most unaccountable
Baptist that ever lived. For he does violence to his own distinguishing
sentiment, and is guilty of Felo de se. Like Job's leviathan, he has not his
equal on earth: an unheard of phenomenon in the religious world, and will
probably be the wonder of ages yet unborn. But the ambiguity of his character
is such, that I ^ear the pen of ecclesiastical history will alays be doubtful
what to call him, or under what denomination of religious professors he claims
a place? Such would be the surprise and such the reflections of the learned and
the vulgar, who had not heard of Baptists that plead for free communion; they
being the only Christians now in the world, for aught appears, that are capable
of realizing such a report.

But were such a singular conduct warranted by the laws of Christ, or agreeable
to the truly primitive pattern; the surprise and the censure of weak, fallible
mortals, would be of little importance. For it is not the approbation of men,
but the revelation of God, that is our only rule in the administration of
divine institutions. To that revelation, therefore, we must appeal, and by it
the sentiment and practice, now in dispute, must stand or fall.

SECTION III. Arguments against Free Communion at the Lord's Table.
IT must, I think, be allowed, that the order and connection of positive
appointments in divine worship, depend as much on the sovereign pleasure of the
great legislator, as the appointments themselves: and if so, we are equally
bound to regard that order and connection, in their administration, as to
observe the appointments at all. Whoever, therefore, objects to that order, or
deviates from it, opposes that sovereign authority by which those branches of
worship were first instituted. -- For instance: Baptism and ^^e Lord's supper,
it is allowed on all hands, are (...) ordinances: and, as such, they depend for
their very existence on the sovereign will of God. Consequently, which of them
should be administered prior to the other, (as well as, to what persons, in
what way and for what end) must depend entirely on the will of their divine
Author. His determination must (...) their order; and his revelation must guide
our practice.

Here, then, the question is, Has our sovereign Lord revealed his will, in
regard to this matter? To the law and to the testimony -- How rea^^^t thou? To
determine the query, we may first consider the order of time, in which the two
positive institutions of the New Testament were appointed. That baptism was an
ordinance of God, that submission to it was required, and that it was
administered to multitudes, before the sacred supper was heard of, or had an
existence, are undeniable facts. There never was a time, since the ministry of
our Lord's forerunner commenced, in which it was not the duty of repenting and
believing sinners to be baptized. The venerable John, the twelve Apostles, and
the Son of God incarnate, all united in recommending baptism, at a time when it
would have been impious to have eaten bread and drank wine as an ordinance of
divine worship. Baptism, therefore, had the priority, in point of institution;
which is a presumptive evidence that it has, and ever will have, a prior claim
on our obedience. -- So, under the ancient economy, sacrifices and circumcision
were appointed and practiced in the patriarchal ages; in the time of Moses, the
paschal feast and burning incense in the holy place, were appointed by the God
of Israel. But (...) former, being prior in point of institution, always had
the priority in order of administration.

Let us now consider the order of words, in that commission which was given to
the ambassadors of Christ. He who is king in Zion, when asserting the plenitude
of his legislative authority, and giving direction to his ministering servants,
with great solemnity says; All power is given to me in heaven and earth. Go ye,
therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19, 20.
Such is the high commission, and such the express command, of Him who is Lord
of all, when addressing those that were called to preach his word, and
administer his institutions. -- Here, it is manifest, the commission and
command are, first of all to teach: then -- what? To baptize? or to administer
the Lord's supper? I leave common sense to determine. And, being persuaded she
will give her verdict in my favor, I will venture to add; A limited commission
includes a prohibition of such things as are not contained in it; and positive
laws imply their negative. For instance: When God commanded Abram to circumcise
all his males, he readily concluded, that neither circumcision, nor any rite of
a similar nature, was to be administered to his females. And, as our brethren
themselves maintain, when Christ commanded that believers should be baptized,
without mentioning any others; he tacitly prohibited that ordinance from being
administered to infants: so, by parity of reason, if the same sovereign Lord
commanded, that believers should be baptized -- baptized immediately after they
have made a profession of faith; then he must intend, that the administration
of baptism should be prior to a reception of the Lord's supper: and,
consequently, tacitly prohibits every unbaptized person having communion at his
table.

The order of administration in the primitive and apostolic practice, now
demands our notice. That the apostles, when endued with power from on high,
understood our Lord in the sense for which we plead, and practiced accordingly,
is quite evident. For thus it is written; Then they that gladly received his
word were" what? admitted to the Lord's table? No; but baptized. And the same
day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they continued
steadfastly in the apostle's doctrine and fellowship, in breaking of bread and
in prayer. Acts ii. 41, 42.
-- Now, in regard to the members of this first Christian church, either our
opponents conclude that they were all baptized, or they do not. If the latter,
whence is their conclusion drawn? Not from the sacred historian's narrative.
For thence we learn, that they whose hearts were penetrated by keen
convictions, were exhorted to be baptized -- that they who gladly received the
truth were actually baptized -- and that they who were baptized, and they only,
for any thing that appears to the contrary, were added to the church. Either,
therefore, our brethren must, in this case, infer without premises and conclude
without evidence; or they must have recourse to some divine declaration, not
contained in this context. But, in what book, in what chapter, in what verse is
any declaration found, relating to this church at Jerusalem, that can warrant
such a conclusion? -- If, on the other hand, our brethren allow, that all the
members of this truly apostolic church were baptized; then, either they
consider the constitution of it, in that respect, as expressive of the mind of
Christ, and as a model for succeeding churches, or they do not. If the former,
either Jesus Christ discovered some defect in that plan of proceeding, and, in
certain cases, countermanded his first order, or the conduct of our brethren
must be wrong; they admitting persons to communion, who; on their own
principles, are not baptized. But if they do not look upon this apostolic
precedent, as express;ive of the mind of Christ, and as a pattern for future
imitation to the end of the world; they must consider the apostles, either as
ignorant of our Lord's will, or as unfaithful in the performance of it.
Consequences these, which cannot be admitted, without greatly prejudicing the
honor and interest of true religion, and not a little contributing to the
cause of infidelity: for which reason they will, no doubt, be abhorred by all
our brethren.

Again: It is manifest from that first and most authentic history of the
primitive Christian church, contained in the Acts of the apostles; that after
sinners had received the truth and believed in Jesus Christ, they were exhorted
and commanded, by unerring teachers, to be baptized without delay. For thus we
read; Repent and be baptized every one of you -- When they believed Philip,
preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were baptized, both men and women -- And Philip said, If thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may. And he answered and said, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. And he commanded the chariot to stand
still: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and
he baptized him -- And was baptized, he and all his straightway -- Many of the
Corinthians, hearing, believed, and were baptized -- And now, why tarriest
thou? Arise and be baptized -- Can any man forbid water, that these should not
be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost, as well as we? And he
commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Acts ii. 38. viii. 12,
37. xvi. 33. xviii. 8. xxii. 16, x. 47.
-- Hence it is abundantly evident, that baptism, in those days, was far from
being esteemed an indifferent thing; and equally far from being deferred, till
the Christian converts had enjoyed communion at the Lord's table for months and
years. Yes, it appears with the brightest evidence, that a submission to
baptism was the first, the very first public act of obedience, to which both
Jews and Gentiles were called, after they believed in Jesus Christ. And it is
equally clear, from the last of those passages here transcribed, that the
highest evidence of a person's acceptance with God, though attended with the
baptism of the Holy Spirit in the bestowal of miraculous gifts, was so far, in
the account of Peter, from superseding the necessity of a submission to the
ordinance of baptism; that he urged the consideration of those very facts, as a
reason why they who were so blessed and honored should submit to it
immediately. Consequently, while our brethren revere the authority by which the
apostles acted, and while they believe that infant sprinkling is not baptism;
they are obliged, in virtue of these ancient precedents, and by all that is
amiable in a consistent conduct, to admit none to communion at the Lord's
table, whom they do not consider as really baptized according to the command of
Christ -- Nor have we the least reason to believe that the apostles were
invested with a discretional power, to alter our Lord's institutions as they
might think proper; either as to mode, or subject, or their order and
connection one with another. No; they never pretend to any such power; they
utterly disclaim it. Let us hear the declaration of one, as the language of
all, and that in regard to the sacred supper. "I have received of the Lord,
that which also I delivered unto you." And again, relating to his doctrine in
general, when writing to the same people and in the same epistle, he says; I
delivered unto you that which I also received 1 Cor. xi, 23. xv. 3.
. The apostles being only servants in the house of God, had no more authority
to alter or dispense with an ordinance of Jesus Christ, than any other minister
of the word. Their apostolic gifts and powers did not at all invest them with a
right of legislation in the kingdom of their divine Lord. They were still but
stewards; as such they claimed regard from the churches, in which they labored
and to which they wrote: at the same time freely acknowledging, that it was
their indispensable duty to "be found faithful" in the whole extent of their
office; they being accountable to the great Head of the church. They acted,
therefore, in the whole compass of their duty, under the command, and by the
direction of the ascended Jesus. Nay, the more they were honored and blessed
by him, the more were they bound to obey the least intimation of his will.

Once more: If we regard the different signification of the two institutions it
will appear, that baptism ought to precede. In submitting to baptism, we have
an emblem of our union and communion with Jesus Christ, as our great
representative, in his death, burial and resurrection: at the same time
declaring, that we reckon ourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive to
God; and that it is our desire, as well as our duty, to live devoted to him.
And as, in baptism, we prosess to have received spiritual life; so in
communicating at the Lord's table, we have the emblems of that heavenly food by
which we live, by which we grow, and in virtue of which we hope to live for
ever. And as we are born of God but once, so we are baptized but once: but as
our spiritual life is maintained by the continued agency of divine grace, and
the comfo^t of it enjoyed by the habitual exercise of faith on the dying
Redeemer, so it is our duty and privilege frequently to receive the holy
supper. Hence theological writers have often called baptism, the sacrament of
regeneration, or of initiation; and the Lord's supper, the sacrament of
nutrition. -- Whether, therefore, we consider the order of time, in which these
two institutions were appointed; or the order of words, in the great commission
given by our Lord to his ministering servants; or the order of administration
in the apostolic practice; or the different signification of the two solemn
appointments, a submission to baptism ought ever to precede a reception of the
Lord's supper. Or, should any one question the validity of this inference, I
would only ask; Whether, in regard to the sacred supper he might not as well
deny the necessity of always blessing the bread, before it be broken; or of
breaking the bread, before it be received; or of receiving the bread, before
the wine? Or, by what better arguments, he would prove the opposite conduct,
either unlawful or improper? Nay, if these declarations, and facts, and
precedents, be not sufficient to determine the point in our favor; it will be
exceedingly hard, if not impossible, to conclude with certainty, in what order
any two institutions that God ever appointed, were to be administered. For,
surely, that order of proceeding which agrees with the time in which two
institutions were appointed; with the words in which the observation of them
was enjoined; with the first administration of them by unerring teachers; and
with their different signification, must be the order of truth, the order of
propriety, and the order of duty, because it is the order of God. And our
brethren will do well to remember, that when Paul commends the Corinthians for
keeping the ordinances as they were delivered to them; it is plainly and
strongly implied, that divine ordinances are given us to keep; that they who
keep them as they were instituted, are to be commended; and that they who do
not keep them at all, or observe them in a different order or manner from that
at first appointed, are worthy of censure. Nor is the order in which the two
positive institutions of Jesus Christ should be administered, less clearly
expressed in the New Testament, than the mode and subject of baptism. This,
however, is a notorious fact, that while the latter have been much and warmly
disputed, the former does not appear to have been ever called in question by
the real disciples of Christ; except in the conduct of those few that plead for
free communion. They, indeed, practically deny that which appears clear as the
sun, to all other Christians, by frequently admitting persons to the Lord's
table, and baptizing them afterward: for they do not refuse to baptize their
Paedobaptist m^mbers, if they desire it, though they may have been (...)
f^^lowship with them for ten, or twenty, or fifty ye^rs. -- But have not -- I
appeal to the understanding and the conscience of my brethren themselves; --
have not the Paedobaptists as good a warrant for their practice, as you have
for inverting the plain, the established, the divinely appointed order, in
which the two positive institutions ought to be administered? They baptize and
then teach; you administer the sacred supper and then baptize. They baptize
thousands whom they never admit to the Lord's table; you receive to that sacred
ordinance numbers who, on your own principles, never were, nor ever will be
baptized. Do they argue in defense of their practice and endeavor to prove
their point, not by express commands, or plain facts, recorded in the New
Testament; but by inferences, and that, sometimes, from such passages of holy
writ, as have not, in our opinion, any relation at all to the subject? so do
you. For it is not pretended, that there is any express command to receive
unbaptized believers into communion; and as to a plain precedent, our brethren
are equally silent. The whole of their arguing, therefore, must be either
analogical or inferential. Yet the design of it is to show, what is our duty in
regard to a positive institution; an appointment about which we cannot know any
thing at all, but from revelation. But what can that be in divine revelation,
relating to a positive ordinance, which is neither commanded in a precept -- a
precept relating to the ordinance in question; nor exhibited in an example?
What I demand, can it be, or how should it direct our conduct? If our
brethren's way of argui^^ be just, we may turn Paedobaptists at once; for it
(...) possible to stand our ground in a contest with them.

It would, no doubt, have been highly offensive to God, if the priests or the
people of old had inverted the order appointed by him, for the administation of
his own solemn appointments. For instance; first admit to the passover,
afterward circumcise; burn incense in the holy place, then offer the
propitiatory sacrifice. This, I conceive, our brethren must allow. Have they
any reason, then, to imagine, that a similar breach of order is not equally
displeasing to God, under the New Testament economy? If not, it must be
supposed, that the Most High has not so great a regard to the purity of his
worship, is less jealous of his honor, and does not so much insist on his
eternal perogative now, as he did under the former dispensation: suppositions
these, which they who acknowledge his universal dominion and absolute
immutability, will hardly admit.

It must, I think, be acknowledged, even by our brethren themselves, that we
have as good a warrant for omitting an essential branch of an ordinance, or to
reverse the order in which the constituent parts of an ordinance were
originally administered; as we have to lay aside a divine institution, or to
change the order in which two different appointments were first fixed. And if
so, were a reformed and converted Catholic, still retaining the Popish tenet of
communion in one kind only, desirous of having fellowship with our brethren at
the Lord's table; they must, if they would act consistently on their present
hypothesis, admit him to partake of the bread, though from a principle of
conscience, he absolutely refused the wine, in that sacred institution. -- Or,
supposing, which is quite the reverse, that any of those who are in actual
communion with them, finding the mastication and swallowing of solid food a
little difficult, should conscientiously approve the condescending indulgence
of Pope Paschal, in the twelfth century; who ordered, that such persons should
partake only of the wine Dr. Priestley, on giving the Lord's supper to
children, page 25, 26.
: -- Or, if any of their people should imagine, that the wine ought always to
be administered before the bread; and should, from an erring conscience
declare, that if the ordinance were not so administered they could not partake
of it; they must, according to the tenor of their arguing, comply. They could
not refuse; because the persons in question are considered, as real believers
in Jesus Christ, and sincerely desirous to be found in the way of their duty,
to the best of their knowledge.

The sentiment which our brethren adopt, if suffered to operate in its full
extent, would exclude both baptism and the Lord's supper from the worship of
God. As to baptism, whether infant or adult, it ought never to be made a term
of communion in the house of God, on the pri^^^^le espoused by our opponents.
For, according to them, the grand, the only query, that is really necessary
relating to a candidate for communion, is; Has God received him? Is he a
believer in Jesus Christ? And, so certain are they of this being an unerring
rule, that if we dare to question a believer's right of communion, because we
think he is not baptized; we might almost as well deny the doctrine of
transubstantiation in the face of the Council of Trent: for we immediately
expose ourselves to the dreadful censure of acting in a way greatly prejudicial
to the honor and interest of true religion, and not a little contributing to
the cause of infidelity. When I read the title of a certain publication a few
years ago, I was ready to say; If the title page do not promise more than the
author performs, we are now in a fair way to have infidelity ruined for ever.
But, alas! I have since found that my expectations were too sanguine. For
infidelity still exists; and the principles of it lurk in every breast, that
will not allow unbaptized believers to have a right of communion at the Lord's
table: of which obnoxious sentiment, almost the whole of the Christian church
now is and has ever been. Pacificus, I presume, knows the book to which I
refer; and verbum sat sapienti.
I think myself happy, however, that the anathema sit of the one, is destitute
of power to enforce it; as the opprobrious charge of the other, wants evidence
to prove it.

If, then, our brethren's grand rule of proceeding be right, we are bound to
receive believers, as such, and have communion with them at the Lord's table,
though they do not consider themselves as baptized. And here I would beg leave to
ask, Whether they would receive a candidate for communion, whom they esteem as
a believer in Jesus Christ, who has not been baptized in infancy; nor, looking
on baptism as a temporary institution, is willing to be baptized at all? The
supposition of a person, in such circumstances, applying for fellowship at the
Lord's table, is far from being improbable; nay, I have known it a real fact.
What, then, would our brethren do in such a case? As to Pacificus, he has
informed us plainly enough what would be his conduct in such an instance; he
pleading expressly for admitting believers of all denominations to communion at
the Lord's table. Yes, The very title of his piece, is; A modest Plea for Free
Communion at the Lord's table, between true believers of all denominations.

Nor is the title of the same plea, under the signature of Candidus, any way
different in its real import, for it runs thus: A modest plea for Free
Communion at the Lord's table; Particularly between the Baptists and
Paedobaptists. For it is manifest that the emphatical word, Particularly, if
not quite impertinent, defends free communion, between Baptists and
Paedobaptists; yet that he is far from denying, nay, that he really pleads for
the same free communion, with those that are neither the one or the other. And
who can they be but Katabaptists, or those in the same circumstances with the
person in the case here supposed? So that whether they be Quakers, or
Catholics; whatever their distinguishing sentiments or modes of worship may be;
they consider themselves as bound to admit them to the sacred supper if they
look upon them as true believers, and they request communion with them. But as
all our opponents are not entirely of their mind in this respect, I shall
proceed with the argument. -- If, then, they receive a person, in the supposed
case, they avowedly reject baptism, as unnecessary to fellowship in a church of
Christ; for if it be not requisite in every instance, it is not so in any. If
they refu^e him, it must be because he is not baptized: for according to the
supposition, they consider him as a partaker of divine grace and a believer in
Jesus Christ. But if they reject him purely on that ground, they ought, on
their Antipaedobaptist principles, to reject all who have had no other than
infant baptism; because they consider it as a very different thing from the
appointment of Christ. Yes, they declare to all the world, every time they
administer baptism on a profession of faith, to any of their Paedobaptist
friends, that they do not believe infant sprinkling to be an ordinance of
Christ.

It may, perhaps, be objected; The two cases are not parallel: because the
supposed candidate for communion, is not only unbaptized, but opposes the
ordinance itself. True: but, admitting a small disparity, he acts on a
principle of conscience; for he supposes, with the Quakers, that baptism was
not intended, by Jesus Christ, as a standing ordinance in his church; though he
has a very different view of the Lord's supper. And, to adopt a method of
arguing used by our brethren, when pleading for free communion; What have you
to do with another man's conscience, in a matter that is non-essential? To his
own Master he stands or falls. He considers the Lord's supper as a very
important ordinance, and longs to partake of it. And have not you told us,
repeatedly, that it was designed for all believers; that all believers are
capable of improvement by it; and that they have a right of communion, entirely
independent of our judgment? Is he to be refused one ordinance, in the
enjoyment of which he has reason to expect the presence of Christ and the
blessing of heaven; merely because a sovereign God has not been pleased to show
him his duty and privilege in regard to another? And though you may not pay so
great a regard to the reasoning of one whom you call a rigorous baptist, yet
you cannot be deaf to the arguing of a friend, an ally, and one of the first
advocates for free communion. Hear, then, I beseech you, what Mr. Bunyan says,
who speaks to the following effect. None can, 'render a bigger reason than
this,' for not submitting to baptism, 'I have no light therein.' Such a person
has an invincible reason, one that all the men upon earth, and all the angels
in heaven, are not able to remove. For it is God that creates light; and for
him to be baptized without light, would only prove him unfaithful to his own
conscience, and render him a transgressor against God. Bunyan's Works, Vol. I.
p. 135, 136. 8 vo. edit.
What, will you keep him from celebrating the death of his Lord, in the sacred
supper, only because he does not see baptism with your eyes! Consider, I
beseech you, that he is in your own judgment, a sincere, a conscientious man;
that he is born of God, and fervently loves our dearest Lord. Yes, the
sincerity of his heart and his disposition to obedience are such, that, could
he be once persuaded of baptism being a permanent ordinance in the Christian
church, he would not hesitate a moment to be baptized. Nay; he would rejoice in
an opportunity of so manifesting his cordial subjection to Jesus Christ, were
he convinced, that he is under an equal obligation to be baptized, as he is to
receive the Lord's supper, and that prior to this. And must, after all, the
ba^e want of a little water be an insurmountable bar to this having communion
with you? Shall this one circumstance of water Drown and sweep away all his
excellencies; not counting him worthy of that reception that with hand and
heart, shall be given to a novice in religion, because he consents to water?'
-- Nay, ' a man can reject him; he can not be a man if he object against him;
not a man in Christ; not a man in understanding.' -- How unreasonable it is to
suppose, that he must not use and enjoy what he knows, because he knows not
all! And it will appear yet more unreasonable when it is considered, that
baptism gives neither being nor well-being to a church. Bunyan's Works, Vol. I.
page 134. 169, 174.
Is this your kindness to a Christian brother! Is this your charity, your
candor, your catholic spirit! Away with such rigid and forbidding notions;
with such an unreasonable attachment to an external rite, and let your
communion be free indeed! universally free, for Quakers, for Papists, for
whomsoever appears to be born of God and desires fellowship with you. For
though a converted Quaker may happen to be no friend to baptism; and though a
reformed Catholic may still be prejudiced against wine, at the Lord's table;
yet, as both may have communion with you, in other respects, why should you
object against it? Besides, do you not hope to have communion with them in
heaven? On the (...) principle, you might refuse communion to En^^^^ or Elijah,
or Paul, were any one of them now upon ^^^th, if he would not submit to
baptism! Were you aware how much this uncharitable and dividing spirit has a
tendency to injure real religion, and how much it contributes to the cause of
infidelity; such is your veneration for the revelation of God, and such your
affection for Jesus Christ, that, I am persuaded, you would never say a word
about baptism, nay, you would wish it out of the world, rather than give such
occasions of scandal and mischief, as you unwittingly do. For the author to
whom I have just appealed assures us, and lays it down as a maxim, which you
ought never to violate; that in such cases, baptism, though an ordinance of
God, is it be prudently shunned. Let the cry be never so loud, Christ, order,
the rule, the command, or the like; carnality is but the bottom, and they are
but babes that do it; their zeal is but a puff. What shall we say? All things
must give place to the profit of the people of God; yea, sometimes laws
themselves, for their outward preservation, much more for godly edifying.
Bunyan's Works, Vol. I. page 136, 141, 144.
-- Further; Though, in the case supposed, the candidate for communion opposes
baptism, yet there is not so great a difference between the two instances as
may, at first view, be imagined. For, on our brethren's Baptist principles,
infant baptism not being an appointment of Christ, they who have had no other
are unbaptized. In this respect, therefore, the cases are parallel. Besides,
they are equally unwilling to submit to what our opponents consider as the only
true baptism; and are equally conscientious in their refusal. The genuine, the
necessary consequence, therefore, is, (if our brethren would act consistently)
they must either accept both, or neither; for, in the judgment they form of
each, God has received the one, as well as the other. But, as before hinted, by
the same rule that we receive one to communion, who is not baptized; who does
not consider himself as baptized; who does not pretend to be baptized; we may
receive all: for as there is but one Lawgiver, there is but one law, relating
to this matter; and he who has a right to dispense with it once, may do as
often as he pleases. Consequently, the principle adopted, by those who plead
for free communion, has a natural tendency to exclude baptism from the worship
of God.

Again: Though our brethren plead, that the persons whom they receive and
continue in communion with them, are, in their own judgment, baptized; yet we
may venture to query, whether this be always the case. The following is a well
authenticated fact. Several persons, being convinced of believers baptism, and
wishing for fellowship with the people of God, related their Christian
experience to a church and her pastor who practice free communion. It was
agreed to receive them. But when the time appointed for their being baptized
came, and the pastor was ready to administer the ordinance to them, one of them
was absent; and, consequently, was not baptized with his brethren. The stated
season for celebrating the death of Jesus at his own table quickly approaching,
he was, notwithstanding, received into fellowship, had communion at the Lord',
table, and was baptized afterward. If I be not greatly deceived, the Pastor of
this church has pleaded the cause of free communion, under the name of
Pacificus. A character, no doubt, very happily chosen, to express that
peculiarly peaceful temper and admirably condescending conduct, which are so
clearly displayed in this little anecdote. But, as a perfectly consist^nt
character is hard, exceedingly hard to be found among mortals, my reader will
not be much surprised if I observe; That Pacificus himself has failed, in one
particular, to answer his name. Yes, he and his coadjutor Condidus have, in a
very unpeaceful, uncandid manner, charged a vast majority of their Baptist
brethren, with not a little contributing to the cause of infidelity, merely
because they do not practice this Remarkable free communion. Peace and Candor
are, indeed, very excellent things, as Pacificus and Candidus are most amiable
names: yet I would take the liberty of hinting, that peace and unity, without
truth and righteousness, are an illicit combination; a wicked conspiracy
against both God and man. Amicus Pacificus, amicus Candidus, sed magis amica
Veritas.
-- Now this person was not a Paedobaptist; this person was not even in his own
judgment, baptized, when he took a seat at the Lord's table. No; by desiring to
be immersed on a profession of faith, he declared that he was unbaptized; as
such he approached the holy table; and as such the pastor, in the name of the
church, gave him the right hand of fellowship. Hence we see, that our opponents
can admit such persons to the sacred supper, as confess themselves to be
unbaptized, if occasion require; that is, if their Christian friends do not
approve of the old, established mode of proceeding. -- Besides, as it is not
uncommon for the Paedobaptist members of those Churches that practice free
communion, to desire baptism upon a profession of faith, after they have been
in fellowship many years; so it is probable, that some such members may be
convinced, that infant sprinkling is not a divine appointment, and
consequently, that they themselves are not baptized; yet live in the neglect of
baptism for months and years, having communion at the Lord's table all the
while. We will, therefore, suppose an instance of this kind in that Christian
community of which Pacificus is pastor; and that he and the church in general
are acquainted with it. What, then, must be done in the case? Done? why
Pacificus will undoubtedly remonstrate against the shameful neglect. But if his
remonstrances do not produce the desired effect, what them? What? why things
must remain in stato quo. Because Pacificus cannot move to have him excluded,
with any appearance of candor or consistency; he openly pleading for communion
with believers of all denominations. Besides, he very well knows, that his
brother is as much baptized now as he was when first received into communion;
and the whole that is laid to his charge relates to baptism: and to ' pull him
into the water' will never do, whatever a witly and polite opponent may have
said to the contrary. Dr. Mayo, in his True Scrip. Doc. of Bap. p. 33.
Besides, as Mr. Bunyan observes, the law is not made for a righteous man,
neither to debar him from communion, nor to cast him out, if he were in.
Bunyan's Works, Vol. I. page 134.
So very pliable, so superlatively complaisant, is free communion, that it
cannot bear the thought of refusing fellowship at the Lord's table to any
believer, even though he consider himself as unbaptized: far less can it endure
the thought of giving any one much disturbance, who has a place at the Lord's
table; even though he stand convicted in the eyes of God and man, in the court
of his own conscience, and before the church to which he belongs, of being
unbaptized, and of living in the total neglect of that divine institution.

Nor would the sacred supper be long practiced in the church of God, or be
esteemed a branch of divine worship, were the same principle applied to it and
suffered to operate without restraint. Suppose, for instance, that a weak but
well meaning man, is a candidate for fellowship, with a church that practices
free communion; that he gives the community full satisfaction, as to his being
a partaker of divine grace, and has been baptized in infancy; but, at the same
time, frankly declares, I see no propriety, nor any utility, in receiving bread
and wine, under the notion of its being an appointment of Jesus Christ. I
consider the Lord's supper as a temporary institution; intended for the
Christian church in the apostolic age, as a happy mean of attaching such
persons to her worship and interests, as were newly converted from the
antiquated ceremonies of Judaism, or the detestable superstitions of Paganism;
and that the command to observe it, ceased long since to be obligatory.
Admitting, however, that I am under a mistake in this particular; yet, as I
have a natural aversion to wine, Bellarmine gives it as one reason for
withholding the cup from the laity, that Multi abhorrent a vine. Apud Amesium.
Bell. Enerv^t. Tome III. page 172.
and as the bread and wine are mere emblems of the body and blood of Christ,
and the reception of them an external ceremony; I think it is quite sufficient
for me, if admitted into your fellowship, to behold the bread as broken, and
the wine as poured out: which may, perhaps, if there be any thing useful in
those outward signs, assist my meditations on the sufferings and death of our
crucified Lord. But though I cannot partake with you of bread and wine, in your
monthly communion; yet I should hope for advantage, great advantage, by having
fellowship with you in every other public act of devotion; in the expressions
of mutual, brotherly love; and in the exercise of holy discipline, according to
the laws of Christ. Nor need I inform you, that it is the dev^tion of the
heart, real affection one for another as brethren, and a strict regard to the
moral conduct of all the members of a religious community, that are the capital
things in a Christian church. And should you, for a moment, hesitate on the
propriety of granting my sincere request; I would beg leave to remind you, that
as being, on your principles, unbaptized, is no bar to my having fellowship
with you; so your well known candor must plead in my favor with equal force,
though, at present, I cannot conscientiously partake with you at the Lord's
table. For what is there -- I appeal to that catholic spirit, for which you are
so remarkable -- what is there essential to a church of Christ, in a
participation of bread and wine, any more than in immersion in water? for upon
your own principles, the holy supper may as well be celebrated without the
former as baptism can be administered without the latter. Or, what authority is
needful for you to dispense with the Lord's supper, which is not included in
that warrant by which you dispense with baptism?

Now, in such a case, what must be done? Here is a person whom that very church
considers as a believer in Christ and received of God. But this is her grand
criterion of a qualification for church fellowship. So that if she violate,
deliberately and openly violate, this capital rule of her conduct, she
contradicts herself; she, according to her wonted application of the rule,
disobeys God, and leaves free communion at the mercy of every opposer. She
must, therefore, give him the right hand of fellowship: she cannot put a
negative on his request, without exposing herself to those very censures which
our brethren so freely pass upon us; not excepting that severest of all in
which we are charged, with not a little contributing to the cause of
infidelity. But this, even the strict Baptists will charitably suppose, she
would not do on any account; and that she would be equally careful to stand
clear of that keen rebuke; -- Thou art inexcusable who judge. For wherein
thou judge another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judge, do the
same thing. I conclude, then, though such a proceeding. ^^^ld be quite novel,
absolutely unexampled in the churches of Christ, and would, probably, both
astonish and offend her sister communities, she must receive him. But if it be
lawful in one instance, it must be so in a thousand: and, therefore, a church
might thus go on, till the Lord's supper were entirely rejected by all her
members, and banished from the worship of God, as it is among the Quakers.

The church of England has justly incurred the censure of all Protestant
Dissenters, for her arrogant claim of 'power to decree rites or ceremonies', in
the worship of God, and of authority in controversies of faith Articles of the
Church of England. No. xx.
; because such a claim infringes on the prerogative royal of Jesus Christ. But
do not our brethren tacitly assume a similar power, when they presume to set
aside an ordinance of Christ, or to reverse the order of divine institutions?
it being demonstrable, that as great an authority is necessary to lay aside an
old, established rite; or to invert the order and break the connection of
several rites; as can be required to institute one that is entirely new. 'For
it is a maxim in law'; and holds good in divinity, That it requires the same
strength to dissolve, as to create an obligation Blackstone's Comment. on the
Laws of England. Vol. I. Book I. chapter 2.
. -- Such a practice, therefore, as that of our brethren, were it adopted by
the Baptists in general, would render our separation from the Established
Church very suspicious. It would seem like the fruit of obstinacy, rather than
the effect of a tender conscience, like a determined opposition to the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, more than a d^ure of purer worship and stricter
discipline. For, while we o^^it a plain and positive appointment of Jesus
Christ, and connive at what we ourselves consider as a human invention; we have
little reason to scruple the lawfulness of subscribing the article to which I
have just referred: and if we can do that, with a good conscience, we have not
much reason to dissent, on account of any thing else that is required in order
to ecclesiastical conformity Dissenting Gent. let. to Mr. White. Let. I. p. 2.
. For if it be lawful to dispense with an appointment of God, out of regard to
our ^^aker brethren; we cannot reasonably think it unlawful to practice the
appointments of our National Church, out of regard to the ruling powers;
submission to the latter, being no less plainly required, in scripture, than
condescension to the former. And if we may safely connive at one human
invention, so as to supersede and take place of a divine institution; why may
not the Church of England make what appointments she pleases? A little
reflection will convince us, that he whose authority is competent, to the
setting aside, or altering of one divine institution, has a power equal to his
wishes -- may ordain times, and forms, and rites of worship; may model the
house of God according to his own pleasure. But can such an authority belong to
any besides the Great Supreme? No: to such an ordaining, or dispensing power,
neither church nor synod, neither parliament nor conclave, neither king nor
pope, has the least claim. For as the exertion of Omnipotence was equally
necessary to the creation of a worm, as an angel; of an atom, as a world; so
the interposition of divine authority is no less necessary to set aside, or to
alter, one branch of instituted worship; than to add a thousand religious
rites, or essentially to alter the whole Christian system.

Nor are those writers who have appeared in vindication of our national
establishment, ignorant of their advantage over such Protestant Dissenters as
proceed on the principle here opposed. For thus they argue; If, notwithstanding
the evidence produced, that baptism by immersion is suitable, both to the
institution of our Lord and his apostles; and was by them ordained to represent
our burial with Christ, and so our dying unto sin, and our conformity to his
resurrection surrection by newness of life; as the apostle does clearly
maintain the meaning of that rite: I say, if notwithstanding this, all our
[Paedobaptist] Dissenters do agree to sprinkle the baptized infant; why may
they not as well submit to the significant ceremonies imposed by our church?
For since it is as lawful to add unto Christ's institution a significant
ceremony, as to diminiso a significant ceremony which he or his, apostles
instituted, and use another in its stead, which they never did institute; what
reason can they have to do the latter, and yet resuse submission to the former?
And why should not the peace and union of the church be as prevailing with them
to perform the one, as in their mercy to the infant's body to neglect the other
Dr. Whitby's Protestant Reconciler, p. 289.
? -- I leave the intelligent reader to apply this reasoning to the case before
us, and shall only observe; That if this learned writer had been addressing
those Dissenters who practice free communion, his argument would have had
superior force. Because our Dissenting Paedobaptist brethren believe that
infant sprinkling is real baptism, and practice it as having the stamp of
divine authority; whereas those Dissenters with whom I am now concerned,
believe no such thing. They consider it as a human invention; and yet receive
Paedobaptists into their churches, as if they were rightly and truly baptized,
according to the command of Christ. Now, as Mr. Thomas Bradbury observes, There
is a great difference between mistaking the divine rule, and totally laying it
aside. The reason, adds he, why we do not act as some other Christians [i. e.
the Baptists] do, is, because we think these demands [relating to a profession
of faith and immersion, as necessary to baptism] are not made in scripture D^ty
and Doct. of Bap. p. 25, 26.


As the sovereign authority and universal dominion of God, over his rational
creatures; as his absolute right, not only to worship, but also to be
worshipped in his own way; are more strongly asserted and brightly displayed in
his positive institutions, than in any other branches of his worship; so, it is
manifest, that we cannot disobey his revealed will concerning them, without
impeaching his wisdom and opposing his sovereignty. Because a special
interposition of divine authority, and an express revelation of the divine
will, constitute the basis, the only basis, on which such institutions rest, in
regard to their mode and subject, their order and connection one with another.
Surely, then, such of our brethren who admit, as a divine institution, what
they verily believe is a human invention, cannot but act an unjustifiable part.
For, on their own principles, infinite wisdom chose and absolute sovereignty
ordained professing believers as the subjects, and immersion as the mode of
baptism: and it appears, by their frequently baptizing persons who were
sprinkled in their infancy, that they look upon such a subject and such a mode
of administration, as essential to the ordinance. By their conduct, in many
instances, it also appears they are no less persuaded, that unerring wisdom and
supreme authority united in appointing baptism to be administered prior to the
Lord's supper: for, where the views and the inclinations of the candidates for
fellowship with them do not interfere, they always baptize, before they admit
to the holy table. Thus, then, stands the case with our brethren, in regard to
the positive appointments of heaven. They are verily persuaded that the wisdom
and sovereignty of God united in ordaining, that immersion should be the mode
of baptism, yet they connive at sprinkling; that professing believers should be
the subjects, yet they admit of infants; that baptism should be administered to
a believer, before he receive the Lord's supper, and yet they permit unbaptized
persons to have communion with them in that sacred ordinance. A paradoxical
conduct this, which nothing in my opinion, short of a plenary dispensing power
can possibly vindicate. Some of my readers will be pleased, I doubt not, with
the following thoughts of Orobius, a learned Jew, on the subject of positive
institutions. Lex ritualis ex Legislatoris arbitrio duntaxat pendet, aliquando,
vel in plurimum nullo fundamento in naturali ratione invento: sed non ob id
inseriorem perfectionis gradum obtinet supposita Legislatoris infinita
Sapientia et Bonitate: altioris potius, et sublimioris ordinis censcri debet:
siquidem supposito, quod sum bonus, et sapiens Deus vanas et ineptas Leges
homini praescribere nequit; quantum nobis earum ratio magis abdita, tantum ad
divinae Sapientiae secretum magis pertinere, oportet credamus: quod nobis nec
curiose, nec philosophice scrutari licet, sed obedienter ejus imperio subjici,
quo nostrum amorem, et debitam reverentiam summo Creatori praestemus: omnia
quae nobis observanda proponit, sua infinita sapientia digna, valde bona, ^t
perfectissima, toto cord credentes: sive ea possit, si vellet, dispensare,
sive pro aliqua occasion intermittere: et insignioris est obedientiae ea
observare quam quae a Deo etiam imperata in ratione nostra fundata invenimus:
ista siquidem, etiamsi De^^ ^on jussit, homines s^irent, et observare possent,
ot p^urimi ex gentibus nullo ad Deum habito respec^u secerunt, Apud Stapferum,
Institut. Theolog. Polem. Tom. III. Chap. XI. 238.
.

Again: as the sovereign will of God is more concerned and manifested in
positive ordinances than in any other branches of holy worship; so it is
evident, from the history of the Jewish church, which is the history of
Providence for near two thousand years; that the divine jealousy was never
sooner inslamed, nor ever more awfully expressed, than when God's ancient
people failed in their obedience to such commands, or deviated from the
prescribed rule of such institutions. The destruction of Nadab and Abihu, by
fire from heaven: the breach that was made upon Uzzah; the stigma fixed and the
curses denounced on Jeroboam; together with the fall and ruin of all mankind,
by our first father's disobedience to a positive command, are among the many
authentic proofs of this assertion. -- Nor need we wonder at the divine
procedure, in severely punishing such offenders. For knowingly to disobey the
positive laws of Jehovah, is to impeach his wisdom, or his goodness, in such
institutions; and impiously to deny his legislative authority and absolute
dominion over his creatures. And though the methods of Providence, under the
gospel economy, are apparently much more mild and gentle, in regard to
offenders in similar cases; yet our obligation to a conscientious and punctual
obedience are not in the least relaxed. For that divine declaration, occasioned
by the dreadful catastrophe of Aaron's disobedient sons, is an eternal truth,
and binding on all generations; I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me
See Levit. x. 1, 2, 3.
. When God speaks, we should be all attention; and when he commands, we should
be all submission. The clearer light which God has assorded, and the richer
grace which Christ has manifested, under the present dispensation; are so far
from lessening, that they evidently increase our obligations to perform every
divine command relating to Christian worship. For, certainly, it must be
allowed, that they on whom greater favors are bestowed and higher honors
conferred, are so much the more obliged to revere, love, and obey their divine
benefactor. And, as a certain author justly observes, To take advantage of dark
surmises, or doubtful reasoning, to elude obligations of any kind; is always
looked upon as an indication of a dishonest heart Dr. Oswall's App^al to Common
Sense, p. 21.
. Accursed, then, is the principle, and rebellious is the conduct of those
professors, who think themselves warranted, by the grace of the gospel, to
trifle with God's positive appointments, any more than the priests or the
people were of old. For whether Jehovah lay his commands on Gabriel in glory,
or on Adam in paradise; whether he enjoin the persormance of any thing on
Patriarchs, or jews, or Christians, they are all and equally bound to obey, or
else his commands must stand for nothing. Neither diversity of economy, nor
difference of state, makes any alteration in this respect: for we must be
absolutely independent of God, before our obligations to obey him can be
dissolved. But as the former is impossible, so is the latter Witsii Miscal^
Sac. Tom. I. Lib. II. Dissert. II. 3.
.

When I consider myself as contending with Pacificus, I cannot but esteem it a
happiness to find, that my reasoning, in the last paragraph, is very strongly
supported by the following quotation; which is taken from a little publication
that received something more than a bare imprimatur, from Mr. John Ryland. And
as Pacificus pays an uncommon regard to Mr. Ryland's judgment, in matters of
this kind; I shall not be thought assuming, if I summons his attention to what
the latter avows, as expressing his own opinion. The passage to which I reser,
is this: The ordinances of the gospel are established by the authority of
Christ, as king and supreme lawgiver in his church; they are particularly
enforced by his own example, and his will expressly declared: and as they have
no dependence on any circumstances, which are liable to vary in different
countries, or distant periods of time, it necessarily follows that the
primitive model of administration should be strictly and conscientiously
adhered to. No pretense to greater propriety, nor any plea of inconveniency,
can justify our boldly opposing the authority of God by the alteration of his
law, and substituting a human ordinance instead of a divine. In a former
dispensation in which the ritual was numerous and burden some, the great
Jehovah was particularly jealous of his honor as Supreme Lawgiver, and looked
upon the least innovation as a direct opposition of his authority. Moses, we
are informed, was admonished of God to make all things according to the pattern
showed him in the mount. And those unfortunate youths who presumed to alter the
form of his religion, and worshipped him in a way he had not commanded, fell
under the severest marks of his displeasure; which shows that he looked upon
the least innovation in the ceremonial part of his precepts, as an impious and
daring opposition and contempt of his authority, and as deserving of peculiar
and distinguished vengeance, as a direct and open violation of the moral law.
And as the great King of the universe required such exactness and punctuality,
and insisted on such scrupulous exactness in the performance of the minutest
rite belonging to the legal dispensation; it would be extremely difficult to
assign a reason why he should be more lax and careless, and allow a greater
scope to human discretion under the Christian [economy]. The greater light
which shines in our religion, the small number and simplicity of its
ceremoniala, and the end and design of those institutions being more clearly
revealed; are reasons which strongly indicate the contrary. And if it be
further observed, that the religion of Jesus is particularly calculated to set
aside worldly wisdom and mortify the pride of man; it cannot, without great
absurdity, be supposed, that the sublime author of it will dispense with the
performance of his positive laws, or admit of the least variation, to honor
that wisdom, or indulge that pride which the whole scope of his gospel has a
manifest tendency to abase. Surely then it behooves Christians, in an affair of
such consequence, to be circumspect and wary; it will certainly be well for
them, if they can give a good account of their practice, and a satisfactory
answer to that important question, Who has required this of your hand? Six
Views of Believ. Bap. p. 17, 18, 19, 20.
? -- Had Mr. Ryland only recommended that little piece to the public, which
contains this excellent passage, he would certainly have deserved my sincerest
thanks. For the quotation produced may be justly considered as a compendious
answer to all that Pacificus has wrote, and to all that he can write, in
defense of free communion, so long as he professes himself a Baptist. Whether
he will make a reply to the animadversions of my feeble pen, I cannot pretend
to say; but I think he will hardly have courage, in any future publication on
the subject before us, openly to confront and attack his dearest and most
intimate friend Mr. Ryland.

Though the Lord's supper is a positive institution of Jesus Christ, and though
we cannot know any thing at all about it, but what we learn from the New
Testament; yet our brethren make, not the word of revelation, but the measure
of light and the dispositions of a candidate for fellowship, the rule of
admission to it. -- This appears from hence. A person applies to one of their
churches for communion in the ordinances of God's house; the pastor of which
community, and a great majority of its members, are Baptists. He gives a reason
of the hope that is in him, to general satisfaction. His moral conduct is good,
and his character amiable. The pastor in the name of the church, desires to
know, what are his views of baptism. He declares himself a Paedobaptist; says
he was baptized in his infancy, and is quite satisfied with it. Now, neither
the pastor, nor the generality of his people, can look upon this as baptism;
but consider it as an invention of men, and a corruption of the worship of God.
Consequently, they would be glad if his views, in that respect, were otherwise.
They agree, however, to receive him into communion. And why? Because they
believe that Christ commanded, or that the scriptures warrant infant
sprinkling? No such thing. Because the New Testament plainly informs them, that
unbaptised converts were admitted to the Lord's table in the apostolic
churches? not in the least. Because Jesus Christ has expressly granted them a
dispensing power, in regard to baptism? They disclaim any such grant The Church
of Rome frankly acknowledges, by her delegates assembled in the Council of
Trent, that our sovereign Lord, when he instituted the holy supper,
administered in both kinds, and that it was so administered for some time; she,
however, expres^ly claims an authority to dispense with that order. Now, though
I would by no means insinuate, that our brethren are equally culpable with that
mother of abominations; yet it may admit of a query, whether, in this
particular, she be not more consistent with herself, than they? Council of
Trent. Sess. XXI. Cap. I, II, III.
. What, then, is the ground on which they proceed? Why, truly, the candidate
believes, is fully persuaded, that infant sprinkling is real baptism; and has
been informed, that he was actually sprinkled in the first state of his life.
On this foundation they admit him to the Lord's table: and, which is very
remarkable, they receive him with a cordial good will, to have him baptized
afterward, if ever he discover an inclination toward it. Their charity
forbids them treating a Christian as unbaptized, if he do but heartily believe
himself to be baptized. As if that could not be wrong, which a sincere disciple
of Christ firmly concludes to be right! Or, as if we were bound, in certain
cases, practically to allow that to be right, which we are fully persuaded is
really wrong! -- But might not the pastor of such a church, on the same
principle, and with equal countenance from the scripture, baptize a person
desirous of it, without a profession of faith, and without any evidence that he
is a believer in Jesus Christ? For, as Pacificus and Candidus argue, in regard
to baptism, Who is to be the judge of what is, or is not faith? Most certainly
every man for himself, and not one for another; else we destroy the right of
private judgment, and go about to establish a Popish infallibility against the
liberty of the gospel. I have no business with any man's conscience but my own,
unless in endeavoring, in a proper manner, better to instruct it where it
appears to be wrong. If my Paedobaptist brother is satisfied in his own mind
that he is rightly baptized [or truly converted] he is so to himself. -- What
is there in a false persuasion, relating to baptism, that merits the regard of
a church; any more than in a deception about faith and conversion, to deserve
the connivance of a minister? for the self-deception is supposed to be as real
in the one case, as in the other; though the state of the two candidates, and
the danger attending their respective mistakes, are undoubtedly very different.
If, notwithstanding, our sovereign Lord has not virtually forbidden us to
baptize any without a profession of faith, what right have we so to limit the
administration of that ordinance? And if our divine Lawgiver has ^ac^tly
prohibited unbaptized believers approaching his table, by what authority do we
admit them? Now I appeal to the reader, I appeal to Christians in general,
whether there be not as much evidence in the New Testament, that baptism was
administered by the apostles, to such whom they did not consider as believers
in Jesus Christ; as there is to conclude, that they received any to communion,
before they considered them as baptized believers. It is not the measure of a
believer's knowledge, nor the evidence of his integrity; nor is it the
charitable opinion we form about his acceptance with God, that is the rule of
his admission to the sacred supper; but the precepts of Jesus Christ, and the
practice of the apostolic churches. To depart from this only rule of our
conduct, through ignorance, is a culpable error; and knowingly to deviate from
it, is nothing short of rebellion against the sovereign majesty of Zion's King.

To dispense with the positive appointments of Jesus Christ, or to reverse the
order of their administration, in condescension to weak believers, and with a
view to the glory of God, cannot be right. For as an ^^^^ment author observes.
They must be evasions past understanding, that can hold water against a divine
order -- God (...) gave power to any man, to change his ordina^^ or to dis^onse
with them. God is a jealous God, and careful of his sovereignty It Is not for
any inferior person to alter the stamp and impression the prince commands. None
can coin ordinances but Christ; and, till he call them in, they ought to be
current among us Charn^ck's Works, Vol. II. p. 763, 773, 774. ^^it. 1.
. -- To which I may add the testimony of another learned writer, who says, when
speaking of baptism; As the salvation of men ought to be dear unto us; so the
glory of God, which consists in that his orders be kept, ought to be much
more dear Ca^twright, in W^^^s Hist. Inf. Bap. Part I. Chap. 15.
. -- Yet here, I humbly conceive, our brethren are saulty. For what is
dispensing with a positive appointment, but laying it aside, or conniving at a
neglect of it, on such occasions in which it was commanded to be administered?
Now, on their Antipaedobaptist principles, they admit unbaptized persons to the
Lord's table; many of whom are never baptized. In regard to such, therefore,
they lay entirely aside, they annul the ordinance. That they reverse the order
of two positive inftitutions, is equally clear; numbers of those whom they
admit to the Lord's table, having communion with them in that ordinance for
many years, before they are baptized. And that this very singular conduct
procoeds from a regard to the edification of sincere, but less informed
believers, and in hopes that God will be glorified by it; they often assert.
Dispense with a divine institution, for the edification of weak believers!
Invert the order of God's appointments and break his positive laws, with a view
to his glory! Theological paradoxes these, which seem to border on that
hateful, Antinomian maxim; "Let us do evil that good may come." A position,
which the pen of inspiration execrates; which every virtuous mind abhors. But
that no pretense of doing honor to God, nor any plea of being useful to men,
can possibly deserve the least regard, if the measures which must be pursued to
obtain the end interfere with the divine revealed will, we learn from various
facts recorded in the Bible. Uzzah, for instance, when he put forth his hand to
support the tottering ark, thought, no doubt, he was doing honor to him who
dwelt between the Cherubim^, over the mercy-seat; and, at the same time, as
that sacred coffer was of the last importance in the ancient sanctuary, he
showed an equal regard to the edification of his fellow worshippers, by
endeavoring to preserve it from injury. But, notwithstanding this fair
pretext; nay, though the man after God's own heart saw little amiss in his
conduct; (perhaps, thought he deserved praise) as the ark, with all that
pertained to it, and its whole management, were of positive appointment; he,
whose name is JEALOUS, was greatly offended. The sincere, the well meaning man,
having no command, nor any example for what he did, fell under Jehovah's anger,
and lost his life, as the reward of his officiousness. And as the Holy Ghost
has recorded the fact so circumstantially 2 Samuel vi. 1 -- 11.
, we have reason to consider it as a warning to all, of the danger there is in
tampering w^^^ positive ordinances; and as a standing evidenc^, (...) God will
have his cause supported and his appoint^ (...) administered, in his his own
way. -- The case of Saul, and the language of Samuel to that disobedient
monarch, inculcate the same truth. The people, said Saul to the venerable
prophet, took of the spoil, sheep and oxen -- to sacrifice unto the Lord thy
God in Gilgal. And Samuel said, Has the Lord as great delight in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. For
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness in as iniquity and
idolatry 1 Samuel xv. 21, 22, 23.
. -- Remarkable words! The king of Israel, we find, pleaded a regard to the
worship and the honor of God. The cattle were spared, that Jehovah's altar
might be furnished with plenty of the finest sacrifices. But Samuel soon
overruled this fair pretense. He quickly informed the infatuated prince, that
obedience to divine appointments, especially in such duties as depend entirely
on an express command (as the utter destruction of Amalek did, and as communion
at the Lord's table now does) is better in the sight of God, than hecatombs of
bleeding sacrifices, or clouds of smoking incense: and, consequently, better
than a misapplied tenderness to any of our fellow creatures, or a misguided
zeal to promote their pence and edification. At the same time the prophet
assures him, that when the Most High commands, nothing can excuse a
nonperformance: because disobedience to a plain, positive, known command is
justly clossed with idolatry and witchcraft.

A very sensible writer, in the conclusion of a discourse upon this passage,
observes; That we may learn from this text, what are the true characteristics
of acceptable obedience. It must be implicit; founded immediately on the
authority of God. We must not take upon us to judge of the moment and
importance of any part of his will, further than he has made it known himself.
It is a very dangerous thing for us to make comparisons between one duty and
another; especially with a view of dispensing with any of them, or altering
their order, and substituting one in another's place.' -- Another 'character of
true obedience is, that it be self-denied and impartial; that it be not
directed or qualified by our present interest -- It is too common, that our own
interest both points out the object, and assigns the measure of our obedience;
and in that case, it does not deserve the name of obedience to God at all. When
the Christian is devoted to God, ready at his call, and equally disposed to any
employment assigned him in providence, he then may be said indeed to do his
will, -- It must 'be universal, without any exception. Saul, and the children
of Israel, had complied so far with the order given them, that the greatest
part both of the people and substance of Amalek was destroyed, but he stopped
short, and knowingly l^st unfinished what had been enjoined him by the same
authority Dr. Witherspoon's Practic. Disc. Vol. 1. p. 335, 336.
.

When a Paedobaptist applies for communion with Baptists, he acts upon a
persuasion that he has been rightly and truly baptized: for there is reason to
believe, that the generality of our Paedobaptist brethren would start at the
thought of partaking at the Lord's table, while they consider themselves as
unbaptized. Consequently, when our opponents admit one of them to communion,
they confirm him in what they consider as a false presumption, and practically
approve of what, at other times, they boldly pronounce a human invention, a
tradition of men, and will worship; for such infant sprinkling must be, if not
a divine appointment. Nor can they exculpate themselves; in this respect,
unless they were professedly to receive him, as unbaptized. Because he
considers himself as baptized; he desires communion as baptized; nor has he any
idea of sitting down at the Lord's table, as unbaptized; well knowing, that
such an attempt would be contrary to the apostolic pattern, and to the sense of
the Christian church in general.

That circumcision was, by divine command, an indispensable qualification, in
every male, for a participation of the Jewish passover, and communion in the
sanctuary worship, is generally allowed. And though I am far from thinking that
baptism came in the place of circumcision, as many of our Paedobaptist brethren
suppose; yet that the former is equally necessary to communion at the Lord's
table, under the Christian economy, as the latter was to every male, in order
to partake of the paschal feast, and to unite in the tabernacle service, I am
fully persuaded. Nor is my opinion singular. It has been the sense of the
Christian church in every age; and, excepting those Baptists who plead for free
communion, it is the voice of the Christian world in general at this day. -- I
do not find that the necessity of circumcision, for the purposes just
mentioned, was ever controverted, either by the ancient or modern Jews. We will
suppose, however, for the sake of argument, that it was disputed in the Jewish
church; and that, amidst a great variety of interesting intelligence, which the
Rabbinical writers pretend to give, concerning ancient customs and ancient
disputes, they are found to speak as follows: In the days of our master, Moses,
disputes arose about the nature and necessity of circumcision: that is, whether
the ancient rite was to be performed on the foreskin, or on a finger; and,
whether it was an indispensably requisite qualification, in every male, for a
seat at the paschal feast, and admission to the sanctuary worship. The
generality of our fathers maintained, that no male, though a son of Abraham;
that no Gentile, though he might acknowledge and serve Abraham's God; had any
claim to communion in those joyful and solemn services, if he was not
circumcised according to the divine command, Others contended, with no less
assurance, that circumcision being only an outward sign of what is internal and
spiritual; every male, whether a descendent from the loins of our father
Abraham, or one of the Gentile race, who knew and feared the God of Israel, had
an undeniable claim to fellowship, though it were not the foreskin of his
flesh, but a finger that was circumcised. The latter asserted, with great
confidence, that the holy blessed God having accepted such; as plainly appeared
by their having the internal and spiritual circumcision; it would be absurd and
uncharitable to refuse them communion. And when disputing with their opponents,
they would with an air of superior confidence demand; Will you reject from
fellowship those whom God has received! -- Absolutely reject those who have the
thing signified, barely because, in your opinion, they want the external sign!
-- Those who possess the substance, perhaps, to a much greater degree than
yourselves, merely because they want the shadow! What, will you refuse
communion to a brother Israelite, or a pious Gentile, in the tabernacle here
below, with whom you hope to enjoy everlasting fellowship in the temple above!
Strange attachment to the manner of performing an external rite! -- Besides,
great allowances must be made for the prejudices of education. These our
brethren whom you reject, as if they were Heathens, as if they were absolutely
unclean; have been educated in the strongest prejudices against what we think
the true circumcision. They have been taught from their earliest infancy, that
though our fathers, for a few centuries after the rite was established,
generally circumcised the foreskin; yet that the part on which the ceremony was
first performed, is by no means essential to the ordinance. And, therefore, at
various inconveniences were found to attend the mode of administration then
generally practiced; instead of cutting off the praeputium, many began to
circumcise a finger; which has been the custom in some of our tribes ever
since, and which, they strenuously plead, is not forbidden by any divine
revelation. This, we readily acknowledge, is a mistake; nor dare we, on any
account, imitate their proceedings in that respect: because, with us, there is
no doubt, that the God of our fathers ordained it otherwise. But yet, as all
have not the same opportunities of information, nor an equal measure of light;
and as our brethren are verily persuaded that they have been circumcised
according to the divine command; (for if they were not, they would readily
comply with our mode of proceeding) it is our indispensable duty to receive
them in love, and not harrass their minds with "doubtful disputations" about a
matter that is not essential. For we all worship the same God; and, so far as
his moral worship is concerned, in the same way; though we happen to differ
about an external rite, that is by no means essential, either to spiritual
worship here, or to the salvation of our souls hereafter. -- Besides, though it
be admitted that the divinely appointed mode of administering the sacred rite
is of some importance; yet it must be admitted, that the edification of such as
truly fear God is of infinitely greater importance. But, if you exclude them
from the solemn sanctuary worship, you debar them from a capital mean of their
spiritual benefit. You should also consider, who is to be the judge of what is,
or is not, the true circumcision. Every man, most certainly, must judge for
himself, and not one for another; else you destroy the right of private
judgment; you invade the sacred prerogative of conscience; and tacitly advance
a claim to infallibility. If your brethren, who circumcise a finger instead of
the part appointed, be satisfied in their own minds, they are circumcised to
themselves: and while the answer of a good conscience attends it, God will and
does own them in it, to all the ends designed by it; so that while they
consider it as laying them under the same obligations to holiness of heart and
life, as we consider our circumcision to do us, why should you not have
fellowship with them? -- Nor are you sufficiently aware, how much you injure
the cause of real religion, and promote the baneful interests of infidelity, by
being so strict and rigid. Were you to be more candid and charitable, in regard
to this matter, it might be expected that numbers of our brethren, who, it must
be allowed, administer this rite in a very improper manner; would cordially
unite with us, and, in time, utterly renounce their mistake. We should also
have reason to hope, that many of our Gentile neighbors, who detest
circumcision, as performed by us, might become proselytes to the Jewish
religion, and worship the most high God in fellowship with us. But so long as
you insist, not only on the rite itself, (for that we ourselves are not willing
to give up entirely) but on that mode of administration which is so obnoxious
to them, as indispensably necessary to communion with you; it will be, not only
a wall of partition between us and them, but a bone of contention among the
chosen tribes themselves. Consequently it must impede, greatly impede, the
exercise of that love to God, and that affection for man, which are of much
greater importance than the most accurate performance of a merely external rite.

Now supposing our brethren in the course of their reading to meet with such an
account, what would they think of it? What would they say? They would,
undoubtedly, suspect the truth of the whole. They would consider it as a
Rabbinical fable. But how would their indignation rise, were the fabulous
narrator to proceed and assert; That Moses and Joshua, warmly espousing this
latter opinion, added much to its credit! This, they would say, is absolutely
incredible, and a vile aspersion on the characters of those illustrious saints.
Had Nadab and Abihu been mentioned as the abettors of this unscriptural
practice, there would have been less reason to deny the truth of the whole
relation; because they were guilty of innovating in the worship of God, and
were awfully punished for it. But thus to represent the most pious, exemplary,
and excellent men in all the Israelitish camp, is beyond the bounds, not only
of credibility, but also of decency. Reflections of this kind, I am persuaded,
they would readily make, were they to find such a narration in the Talmud, or
in any Rabbinical author. -- And now give me leave again to remind them; That,
according to the judgment of the Christian world in general, circumcision was
not more necessary for all the males, who desired communion at the paschal
supper and in the solemn services of the tabernacle, than baptism is to
fellowship in the Christian church, and a seat at the Lord's table -- That
there is, on their own principles, a wider and a more material difference
between baptism, as now administered to infants, and baptism, as appointed by
Jesus Christ; than there would have been, between cutting off the foreskin, and
circumcising a finger: because the latter would have been circumcision, and the
circumcision of a proper subject also, though not of the part required; but
sprinkling, whether infants or adults, is no more baptism, in their account,
than it is immersion -- And that, had any members of the ancient synagogue
introduced, or admitted, such an alteration as that supposed; they might have
defended it on the same general grounds, and with much greater plausibility, in
several respects at least, than our brethren can the practice of free
communion. For I appeal to my reader, whether the Pentateuch of Moses and the
scriptures of the prophets do not say as much of the one, as the evangelical
history and the writings of the apostles do of the other?

Paul, when meeting with certain disciples at Ephesus, desired to know, whether
they had received Holy Ghost since they believed. To whom they answered, We
have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. On which the apostle
put the following question: Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said,
Unto John's baptism. From which it plainly appears, that as these persons
professed to be disciples of Jesus Christ, Paul took it for granted they had
been baptized. For his query is not, Have you been baptized? But, Unto, or
into, what then were ye baptized? He inferred their baptism from their
profession: and he had reason so to do. For he well knew, that the first
administrator of the ordinance required a submission to it, of all that brought
forth fruits meet for repentance; that the apostolic ministry demanded the same
act of obedience, from all that believed in Jesus Christ; and the
administration of baptism is a part of the ministerial office, being strictly
connected with teaching the disciples of Christ, to observe all things which he
has commanded. And, as an author before quoted, justly remarks; We find that
the preachers of the gospel always did it, and the people who gladly received
the word, desired it. How indifferent soever it appears to some in our days,
yet the grace of God never failed to stir up an early regard to it in times of
old. Mr. ^radb^^^y's Duty and Doct. Bap. p. 70. -- In a preceding (...) of the
same Treatis^^^ (...) says I hear the^^ (...) ^^^eral who suppose th^^^
baptism, is only (...) of those that are grown up ^^^^^t neglo^^^ (...)
^^^^^^ves (...) br^^re^ W^^^e (...) is in (...) are quite wrong in practice.
D^^^^^ de^^^ (...) advice of one who has more va^^^^ (...) happiness, than
(...) his own opi^^^^ (...) will give you it in (...) Ananias (...) ^^^ou?
A^iso (...) ap^ined, washing away (...), and ^^lling (...) ^^^^e of the Lord.
See, as above p. 16.
-- But though the great apostle, when meeting with those disciples at Ephesus,
made no doubt of their having been baptized, even before they informed him of
it; yet our brethren's conduct forbids us forming the same conclusion, with
equal ease and certainty, concerning all that are in communion with them. Nay,
Pacificus himself, for instance does (...) consider all that belong to his
community (...) ^^^ptized persons. So that were the apostle's query address^^
to him, with a little alteration; Into^^^^^ were the Paedobaptist members of
your church ba^^^zed? His answer as a Baptist, must be; Into -- nothing: for I
do not consider them as baptized at all. -- Pan^^es before observed, when
correcting some irreg^^^^^ies in the church at Corinth, says: "We have no such
custom, neither the churches of (...) which we may safely conclude, that what
(...) ^^ised in the worship of God, which (...) not a p^^^^tient in the conduct
of the apostles (...) primitive churches, is unwarrantable. And as our
opponents believe that Paul knew of no such custom as infant sprinkling; as it
also appears from his language to his disciples at Ephesus, that he knew of no
such custom, among believers, as deferring a submission to baptism for months
and years; so we have reason to infer, that he was equally ignorant of any such
custom, as admitting unbaptized believers to the Lord's table. Nay, our
brethren do not pretend that he knew of any such thing. But, however it was in
the apostolic age, which is now hoary with great antiquity, that bold perverter
of gospel truth, Socinus, introduced the custom of receiving unbaptized persons
to communion; many of his pupils adopted it; and our brethren continue it:
which reminds us of the old saying, The times are changed, and we are changed
in them.

Once more: Lither Jesus Christ has informed us in the New Testament what
bap^^in is, and what is requisite to communion at his table, or he has not. If
the former, we cannot admit any thing as baptism, which we believe is not so;
nor receive any to communion, but those whom we consider as qualified according
to his directions, without violating our allegiance to him as the King Messiah,
and rebelling against his government. If the le^^^ these is no judge in Israel,
and every one may do that which is right in his own eyes, in regard to these
institutions. Yes, if our lord instituted baptism, and left it undetermined how
and to whom it should be administered; if he appointed the sacred supper,
without charcteri^ing (...) who are to partake of it; his ministering serva^^^
^^ve a discretional power to administer them how and to whom they please. And
if so, our brethren may sprinkle or immerse, infants or adults, just as their
own convenience and the dispositions of their people require. Nay, they may
proceed a step further, and admit the infant offspring of their Paedobaptist
friends to the Lord's table; which was the general custom for several ages, in
the apostate state of the Christian church, and, as a learned author informs
us, is yet the practice of very near half the Christians in the world. Dr.
Wall's Hist. ^^sant Bap. Part II. Chap. IX.
Then their communion would be free indeed, entirely free from the shackles of
divine commands, and from the untoward influence of apostolic precedent.

SECTION IV. Several Passages of Scripture considered, which our Brethren
produce in favor of their Sentiments.
THE cause which our brethren undertake to defend, is denominated by them, Free
Communion. That communion, then, for which they plead, is free. But here I beg
leave to ask, From what? The restraints of men? that is a laudable freedom.
From the laws of Heaven? that were a licentious liberty. Absurd, in theory;
impossible, in fact. It never was, it never can be the case, that God should
institute a positive ordinance of divine worship, as the Lord's supper
undoubtedly is; and leave it entirely to the discretion of men, to whom it
should be administered. Free -- for whom? For every one that will? This they do
not pretend. For all who imagine themselves believers and qualified for it?
This they dare not assert. For, notwithstanding all their candor and all their
catholicism, they do not consider every one that thinks himself a believer and
desires communion, as fit for it. Hence it is, they ask a reason of the
candidate's hope, and take the liberty of judging for themselves, what his hope
and the ground of it are. They think it their duty to inquire, in what light he
views himself and what he believes concerning the Son of God. And if, in their
judgment, he be not converted to Jesus Christ, they put a negative on his
request; even though they feel an affection for him, as a moral, a sincere, a
well meaning man. Here, then, is another and great limitation; a boundary which
it would not be lawful to set, if a positive institution were not concerned,
and if such limitation were not fixed by the divine Institutor. By parity of
reason, therefore, if our Lord has given any other direction, relating to the
same ordinance, it should be regarded with equal reverence and equal
punctuality.

What, then, is the freedom for which they plead? Why, that Baptist churches
should admit Paedobaptists into communion with them. In other words, That they
should admit believers to the Lord's table, whom they consider as unbaptized. A
very extraordinary position this! Such, however, is free communion: in defense
of which, several pamphlets have, of late, been published. And who can tell,
but some of our brethren may so improve on the doctrine of liberty, in regard
to divine institutions of a positive nature, as to favor us, ere long, with a
Plea for free Baptism? -- With a dissertation, intended to prove the
lawfulness, and, in some cases, the necessity, of administering baptism to such
whom we consider as unbelievers? especially, if the candidates for that
ordinance be firmly persuaded in their own minds, that they are believers in
Jesus Christ. At the same time declaring, that it will be at the peril of
greatly dishonouring real religion, and not a little contributing to the cause
of infidelity, if we refuse. -- But let us now briefly consider what they say,
in defense of their hypothesis. They argue, from several passages of scripture;
from the temper required of real Christians, in their behavior one toward
another; and object against us our own conduct, in another respect.

The principal passages adduced from holy writ, and here to be considered, are
the following: -- Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations -- for God has received him -- Receive ye one another, as Christ
also received us, to the glory of God -- God, which knows the hearts, bare
them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us: and put no
difference between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith -- I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. Rom xiv. 1, 3. and
xv. 7. Acts xv. 8, 9.1 Cor. ix. 19 -- 23.
-- On which passages we may observe in general; Whatever their meaning may be,
except our opponents can make it appear, that they contain the grant of a
dispensing power to gospel ministers and churches; that is, unless these divine
declarations authorize the ministers and churches of Christ, to set aside an
ordinance of his, or to invert the order of its administration, as they may
think proper; they are far from answering the exigencies of their case, or
serving the purpose for which they are cited.

Again: The texts produced do not so much as mention communion at the Lord's
table, nor appear to have the least reference to it. No; the Holy Ghost has
other objects in view, in each of the contexts. And as these are the principal
passages to which our brethren appeal in proof of their point, we may take it
for granted, that better are not to be found; and, consequently, as a tacit
acknowledgment, that positive proof is wanting. But if it be allowed, that
there is no positive evidence in favor of their practice, (...) amounts to a
concession that there is no proof at all. Because nothing of a positive and
ritual nature can be proved a duty, or agreeable to the will of God, merely by
our own reasonings; nor by arguments formed on moral precepts and general rules
of conduct. For if once we admit any thing in the worship of God, as a duty,
that is grounded, either on far-fetched inferences from particular declarations
of scripture, in which the holy penmen do not appear to have had the least
thought of the matter in question; or on our own ideas of expediency and
usefulness, we shall not know where to stop. On this principle, a great number
of ceremonies were brought into the church of Rome, and might be introduced by
us, though not one of them could stand that divine query, "Who has required
this at your hand?" As it cannot be proved, by the deductions of reason, that
it is the duty of any man to eat bread and to drink wine, as a branch of divine
worship, but only from the testimony of God, so what he has revealed in regard
to that matter, is our only rule in all that relates to the Lord's supper.
Plain account of Bap. Course of Let. to Bp. Hoadly, page 127, 128.
Consequently, as these passages say nothing at all about baptism, nor about
communion at the Lord's table, either strict, or free; they have little
pertinency of application, or force of argument in them.

Our brethren maintain, when disputing with Paedobaptists, that the New
Testament knows no more of infant baptism, than it does of infant communion:
and that many of the arguments adduced in defense of the former, will equally
apply to the latter. Dr. Priestley is also of the same opinion. For he says, No
objection can be made to this custom, [i. e. of giving the Lord's supper to
infants] but what may, with equal force, be made to the custom of baptizing
infants.' And he informs us, that Infant communion is to this day the practice
of the Greek churches, of the Russians, the Armenians, the Maronites, the
Copts, the Assyrians, and probably all other oriental churches. Address to
Protest. Dissent. on giving the Lord's Sup. to Children, p. 28, 31.
Here they seem quite confident that they have truth on their side. But might
not Dr Priestley, for instance, who maintains both, retort; That sacred code of
Christian worship to which you appeal, knows as much of our sentiments and
practice as it does of yours? Produce your warrant from those heavenly
institutes contained in the New Testament, for admitting a believer to the
Lord's table, in a church of Christ, while that very church considers him as
unbaptized; and you shall not wait long for equally authentic evidence, that
infant baptism and infant communion have the sanction of divine authority. You
frequently assert, that our arguments formed on the covenant made with Abraham;
on the rite of circumcision; on the holiness attributed, by Paul, to the
children of believers; and several other passages of scripture, in defense of
an infant's right to baptism, are inconclusive; not only because that sacred
institution is not expressly mentioned in any of those places; but also
because, in your opinion, nothing short of an express command, or a plain,
apostolic example, can suffice to direct our practice, in the administration of
ordinances that are of a positive kind. Yet, when pleading for free communion,
you adopt this very method of arguing, and think it quite conclusive: otherwise
you never would appeal with such confidence as many of you do, to the passages
now produced. In things of external appointment, says Dr. Samuel Clarke, and
mere positive institution, where we cannot, as in matters of natural and moral
duty, argue concerning the natural reason and ground of the obligation, and the
original necessity of the thing itself; we have nothing to do but to obey the
positive command. God is infinitely better able than we, to judge of the
propriety and usefulness of the things he institutes; and it become us to obey
with humility and reverence. Expos. of Church Catech. p. 305, 306. Edit. 2.
-- But let us take a more particular view of the passages now before us.

The converted Romans were commanded by Paul, to receive them that were weak in
faith, as God and Christ had received them. And we are plainly informed, that
the persons intended were such, as had not a clear discernment of their
Christian liberty, in regard to the eating of meats forbidden by the ceremonial
law, and the observation of days, that was of old required by it. But what has
this to do with free communion? Is there no way of receiving him that is weak
in faith, but by admitting him to the Lord's table? Must the exhortation to
receive a Christian brother, be confined to that single instance of true
benevolence? Or, is our so doing the capital idea and the primary sense of the
precept, in any of Paul's writings? He says, in this very epistle, I commend
unto you Phebe our sister, -- that ye receive her in the Lord. Was her
admission to the holy table the principal thing that he desired of the
believing Romans, on her account? No; he evidently had something else in view;
something that would manifest their love to a disciple of Christ, much more
than barely permitting her to have communion with them in the sacred supper.
For he immediately adds; And that ye assist her in whatsoever business she has
need of you. Romans xvi. 1, 2.
Or, did he solicit admission to the Lord's table, for himself and his fellow
ministers, among the Corinthians, when he said; Receive us; we have wronged no
man; we have corrupted no man; we have defrauded no man? 2 Cor. vii. 2.
Or, for Epaphroditus, when he thus expressed himself to the Philippians;
Receive him, therefore, in the Lord, with all gladness, and hold such in
reputation? Philip. ii. 29.
Or, for Onesimus, when he said to Philemon; Receive him, that is mine own
bowels -- Receive him as myself? Or, was communion at the Lord's table Philem.
12, 17.
the principal thing which the apostle John had in his eye, when he said; We
therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellow helpers to the truth?
3 John 8.
It is, I will venture to affirm, a much greater thing to receive either a weak
or a strong believer, in the sense of these exhortations; than merely to grant
him a place at the Lord's table. Why, then, should our brethren plead for it as
they do, as if it were the grand criterion of our acknowledging Paedobaptists
to be real converts, and of our love to them, as such?

Besides, the faith of a sincere believer may be as weak, and require as much
forbearance, in regard to the holy supper, as in respect of baptism. A reformed
and really converted Catholic may desire fellowship with us, who still retains
the Popish error of communion in one kind only: but are we obliged by this
apostolic precept, to mutilate the sacred ordinance in condescension to his
weakness? -- To embrace the weak, as well as the strong believer, in the arms
of Christian affection, is a capital duty of the moral law. To bear with a
brother's infirmities, and to "forbear one another in love," are certainly
required by that command which says; Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself;
and would have been our duty, if neither baptism, nor the Lord's supper, had
ever existed. But are we to regulate our conduct, in the admission of persons
to a positive institution; -- to one which depends entirely on the sovereign
pleasure of God, by inferences drawn from the general and natural duties of the
moral law? -- Were the precepts of that eternal law ever considered by the
priests or the people of old, as the rule of administering positive
institutions? Had they not another system of precepts, express precepts,
intended for that purpose? and was not such a ritual absolutely necessary?

Supposing, however, that there were no way of receiving one that is weak in
faith, but by admitting him to the Lord's table, this text would be far from
proving what our opponents desire; unless they could make it appear, that the
persons of whom the apostle immediately speaks, were not members of the church
of Rome, when he gave the advice. There being disputes among the believing
Romans, about the eating of meats and the observation of days, affords no proof
nor any shadow of proof, that they had not communion together at the Lord's
table. -- But admitting that to be a fact, of which there is not the least
evidence, the conclusion drawn from the passage would not be just, except it
were also proved, that the "weak in faith" were unbaptized; or, at least, so
considered by their stronger brethren; for that is the point in dispute between
us. But that Paul considered the believing Romans to whom he wrote, as baptized
Christians, is allowed by all, so far as I have observed, who have no
hypothesis to serve, hy admitting a contrary supposition. The Socinians, the
Quakers, and Mr. Bunyan agree, in referring us to Romans vi. 3. 1 Cor. i. 14, 15,
16. and Gal. iii. 27. with a view to serve their several hypotheses, which all
unite in greatly depreciating the ordinance of baptism. The words of Mr.
Bunyan, when speaking of the apostolic times, and mentioning these three
passages, are as follows: that all that were received into fellowship were even
then baptized first, would strain a weak man's wit to prove it, if arguments
were closely made upon these three texts of holy scriptures. -- And, a few
pages after, when arguing from the second of these apostolic testimonies, he
says; By this negligent relating who were baptized by him [Paul] he shows,
that he made no such matter of baptism, as some in these days do; nay, that he
made no matter at all thereof, with respect to church communion. Works. Vol. I.
p. 135. 144.
For, as Dr. Goodwin observes, He argues from the known and generally received
profession and practice of all Christians. Know ye not that so many of us as
were bapti^^^. that is, that whoever of us that profess baptism (...) Christ,
profess baptism into his death, as the thing intended by it. The us, there, is
the generality of Christians, distinguished usually by that word from Heathens:
as, Romans xiv. 7. 1 Cor. viii. 6. To Us there is but one God, etc. That is, we
Christians profess all, and generally so. And his scope being to show, how
sanctification flows from being in Christ; his argument is drawn from a general
principle of the us of Christians -- So that this expression, as many of us,
imports not, as if some were, and some not, baptized; for then his argument of
sanctification had not been binding to the generality of Christians, which, it
is evident, it was in his intention: but it imports the contrary, that as many
as were Christians, were all baptized, and were taught this to be the meaning
of that great ^^^nt and princiciple of religion, that as they were baptized
into Christ thereby, so also into his death. Works, Vol. IV. On the Government
of the Churches of Christ, p. 30. Vid. H^ornbeck. Socin. Cons. Tom. III. p.
431, 432.


But God receives the weak in faith; and we are expressly commanded to receive
one another, not to doubtful disputations, but as Christ has received us to
the glory of God. Granted: yet permit me to ask, Is the divine conduct, is the
favor of God, or the kindness of Christ, in receiving sinners, the rule of our
proceeding in the administration of positive institutions? Whom does God, whom
does Christ receive? None but those that believe and profess faith in the Lord
Messiah? Our brethren will not affirm it. For if divine compassion did not
extend to the dead in sin; if the kindness of Christ did not relieve the
enemies of God; none of our fallen race would ever be saved. But does it hence
follow, that we must admit the unbelieving and the unconverted, either to
baptism, or the holy table? Our gracious Lord freely accepts all that desire it
and all that come; but are we bound, by his example, to receive every one that
solicits communion with us? Our opponents dare not assert it. For though the
Great Supreme is entirely at liberty to do as he pleases, to reject or accept
whom he will; yet it is not so with his ministering servants and professing
people, in regard to the sacred supper. No; it is their indispensable duty and
their everlasting honor, to regard his revealed will and obey his righteous
commands. The divine precepts contained in the Bible, no^ the divine conduct in
the administration of a sovereign Providence, are the only rule of our
obedience in all things relating to positive institutions.

Besides, gospel churches are sometimes obliged, by the laws of Christ, to
exclude from their communion those whom he has received; as appears from the
case of the incestuous person in the church at Corinth. And have those churches
that practice free communion never excluded any for scandalous backslidings;
whom, notwithstanding, they could not but consider as received of Christ? What,
do they never exclude any from fellowship with them, but such of whom they have
no hope! I cannot suppose, nor will they affirm any such thing. But if there
may be a just cause of excluding such from communion whom God has received,
though at present in a state of backsliding; why may there not be a sufficient
reason of refusing communion to some, whom we look upon as the objects of God's
peculiar favor? Is there not as great a degree of disapprobation discovered in
the former case, as there is in the latter? and is not the word of God our only
rule in both cases? It is not every one, therefore, that is received of Jesus
Christ who is entitled to communion at his table; but such, and only such, as
revere his authority, submit to his ordinances, and obey the laws of his house.

And are our opponents verily persuaded that baptism is a matter of "doubtful
disputation?" Why, then, do they not both sprinkle and immerse, infants and
adults, that they may be sure, in some instances at least, of doing that which
is right? Why so positive, on certain occasions, when they preach, or publish,
upon the subject? That it has been, and is disputed, must be allowed: and so
has almost every article of the Christian faith; especially such articles as
appear to us the clearest and of the greatest importance. Witness those
doctrines relating to the Trinity and the Deity of Christ; his vicarious
atonement and original sin. These have been much oftener disputed, in ancient
and modern times, than the mode and subject of baptism. -- And has not almost
every branch of Christian worship been disputed? The supper of our Lord has
been much more frequently controverted, between Papists and Protestants, between
Lutherans and Calvinists, than ever baptism was among any professors of
Christianity. Yet who, among our brethren, will dare to affert, that no
Catholic, who ever disputed for with holding the cup from the people, was
received by Jesus Christ? For that matter is not so clear, but real Christians
may possibly differ in their judgment and practice concerning it. Nay, such
doubts and difficulties are there attending the holy supper, that Bellarmine
assures us, we cannot certainly determine from the express words of scripture
only, what there was in the cup, before our Lord blessed it; whether a little
wine, or wine mixed with water, or strong drink, or water only. Quid in calice
fuerit ante consecrationem, an vinum parum, an vinum aqua mi^^u^, an sitera; an
aqua sola, exsola Scriptura expr^^^ non hab^tur. Apud Voss. Theses Theolog. p.
486.
And will Pacificus or Candidus, dare to assert, that the zealous Cardinal was
absolutely rejected of God? No; they cannot do it, without violating the
amiable import of their several names. -- The Quakers also, have disputed the
whole ordinance, and every pretense to it, as well as baptism, out of their
assemblies. But is it lawful hence to conclude, that they are all rejected of
Jesus Christ? So true are those words of Pacificus and of Candidus, his
colleague: The points in baptism [and the Lord's supper] about which we
[Papists and Lutherans, Quakers, Paedobaptists, and Antipaedobaptists] differ;
are not so clearly stated in the Bible (however clear to us) but that even
sincere Christians may mistake them. We may, therefore; henceforth consider
baptism and the Lord"s supper, the only positive institutions in the Christian
church, as justly reckoned among those things that are of "doubtful
disputation:" but whether they are to have the first place among Paul's (...),
I leave our brethren to determine. For to them the honor of classing a
positive institution of Christ among things ambig^^^^ is undoubtedly due; since
all besides themselves look upon it as evident, either, that baptism is an
indifferent thing, as Socinus, and some of his followers; Baptismum aqua tem
indifferentem esse statui^us. Th^^^ Nicho^aid. De Eccles. p. 22. Apud Hornb.
Soci^. Conf. Tom. III, p. 250.
or, that it should be entirely lai^ side, as the Quakers; or, that it is a
term of communion, which has even been the opinion and practice of the
Christian church in general. One step further, and is will be matter of
doubtful disputation, whether both the positive appointments of our divine Lord
should not be quite discarded. For, that baptism ought to be administered prior
to the sacred supper, is as clearly revealed, as that either of them was
intended for the use of believers in all succeeding ages.

Our honest friend, Barclay, when taking notice of those disputes which have
been about the sacred supper, says; The ground and matter of their contest lies
in things extrinsic from, and unnecessary to, the main matter. And this has
been often the policy of Satan, to busy people and amuse them with outward
signs, shadows, and forms; making them contend about it [them;] while, in the
mean time, the substance is neglected -- For there have been more animosities
and heats about this one particular, and more bloodshed and contention, than
about any other. And, surely, they are little acquainted with the state of
Protestant affairs, who know not, that their contentions about this have been
more hurtful to the Reformation, than all the opposition they met with from
their common adversaries. Barclay's Apology, p. 455, 456.
He advises, therefore, to give up the ordinance for the sake of peace, and as
the only effectual way of securing tranquillity in the church of God -- So the
Socinians maintain, that we may either administer or dispense with baptism, as
occasion requires. For, says Velokelius, As all other indifferent things may be
either used or omitted, as charity shall direct; even so baptism, if the honor
of God and the love of our neighbor demand it, seems at sometimes absolutely
necessary to be administered, in order to avoid giving offense. Ut omnia alia
adiaphora, -- pro eo ac charita^ praescribit, jam usurpari, jam amitti possunt:
ita et baptismus iste, divinae gloria ratione, et proximi amore postulante, ut
nimirum scandalum vitetur, adhibendus interdum plane videtur. Apud Hoornb. ubi
supra, p. 266.
-- And as the Socinian pleads for the administration of baptism, on some
occasion; so Mr. Bunyan strongly asserts the necessity of its omission, on
others. These are his words: If water baptism, as the circumstances with which
the churches were pestered of old, trouble the peace, wound the consciences of
the godly, dismember and break their fellowships, it is, although an ordinance,
for the present, to be prudently shunned. Works, Vol. I. p. 136.
-- How slight the barrier, how thin the partition, between free communion and
Katabaptism! Thus baptism is treated, not as a branch of divine worship, but as
a tool of human convenience; not as an ordinance of God and a mean of his
glory, but as a happy expedient in the hands of men, to secure the applause of
their fellow mortals; -- that applause which is considered as due to persons of
a condescending, candid, catholic spirit. If the omission of it would give
offense, let it by all means be administered: and if the use of it would be
attended with the same inconveniences, lay it aside and say not a word about
it. Such is the advice of Volkelius and Bunyan.

The reader, I take it for granted, can hardly forbear observing, what an
admirable method is here proposed by this truimvirate, Volkelius, Barclay, and
Bunyan, in order to promote and secure peace among Christian brethren. A
method, it must be confessed, that is at once very comprehensive, quite
expeditious, and extremely easy. So comprehensive, that it will apply to every
case: so expeditious, that any controversy may, by the happy expedient, be
finished in a trice: and so easy, that every one may have the benefit of it.
Were it universally known and universally pursued, there would be soon be no
disputes at all, either about truth or duty. For the whole process consists in
this; If divulging a truth believed, or practicing a duty required, should at
any time give offense, or be likely so to do; keep the former to yourself, let
the latter alone, and all shall be well. But how much more agreeable to
scripture, is the following maxim of a celebrated author; The appointment of
God, is the highest law, the Supreme necessity; which we ought rather to obey
than indulge popular ignorance and weakness. Dei ordinatio nobis summa lex,
suprema necessitas, cui potius parendum, quam populari ignorantiae et
infirmitati indulgendum. Turretini Inst. Theolog. Tom. III. Loc. XIX. Quaest.
XIV. 14.
-- From the manner of reasoning sometimes used by our opponents, and by those
three authors to whom I have just referred; one would imagine, that Socinians,
Quakers, and those Baptists who plead for free communion, were almost the only
persons in the Christian world, that exercise a proper degree of can^^ (...)
toward professors of other denominations, or have a (...) regard for peace
among the people of God: but wh^^her this be a fact the reader will judge.

But is it possible for our opponents to imagine that Paul intended to place
baptism on the same footing with certain meats and days; the former of which
were forbidden, the latter enjoined, by the God of Israel, under the Jewish
economy? What, baptism become an article of "doubtful disputation" in so early
a day! If, on the other hand, that inspired writer had no thought of baptism
when he mentioned "doubtful disputations;" if what he there says about matters
then in dispute, regard things that belonged to an antiquated ritual; what
authority have our brethren to put baptism on a level with them? Or where is
the force of their argument from this passage?

Receive ye one another, as Christ also has received us. These words have been
understood in a larger sense than that for which our brethren plead. For some
Paedobaptists have concluded from hence, that it is the indispensable duty of a
particular church to allow communion to all that desire it: taking it for
granted, no doubt, that none would request the privilege but these who were
baptized. This, the reader will certainly think is free communion. And, indeed,
if this text warrant our brethren's practice, I see but little objection
against its being understood in such a latitude of signification. But, in
opposition to such a sense of the passage, a Paedobaptist writer observes: This
inference is glaringly forced and wide, discovering their ignorance of the true
meaning and design of the text who make it. The apostle is not here speaking of
admission to church membership at all; -- nor does he consider those to whom he
writes in the precise light of members of the church universal, but as members
of a particular church, or body; among whom there was some difference of
opinion about meats, etc. which was like to break their communion together, as
is plain from the preceding chapter. The apostle sets himself to prevent this,
and to accomplish a reconciliation. And, after a number of healing things, he
concludes with these words; Receive ye one another. That is, ye who are saints
at Rome, who have agreed to walk together in the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord Jesus; ye who are professedly united in church-commumon, receive ye
one another in love, as becomes saints, united in one body for mutual benefit.
Bear ye one another's burdens: watch over and admonish one another in love,
notwithstanding of some difference in sentiment among you: as to the eating
certain meats and regarding certain days, let not that difference make any
breach in your communion together as a church of Christ. But let the strong
bear with those that are weak, and the weak not be offended with the liberty of
the strong. -- Judge not one another uncharitably, but let brotherly love
continue. -- This is precisely the apostle's meaning; as will appear to those
who look impartially into the connection of his argument; and by no means
serves the purpose for which the objector, bring it. Smith's C^^^^^nd. Account
of the Form and Order of (...) (...) 11^.


And supposing our brethren to argue from this passage only by way of analogy,
their inference is equally weak, and their conclusion palpably forced: there
being a great, an essential difference, between eating or not eating of certain
meats, in the apostolic times; and our being baptized or not baptized, prior to
communion at the Lord's table. For, though while the ceremonial law was in force,
the Jews were obliged to abstain from prohibited meats; yet our opponents will
not affirm, that their observance of a negative precept was intended by the
Eternal Sovereign, to answer similar purposes with the ordinance of baptism, as
appointed by Jesus Christ. The latter is a solemn institution of divine
worship: but can this be asserted of the former? Baptism was instituted prior
to the sacred supper; was commanded to be administered to professing believers,
before they approached the holy table; and, in the apostolic age, for aught
appears to the contrary, was constantly administered to believers previous to
their having communion in the Christian church. But can similar things be
affirmed concerning that abstinence from certain meats, which were forbidden
under the Jewish economy.

To conclude my remarks on the text before us, and to illustrate the passage.
Candidus, we will suppose, is the pastor of a baptist church, and that a
dispute arises among his people, about the lawfulness of eating blood, or any
thing strangled. The controversy rises high, and is carried on with too much
heat of temper. Each party is blamed by the other; the one, as judaizing; the
other, as violating a plain, apostolic precept. -- A report of this comes to
Irenaeus. Concerned and grieved at such contentions and such a breach of
brotherly love, in a once flourishing and happy church, he writes a friendly
letter; in which he bewails their hurtful contests, gives them his best advice,
and, among other things, he says: Him that is weak in the faith, receive ye,
but not to doubtful disputations. For one believes that he may eat all things:
another who is weak, eats herbs. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not: and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats; for God
has received him. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us
to the glory of God. -- In a while-after this healing epistle is published, and
read by many. In the perusal of which, some suspect, and others conclude that
the persons exhorted to mutual forbearance, had not communion one with another,
under the pastoral care of Candidus, and that they who are styled, "weak in
faith," had never been baptized. Nay, some assert, that the mere want of
baptism, in the opinion of Irenaeus, ought never to be objected against any
that are candidates for communion at the Lord's table; nor ever be made a bar
to fellowship in a church of Christ. Yet Irenaeus was never known, in any
instance, to give the least cause for such a suspicion. The application is
easy: I shall therefore only ask, Whether, in the supposed case, such
inferences would be genuine and just, or forced and unnatural? and, whether
they who drew them might not be suspected of being, either very fanciful and
weak, or as acting under the power of some prejudice? The reader will pardon my
prolixity on this passage, when he considers that our opponents lay a very
great stress upon it.

By the text produced from the acts of the apostles we learn, that "God is no
respecter of persons;" that he, as an absolute sovereign, bestows his favors
on Jews and Gentiles without any difference. But will our brethren infer from
hence, that they whose honor and happiness it is to be his obedient servants,
are entirely at liberty to receive to communion at the Lord's table all that
believe, without any difference? Can they justly conclude, that because Jehovah
dispenses his blessings as he pleases, they may administer, or omit, his
positive institutions as they please?

Once more: They produce, as much in their favor, the declarations of Paul to
the church at Corinth, 1 Cor. ix. 19 -- 23.
relating to his own conduct. And what do we learn in general from this
passage, but that he, out of his great concern for the good of mankind, and his
abundant zeal for the glory of God, was willing to do, or forbear, any thing
that was lawful, in order to gain an impartial hearing from both Jews and
Gentiles wherever he came? I said, any thing that was lawful; the rule of which
is the divine precept, or some example warranted by divine authority. Nor can
we view these words in a more extensive sense, without implicitly charging the
great apostle with temporizing, and highly impeaching his exalted character. --
But what has this text, any more than the former, to do with the
administration, or laying aside, of positive institutions? It was the duty of
Aaron, as well as of Paul, and of us, to seek the happiness of his fellow
creatures and the honor of God, to the utmost of his ability. But was this
general obligation the rule of his performing the solemn sanctuary services on
the great day of atonement? Could he conclude from hence, that if the
dis^^^tions of the people required it, he was at liberty to omit any of the
sacred rites, or to transpose the order in which Jehovah commanded they should
be performed? If, however, any of our opponents can make it appear, that this
passage really has a relation to the positive appointments of Christ; it must
be considered as the Magna Charta of a dispensing, priestly power, in regard to
those institutions. And, consequently, if our brethren can make out their claim
to the honor, free communion will be established with a witness. In such a
case it might be expected, that the next advocate for it, when citing the
passage, would comment upon it, and address us in the following manner: This
text is full to my purpose. It contains all I could wish, when contending with
my stricter brethren. For hence it is plain, that I am at liberty, perfectly at
liberty, to omit, or administer, the ordinance of baptism, just as the
dispositions and choice of my hearers may render it convenient. Yes, ye strict
Baptists! this admirable text authorizes me, in condescension to the weakness
of my sincere hearers, not only to receive Paedobaptists into communion; for
that is a mere trifle, with such a patent of church power in my hand; but also
Semi-Quakers, who reject baptism; and converted Catholics, who mutilate the
sacred supper; yea to baptize the infant offspring of any who shall desire it.
By doing of which, I hope to obtain the favor of many respectable
Paedobaptists, who have been extremely offended by that rigid and forbidding
conduct, for which you are so notorious. Yes, and by dispensing with baptism,
in some instances, I doubt not but I shall convince many of the utility and
necessity of it; which you know, would be an (...) method of producing
conviction, and (...) great honor to my cause. This text -- what shall I say?
this wonderfully comprehensive passage, gives me a discretionary power to do
just as I please in the house of God, in regard to baptism and communion.

SECTION V. The Temper required of Christians toward one another, not contrary
to our Practice -- Our Conduct freed from the Charge of Inconsistency -- No
Reason to exalt the Lord's Supper, in point of importance, us greatly superior
to the Ordinance of Baptism.
NOTHING is more common with our opponents, when pleading for free communion,
than to display the excellence of Christian charity; and to urge the propriety,
the uti^^^^, the necessity of ^earing with one another's mistakes, in matters
that are non-essential; in which number they class the ordinance of baptism.
From considerations of this kind, they infer the lawfulness of admitting
Paedobaptists to communion with them. -- Not fundamental -- Non-essential.
These negative epithets they frequently apply to baptism. And might they not be
applied, with equal propriety to the Lord's supper? But in what respect is a
submission to baptism non-essential? To our justifying righteousness, our
acceptance with God, or an interest in the divine favor? So is the Lord's
supper; and so is every branch of our obedience. For they will readily allow,
that an interest in the divine favor, is not obtained by the miserable sinner,
but granted by the Eternal Sovereign. That a justifying righteousness is not
the result of human endeavors, but the work of our heavenly Substitute, and a
gift of boundless grace. And that acceptance with the high and holy God, is not
on conditions performed by us but in consideration of the vicarious obedience
and propitiatory sufferings of the great Immanuel. Nay, since our first
father's apostasy, there never was an ordinance appointed of God, there never
was a command given to man, that was intended to answer any such end.

Baptism is not fundamental; is not essential. True; it limited to the
foregoing cases. But are we hence to infer, that it is not necessary on other
accounts and in other views? If so, we may alter, or lay it aside, just as we
please; and, on the same principle, we may dismiss, as non-essential, all order
and every ordinance in the church of God.

Is not the institution of baptism a branch of divine worship? And is not the
administration of it, prior to the Lord's supper, essential to that order in
which Christ commanded his positive appointments to be regarded? Nay, Pacificus
himself tacitly allows, that the practice of free communion is a breach of
order in gospel churches. For, in answer to an objection of this kind, he says;
Though it be admitted that the order of churches is of great importance, yet it
must be admitted that the edification of Christians, and their obedience to the
acknowledged command of Christ to all his disciples, "Do this in remembrance of
me," are points of infinitely greater importance; the least therefore ought to
give way to the greatest. -- The order of churches, then, is of great
importance, Pacificus himself being judge; and Candidus, his colleague,
acknowledges, that it is of some importance. Nor could they deny it, without
impeaching the wisdom, or the goodness of Christ, as Lord over his own house;
and imposing that injunction of the Holy Ghost, Let all things be done decently
and in order. And as the Divine Spirit requires the observation of order in the
church of God, so Paul commends the Corinthians for "keeping the ordinances as
he delivered them;" and expresses a holy joy, on "beholding the order" of that
Christian church which was at Colosse. But that order which the great Lord of
all appointed, and in the practice of which the good apostle sincerely
rejoiced, our brethren, it seems, consider as a mere trifle -- as comparatively
nothing. For what is any thing that has only a finite importance attending it,
when compared with that which is of infinite importance? On such a comparison,
it sinks into littleness; it is Iost in obscurity. Yet thus our opponents
venture to state the comparative worth of church order, and the edification of
individuals. -- But give me leave here to inquire, Whether the primitive order
of gospel churches can be detached from the legislative authority of Jesus
Christ? And, whether the exercise of that authority can be considered as having
no connection with his honor? To answer these questions in the negative, free
communion itself can hardly demur. Consequently, a breach of that order which
Christ appointed, as king in Zion, must be considered as an opposition to his
crown and dignity; and his honor is of much greater importance than the
edification of believers. For our Jesus and our Lawgiver is Jehovah; between
whose honor and the happiness of sinful worms, there is, there can be no
comparison. For the latter is only a mean, whereas the former is the grand end,
not only of a church state, but of the whole economy of providence and grace. I
may, therefore, venture to retort the argument; Though it be admitted, that the
edification of Christians is of great importance; yet it must be allowed, that
the honor of our divine Sovereign is of infinitely greater importance; and,
consequently, the primitive order of the gospel churches should be observed.

Again: Are not my readers a little surprised at the reasoning of our opponents
which I have just produced? Are they not ready to say, with some of old, "May
we know what this new doctrine is?" What, reverse the order of churches,
appointed by God himself, with a view to edification! Dispense with a positive
ordinance of heaven, and break a divine command, under the fair pretense of
promoting obedience to Christ! Our brethren, in pleading for free communion,
bring certain strange things to our ears; we would know, therefore, what these
things mean, and how they may be supported. For if we are obliged, in some
cases, to set aside an ordinance of divine worship, and to break a positive
command, in order that certain individuals may perform another positive
injunction of the great Legislator; the laws of Christ are not half so
consistent as Paul's preaching; which was not yea and nay, as those would be,
if the argument here opposed were valid. -- Nor have we, that I remember, any
thing like a parallel case, either in the Old or New Testament. We find,
indeed, an instance, or two, of positive and typical rites giving way to
natural necessities and moral obligations, when the performance of both was
impracticable; as, when David are of the show ^^^ead, without incurring a
divine censure: but we have no example of a positive being set aside, in favor
of any one's ignorance or prejudice against it, that he might be edified by
submitting to another positive institution, of which he desired to partake.
That maxim of our Lord, I will have mercy and not sacrifice; is, therefore,
totally inapplicable in the present case.

Mr. Bunyan, I know, strenuously pleads the neglect of circumcision by the
Israelites in the wilderness, while they attended on other positive
appointments of God, as arguing strongly for free commuon; but he seems to have
forgotten that the omission of which he speaks, is keenly censured by the Holy
Ghost. The uncircumcised state of the people, whatever might be the occasion of
it, is called, a reproach, "the reproach of Egypt;" which odium was rolled from
them on the borders of Canaan, and the place in which they were circumcised was
called by a new name, to perpetuate the memory of that event. Josh. v. 9.
Now, as that neglect of the Israelites was a breach of the divine command, a
reproach to their character as the sons of Abraham, and stands condemned by the
Spirit of God; it cannot be pleaded in defense of a similar omission, with the
least appearance of reason. And if so, I leave our brethren to judge whether it
can be imitated without injuring the honor of true religion, and promoting the
cause of infidelity. -- Nor is that other instance, which the same author
produces, relating to the feast of passover, in the reign of Hezekiah, any more
to his purpose. For though many of the people were not cleansed according to
the purification of the sanctuary; though they did eat the passover otherwise
than it was written," and were accepted of God; yet Hezekiah was so conscious
of those irregularities, that he deprecated the divine anger, saying, The good
Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
fathers, though he be not not cleansed according to the purification of the
sanctuary. And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. 2 Cron.
xxx. 18, 19, 20.
With what shadow of reason, then, or of reverence for God's commands, can any
one plead this instance in favor of free communion? What, shall a deviation
from the divine rule, in the performance of sacred rites -- a deviation that is
acknowledged as criminal before the Lord, and for which pardon is requested, be
adduced, as a precedent for the conduct of Christians! What would our brethren,
what would Mr. Bunyan himself have thought of Hezekiah and his people, had they
taken the liberty of repeating the disorderly conduct, whenever they celebrated
the paschal anniversary? -- Taken the liberty of transgressing the divine rule,
because Jehovah had o^^^ graciously pardoned their irregularities, and accepted
their services, on a similar occasion? Would they not have been chargeable with
hold presumption, and with doing evil that good might come? -- But I return to
our candid and peaceful opponents.

Disturb and break the order of churches, or order by Jesus Christ, with a view
to edification? The reader will here observe, the order intended is that of
administering baptism to believers, before they are admitted to the Lord's
table. That infraction of order, therefore, for which they plead, is no other
than setting aside an ordinance, allowed to be divine; and this to promote the
edification of those concerned. Very extraordinary, I must confess? For
professors in every age, have been more disposed to increase the number of
religious rites, than to lessen it, with a view to edification. So the Jews of
old frequently acted, and as frequently offended God. So the church of Rome has
appointed many forms and rites or worship, with a view to the edification of
her deluded votaries. The church of England also has retained the sign of the
cross in baptism, and claims a power to decree rites and ceremonies in divine
worship whenever she pleases; and all, no doubt, with a view to edification.
Yet I never heard that either of those establishments, arrogant as the former
is, ever talked of altering the primitive order of the Christion church, or of
omitting an ordinance, allowed to be divine, with a view to edification. Our
brethren, however, plead for this; and, which is equally wonderful, they plead
for it under the specious pretext, that a command of Christ may be performed.
But is not baptism a command, an acknowledged command of Christ? And was it not
graciously intended, as well as the holy supper, for the edification of
Christians? Or, do our opponents imagine, that we may slight, with impunity,
one command, provided we be but careful to observe another: even though the
command neglected has a prior claim on our obedience? -- In opposition to their
novel way of proceeding, and their unprecedented manner of talking, I will
present my reader with the sage maxim of a smart writer. He [Christ] has not
published his laws as men do theirs, with those imperfections, that they must
be explained and mended Mr. Bradbury's Duty and Doct. Bap. p. 24.
. To which I may add the following declarations of a learned pen: We must serve
God, not as we think fit, but as he has appointed. God must be judge of his
own honor -- Nothing, then, is small, whereupon depends the sanctity of God's
commandment and our obedience Pemble's Introduct. to Worthy (...). the Lord's
supper. p. 21, 31.
There is, however, little need of the maxims, or the declarations of men,
while we have the decision of Him who purchased the church with his own blood;
of -- Him who is to be our final judge. Now the language of that sublime Being
is; In all things that I have said unto you, he circumspect -- Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And it is worthy of being
remarked, that it stands recorded, to the honor of Moses, seven or eight times
in one chapter, that he did as the Lord commanded him See Exodus xl.
.

The question is not, whatever our opponents may think, Whether baptism is
essential to our salvation? But, Whether God has not commanded it? Whether It
is not a believer's duty to be found in it? And, Whether the pastor and members
of a gospel church can justify themselves, in admitting persons to communion
that have never been baptized? On the principle assumed by our opposers, a
professor that has no inclination to obey the divine command, in any particular
instance, may vindicate his refusal by saying; The performance of it is not
essential to my happiness; for a sinner may be saved without it A mode of
arguing this, that is big with rebellion against the dominion of God: A vile
antinomian principle, which, pursued in its consequences, is pregnant with ruin
to immortal souls. What, shall we avoid nothing that God has commanded, unless
we look upon it as essentially necessary to our future felicity! Is this the
way to manifest our faith in Jesus and love to God! -- How much better is the
reasoning of Mr. Charnock, when he says! Deus voluit, is a sufficient motive;
and we cannot free ourselves from the censure of disobedience, if we observe
not his commands in the same manner that he enjoins them; in their
circumstances, as well as their substance -- Who can, upon a better account,
challenge an exemption from positive institutions than our Savior, who had no
need of them? Yet how observant was he of them, because they were established
by divine authority! So that he calls his submitting to be baptized of John, a
fulfilling of righteousness -- Is it not a great ingratitude to God, to despise
what he commands as a privilege? Were not the apostles men of an extraordinary
measure of the Spirit, because of their extraordinary employments? And did they
not exercise themselves in the institutions of Christ? How have many [meaning
the Quakers] proceeded from the slighting of Christ's institutions, to the
denying the authority of his word! A slighting Christ himself, crucified at
Jerusalem, to set up an imaginary Christ within them *!

But must we not exercise Christian charity, and bear with one another's
infirmities? Should we not Works, Vol. II p. 766, 773, 775
seek peace, and endeavor to promote harmony among the people of God?
Undoubtedly: yet give me leave to ask, Is there no way to exercise love and
forbearance without practicing free communion? Cannot we promote peace and
harmony without practically approving of infant sprinkling, as if it were a
divine ordinance; while we are firmly persuaded that God never appointed it?
Or, are we bound to admit as a fact, what we verily believe is a falsehood; The
distinction between a Christian who holds what I consider as a practical error
in the worship of God, and the mistake maintained, is wide and obvious. It is
not an erroneous principle, or an irregular practice, that is the object of
genuine charity. No; it is the person who maintains an error, not the mistake
defended, that calls for my candor. The former, I am bound by the highest
authority, to love as myself; the latter, I should ever consider as inimical to
the honor of God, as unfriendly to my neighbor's happiness, and therefore
discourage it, in the exercise of Christian tempers, through the whole of my
conduct. -- It is freely allowed, that a mistake which relates merely to the
mode and subject of baptism, is comparatively small; but still, while I
consider the aspersion of infants as a human invention in the solemn service of
God, I am bound to enter my protest against it; and by a uniform practice to
show, that I am a Baptist -- the same when a Paedobaptist brother desires
communion with me, as when one of my own persuasion makes a similar request.
Thus proving that I act, not under the impulse of passion, but on a dictate of
judgment: and then the most violent Paedobaptist opponents will have no shadow
of reason to impeach my integrity; -- no pretense for surmising, that when I
gave the right hand of fellowship to such as have been immersed on a profession
of faith, I act on principles of conscience; but when admitting such to
communion, who have been only sprinkled in their infancy, on motives of
convenience. For it is allowed by all the world, that consistency is the best
evidence of sincerity.

I would also take the liberty here to observe, that some of those churches in
which free communion has been practiced, have not been the most remarkable for
brotherly love, or Christian peace and harmony. Has the pastor of a church so
constituted, being a Baptist, never found, that his Paedobaptist brethren have
been a little offended, when he has ventured freely to speak his mind on the
mode and subject of baptism? When Paedobaptist candidates for communion have
been proposed to such a church, have those members who espoused the same
sentiment never discovered a degree of pleasure, in the thought of having their
number and influence increased in the comnity, that has excited the jealousy of
their Baptist brethren? When, on the contrary, there has been a considerable
addition to the number of Baptist members, has not an equal degree of pleasure
in them, raised similar suspicions in the minds of their Paedobaptist brethren?
And are not suspicions and jealousies of this kind, the natural effects of such
a constitution? Must not a Baptist, as such, desire his own sentiment and
practice to increase and prevail, while he considers them as agreeable to the
will and command of his Lord? And must not a Paedobaptist, as such, sincerely
wish that his opinion and practice may spread and prevail, so long as he
considers infant sprinkling in the light of a divine appointment? To suppose a
member of such a church, whether he be Baptist or Paedobaptist, to love God,
and firmly believe his own sentiment concerning baptism to be a divine truth;
and yet be indifferent whether that or its opposite prevail, involves a
contradiction. For he who is indifferent to the performance of what he
considers as a command of God, treats God himself with an equal degree of
indifference: there being no possible way of expressing our affection for God,
but by regarding his revealed will. This is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments. Now, as our opponents must allow, that their communities are
liable to all those other imperfections which are common to the real churches
of Christ; so, I presume, the reader will hardly forbear concluding, that free
communion exposes them to some additional disadvantages, which are peculiar to
themselves.

Besides, though many of our Paedobaptist friends aunex those pleasing
epithets, candid and catholic, to the names of our opposers; I would not have
them be too much elated with such ascriptions of honor. For, is it not a fact,
that others who plead for infant baptism, and those not less wise and
discerning, consider their conduct in a very different point of light? Do they
not look upon it as savouring more of carnal policy, than of Christian charity;
and as being much better calculated to express their desire of popularity, in
adding to the number of their communicants, by opening a back door for the
members of Paedobaptist churches to enter, than to promote the edification of
sai^^^, or to maintain the purity of divine worship, considering their avowed
sentiments in regard to baptism? -- A Paedobaptist, when remonstrating against
the conduct of some Independent churches, that received Baptists into communion
with them, says; Let men pretend what they can for such a botch-p^lch communion
in their churches, I steadfastly believe the event and issue of such practices
will, sooner or later, convince all gainsayers, that it neither pleases
Christ, nor is any way promotive of true peace or gospel holiness in the
churches of God's people -- I shall never be reconciled to that charity, which,
in pretense of peace and moderation, opens the church's door to
church-disjointing principles. And he entitles his performance, The sin and
danger of admitting Anabaptists to continue in the Congregational churches, and
the inconsistency of such a practice with the principles of b^th. In Crosby's
Hist. Bap. Vol. III. page 45, 46, 47.
-- Thus, while our opponents gain the applause of some Paedobaptists, they
incur the censure of others, who consider their conduct as inconsistent with
Antipaedobaptist principles. Just as those Dissenters who have occasionally
conformed to the National Establishment, with a view to secular honors or
temporal emoluments; and who, by so doing, have converted the sacred supper
into a mere tool of ambition, or of avarice; while they have pleased some
Conformists, have offended others. For though such Dissenters have pretended a
concern for the public good, as the ruling motive, and have shown that they
were far from being bigots to the principles of Nonconformity; yet member^ of
the National church have not been wanting, who despised their duplicity of
conduct; who have censured it as a criminal neutrality in religion, and as
halting between two opinions, to the great dishonor of both; who have
repeatedly sounded that startling query in their ears. Far God, or for Baal?
and have pronounced them, amphibious Christians. See Mr. Stubbs's Sermon.
entitled, For God or for Baal^ Published, 1702.


Here one can hardly avoid observing, the very peculiar treatment with which
the Baptists in general meet from their Paedobaptist brethren. Do we strictly
abide by our own principles, admitting none to communion with us, but those
whom we consider as baptized believers? We are censured by many of them, as
uncharitably rigid, and are called, by one gentleman, watery bigots. Do any of
our denomination, under a plea of catholicism, depart from their avowed
sentiments, and connive at infant sprinkling? -- They are suspected, by others
of the Paedobaptists, as a set of temporizers. So that, like those unhappy
persons who fell into the hand of Procrustes, some of us are too short, and we
must be s^ret^l^ed; others are too long, and they must be lopped. -- But I
return to my argument.

It should be observed, that forbearance and love, not less than resolution and
zeal, must be directed in the whole extent of their exercise, by the word of
God; else we may greatly offend and become partakers of other men's sins, by
conniving when we ought to reprove. If the divine precepts, relating to love
and forbearance, will apply to the case in hand; or so as to justify our
connivance at an alteration, a corruption, or an omission of baptism; they will
do the same in regard to the Lord's supper. -- And then we are bound to bear
with sincere Papists, in their mutilation of the latter; and to exculpate our
upright friends the Quakers, in their opposition to both. For it cannot be
proved that baptism is less fundamental than the sacred supper. -- There is a
false, ungodly charity, says a sensible Paedobaptist writer, a strange fire
that proceeds not from the Lord; a charity that gives up the honor of
religion, merely because we will not be at the pains to defend it -- Vile
principles can easily cover themselves with the names of temper, charity,
moderation, and forbearance; but those glorious things are not to be confounded
with lukewarmness, self-seeking, laziness, or ignorance -- As there is a cloak
of covetousness, so there is a cloak of fear and cowardice -- You are never to
make peace with men at the expense of any truth, that is revealed to you by the
great God; because that is offering up his glory in sacrifice to your own -- Do
not dismember the Christian religion, but take it all together: charity was
never designed to be the tool of unbelief. See how the Spirit has connected
both our principles and duties. Follow peace with all men, and holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord.' Mr. Bradbury's Duty and Doct. of Bap.
p. 201, 213, 214.
-- 'I know not that man in England, says Dr. Owen, who is willing to go
farther in forbearance, love, and communion with all that fear God, and hold
the foundation, than I am: but this is never to be done by a condescension from
the exactness of the least apex of gospel truth. In Mr. Bradbury, as before, p.
198.


Another Paedobaptist author, when treating on charity and forbearance,
expresses himself in the following language. A considerable succedaneum for the
Christian unity, is the catholic charity; which is like the charity commended
by Paul, in only this one circumstance, that it "grows exceedingly" -- Among
the stricter sort, it goes chiefly under the name of forbearance. We shall be
much mistaken if we think that, by this soft and agreeable word, is chiefly
meant the tenderness and compassion inculcated by the precepts of Jesus Christ
and his apostles. It strictly means, an agreement to differ quietly about the
doctrines and commandments of the gospel, without interruption of visible
fellowship. They distinguish carefully between fundamentals, or things
necessary to be believed and practiced; and circumstantials, or things that are
indifferent. Now whatever foundation there may be for such a distinction in
human systems of religion; it certainly looks very ill-becoming in the churches
of Christ, to question how for He is to be ^^lieved and obeyed. Our modern
churches -- have nearly agreed to hold all those things indifferent, which
would be inconvenient and disreputable; and to have communion together, in
observing somewhat like the customs of their forefathers.

Many of the p^^inest sayings of Jesus Christ and the apostles, are treated
with high contempt, by the advocates of this forbearance. -- The common people
are persuaded to believe, that all the ancient institutions of Christianity
were merely local and temporary; excepting such as the learned have agreed to
be suitable to th^se times; or, which have been customarily observed by their
predecessors. But it would well become the doctors in divinity to show, by what
authority any injunction of God can be revoked, besides it is own: or, how any
man's conscience can be lawfully released, by custom, example, or human
authority, from observing such things as were instituted by the apostles of
Christ, in his name. -- This corrupt forbearauce had no allowed place in the
primitive churches. The apostle, in the epistle to the Ephesians, required of
them, to adorn their "vocation with all lowliness and meekness, with long
suffering, forbearing one another in love." But had they dispensed with the
laws of Christ, for convenience and ease, it had been forbearing one another in
hatred. For those laws were expressions of his love; the most fervent love that
was ever shown amongst men, directed by infallible wisdom. Whosoever,
therefore, would obliterate them, or any how attempt to change them, must
either suppose himself wiser than Jesus Christ, or a greater friend to mankind.
He must be moved, either by an enormous self-conceit; or by the spirit of
malevolence. --

The more thinking part of religious men, observing what great mischiefs have
arisen from contentions about truth, -- have found it most desirable to let
truth alone; and to concern themselves chiefly about living profitably in civil
society. To be of some religion is but decent; and the interests of human life
require that it be popular and compliant. If men have different notions of
Jesus Christ, his divinity, his facrifice, his kingdom, and the customs of his
religion, even from what the apostles seemed to have; charity [with many]
demands that we think well of their religious characters, notwithstanding this.
It is unbecoming the modesty of wise men to be confident on any side; and
contending earnestly for opinions, injures the peace of the Christian church.
Thus kind and humble is modern charity. -- Instead of rejoicing in, or with the
truth, it rejoiceth in contemplating the admirable piety that may be produced
from so many different, yea, opposite principles. -- It is very true, that the
power of godliness has often suffered in a zealous contention about rites and
ceremonies; but the contention has been chiefly about forms of human device.
The Christians of old time were taught, not to dispute about the institutions
of their Lord, but to observe them thankfully; and hereby they expressed their
affection to him and to each other. If that affection be granted to be more
important than the tokens of it, it would be unjust to infer that the latter
have no obligation; which would imply, that Christ and the apostles meant
nothing by their precepts. The Methodists have not, indeed, gone so far as
their spiritual brethren [the Quakers] have done, in rejecting all external
ceremonies; but they are taught to believe, that all concern about the ancient
order and customs of the Christians is mere party-spirit, and injurious to the
devout exercises of the heart. Thus the mother charity vaunts itself, in
answering better purposes than could be accomplished by keeping the words of
Christ. It produces a more extensive and generous communion; and animates the
devotion of men, without perplexing them by uncertain doctrine, or rigorous
self-denial. Although it supposes some revelation from God. and some honor due
to Jesus Christ; it claims a right to dispense with both; to choose what, in
his doctrine and religion, is fit to be believed and observed. Strictures upon
Modern S^mony, p. 48 -- 55.
-- So, that illegitimate charity and false moderation, which incline
professors to treat divine institutions as articles of small importance; led
that great man, Melan^thon, to place the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, the number of positive institututions in the Christian church, the
jurisdiction claimed by the Pope, and several supersititions rites of the
Romish religion, among things indifferent, when an imperial edict required
compliance. Mosheim's ^^^hs. Hist. Vol. IV. p. ^7, ^8.
But, as we must take heed that we do not add the fancies of men to our divine
religion; so we should take equal care that we do not curtail the appointments
of Christ, Dr. Watts (...). Attempt. p. 6^.
out of any pretense to candor, or peace, or the edification of our fellow
Christians. -- The charity for which many professors plead, is of so lax a
nature, and so far belide the rule, both in regard to doctrine and worship; as
gives too much occasion to ask, with Joshua, Are you for us, or for our
adversaries?

Once more: Remarkable strong, and not foreign to my purpose, are the words of
Mr. John Wesley. which are quoted with approbation by Mr. Rowland Hill. A
catholic spirit is not speculative latitudinarianism. It is not an indifference
to all opinions. This is the spawn of hell; not the off spring of heaven. This
unsettledness of thought, this being driven to and fro, and tossed of though
with every wind of doctrine, is a great curse, not a blessing; an
irreconcilable enemy, not a true catholicism. -- A man of a true cathohe spirit
-- does not halt between two opinions; nor vainly endeavors to blend them into
one. Observe this, you that know not what spirit you are of: who call
yourselves of a catholic spirit, only because you are of a muddy understanding;
because your mind is all in a mist because you are of no settled, consistent
principles, but are for jumbling all opinions together. Be convinced that you
have quite missed your way. You know not where you are. You think you are got
into the very Spirit of Christ; when, in truth, you are nearer the spirit of
Antichrist. In Mr. Rowland Hill's full Answer to Mr. J. Wesley' s Remarks, p.
40, 41.


Our brethren with an air of superior confidence often demand, What have you to
do with another's baptism? This interrogatory I would answer by proposing
another: What have I to do with another's faith, experience, or pracliee? In
one view, nothing at all, if he do not injure my person, character, or
property; for to his own master he stands or falls. In another, much; that is,
if he desire communion with me at the Lord's table. In such a case, I may
lawfully address him in the following manner: What think you of Christ? What
know you of yourself? Of yourself, as a sinner; of Christ, as a faviour? Of
Christ, as King in Zion; of yourself, as a subject of his benign government?
Are you desirous to be found in his righteonsness, and sincerely willing to
obey his commands? Are you ready to hear his cross, and to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes? -- Receiving satisfaction to these most important
queries, we will suppose the conversation thus to proceed: What are the divine
commands? After believing, baptism is the first, the very first that requires a
public act of obedience. -- 'But I have been baptized.' Perhaps not. Make it
appear, however, and I shall say no more on that subject. -- I am really
persuaded of it in my own mind. Were it otherwise, I should think it my duty, I
should not hesitate a moment, to be immersed on a profession of faith. I
commend your integrity: abide by the dictates of conscience. Yet care should be
taken, that her language be an echo to the voice of divine revelation; else you
may neglect your duty and slight your privileges, offend God and injure your
soul, even while you obey her commands. -- But I am persuaded Christ has
accepted me, and that it is my duty to receive the holy supper. That Christ has
received you, I have a pleasing persuasion; and so I conclude, in a judgment of
charity, concerning all whom I baptize: but that it is the immediate duty of
any unbaptized believer to approach the Lord's table, may admit of a query:
nay, the general practice of the Christian church in every age, has been quite
in the negative. For a learned writer assures us, that among all the
absurdities that ever were held, none ever maintained that, that any person
should partake of the communion before he was baptized. Was it, think you, the
duty of an ancient Israelite to worship at the sanctuary, or to partake of the
paschal seast, before he was circumcised? Or, was it the duty of the Jewish
priests to burn incense in the holy place, before they offered the morning or
the evening sacrifice? The appointments of God must be administered in his own
way, and in that order which he has fixed. For, to borrow an illustration from
a well known author, Suppose a master commands his servant to sow his ground;
does this give a right to him to go immediately and cast in the seed, before
that ever he break the ground with the plough, and make it fit for the
receiving the seed? Should he go thus to work, he were a disobedient servant.
Neither could it excuse, that he had his master's immediate command to sow his
ground. Even so in the present case Mr. Thomas Boston's Works, page 386.
-- Christ commands believers to remember him at his own table. But were those
believers to whom he first gave the command unbaptized? Or, can we infer,
because it is the duty of all baptized believers to celebrate the Lord's
supper, that it is the immediate duty of one that is not baptized, so to do? --
Could you produce an instance from the records of the New Testament, of any
believer being refused communion, merely because he scrupled the propriety of
being immersed on a profession of faith, it would warrant your present denial.
But, whenever you shall make it appear, that a truly converted person, and one
who was considered as such, desired fellowship with a church of Christ in the
apostolic age: I will engage to prove that he was received, whatever might be
his views relating to the mode and subject of baptism. And when you shall
adduce an instance of any real convert, in those primitive times,
conscientiously scrupling the use of the wine at the Lord's table; I will enter
under the same obligation to prove, that the sacred supper was administered to
him in his own way. -- Will you, then, dare to reject those whom Christ
accepts! Reject, from what? My esteem and affection? Far be it! Under a
persuasion that Christ has received you, I love and honor you as a Christian
brother. His image appearing in your temper and conduct commands my regard. --
With what consistency, then, can you refuse me communion? If Christ has
accepted me, if Christ himself has communion with me, why may not you?
Communion with you in the knowledge and comfort of the truth I have; and this
would be both my honor and happiness, were you a converted Jew. Communion with
you I also have in affection; but fellowship at the Lord's table is a distinct
act, a very different thing; and is to be regulated entirely by the revealed
will of Him that appointed it. Communion at the holy supper would never have
been either the duty or privilege of any man, if Christ had not commanded it,
any more than it is now my duty to celebrate the ancient passover. But that
eternal law which requires me to love my neighbor as myself, would have
obliged me to love you, both as a man and a Christian, if baptism and the
Lord's supper had never been ordained. -- After all, your professions of
affection for me as a believer in Jesus Christ, and your refusing to have
communion with me at the holy table, carry the appearance of a strong
inconsistency. Admitting they do, the inconsistency is not peculiar to me, nor
to those of my persuasion; because I act on a principle received in common by
the whole Christian church. There is no denomination of Christians, except
those who plead for free communion, that would admit you to the Lord's table,
if they did not think you had been baptized. This, therefore, is the principle
on which I refuse to have communion with you: I consider you as unbaptized.
Suppose a Jew, a Turk, or a Pagan, to be enlightened by divine grace, to have
the truth as it is in Jesus, to love God and desire communion with his people
before he is baptized; would you think it right, could your own conscience
admit of it, as consistent with the revealed will of Christ and the practice of
his apostles, that such a request should be granted by any gospel church? in a
case of this kind, I presume, -- and there have been millions of Jews and
Heathens converted, since the Christian era commenced, -- in such a case you
would easily discern a consistency, between loving him as a believer, and
refusing to have communion with him till he was baptized. Nay, I cannot help
thinking, but you would be startled at the report of any religious community
admitting such an one to the Lord's table; because it would strike you as a
notorious departure from the divine rule of proceeding; from the laws and
statutes of Heaven, in that case made and provided. Besides, you have already
acknowledged, that if you did not consider yourself as baptized; if you thought
immersion on a profession of says essential to baptism, which you very well
know is my sentiment; you should think it your duty to submit, you would not
hesitate a moment. So that, were I to encourage your immediate approach to the
sacred supper, I should stand condemned on your own principles. This,
therefore, is the only question between us, What is baptism? For you dare not
assert, you cannot suppose, that an unbaptized believer, descended from
Christian parents, has any pre-eminence, in point of claim to communion, above
a truly converted Jew: and you must allow that I have an equal right with you,
or any other man, to judge for myself what is essential to baptism. You verily
believe that you have been baptized; I am equally confident, from your own
account of the matter, that you have not. Your conscience opposes the thought
of being immersed on a profession of says, because, in your opinion, it would
be rebaptization; mine cannot encourage your approach to the Lord's table,
because I consider infant baptism as invalid. -- I perceive, then, that you
look upon me as an unbaptized Heathen: for you cannot imagine that I am, or
ever was, a Turk or a Jew. Quite a mistake. I consider you as a real convert,
and love you as a Christian brother. Were you persuaded that a son of Abraham
after the flesh, or a dupe to Mahomet's imposture, or an uncultivated
Hottentot, had received the truth and was converted to the Lord Redeemer; would
you still call him, without limitation, a Jew, a Turk, or a Heathen? No,
candor and common sense would forbid the thought. You would rather say, He is
a believer in God's Messiah, and a lover of Jesus Christ; he feels the power of
gospel truth on his heart, and his moral conduct is comely; but, as yet, he is
unbaptized. I should rejoice to see him convinced of the importance of that
institution, of the connection it has with other appointments of Christ, and
behold him submit to it. Then, were I in communion, I should freely give him
the right hand of fellowship, and break bread with him at the Lord's table.
Till then, however, though I think it the duty of every Christian to love him
for the truth's sake, I consider it as no breach of charity, in any community,
not to admit him to the Lord's table. -- Now I appeal to the reader, I appeal
to our brethren themselves, Whether, on our Antipaedobaptist principles, we are
not obliged to consider a truly converted but unbaptized Mussulman, and a
converted Englishman, who has has had no other than Paedobaptism, as on a
level, in point of claim to communion with us? For God is no respecter of
persons. It is not matter where a man was born, or how he was educated; whether
he drew his first breath at Constantinople or Pekin, or London; whether his
parents taught him to revere the Koran of Mahomet, the Institutes of Confucius,
or the well attested Revelation of God; if he really be born of the Spirit, he
has an equal claim to all the privileges of a gospel church, with a true
convert descended from Christian ancestors. And if so, while our brethren abide
by their present hypothesis, they could not refuse the sacred supper to the
one, any more than the other, without the most palpable inconsistency; though,
by admitting the former to that divine appointment, they would surprise and
offend all that heard of it.

Our opponents further suggest, nay, they seem quite confident, That the
Christian Jews in the primitive church, might, on our principles, have refused
communion to the believing Gentiles, because they were not circumcised; and
that the converted Gentiles might have denied fellowship to the believing Jews,
for the opposite reason. But here our brethren take for granted, what we cannot
by any means allow. For this way of talking supposes, that a submission to
baptism is no more demanded of believers now, than circumcision was of Gentile
converts in the apostolic age; and that we who plead for baptism, as a term of
communion, have no more authority so to do, than Judaizing Christians then had
for maintaining the necessity of circumcision. Now such extraordinary positions
as these should not have been assumed gratis, but proved, soundly proved;
which, had our opposers well and truly performed, would have made me and many
of their stricter brethren, thorough proselytes to free communion. Nay, we
should, probably, before now, have been in a hopeful way of getting entirely
rid of that ordinance, about the order and importance of which we now contend.
For neither Pacificus, nor Candidus, will dare to assert, that our ascended
Lord requires any of his disciples to be circumcised, either before or after
their admission to the holy table: consequently, if their arguing from
circumcision to baptism be conclusive, we may absolutely omit the latter, as
converts of old did the former, without fear of the least offense, or of any
divine resentment.

And must we, indeed, consider the administration and the neglect of baptism,
as on a perfect level with being circumcised, or uncircumcised, in the
apostolic times! Must an ordinance of the New Testament, submission to which
our Lord requires of all his disciples, be placed on the same footing with an
obsolete rite of the Jewish church! How kind it is of our brethren who possess
this knowledge, and are so well acquainted with Christian liberty, relating to
baptism, that they are willing to inform us of its true extent! For, as Socinus
long ago observed, Ignorance of it is the cause of many evils. I may, however,
venture an appeal to the intelligent reader, Whether this way of arguing does
not much better become the pen of Socinus, of Volkelius, or of a Quaker; than
that of Pacificus, of Candidus, or of any Baptist? Because, as Hornbeek
remarks, in answer to the Socinians; If is very absurd to explain the design,
the command, and the obligation of baptism, by the abrogation and abuse of
circumcision. As our brethren detest the Socinian system in general, I cannot
but wonder that they should so often use weapons, in desence of their novel
sentiment, that were forged by Socinus, or some of his pupils, for a similar
purpose. I could wish therefore, that some such person as Mr. Ryland, who is
well known to have an utter aversion to the capital tenets of that pretended
reformer of the Reformed church in Poland, would seriously take Pacificus to
task, for paying so much honor to a depraver of divine truth, and a mutilator
of God's worship. For who knows but it might have a happy effect, and cause him
to retract his Modest Plea? -- Before I proceed to another objection. it may
not be amiss to observe, What a variety of laudable and kindred purposes this
argument is adapted to serve, according to its various application by different
persons. In the hands of our opponents, it effectually proves the necessity of
admitting infant sprinkling, in some cases, as a proper succedaneum for what
they consider as real baptism. From the pen of Socinus, it evinces beyond a
doubt, that baptism is an indifferent thing. And in the mouth of Barclay, it
will equally well demonstrate, that baptism should be entirely laid aside.
Well, then, might our Candid and Peaceful opposers congratulate themselves on
the safety of their cause, it being defended by such a three edged sword as
this! And well might they unite, at one man, in saying: If, therefore, this
were the only thing that could be urged in savor of the latitude of communion
I plead for, I should think it would be sufficient; at least sufficient to
excuse our conduct, and stop the mouth of censure.

But, notwithstanding all I have said, we stand charged by our brethren with a
notorious inconsistency in our own conduct; because we occasionally admit, with
pleasure, Paedobaptist ministers into our pulpits, to whom we should refuse
communion at the Lord's table. This objection has been much insisted upon of
late, and is sometimes urged against us by way of query, to the following
effect. Is not as much required in order to an offi^e in the church, as to
private membership? Is it not as inconsistent to receive a Paedobaptist, as a
minister, and admit him into the pulpit, as to admit him into the church and to
the Lord's table? Where have you either precept, or example, for receiving them
as ministers, any more than for receiving them as members? -- These queries
being considered, by many of our opponents, as quite unanswerable, I shall take
the more notice of them.

The first thing then, that demands regard, is the state of the question which
is now before us. For it is not, as these queries suggest, Whether as much be
not required in order to an office in the church, as to private communion? This
we readily allow; this we never denied. For what congregation of strict
Baptists would think they acted consistently in making choice of a Paedobaptist
for their pastor, or to officiate as a deacon? Besides, will not our brethren
acknowledge, that in every orderly society, and more especially in a church of
Christ, a person must be a member before he can be an officer in it? This is
the point in dispute, at least it is this about which I contend; Whether
baptism be equally necessary to the occasional exercise of ministerial gifts,
as it is to communion at the Lord's table? and, Whether the scripture favor
the one as much as the other?

Such being the true state of the question, I now beg leave to ask; Supposing
our brethren to prove the affirmative beyond a doubt, what is the consequence,
and how are we affected by it? Is it, that we are found guilty of a direct
violation of some divine command, that requires us to receive Paedobaptists
into our communion? No such thing is pretended. Is it, that we oppose some
plain apostolic precedent? neither is this laid to our charge. For they do not
believe there were any Paedobaptists in the apostolic times; and, consequently,
they cannot suppose that the New Testament contains an example of such being
received into communion. What, then, is the conclusion they would infer? It
must, surely, be something formidable to every strict Baptist; otherwise it is
hardly supposable that so much weight should be laid upon this objection. The
consequence, however, is only this; The premises proved, the strict Baptists
have no reason to censure their brethren of a looser cast, because they
themselves are equally culpable, though in a different respect. Or, in other
words. The strict Baptists, like some other folks, are not quite infallible; do
actually err; and, by reason of a mistake, impertinently blame the conduct of
their more free, and open, and generous brethren, when they ought rather to
examine and reform their own. -- But this inference can be of little service to
the cause of free communion, except it be good logic and sound divinity, to
attempt a justification of my own faults, by proving that he who accuses me is
equally guilty: or to congratulate myself as an innocent man, because my
neighbor cannot with a good grace reprove me. Our opponents, I persuade
myself, will not be greatly offended with us, if this argument, Herculean as it
seems to them; should not make us complete converts to free communion. So soon,
however, as our brethren shall make it appear, that they have as good a warrant
for receiving Paedobaptist believers into stated communion, as I have to admit
a Paedobaptist minister occasionally into my pulpit; I will either encourage
the former, or entirely refuse the latter.

But if these queries prove any thing, they prove too much; more at least, than
the querists intend. For, according to the argument contained in them, it is
equally unwarrantable for us to hear a Paedobabtist minister preach, or to
unite with him in pubblic prayer; as it is for them to receive him into
communion. For instance: do they demand, Where have you either precept, or
example, for admitting Paedobaptist ministers into your pulpits, any more than
for receiving them as members? I resort, on their Baptist principles; Where
have you either precept or example, in the New Testament, for bearing
Paedobaptist ministers preach; or for uniting with them in public prayer, any
more than for receiving them as members? And, to show the futility of this
argument, I again demand; If, in bearing such ministers preach, or by uniting
with them in public prayer (which are undoubtedly branches of the moral worship
of God, nor peculiar to any dispensation of religion) we act without any
express command or plain example in the New Testament; with what propriety, can
we blame our brethren for admitting. Paedobaptists to the Lord's supper (which
is a positive institution; (...) part of divine worship that depends entirely
on a revelation of the sovereign will of God) though they have neither precept
nor precedent for so doing? Queries of this kind might be multiplied, but these
may suffice.

But is there no difference between the two cases? No difference between
occasionally admitting Paedobaptist ministers into our pulpits, and receiving
them, or others of the same persuasion, into our communion? I can scarcely
imagine that our brethren themselves will here answer in the negative; but that
this difference may plainly appear, let the following things be observed. --
Public preaching is not confined to persons in a church state, nor ever was;
but the Lord's supper is a church ordinance, nor ought ever to be administered
but to a particular church, as such. Now it is of a particular church, and of a
positive ordinance peculiar to it, concerning which is all our dispute. --
There is not that strict mutual relation between bare hearers of the word and
their preachers, as there is between the members of a church and her pastor, or
between the members themselves. And as, according to the appointment of God,
persons must believe the gospel before they have any thing to do with positive
institutions; so, in the ordinary course of Providence, they must hear the
gospel in order to their believing. The Corinthians heard before they believed;
they believed before they were baptized; and, no doubt, they were baptized
before they received the sacred supper. (Acts xviii. 8.) When our opponents
receive Paedobaptists into their fellowship, they practically allow what they
themselves consider as a human invention, to supersede a positive, divine
institution; and that with a view to their attending on another positive
appointment of Jesus Christ. Not so, when we admit ministers of that persuasion
into our pulpits. In this case there is no divine institution superseded; no
human invention, in the worship of God, encouraged: nor is it done with a view
to introduce them to any positive appointment of our sovereign Lord. -- Again:
When we admit Paedobaptist ministers into our pulpits, it is in expectation
that they will preach the gospel; that very gospel which we believe and love,
and about which there is no difference between them and us. But when they
receive Paedobaptists into communion, they openly connive at what they consider
as an error; an error both in judgment and practice; an error of that kind
which the scripture calls, "will worship, and the traditions of men." There is,
undoubtedly, a material difference, between hearing a minister who, in our
judgment, is ignorant of the only true baptism, discourse on those doctrines he
experimentally knows, and countenancing an invention of men. In the former case
we show an esteem for his personal talents, we honor his ministerial gifts,
and manifest our love to the truth; in the latter, we set aside a divinely
appointed prerequisite for communion at the Lord's table.

It has been already observed, as a fact, that persons have been called by
grace, who were not baptized in their infancy; and, considering baptism as a
temporary institution, have conscientiously refused a submission to that
ordinance when converted, who yet desired communion in the holy supper. We will
now suppose a community of such; and that they call to the ministry one of
their number, who is allowed by all competent judges, to possess great
ministerial gifts, and to be a very useful preacher: -- Or we may suppose a
reformed Catholic, equally the subject of divine grace, and endued with equal
abilities for public service: yet conscientiously retaining the Popish error of
communion in one kind only. Now, on either of these suppositions, I demand of
our brethren, whether they would receive such an one into communion with the
same readiness that they would admit him into their pulpits? If they answer in
the negative, then by their own confession, there is not so close a connection
between admitting a person to preach amongst us, and receiving him into
communion, as they pretend. And we may venture to retort upon them; Shall an
excellent, laborious and useful minister of Christ work for you, and shall he
not be allowed to eat with you! What, shall he break the bread of life to you,
and must he not be suffered to break bread at the Lord's table with you! --
Again: We will suppose a good man and a useful preacher to be fully persuaded,
with the Hydroparastates in the second century, that water should always be
used at the Lord's table, instead of wine; and that, on a principle of
conscience, he absolutely refuses the latter: Or, that it is more significant
and more agreeable to dip the bread in the wine, and receive them both at once;
as practiced by some in the fourth century, and more frequently afterward: Or,
that he conscientiously approves the custom of the Greeks, who mix boiling
water with wine, crumble the bread into it, and taking it out with a spoon,
receive both elements together. Witfii Econom. Faed. L. IV. C. XVII. 10, 25. To
what lengths of superstition and absurdity may persons professing the Christian
religion run, when they leave the divine rule of proceeding! No branches of
Jehovah's worship require a more punctual regard to the sacred rule, than those
which are of a position kind; yet none have been so mutilated, metamorphosed,
and abused, as they have been, by the perverse inventions and bold impieties of
men.
Now though, I consess, they could not refuse him a place at the Lord's table,
to partake of the holy supper in his own way, without violating that grand rule
of their conduct, "God has received him;" and though Pacificus and Candidus
could not reject him, without contradicting the titles of their plea for free
communion; yet, I presume, the generality of our opponents would hardly allow
of such a peculiar mode of proceeding, in any of their churches. No; they would
be ready to say of such a candidate for fellowship; He ought to regard the
example of Christ, who used wine: Or, he ought to obey the divine command,
which requires that we should drink the wine. Yet they might not think it
proper to refuse him the occasional use of a pulpit, and might hear him preach
the truth, received in common, with pleasure.

Though, as Antipaedobaptists, it cannot be expected, that we should produce
instances out of the New Testament of Paedobaptist ministers being encouraged
in a similar way; because we are firmly persuaded there were none such, till
after the sacred canon was completed: yet we find, in that inspired volume, a
sufficient warrant for uniting with those that believe, in affection and walk,
so far as agreed; notwithstanding their ignorance of some part of the counsel
of God, to which a conscientious obedience is indispensably required, from all
those by whom it is known. (Philip. iii. 15, 16.) Yes, the New Testament not
only permits, as lawful, but enjoins as an indispensable duty, that we should
love them that love the Lord; and that we should manifest his holy affection in
every way, that is not inconsistent with a revelation of the divine will in
some other respect. So it was under the Jewish economy, and so it is now. To
admit, therefore, a minister to preach among us, with whom we should have no
objection to commune, could we allow the validity of infant baptism; as it is a
token of our affection for a servant of Christ, of our love to the truth he
preaches, and is not contrary to any part of divine revelation, must be lawful:
or if not, it lies with our brethren to prove it; because they cannot deny that
the word of God requires us to love him, and to manifest our affection for him.
But as to communion at the holy table, Christians in general have had no more
doubt, whether baptism should precede it, according to a special revelation of
the divine will; than whether baptism itself be a part of the counsel of God.
-- When we ask a Paedobaptist minister to preach in any of our churches, we act
on the same general principle, as when we request him to pray with any of us in
a private family. And as no one considers this as an act of church communion,
but as a testimony of our affection for him, so we consider that; and it is
viewed by the public, as a branch of the general intercourse which it is not
only lawful, but commendable and profitable to have, with all that preach the
gospel.

I take it for granted, that circumcision was absolutely necessary for every
male, in order to communion at the paschal supper, and in the solemn worship of
the sanctuary. And if so, had the most renouned antidiluvians that ever lived,
or the most illustrious Gentiles that ever appeared in the world, been
cotemporary with Moses and sojourners in the same wilderness, they could not
have been admitted to communion in the Israelitish church, without submitting
to circumcision. Enoch, though as a saint he walked (...): though as a prophet
he foretold the coming of Christ to judgment -- Noah, though an h^^r of the
righteousness of faith, a a preacher of that righteousness, and one of
Ezekiel's worthies, (Chap. xiv, 14, 16, 18, 20.) -- Melchisedeck, though a
king, and a priest of the most high God; superior to Abraham, and the greatest
personal type of the Lord Messiah that ever was among men -- And Job, though
for piety there was none like him upon earth, Jehovah himself being judge, and
one of the prophet's illustrious triumvirate, (Ezekiel, as before.) These I say,
notwithstanding all their piety and holiness, notwithstanding all their shining
excellencies, exalted characters, and useful services; could not, as
uncircumcised, have been admitted to communion with the chosen tribes at the
tabernacle of the God of Israel, without a violation of the divine command.
This, I persuade myself, our opponents must allow: this, I think, they dare not
deny. Yet if Enoch, for instance, had been in the camp of Israel when Korah and
his company mutinied, and had been disposed to give the rebels a lecture on the
second coming of Christ; I cannot suppose that his offered service would have
been rejected by Moses or Joshua, merely because he was not circumcised. Or, if
Noah had been present at the erection of the tabernacle, and inclined to give
the people a sermon on the future incarnation of the Son of God, and the
righteousness of faith; to which most important objects that sacred structure,
with its costly utensils and solemn services, had a typical regard; I cannot
but think they would have given him a hearing. Nay, I appeal to our opponents
themselves, whether they do not (...) so as well as I. Yet that favored people
could not have admitted them to communion in some other branches of divine
worship, without transgressing the laws of Jehovah. (Exodus xii. 44, 48. Ezekiel.
xliv. 7.) If this be allowed, the consequence is plain, and the argument,
though analogical, is irrefragable. For the Paschal feast and the sanctuary
services were not more of a positive nature than the Lord's supper; nor were
the former more peculiar to that dispensation than the latter is to this; but
preacing and hearing the word are not peculiar to any dispensation of grace, as
are baptism and the sacred supper.

Our Lord, though he warned his hearers against the pride and hypocrisy, the
unbelief and covetousness, of the ancient Pharisees, and Scribes, and Jewish
teachers; yet exhorted the people to regard the truths they delivered. (Matt.
xxiii, 1, 2, 3.) Our opponents notwithstanding, cannot imagine that Christ
would have admitted those ecclesiastics. to baptism, had they desired it; nor
will they assert that any, who are not proper subjects of that ordinance,
should be received into communion. -- When the beloved disciple said, Master,
we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and we forbad him, because he
follows not with us:" Jesus answered, Forbid him not; for he that is not
against us, is for us. Luke ix. 49, 50. From which it appears, that we are
under obligation to encourage those that fight against the common enemy, and
propagate the common truth; though they and we may have no communion together,
in the special ordinances of God's house; which is the very case when we admit
our Paedobaptist brethren to preach among us -- We are also informed, that the
first Gentiles who were converted by the apostolic ministry, were endued with
miraculous gifts immediately upon their believing and before they were
baptized; for they spoke with tongues and glorified God. (Acts. x. 44.) Nor is
it improbable but some of them then received gifts for the ministry; and if so,
in the fullness of their hearts and the transport of their joy, they also gave
the first specimen of their future ministrations, to the pleasing astonishment
of Peter and those that were with him. But can our brethren suppose, that the
great apostle would have taken equal pleasure in hearing them request a place
at the Lord's table, before they were baptized? No; his own conduct opposes the
thought. For, having beheld with astonishment the gifts they received, and
hearing with rapture the truths they delivered, he commanded them to be
baptized in the name of the Lord; to be baptized immediately in the name of
that Lord, who requires a submission to the ordinance from all that believe.

Once more: A very competent judge of all that pertains to the ministerial
character, and of all that belongs to a Christian profession, has left his
opinion on record concerning the ministry of certain persons, whom he
considered as quite unworthy of his intimate friendship. Yes, Paul, that most
excellent man, when acting as amanuensis to the Spirit of wisdom, and when
speaking of some who preached the gospel, informs us, that envy and strife were
the principles on which they acted, and the increase of his afflictions the end
which they had in view. How carnal and base the principles! How detestable the
end at which they aimed! -- But was the apostle offended or grieved, so as to
wish they were silenced? Or, did he charge his beloved Philippians, and all the
sincere followers of Christ, never to hear them? Let his own declaration answer
the queries. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached; and therein I do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
(Philip. i. 15 -- 18.) When a corrupted gospel is preached, he asserts his
apostolic authority, and thunders out anathemas against the propagators of it.
(Gal. i. 6 -- 9.) Because, as God will not set the seal of his blessing to a
falsehood, or sanctify a lie, it can do no good; it is pregnant with mischief.
But when the pure gospel is preached, though on perverse principles, as it is
the truth, God frequently owns and renders it useful, whover may publish it.
Hence the apostle's joy in the text before us. -- Now, as we are far from
impeaching the sincerity of our Paedobaptist brethren, when preaching the
gospel of our ascended Lord; and as Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached,
though by persons who acted on the basest principles; ^e cannot imagine that he
would have taken less ple^sure in the thought of Paedobaptist ministers
publishing the glorious gospel of the blessed God, had the^e been any such in
those days, even though he might have considered them as under a great mistake,
in regard to baptism: for our opponents do not believe any more than we, that
Paul knew any thing of infant sprinkling. And if so, we may safely conclude,
that there is nothing inconsistent with our hypothesis, in occasionally
admitting Paedobaptist ministers into our pulpits, and hearing them with
pleasure. -- But will our opponents assert, or can they suppose, that the great
apostle of the Gentiles would have encouraged with equal delight such persons
as those of whom he speaks, to approach the holy table and have communion with
him in all the ordinances of God's house? Persons, who made the glorious gospel
of the blessed God, the vehicle of their own pride, and envy, and malice; and
in whose conduct those infernal tempers reigned, and had for their immediate
object one of the most excellent and useful men that ever lived? Certainly, if
on any occasion, we may here adopt the old proverb; Credat Judaeus apella.

Christ is preached, and therein I do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.
Disinterested, noble saying! Worthy of a first rate minister in the Messiah's
kingdom; worthy of Paul; who cared not who opposed him, nor what he suffered,
if Christ were but glorified in the conversion of sinners. But though that man
of God thus expresses himself, in reference to gospel preaching; I cannot
imagine, nor will our brethren affirm, that he would with the same pleasure
have admitted any of the Jewish converts to communion, because they supposed
themselves to have been baptized, merely on account of their having been washed
according to the traditions of the elders. To a request of this kind, his
mildest answer, we have reason to think, would have been, We have no such
custom, nor the churches of God. Yet, as Baptists, our opponents must consider
infant sprinkling, as having nothing more to recommend it, than human authority
and general practice; which were the grand recomendations of those Jewish
washings, and the very basis on which they stood. -- Suppose our brethren in
the course of their reading, were to find it asserted by some ancient author,
That Paul frequently admitted persons to communion, on such a pretense to
baptism; what would they say? They would, I presume, consider the assertion as
a libel on his character. They would execrate the pen which transmitted such a
falsehood to posterity; and look on the writer, either as a weak and credulous
man, or as a forger of lies. And, except a predilection for free communion
biassed their judgment, their opinion and censure would be much the same, were
they to find it recorded; He frequently admitted believers to the Lord's table;
before they were baptized. The utter silence of the New Testament, relating to
a conduct of this kind; the many passages, in that infallible code of divine
worship, inconsistent with such a practice; and their veneration for the
character of the great apostle, would oblige them so to do. Yet, amazing to
think! for such a procedure they plead; such a conduct they adopt; and look
upon as greatly injuring the honor and interests of real religion, and not a
little contributing to the cause of infidelity; merely because we cannot
consider them as the followers of Paul in this particular, nor become their
humble imitators!

But why should our brethren so earnestly plead for believers receiving the
Lord's supper, while they treat baptism as if it were a mere trifle; an
appointment of Christ that might very well have been spared? What is there of
obligation of solemnity, of importance, in the former that is not in the
la^ter? Have they not the same divine Institutor, and the same general end!
Were they not intended for the same persons, and are they not ^^^^ly permanent
in the church of God? And as to baptism, was not the administration of it by
John, one of the first characteristics of the Messiah's appearance, and of the
gospel dispensation commencing? Did not the King Messiah submit to it, as an
example of obedience to all his followers; and most strongly recommend it to
their judgment and conscience, their affections and practice, when he said;
Thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness? Which, by the way, is more
than can be asserted concerning the sacred supper; for though he instituted it
with great solemnity, yet we do not read that he partook of it. Welfius in Luc.
xxii. 18.
Was not the administration of baptism so honored at the river Jordan, when
the great Immanuel submitted to it; when the eternal Father, by an audible
voice, declared his approbation of it; and when the Divine Spirit descended on
the head of Jesus, just emerged from the water, as no other institution ever
was? And does not the divinely prescribed form of words that is used in its
administration show, that there is a peculiar solemnity, an excellence, an
importance in it? while, at the same time, it suggests arguments of
unanswerable force against those Antitrinitarian errors which now so much
abound. For no man who has been baptized at his own request, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; can deny that fundamental
doctrine of the Trinity, without giving the lie to his baptism.

Nor is it unlikely that this consideration may have inclined some to oppose
the ordinance. I believe one reason, says Dr. Wall, why Socinus had such a mind
to abolish all use of baptism among his followers, was, because persons
baptized in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, would be
always apt to think those names to express the Deity in which they were to
believe; which he did not mean they should do. And some of his followers have
been so disgusted with that form of baptism, that they have given profane
insinuations that those words were not originally in the scripture; but were
taken from the usual doxology into the form of baptism, and then inserted into
the text of Matt. xxviii. 19. Hist. Ins. Bap. Part II. Chap. VII.
-- The same suspicions, relating to this matter, were entertained by Mr.
Thomas Bradbury, as appears by the following words: My friends, I ought to warn
you, that the main debate in a little time will be, not how much water should
be used, but whether any at all. They who deny the doctrine of the Trinity are
so uneasy at the form of words, that our Savior has made essential to baptism,
that they have a great mind to lay aside the ordinance, as Socinus did in
Poland. They write and argue that it is not necessary; by which if they mean
any thing that is worth our heeding, it must be, that it is not commanded. For
though we dare not say that it is necessary to God's grace, yet the question
is, whether he has not made it so to our (...). And when they ask you, whether
a man may not be saved without it? Do you ask them, whether he is obedient
without it? whether he stands complete in all the will of God? whether he
fulfils all righteousness? or whether he neglects to do, what the scripture
told him he ought to do? Duty and Doct. p. 52.


It is with peculiar pleasure, on this occasion, that I introduce the following
pertinent passage from a little publication written by Mr. John Ryland. His
words are these: Dr. Daniel Waterland justly observes, that the true doctrine
of the Trinity and the atonement of Christ, have been kept up in the Christian
church, by the institutions of baptism and the Lord's supper, more than by any
other means whatsoever; and, humanly speaking, these glorious truths, which are
essential to salvation, would have been lost long age, if the two positive
institutions had been totally neglected and disused amongst professors of
Christianity. In this point of view, baptism and the Lord's supper appear to be
of unspeakable importants to the glory of God, and the very being of (...) true
church of Christ on earth. Duty and Doct. p. 52.
-- Again: In another little piece, to which I have already referred, and of
which the same worthy minister of Jesus Christ has expressed his approbation in
more ways than one, though it does not bear his name; I find the following
strong assertions relating to the importance and utility of baptism. It is
highly incumbent on all that love the Lord Jesus Christ^^ sincerity, and are
glad to behold their Savior in every view in which he is pleased to reveal
B^^^ty of Social Relig. p. 10.
himself, to consider the dignity and glory of his holy institutions. These
last legacies of a dying Savior, these pledges of his eternal and immutable
love, ought to be received with the greatest reverence and the warmest
gratitude. And as they directly relate to the death of the great Redeemer,
which is an event the most interesting: an action the most grand and noble that
ever appeared in the world; they ought to be held in the highest esteem, and
performed with the utmost solemnity. Of these institutions, baptism calls for
our first regard, as it is appointed to be first performed: and however lightly
the inconsiderate part of mankind may affect to treat this ordinance, it ought
to be remembered, [I hope Candidus, and especially Pacificus, will never forget
it] that Christ himself considered it and submitted to it, as an important part
of that righteousness which it became even the Son of God to fulfill. As this
ordinance is to be once performed, and not repeated, every Christian ought to
be particularly careful that it is done in a right manner; or the benefit
arising to the soul from this institution is lost, and lost for ever. We ought
with the utmost deliberation and care to consider -- its own native dignity, as
an action of the positive, or ritual kind, the most great and noble in itself,
and well pleasing to God, that it is possible for us to perform on this side
Heaven. -- In this action, Christians, you behold the counsel of God: it is the
result of his wise and eternal purpose: it is clearly commanded in his word: it
is enforced by his own example; and honored in the most distinguished and
wonderful manner, by every Person in the adorable Trinity. This ordinance is no
^^i^ial affair; it is no mean thing; and whoever is so unhappy as to despise
it, wants eyes to see its beauty and excellency. -- Our great Redeemer seems to
have designed this ordinance as a test of our sincerity, and to distinguish his
followers from the rest of mankind. As a captain who, to try a new soldier,
employs him at first in some arduous and important service; so our Savior, to
try his own work, and to make the reality of his powerful grace in the heart of
his people manifest to themselves and to the world, calls them out at first to
a great and singular action, and requires their submission to an institution!
that is disgustful to their nature and mortifying to their pride. And the title
of the pamphlet, from which these extracts are made, speaks of baptism, As an
act of sublime worship to the adorable Persons in the Godhead -- As a
representation of the sufferings of Christ, his death, burial, and resurrection
-- As the answer of a good conscience toward God -- As an emblem of
regeneration and sanctification -- As a powerful obligation to newness of life
-- And as a lively figure of the natural death of every Christian. Six Views of
Believers Bap. p. 1, 2, 3, 15.


Mr. Daniel Turner has also borne his testimony to the usefulness and
importance of baptism. For, speaking of that ordinance, he says: Christ himself
submitted to this rite, as administered by John; not indeed with the same
views, or to the same ends, with others; but as pointing out by his example,
the duty of Christians in general. He also gave his ministers a commission and
order, to baptize all the nations they taught. -- It appears that being
baptized, was the common token of subjection to Christ, and necessary to a
regular entrance into his visible church. And, when describing the
qualifications of those that are to be received into communion, he says; They
should be acquainted with the chief design of the rites and positive
institutions of Christianity, and reverently use them; viz. baptism, and the
Lord's supper. Once more: Speaking of that respect which the two positive
appointments have to visible fellowship among believers, he says; Baptism,
indeed, by which we are first formally incorporated into the visibe church, or
body of Christ, is the beginning and foundation of this external communion: but
the Lord's supper is best adapted for the constant support and continual
manifestation of it. Compend. Social Relig. p. 27. (Note); and p. 63, 120.
(Note).
Nay, he mentions the reverent use of the two sacraments, among those things
which are essential to the constitution of a particular visible church. See p.
5. Note.


After such considerations as these, relating to the vast utility and grand
importance of baptism, one cannot but wonder at Pacificus, Candidus, and others
of our opponents that were never suspected of Antitrinitarian error; calling
that ordinance, a non-essential, an external rite, an indifferent thing, a
shadow, a mere outward form; comparing it with the antiquated rite of
circumcision, in the apostolic age. How different this way of talking from the
quotations I have just produced; especially those I have taken from pieces that
were either published, or composed and recommended, by my worthy friend Mr.
Ryland! For he looks upon baptism, in connection with the Lord's supper, as of
unspeakable importance to the glory of God, and the very being of a true church
upon earth. He insists upon it, that baptism demands the believer's regard,
prior to the holy supper, as it was appointed to be first administered: and he
severely censures those inconsiderate mortals, who treat the ordinance lightly.
-- Mr. Turner also, as we have seen, maintains that baptism is the duty of
Christians in general; that it is the common token of our subjection to Christ;
that it is necessary to a regular entrance into the visible church; and that it
is the foundation of external communion in the house of God. Surely, then,
these authors cannot but be greatly grieved, if not offended, which those
diluting terms and that degrading comparison, which are used by Messieurs
Pacificus and Candidus, when speaking of the ordinance! Nay, they will be ready
to retort upon them that heavy charge, with those Peaceful and Candid Gentlemen
levelled at us; and to remind them that, by treating baptism in such a manner,
they greatly injure the honor and interest of true religion, and not a little
contribute to the cause of infidelity. For they have united in repeatedly
calling baptism a non-essential; and in comparing it with that obsolete
appointment circumcision, of which judaizing Christians of old were so fond.
This being the case, I am heartily glad that these worthy authors have
reprobated their conduct, and so publicly condemned their way of thinking, in
regard to baptism. It may serve, perhaps, as an antidote against the hurtful
influence of their Modest Plea; nor may it be entirely useless to Pacificus and
Candidus themselves. But yet, methinks, I could sincerely wish, as Mr. Ryland
and Mr. Turner are pretty well acquainted with those writers, that they would
seriously examine and converse with them in private, on the subject about which
they so widely differ. -- And I may just hint, that as they are the fittest
persons in the world to perform the friendly office, they need not fear
provoking their choler. For as their names are, Candid and Peaceful, so is
their temper; and it might have a beneficial effect, by making them more
careful what they write and publish in future, in regard to free communion. --
But I return from this digression.

Mr. Bunyan, when speaking of baptism, calls it an outward circumstantial thing
-- A shadow, an outward circumstance -- Water -- water -- water -- water --
water; five times over, in so many lines. And a submission to baptism he
describes in equally, degrading language. For he represents it, as an outward
conformity to an outward circumstance -- As an outward and bodily conformity to
outward and shadowish circumstances -- And calls it obedience to water. Works,
Vol. I. p. 133, 137, 168, 169, 134, 138, 194.
What depreciating terms! What irreverent language! Is not the reader tempted
to think, that I have made a mistake in my author; and that I have been
referring to Socinus, or Barclay, instead of him who penned that immortal work,
The Pilgrim's Progress? But let me not wrong those authors, by insinuating that
they make use of similar language on the same subject. For though the former,
when speaking of the ordinance under consideration, frequently calls it, The
external baptism of water,for which his opponent reproves him; Baptismum aquae
externum. Apud Hoornb. Socin. Conf. Tom. III. p. 301.
and though the latter denominates both the positive institutions of our Lord,
Shadows, and outside things; yet, so far as I have observed, neither of them
ever used such degrading and indecent language concerning baptism, as that
produced from Mr. Bunyan. Nay, I do not remember to have met with any thing of
the kind that is equal to it, except what is reported of some ancient heretics,
called Archontici. Who impiously, as Theodoret asserts, Lavacrum execrantur, et
mysteriorum participationem, ut quae fiat in nomine Sabbath. Apud, Suicerum,
These. Eccles. sub voce (...)
Yet had Socinus, or Barclay, so expressed himself, we should not have been
much surprised; because the one maintain^, that Christ never required his
apostles to baptize in water, but only permitted them so to do; and the other
expresaly says, That he [Christ] commanded his disciples to baptize with water,
I could never yet read. Hoornb. ubi supra, p. 249, 250.251.301. Barclay's Apol.
p. 424.
Our brethren, therefore, who plead for free communion, are the only persons
professing firmly to believe, that Christ commanded, really and solemnly
commanded his ministering servants to baptize in water, and continue the
practice to the end of the world; and yet treat the ordinance as if it were a
mere circumstance in divine worship; an indifferent thing; and dispense with it
just as o^casion requires. Consequently, they have the complete monopoly of
that honor which arises from the union of such a creed and such a conduct.

The Lord's supper, however, is considered and treated by them in a different
manner; for they speak of it as a delightful, an edifying, an important
institution. But what authority have they for thus distinguishing between two
appointments of the same Lord, intended for the same persons, of equal
continuance in the Christian church, and alike required of proper subjects?
They have, indeed, the example of some Socinians, and the venerable sanction of
the whole Council of Trent. For the title of one chapter in the records of that
Council, is; Concerning the excellence of the most holy Eucharist, above the
rest of the sacraments. Council. Trident. Sess. XIII. Chap. III.
But as a good old Protestant writer observes, That the one sacrament should be
so much extolled above the other, namely, the Lord's supper to be preferred
before baptism, as the more worthy and excellent sacrament, we find no such
thing in the word of God; but that both of them are of like dignity in
themselves, and to be had equally and indifferently in most high account.
Willet's Synops. Papismi, p. 556, 557.
Nay, Mr. Ryland assures us, of which I would have Pacificus take particular
notice; That baptism ought to be considered as glorious an act of worship, as
ever was instituted by God. Beauty of Social Relig. p. 9.
-- Might not the Jews of old have distinguished, with equal propriety, between
circumcision and the paschal supper? Does it become us to form comparisons
between the positive appointments of our Eternal Sovereign, in regard to their
importance; and that with a view to dispense with either of them, while the
very same authority enjoins the one as well as the other? Can such a conduct be
pious, humble, or rational? Is it not something like being partial in God's
law, for which the ancient priests were severely censured? Or, shall we say of
our obedience to God, as he says to the mighty ocean; Hitherto shall thou come,
but no further?

But supposing it is evident, that baptism is much inferior to the sacred
supper, in point of importance; yet, while it is an ordinance of God, it has an
equal claim on our obedience. For it is not the manifest excellence, or the
great utility of any divine appointment, that is the true reason of our
submission to it; but the authority of Him that commands. It has been ever
God's wont, says Bp. Hall, by small precepts to prove men's dispositions.
Obedience is as well tried in a trifle, as in the most important charge: yea,
so much more, as the thing required is less: for oftentimes those who would be
careful in main affairs, think they may neglect the smallest. What command
soever we receive from God, or our superiors, we must not sean the weight of
the thing, but the authority of the commander. Either difficulty, or
slightness, are vain pretenses for disobedience. Contemplations, Vol. III. p.
274. Edinb. Edit.
Nay, even Dr. Priestley, though remarkable for his liberal sentiments and
rational way of thinking, and far from ascribing too much to God's dominion
over the subjects of his moral government; yet strongly asserts Jehovah's
prerogative in this respect. These are his words; Every divine command ought
certainly to be implicitly complied with, even though we should not be able to
discern the reason of it. And has not He who is God over all blessed for ever,
said; Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach
men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven? As in the great
concerns of religious worship, nothing should be done that is not required by
Jehovah; and as the lawfulness of all positive rites depends entirely on their
divine Author and his institution; so he who complies with some, and neglects
others that are equally commanded and equally known, may please himself, but he
does not obey the Lord.

Further: These depreciating expressions, non-essential, external rite, a
shadow, and a mere outward form, may be applied to the sacred supper with as
much propriety as they are to baptism. Another quotation from Barclay will not
be displeasing to our opponents; especially when they observe, how nearly his
language, in regard to baptism, coincides with theirs. We, says the plain
dealing apologist, we always prefer the power to the sorm, the substance to the
shadow; and where the substance and the power is, we doubt not to denominate
the person accordingly, though the form be wanting. And, therefore, we always
seek first and plead for the substance and power, as knowing that to be
indispensably necessary; though the form sometimes may be dispensed with.
Apology. p. 419.
-- Dispense with the form, in regard to such persons as possess the power: why
that is the very thing for which our brethren plead. How happily friend Robert
and they are agreed, in this respect! And what an honor it reflects upon them,
as Baptists, to have such an associate! They, however, will do well to remember
that the principle on which the Quaker proceeds, extends its influence to the
holy supper, no less than to baptism; and that he who has a right to dispense
with a law, may entirely repeal it, and enact another whenever he pleases. --
Baptism is an external rite, a mere outward form. But whatever Socinus, or
Bunyan, or any of our brethren, may say in defense of their conduct on this
ground, will apply with equal force against a punctual observance of the Lord's
supper. This Barclay intended. For are not bread and wine external things, as
well as water? And has not the act of baptizing as much spirituality in it, as
the acts of eating and drinking? Besides, an apostle has assured as, that "the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink," though the latter were the richest of
cordials, any more than it is immersion in water. Vid. Hornbeek, ut supra. p.
362.


Once more: When I consider how much more frequently baptism is mentioned in
the New Testament, than the sacred supper; Hornbeek, ut supra, p. 409, 416.
how often repenting and believing sinners are exhorted, by the apostles, to be
baptized; how soon that ordinance was administered to Christian converts after
they believed; what exhortations are given to professing Christians, on the
ground of their being baptized; and when I reflect, that the Holy Spirit
commends them that were baptized by John, as "justifying God;" while he
severely censures others, as rejecting the counsel of God against themselves,
because they slighted the solemn appointment; I cannot but wonder at the
language and conduct of our opponents. -- Their very singular conduct appears
to me still more extraordinary, and yet more unwarrantable, when I reflect;
that baptism is a divine institution to which a believer submits but once, and
a branch of divine worship that he is required to perform but once: in which
respect it greatly differs from every other appointment in the worship of God,
under the Christian economy. For, this being the case, one should have
imagined, if notorious and stubborn facts had not forbidden the thought; that
every minister of Jesus Christ, and every church of the living God, would
insist on a submission to what to what they consider as real baptism, in all
whom they admit to the Lord's table. And, whatever Pacificus may have said to
the contrary, or however unimportant he may suppose the ordinance to be; I have
the pleasure to find, that Mr. Ryland, as before observed, seems to consider it
in the same light with myself; if one may venture to form a judgment of his
views relating to this institution, from what he has published under his own
name. These are his words, and I would warmly recommend them to the
consideration of Pacificus: Baptism ought to be considered as glorious an act
of worship as ever was instituted by God. It is to be performed but once in the
life of a Christian -- but once to eternity; and therefore, it ought to be done
with the utmost veneration and love. Beauty of Social Relig. p. 9.
-- Here, then, we have an ordinance appointed by Supreme authority, which
requires to be celebrated but once; a command given by the Lord Redeemer, that
is perfectly satisfied with one, yes, with only one not of obedience in the
whole course of a Christian's life: ye^, strange to imagine, but certain in
fact, though the authority enjoining is absolute, and acknowledged so to be;
though the obedience required consists in a single instance; and though the
duty commanded is generally easy, very easy to be performed, where there is a
disposition for it; our brethren not only connive at a neglect of it, but
severely censure us because we do not adopt their conduct! but whether we, or
they, deserve censure, considering the principles we hold in common, I leave
the impartial reader, I leave all but themselves, to judge they not believing,
any more than we, the divine authority, or the validity of infant sprinkling;
for if they did, they would stand convicted before all the world of A^abaptism.
My reader will pardon the frequent repetition of this thought, it being of
great importance in every dispute of this kind; nor can we suffer our opponents
long to forget it.

SECTION VI. Reflections on the distinguishing Character, Strict Baptists,
which our Brethren apply to us.
OUR opponents, I observe, repeatedly call us, Strict Baptists; but whether for
so doing they merit commendation, or deserve censure, may, perhaps, be a
question with some. If, by the epithet strict, they mean exact, accurate,
conscientiously nice; their candor deserves commendation. In that sense of the
term we are not ashamed to be called Strict, Baptists; we cheerfully adopt the
character.

It may, however, admit of a query, whether we be so fully entitled to possess
this honor without a rival, as our brethren seem to insinuate. Is it because
we are stricter than the apostles, in regard to communion at the Lord's table?
That remains to be proved. Is it because we consider baptism as equally the
duty of all believers? This, indeed, we maintain: and the reason is, those
arguments which prove it the duty of one, will apply to all. Or, is it because
we consider baptism as a term of communion? We, it is true, avow the sentiment;
but it is far from being peculiar to us. For it appears from the foregoing
pages, that we act on a principle received in common by Christians of almost
every name, in every age, and in every nation. When, therefore, we are compared
with professing Christians in general, we have no peculiar claim to the epithet
strict; whatever right we may have to the denomination of Baptists, or whatever
be our distinguishing character, when opposed to our brethren with whom we now
contend. -- Nor can we be otherwise than strict, without violating our own
principles, and contradicting our own practice. For we believe that all who
have received the truth, should profess their faith in Jesus Christ and be
baptized. And have we not the happiness, in this respect, of agreeing with our
brethren? When we made a public declaration of our dependence on Christ, and
gave a reason of the hope that is in us, we believed it was our duty to be
baptized, before we received the sacred supper. Did not our opponents do the
same? or had it no place at all in their creed? In consequence of such a
conviction, we were actually immersed in the name of the Lord, before we
approached the holy table. And were not they also? But how came it to be either
our duty, or theirs, thus to proceed? Was it because they or we believed that
it was required of us? Or, did a full persuasion of this kind constitute that a
duty, which would no otherwise have been obligatory? If so, a Catholic may
lawfully adore the host, a Mussulman revere Mahomet, and a Jew blaspheme the
Messiah. No; that which made it our duty to be baptized, and then to receive
the Lord's supper, was the command of God; which lies on every person so
qualified, by the renewing agency of the divine Spirit, as we humbly conceived
ourselves to be. Now, can it be supposed that this command extends to none but
those among real converts, who feel its force on their own consciences? Or, may
we safely conclude, that a believer is no further obliged by any divine
precept, or prohibition, than he sees and acknowledges the obligation, in
regard to himself? If so, a believer who has been baptized, may live all his
days in the neglect of communion at the Lord's table, and stand acquitted of
blame; and covetousness is no crime, in thousands who bow at the shrine of
Mammon; for there are comparatively few lovers of money, who acknowledge their
guilt in that respect. Nay, on this principle it will follow, that the more
ignorant any believer is, and the less tender his conscience, he is under so
much the less obligation to obey the divine commands. But the reader will do
well to remember, that the Great Supreme do^^ not lie at our courtesy for his
claim of obedience upon us, in any instance that can be named. No; it is not
our conviction of the propriety, the utility, or the necessity of any command
which he has given, that entitles him to the performance of it; but, in all
things of a moral nature, our being rational creatures is the ground of his
claim; and in those of a positive kind, our being qualified according to his
direction, whether we be so wise and so sincere as to acknowledge the
obligation, or no. Thus it appears that the epithet strict, if taken in the
sense already explained, is no dishonor to us.

But if, on the contrary, our brethren mean by the epithet, that we are
bigoted, unnecessarily exact, unscripturally confined; their forwardness to
give us a name calls for our censure. In the former sense, I will venture to
affirm, every Baptist ought to be a strict one, or else to renounce the name.
In the latter use of the term, we reject the distinguishing epithet, and
require our opponents to prove -- I say to prove, not to surmise, that it
justly belongs to us. And that they use the word in this obnoxious meaning
appears to me, by the tenor of their arguing; by superadding that harsher
epithet rigorous; and by that home charge, of greatly injuring the honor and
interest of true religion, and not a little contributing to the cause of
infidelity?

But if we be Strict Baptists, what are they? Our brethren will not be
offended, if I again ask, What are they; and by what name shall we call them?
That they are not strict Baptists, is out of all dispute; because from such
they expressly distinguish themselves, and have abundant reason, if the charge
just mentioned be true, to be ashamed of them. I am obliged, therefore, if it
be lawful for me to imitate their officiousness, and to give them a name, (for
as yet they are half anonymous) to search for some significant and descriptive
adjective, that will set them at a wide distance from the strict Baptists. But
what must it be? Innaccurate, or loose, or latitudinarian? I would not,
designedly, be guilty of a misnomer; but as all these terms are very different
in their meaning from that obnoxious word strict, it can hardly be supposed
that. I am far from the truth. As they profess themselves Baptists, there we
agree; but as they hold the ordinance of baptism with a loose hand, there we
differ; and hence the necessity of such oppositely significant epithets, to
mark our different conduct. For names, you know, are so much the more perfect,
by how much the more they express the nature and properties of persons and
things. Yes, the practice of our opponents makes it evident to all the world,
that the term Baptists, when applied to them, is to be understood in such a
latitude of signification, as will comport with receiving persons to communion,
who, in their judgment, are unbaptized. That is, they are Baptists, when the
ideas expressed by that name suit the dispositions of their hearers; and they
entirely omit the ordinance, from which they take their denomination, when
candidates for communion with them do not approve of it. And, which makes their
conduct, in this respect, appear exceedingly strange, they do not, like his
Holiness of Rome, expressly claim a dispensing power; nor, in the madness of
enthusiasm, pretend to any new revelation; nor yet, with the disciples of
George Rox, confider baptism as a temporary institution.

Our character, then, is fixed. Their own pens have engrossed it. And, be it
known to all men, we are Strict Baptists. To this character, as before
explained, we subscribe with hand and heart; in the last words of the
celebrated Father Paul, Esto perpetua. Theirs I have attempted to draw, in
contrast with ours, and will now venture to call them, Latitudinarian Baptists.
Whether they will allow the name to be just, and esteem it as we do ours, I am
not certain. But of this I make no doubt, that the religious world in general,
were they to see and compare it with the opinion and practice of our brethren;
would pronounce it descriptive of the persons to whom it is given. Strict
Baptists -- they will permit our character to stand first, as it has
confessedly the right of primogeniture -- Strict Baptists! Latitudinarian
Baptists! These characters, in contrast, sound very oddly, I must confess; and
they are but of a novel date. For they do not appear to have had an existence
till about the middle of the last century. What a pity it is but something of a
similar kind could have been found, in the ancient monuments of the Jewish
church, relating to circumcision, as a prerequisite for communion in it. Had it
appeared, in any authentic records, that the sons of Abraham, in times of yore,
were divided in their judgment about that obsolete rite; and that some of them
were called Strict Circumcisionists, and others Latitudinarian
Circumcisionists; it would have given, at least, an air of antiquity to our
brethren's hypothesis, practice, and character. But -- we must take things as
we find them.

I just now recollect, what many of my readers must know to be fact, that our
Paedobaptist brethren, when they have a mind to show their wit and be a little
merry at our expense, represent the Baptists, without distinction, as
exceedingly fond of water; as professors that cannot live in a church state,
without a great deal of water. Nay, one of them has very politely called us
'watery Bigots;' and then adds, Many ignorant sprinkled Christians are often,
to their hurt, pulled by them into the water. Dr. Mayo's True Scripture
Doctrine of Baptism, p. 33. Poor creatures! How much these sprinkled Christians
are to be pitied, when treated so rudely by watery bigots! Is there no remedy
against such an invasion of personal liberty, by appealing to Caesar? If there
be, a Doctor of Laws would not spend his time ill in pointing it out, for the
benefit of such ' ignorant sprinkled Christians,' and to prevent any of them
being hurt, in future.
-- According to this Gentleman, then, we are watery bigots. Well, it does not
greatly distress me to be thus represented by a sneering antagonist; because I
really believe that much water is necessary to baptism, and am no less
confident, that baptism is necessary to communion at the Lord's table. But
since I have maturely considered the singular character and peculiar situation
of our latitudinarian brethren, I can by no means think it either candid or
equitable that they should be thus represented. Because it is evident, evident
even to demonstration, that their profession and practice taken together will
not admit of it. They, it must be acknowledged, will sometimes declaim aloud on
the necessity of a profession of faith, and of immersion in the name of the
triune God, to constitute that baptism which is from heaven. So, when they
write on the subject, and publish their thoughts to the world at large, they
assert these things with the greatest confidence. They will also, with the
venerable John, go down into Jordan, and there administer the significant
ordinance: so that one would be tempted to think they were strict Baptists,
real Baptists, and that Baptism has no faster friends upon earth. But when they
plead for free communion, they talk a different language; they speak of it as
an indifferent thing and a mere trifle, that is not worth contending about.
And, when they admit communicants, they often act in a different way; for, in
receiving a Paedohaptist, what they consider as real baptism is entirely set
aside. They might, consequently, with equal consistency, admit believers to
their communion, who have neither been immersed nor sprinkled; and so, like the
Quakers, have nothing at all to do with water in the worship of God. Whether,
therefore, a person has been immersed in a river, be the waters ever so many;
or sprinkled with that element from the palm of the hand, be the drops ever so
few; or has had no concern with water at all, it makes no material difference
with them, in point of communion. So, then, as they can receive members into
their communities, subsist in a church state, and enjoy fellowship at the
Lord's table, with either much water, or little water, or none at all; I humbly
conceive, that if our bantering opponent would do them justice, while he
displays his own wit, he should give them a different name. For though they
seem, at sometimes, to be as fond of water as we are; insisting upon it, that
where there is no immersion there is no baptism; yet, at others, they warmly
contend, that believers of all denominations, (i. e. Baptists with much water;
Paedobaptists, with little water; and Katabaptists without any water at all)
have a right of communion with them in the sacred supper. It behooves the
Doctor, therefore, if ever he favor us with another address, to search for a
new distinguishing epithet, to connect with the term bigots, that shall include
and express these various ideas. But whether our own language be able to
furnish an adjective comprehensive enough, on such an occasion, I dare not
assert: very probably, however, among those numerous compounds contained in the
language of ancient Greece, he may find one that is fit for the purpose. And as
it is not every one, no, nor every Doctor, who could have thought of that
elegant phrase, 'Watery Bigots;' I doubt not the fertility of his invention,
and the well known accuracy of his pen, when handling the Baptists, will enable
him to give our brethren a descriptive character, that shall be equally polite
and perfectly suitable.

Though I am far from suspecting that our brethren want sincerity, or from
thinking that they violate the dictates of conscience, in maintaining their
very singular hypothesis; yet their conduct, in regard to baptism, has such an
ambiguous appearance, and looks so much like holding both sides of a
contradiction, that I should not wonder if one or another of our Paedobaptist
opponents, were to apply them with a little alteration, the spirited
remonstrance of Bp. Hall to Abp. Laud. The latter being strongly suspected of a
predilection for Popery, and the former intending to deal roundly with him on
that subject, addressed him in the following language. I would I knew where to
find you -- To day you are in the tents of the Romanists; to morrow in ours;
the next day between both, against both. Our adversaries think you ours; we
theirs -- This of yours is the worst of all tempers. Heat and cold have their
uses; lukewarmness is good for nothing but to trouble the stomach -- How long
will you halt in this indifferency? Resolve one way, and know, at last, what
you do hold; what you should. Cast off either your wings or your teeth; and,
loathing this bat-like form, be either a bird or a beast. If you must begin,
why not now? -- God cries with Jehu, Who is on my side, who? -- Take you
peace; let me have truth, if I cannot have both. * Thus the acute and good
Bishop Hall, to one who halted between two opinions; who was neither an uniform
Papist, nor a consistent Protestant.

And now, before I conclude, our brethren will suffer me also to remonstrate;
and the reader may rest assured, that I do it without the least impeachment of
their integrity; If infant sprinkling be a human invention, disown it, renounce
it, entirely reject it, and no longer let it hold the place of a divine
institution in any of your churches. But if it be from Heaven, embrace it,
profess it, practice it in the face of the sun, and lay the other absolutely
aside, as destitute of a divine warrant. For as there is but one God, and one
faith, so there is but one baptism. Divine truth is consistent; divine
ordinances are consistent, for they are not yea and nay; and all the Christian
world are consistent with themselves, relating to baptism; be ye, therefore,
consistent, in this, as you are in other respects. That is, be either
consistent Baptists, or Paedobaptists; for, according to your present practice,
all thinking and impartial men must pronounce you an heterogeneous mixture of
both.

FINIS.
Speedily will be Published, By THOMAS DOBSON, bookseller, at the STONE HOUSE
in Second street, between Market and Chestnut street -- BOOTH's Paedobaptism
examined and refuted, UPON THE PRINCIPLES AND CONCESSIONS OF PAEDOBAPTIST
WRITERS.


