^N ACCOUNT OF THE WONDERFUL OLD HERMIT'S DEATH AND BURIAL. -- AGED TWO HUNDRED
TWENTY EIGHT YEARS.
SOMETIME in June, 1787, Doctor SAMUEL BRAKE, a gentleman eminent both for
physic and surgery, and a man indefatigable in the search of curiosities,
hearing of the wonderful account of the HERMIT, set out with a full
determination to go and find him. The Doctor furnished himself with the best
intelligence Capt. Buckland could possibly give him, and took with him two
attendants well armed, and as much provision as was necessary for such a
journey, and being favored with good weather, they soon came to the Allegany
mountains: -- Here the Doctor discovered a certain root never known nor heard
of before, which proves a remedy for all diseases. -- After a great deal of
trouble they found the HERMIT, but it was entirely by accident that they
happened at last to discover him; for the country was very wild, covered with
shrubs as thick as possible, and the trees grew large beyond description. --
One day the Doctor discovered with his spy-glass, a very high hill at a
considerable distance; and thought he would go and take an observation from the
top of that hill; when he arrived there, he soon found the old HERMIT's path,
just as Capt. Buckland had directed. -- They followed the path down the valley,
and soon came to the HERMIT's cave; -- nothing was seen of the HERMIT for
sometime, and they supposed he was asleep in his cave, and not one soul durst
venture into his old habitation; at length, whilst they were listening at the
mouth of the cave, they discovered the HERMIT at a little distance, coming with
a handful of roots which he had been gathering for food; -- he walked in a slow
and grave manner, and when he saw them he came and embraced them; -- but did
not seem to be so much surprised to see them as he was when first discovered by
Capt. Buckland, etc. -- He invited them in a very friendly manner into his
cave, and was overjoyed to see them. The cave was very curious, which appeared
to be dug out of a solid white flint rock: But as a particular description has
been given of it, it will be needless to say any thing further concerning it.
-- The HERMIT made particular enquiry after Capt. Buckland and Mr. Fielding,
and said that he received great satisfaction from a visit which they had made
him, and added, that they were the first human beings that he had seen from the
time that he first landed on this shore, which was about TWO HUNDRED YEARS. Dr.
Brake tarried there several days, (...) became very intimate with the HERMIT,
and found sevearl things which were not discovered before: -- Two books in
particular, which he brought with him from England, one in poetry, the other in
prose. -- The HERMIT appeared to have had a good education when he was young,
and discovered a surprising greatness of mind. His eyes were good, but his
teeth were very poor, he had but little hair on his head, but his beard was
very long. He could not articulate his words very distinctly, but his language
was better than any spoken in England at the time he left it, which makes it
appear evident that he was an extraordinary genius when he was young. He showed
Doctor Brake his books, writings, etc. of which he had a large pile in one
corner of his cave, some were done (...) barks of trees, and some o^ (...) made
into a kind of parchment. The Doctor obtained liberty to take a copy of the
HERMIT's compositions. One contained principally moral sentiments, and the
following sentences were found written in one of them: -- "Young men and young
women, beware of seducing appearances which may surround you and recollect what
others have su^^^red from the power of headstrong desire. -- This world is but
a wilderness -- eager passions and violent desires were not made for man. --
Pitch upon that course of life which is best, and habit will render it most
delightful."

After a while the Doctor determined to try the HERMIT with a little rum, and
see what the effect would be; but it was with great difficulty that he ^^uld
persuade him to drink: The Doctor said that it was an excellent cordial that
tended to strengthen the constitution, and at last the poor innocent HERMIT was
persuaded to drink a little of that horrid bane, which has sent thousands out
of the world. -- He drank about three quarters of a gill of that poison liquor,
and in a quarter of an hour there was a visible alteration in his looks and
conduct; and in half an hour he appeared wild and almost mad, and attempted to
tell a kind of a love story; and in about an hour he was entirely senseless,
and remained in that shocking situation until 12 o'clock at night and then died.

Poor old man! he lived about two hundred years in his cave, free from the busy
scenes of the world, and enjoying all the happiness of a retired life! And
might perhaps have lived as many more, had he not drank that horrid draught!
Cursed liquor! Thousands have fell a sacrifice to its bewitching power.

Among the HERMIT's writings was found his WILL, which appeared to have been
made soon after he was discovered. -- He had given his cave to Capt. Buckland
and Mr. Fielding, as also all his writings: His curious cane he willed to one
of Capt. Buckland's servants, which was all the HERMIT was possessed of,
excepting a few old skins which had served to clothe him, those he gave to the
other servant, as a reward for his kindness in singing a love song to him
before they departed.

Doctor Brake was much affected at the sudden death of the HERMIT, more
especially the manner in which he was brought to his untimely death -- but the
Doctor said he felt no remorse of conscience, as he really supposed that a
little of that cordial would serve to raise his spirits, and make him more
cheerful with his new visitors.

The next day the Doctor and his attendants employed themselves about burying
the old gentlemen in as decent a manner as possible in his cave, which was done
with great solemnity and good order. -- The Doctor ordered one of his
attendants to shave the HERMIT, and his beard is carefully preserved as a very
great curiosity, it being at least twelve inches long.

N. B. Doctor Brake mentions that this good old man made it his constant custom
to devote himself to prayer every day, and there is no doubt of his everlasting
happiness.

Those who do not credit the above, may apply to Doctor BRAKE for better
information.

PRINTED and SOLD at the PRINTING OFFICE, in WORCESTER. MDCCLXXXVIII.


