A LETTER TO PHILO AFRICANUS, UPON SLAVERY.

A LETTER TO PHILO AFRICANUS, UPON SLAVERY; IN ANSWER TO HIS OF THE 22d OF
NOVEMBER, IN THE GENERAL EVENING POST; TOGETHER WITH THE OPINIONS OF SIR JOHN
STRANGE, AND OTHER EMINENT LAWYERS UPON THIS SUBJECT, WITH THE SENTENCE OF LORD
MANSFIELD, IN THE CASE OF SOMERSET AND KNOWLES, 1772, WITH HIS LORDSHIP's
EXPLANATION OF THAT OPINION IN 1786.

LONDON, PRINTED: NEWPORT (RHODE ISLAND) REPRINTED BY PETER EDES.

A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
LIVING in the country where I see so few of the London papers, that I hardly
know what passes in the world; but lately meeting with your letter, upon the
subject of slavery, in the General Evening Post of the 22d of November; and
also those of your friend Africanus, in the preceding papers, which you refer
to, I have sat down to make a few brief remarks upon this subject.

I observe that your letters, and all the writings that I have seen upon that
side of the question, are in the same declamatory style, which may bespeak the
compassion of your readers; but when subjects of such magnitude are brought
before the public, wherein so many individuals are materially interested; and
even the nation itself may be involved in the event, they ought to be fairly
and dispassionately discussed.

The abolition of the slave trade, and the consequences attending it, which
would evidently be the breaking up of the British sugar colonies, and the total
ruin of a multitude of innocent families, is not a little thing. Neither are a
few exaggerated tales told by mariners, or others, who probably may not be
competent judges of the polity of the princes of Africa; or the default of
those towns which you mention, on which the depredations fall: or is an
instance or two of such inhuman masters as Macmahon, if they are true,
sufficient to found a law upon to abolish this trade.

There are various ways which supply the markets in Africa with slaves; but the
convicts, which you seem to think the principal support of the trade, are very
few, compared with others that are brought to market.

The slaves sold from the estates of the grandees, whose sole property they
are, as much as other stock upon their plantations, or as much so as an English
farmer by the law of England is entitled to the stock upon his estate, amount
to a great number; but the principal source of the slave trade are the captives
taken in war, which is indeed often kindled by those tyrannical princes upon
small occasions, but generally arises from rebellion or default in the payment
of tribute.

When a tribe is conquered they become tributary to the conqueror, and upon
failure in the payment, the war is renewed, and the captives on either side are
made slaves; but certainly this practice is not founded upon their commerce
with Europeans, as is often suggested by those who censure the trade. It was
the common usage very many ages before the Europeans had any intercourse with
Africa: the states of Carthage, at a very early time, after they grew powerful,
obliged some African princes to pay them tribute, which was one source they had
to get slaves; but the great commerce that the Carthagenians, Numidians, the
Mauritanians, and others, who occupied the northern coasts of Africa, carried
on with the Lybians or Nigritians, a people who inhabited the interior country
that we now call Negroland, was the fountain from whence sprung the multitude
of blacks which recruited their armies, and served for laborers and all
servile purposes as well as commerce, as appears by the fragments of ancient
history See the ancient history of Carthage, of Numidia, the Nigritians, the
Getulians, the Melano Getulians, etc.
.

But in regard to the custom of seizing and carrying off inhabitants for
default in the payment of tribute, we have a very early instance from divine
revelation. -- Several nations of the African race, who held territories in
Arabia, were tributary to the king of Elam, and paid him tribute regularly for
a number of years, and then rebelled against him: upon which Chedorlaomer, the
king of Elam or Persia, went out to war against them, and subdued them, and was
carrying off his booty, of which the principal part was captives, when the
patriarch Abraham, with his little army, met him. And this expedition was but
three hundred and seventy-seven years after the flood Genesis xiv. 4, 16.
.

Mr. Clarkson, a late writer on the commerce and slavery of the human species,
cites Homer to prove that the slave trade was in practice in Egypt and Cyprus
so long ago as the Trojan war; but he might have ascertained this fact upon
much higher authority, and done more than hinted that Homer coincided with
scripture in this point. Slaves are expressly mentioned as a part of the trade
of ancient Babylon Rev. xviii. 13.
; they are also mentioned as part of the trade of Tire Ezekiel. xxvii. 13.
, and of Haran, a city of Babylon, built by Nimrod Genesis xii. 5.
, and in many other places, as will appear hereafter Genesis x. 10. and Ezekiel.
xxvii. 23.
. If we trace it further, we shall find that it was not only in practice among
the heathen nations, but universally so among the worshippers of the true GOD.
Abraham and Lot got slaves in Haran, when they were going to Canaan Genesis xii. 4.
. The scripture calls these people the souls they got in Haran; but if they
were not slaves, then Bishop Patrick, Dr. Whitby, and many other learned
divines have been mistaken in their comment upon this text; and if Abraham's
servants, of which he had a great multitude, were not slaves, it seems strange
that they should be enumerated as Isaac's inheritance when he was offered in
marriage to Rebecca Genesis xxiv. 35.
. We are also told, expressly, that Pharaoh, king of the Egyptians, and
Abimeleck, king of Gerer, or of the Philistians, both branches of Ham's family,
gave Abraham sheep and oxen, and men servants and women servants Genesis xii. 16.
and xx. 14.
; and I believe nobody will doubt of those presents being the property of the
king's who bestowed them upon Abraham. Hagar who was also an Egyptian, is
expressly called the bondmaid or slave of Sarah, over whom Abraham tells her
she had absolute power; and when she run away from her mistress, the angel of
the Lord met her, and said to her, Hagar, return to thy mistress and submit
thyself unto her Genesis xvi. 6, 9. This admonition, according to Mr. Sharp, was a
shameful and notorious breach of the law of God. See his just limitation of
slavery, page 53.
. The scripture informs us that Isaac had such store of servants, that he was
envied even by the Philistines; who abounded in slaves Genesis xxvi. 14.
. When Jacob met his brother Esau, he ordered messengers to go forward to greet
him, and press him to accept of a present of any thing he had, and thus
enumerates his substance; I have sojourned with Laban, and I am possessed of
oxen and asses, and men servants and maid servants Genesis xxxii. 5.
. When Joseph was carried into Egypt, slaves were bought and sold there in open
market, which Mr. Clarkson admits Genesis xxxvii. 27, 28.
. When Moses was going out of Egypt with the Israelites, it plainly appears
that slaves were then bought and sold there, and that the Israelites were
allowed to buy them to carry out with them Exodus xii. 44.
. And when Moses formed his code of laws for the Israelites, he expressly
points out a people of the same family, from whom he directs them to buy their
hereditary slaves; and among the same laws, institutes the most humane precepts
for their government Levit. xxv. 44, 45, 46. Exodus xxist chapter, etc.
.

If these instances from divine writ need the corroboration of profane history,
I recommend the reader to the various relations of the ancient slave feasts,
namely the Sacae^, the Saturnalia, etc. among the Babylonians, the Assyrians,
the Greeks, the Romans, etc.

From these general hints, which the limits of this letter will not admit of
enlarging, we may fairly infer, that the traffic in slaves is of very early
date, and that it was considered as a legal commerce under the law of Moses.
And if we trace it further with an unbiassed mind, we shall find that it was
not abolished under the gospel; but, on the contrary, St. Paul frequently
exhorts servants in their duty to their masters, in these words. Servants obey
your masters according to the flesh, and not with eyeservice Col. iii. 22.
. Servants be obedient to your masters according to the flesh, etc. Ephesians. vi. 5,
6, 7, 8.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called 1 Cor. vii. 20.
. Let as many as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor
1 Timothy vi. 1.
. In his epistle to Titus he says, Exhort servants to be obedient unto their
masters, and please them well in all things, not answering again, and not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity Titus ii. 9.
. Servants be subjects to your masters with all fear, not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward 1 Pet. ii. 18.
. St Paul mutually admonishes masters respecting their duty to their servants
Moses distinguishes those servants who were considered as an inheritance, by
the name of bondmen, and before Moses's time they were called by that name. St.
Paul calls them by the general name of servants, or servants under the yoke, or
servants according to the flesh. Onesimus is called Philemon's servant; but
even Mr. Clarkson allows that he was Philemon's slave. The prophet Ezekiel
calls those which were sold with vessels of brass at the markets of Tire, the
persons of men. St. John calls them bondmen, and souls of men, and slaves,
promiscuously. Genesis xxi. 10. Levit. xxv. 44. Ezekiel. xxvii. 13. 1 Timothy vi. 1.
Rev. vi. 15. and xiii. 16. and xviii. 13.
: and he is so explicit in both, that it needs no comment; but he never once
hints to his disciples that it is the duty of Christians to emancipate their
slaves.

These exhortations are contained in the epistles and discourses which St. Paul
addresses to the people of the Greek cities and churches of Asia Minor, Greece
and Macedonia, that is Ephesus, Colosse, Thessilonica, Corinth, Achaia, Smyrna,
Pontus, Galatia, Phrygia, Cappadocia, Bythinia, Athens, etc. where missionaries
were employed to propagate christianity, and where a multitude of slaves were
held as property. In the little city of Athens only, they reckoned no less than
four hundred thousand slaves Universal History, vol. 6. page 43.
, who were treated in this city with more humanity than in other places; yet by
the Greeks in general they were considered as an inferior people, and by the
Lacedaemonians in particular they were used with a severity offensive to human
nature. Aristotle, as Mr. Clarkson remarks, advised Alexander to treat his
Barbarians with rigor; suggesting that they could not bear gentle usage, but it
is very evident that Aristotle does not speak of Greeks or Jews, but of the
African slaves in Alexander's army; whom, I say, the Greeks looked upon in a
very degraded light, but not more so, by calling them Barbarians, for even St.
Paul frequently distinguishes them by that appellation, which looks as if that
name was not a term of reproach.

The Lacedaemonians began their commerce in slaves at a very early period with
the Mauritarians, and other states on the northern coasts of Africa, who spread
it all over the Mediterranean, and many other places, and it continued among
the Carthagenians, the Phenicians, and their successors, and is at this day in
a flourishing condition in the states of Barbary, and in the dominions of the
king of Morocco, and all over the empire of the grand Seignor.

Therefore if slavery should be abolished by all the nations in Europe, it is
evident that even that would not put an end to it; and if it is annihilated in
the British dominions only, it can answer no other purpose, but to ruin a great
many unoffending families, and to increase the sugar colonies of France, Spain,
Portugal, Holland, etc. upon the downfall of ours. It ought to be considered
too, that our slave trade is not of that magnitude that is suggested by its
opposers, and that it bears no proportion to that of other nations. Cook tells
us in the first volume of his voyages, page 30, among his remarks at Rio
Janeiro, that in that province alone there were six hundred and twenty-nine
thousand negroe slaves belonging to the Portugueze, which is near double the
number that there is in all the British plantations; others say; that the
Spanish colonies require an annual supply of seventy or eighty thousand, but it
is an undoubted fact, that the slaves imported into the Portugueze colonies in
America are more than double of those imported into the British plantations.
Guthrie says, they import about fifty thousand slaves annually into the
Brazils, and it is supposed that about twenty thousand are imported annually
into the British colonies. The Portugueze having their slaves at a lower rate
from their African colonies than the English can get theirs, may be the reason
that their sugars are cheaper; but I wish I could impute it to another cause,
which is suggested by some, namely, That the Portugueze treat their slaves with
more humanity than other nations, and therefore get more labor from them.

I should also be glad to have it fairly pointed out, how Great Britain is to
be supplied with West India produce when this scheme takes place, as it is now
become a necessary of life. Who are we to stipulate with for those supplies;
and are we sure that we can pay for them in the produce and manufactures of
this country? Shall we suffer nothing by having several millions consumed among
foreigners which is now spent among ourselves; and is it not a matter worthy of
consideration, how far our navy may be affected when this great branch of trade
is lopped off; which now returns annually three or four millions sterling to
Great Britain. Or can there be many people so visionary, as to think the
project of Dean Tucker eligible, that is, of replacing this trade by
establishing sugar colonies among the natives of Africa, or going to Cochin
China for sugar. When this scheme takes place, is will be time to look out for
the accomplishment of the Dean's prophecy, which he desires may never be
forgotten, and therefore I, for one, record it, which is as follows:

That in the course of half a century, Great Britain and Ireland, and all
Europe, if they please, may be supplied with West India produce; without
slaves, without colonies, without governments, without forts or men of war, and
without officers and contracts Dean Tueker's reflections on the matters in
dispute between Great Britain and Ireland 1785, page 17.
.

I know that the Dean, as well as Mr. Ramsay and some others, who have wrote
upon this subject, are impressed with an opinion, that the enlargement of
slaves would make the West India produce come cheaper to the consumer, and that
negroes in that condition would become more useful to Great Britain, and more
profitable to the owners of plantations than they are now; that they of course
would get into the habits of Europeans, and having families of their own, would
be encouraged to do more labor. But experience informs those who have made the
trial, so far as respects their having families, that it has just the contrary
effect: that there is a greater surplusage from the labor of one single man in
the course of the year, than from the labor of another with the assistance of
a wife and children, and that this is the general observation. Therefore it is,
as some of you, gentlemen, remark, that the most avaricious planters always
choose to buy a much greater proportion of males for their plantations; and that
it falls mostly to the lot of indigent planters to buy females. Still I think
this a great oppression, and requires a better regulation, for I do not see why
a negro slave should not have every comfort in human life that is consistent
with his duty and the safety of his master. But we have no example of a body of
negroes under their own government, or in a state of freedom, making a figure
in agriculture or useful arts. If we look into Africa among their countrymen,
we shall find nothing that favors this opinion. If we have recourse to the
African islands, or other places, where negroes form the community, we shall
find a parcel of indolent, improvident miserable wretches, who out of a state
of warfare with their neighbors, know not how to employ their time. If we form
our judgment by the customs and manners of Europeans, who are bred up in
different habits, and naturally of a different bent of mind, the parallel will
not be just. Several historians of good authority inform us, that the natives
of interior Africa remain, in general, at this day, in the same rude situation
that they were in two thousand years ago; that they have made no progress in
science, and even in agriculture they do no more than what is extorted from
them; but trust to spontaneous fruits and other adventitious supplies for their
support; that in general they live promiscuously with their women, and have
nothing of humanity about them but the form: and that wherever any civilization
is found among them upon the frontiers, it is owing to the trade which you
censure. If we look into the deportment of negroes that have come more within
our own sphere of knowledge; who have had opportunity of improving by the
customs of white people, (...) still perceive the same indolence and the same
improvidence.

During the late war with America, some of the United States to the northward
emancipated their slaves, and those slaves having lived in the habit of
industry, under humane masters, one would naturally think they would be able to
provide for themselves when they had their freedom; but ask any candid man from
that country, and he will tell you, that more than half of them are become
vagabonds in this short space of time, and but very few of them are able to
provide for themselves. A small colony of negroes, not less than four or five
thousand were transported from the states of America, on the late peace, to
Nova Scotia, who had every privilege of British subjects; lands assigned them
for an inheritance; allowed to choose officers among themselves, and assisted
with rations from government; yet now, in the course of a few years are
dwindled away and coming to nothing. -- It is well known how the city of
London, and the country about it, was lately infested with American negroes.
Now I appeal to any gentleman under whose particular inspection they came,
whether one in a hundred of them would apply steadily to labor; or was fit to
take care of himself. Some instances came to my own knowledge of able bodied
negroe men that found employ in the country; but never worked longer, than till
they got a little money in their pockets, and then got off to spend it, and
never provided clothes for winter, or scarce enough to cover their nakedness in
summer; and wherever they gained a settlement became a burden to the parish.

If I have here given a true characteristic of negroes, which I think is
agreeable to the general opinion of mankind who are acquainted with them; then
their enlargement would not have the effect that you seem to expect from it.
But if you can make it plainly appear, that it would be for the interest of
proprietors to emancipate their slaves, there would be no need of parliamentary
aid to accomplish your point. Or could you prove what you assert, viz. that
their manumission would be of public utility, I have no doubt but
administration would find ways and means to raise fourteen or fifteen millions
sterling to compensate the proprietors.

Still, if the object of your society is nothing more than the regulation of
the slave trade, and to obtain an act of parliament for the express purpose of
binding masters and slaves in their duty to each other, I should think that
every man would unite to promote it: or, if this trade is as you affirm,
contrary to all laws human and divine, no man would oppose the annihilation of
it; but to make this appear, there must be something more than mere assertion;
or pervertion of texts, or suppression of parts of texts to serve your purpose.

It has been too much the practice of those who have wrote on your side the
question, in order to make their argument more specious, to accommodate
passages of scripture to their own convenience, and do not seem to have so
sacred a regard to truth as they ought to have, who profess to write only to
serve the cause of humanity, and I am sorry to observe, that even Mr. Sharp,
the president of your society, is not free from censure in this point. In his
book, entitled, The just Limitations of Slavery, he is endeavoring to prove
that this commerce is incompatible with the will of GOD; and in one place cites
a passage from the 23d chapter of Deuteronomy, the 14th and 15th verses, which
he gives us in these words. That though the Jews were permitted by the law of
Moses to keep slaves, yet there was no inherent right of service implied from
this permission; because whenever the slave could escape, he was esteemed free,
and it was absolutely unlawful for any man to deliver him up again to his
master. This is a strange doctrine for a legislature to advance, who makes it
death for any man to steal or withhold a slave from his lawful master. But
before we censure the lawgiver for inconsistency, let us examine the text, and
see whether Mr. Sharp has given us a just interpretation of it. It is the 15th
verse that is alluded to; but it is thus introduced in the 14th verse. For the
Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp to deliver thee, and give up
thine enemies before thee. Then in the 15th verse are these words. Thou shall
not deliver unto his master, the servant which escapes from his master unto
thee. Now I think it must appear plain to any candid reader, that the text
refers to servants that escaped from the enemy, who encompassed Moses's camp.
It was good policy, and agreeable to the custom of all nations to succor
deserters.

In the appendix, page 22, Mr. Sharp says, that the Israelites were expressly
permitted by the law of Moses to give a bill of divorce to their wives,
whenever they pleased, and to marry other women, and from hence concludes, that
the laws of Moses are not consistent with natural equity. But this is not a
fair representation of the text which we find in the first verse of the 24th of
Deuteronomy, where we may see that this law does not allow of a divorce
whenever the husband pleased; but only upon a breach of the marriage covenant;
so this is not sufficient to mark the law of Moses with injustice Compare Deuteronomy.
xxiv. 1, with Lev. xv. chap. and Romans 1st chap. etc.
.

In the 36th page, Mr. Sharp quotes the 23d verse of the 7th chapter of the 1st
of Corinthians, in these words: Ye are bought with a price, be not therefore
the servants of men; as if St. Paul was enticing servants to run away from
their masters. But the words of the text are these. You are bought with a
price, be not ye the servants of men? which the context fully explains.

The bounds of a letter will not permit of my following Mr. Sharp any further
at present; but I cannot conclude this letter without remarking the same
disingenuity in Mr. Clarkson; who also misleads his readers in some material
historical facts. In his essay upon the slavery and commerce of the human
species, he asserts, page 38, That it is necessary for a man to be free, to be
a Christian. But I deny this to be scripture doctrine. We are positively
assured, that all men are alike in the sight of GOD. Jew or Greek, Barbarian or
Scythian, bond or free.

In page 206, he is speaking in favor of a system which some have advanced,
namely, that white men and negroes do not differ from each other in complexion
or hair, but only according to the climate they live in; and in support of this
hypothesis, he says, we cannot have a more striking instance of this, than in
the Jews, who are scattered over the face of the whole earth; yet have
preserved themselves distinct from the rest of the world by their religion, as
they never intermarry with any but those of their own sect, so they have no
mixture of blood in their veins, that they should differ from each other: and
yet their complexion is different according to the country they reside in. But
if we investigate this point, we shall find it not founded in fact. Moses
married an Ethiopian woman Numb. xii. 1.
; Joseph married an Egyptian woman, from whence sprung the two tribes of
Ephraim and Manassah, who of course were mingled nations, that is, a mixture of
Egyptian and Hebrew blood. King Solomon had at least one wife that was an
African, and many other foreign women, which most probably was imitated by his
subjects. The Jews were scattered over all the dominions of Ahasuerus, who is
called Artaxerxes, which contained a hundred and twenty-seven provinces,
extending from Ethiopia to India; and there is a plain intimation in the book
of Esther, that when they had rest from their enemies, they mingled with the
natives of the land Esther viii. 9, 17. and ix. 27.
. Be this as it will, the Jews are continually upbraided by the prophets for
intermarrying with the Egyptians, the Canaanites, the Ammonites, the Moabites,
etc. Ezr ix. 2. Esdras viii. 69, etc.


In page 245 of the same book, Mr. Clarkson says, that St. Paul having
converted Onesimus, who was a fugitive slave of Philemon, sent him back to his
master with this address. I send him back to you, but not in his former
capacity, not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved. In this
manner I beseech you to receive him, for though I could enjoin you to do it,
yet I had rather it should be a matter of your own will than of necessity. Now
if we look into the 16th verse of St. Paul's epistle to Philemon, we shall find
a very material part of that verse suppressed, which plainly shows that
Onesimus did continue in his former capacity, that is, Philemon's servant in
the flesh, though he had become his brother according to the bond of
christianity.

After all Mr. Sharp will say, that though this commerce may have the voice of
the people, or of the whole world in its favor, and divine revelation to
support it, yet it is inconsistent with natural equity for one man to be a
slave to another.

Many things occur in the course of Providence that may have this appearance to
our inadequate ideas of Divine justice. What shall we then say? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Shall the thing formed say unto him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay,
to make one vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor?

Eve disobeyed the command of GOD, and her punishment was to bring forth
children in sorrow; but her innocent posterity were doomed to suffer, and do
suffer the same affliction.

When the serpent seduced Eve to taste the forbidden fruit, he walked erect,
and spoke with a human voice; but as a punishment for his crime, he was doomed
to crawl upon his belly and lick the dust, and be deprived of the form he had
appeared in before, and his issue have continued in that degraded state to this
day.

All the posterity of Adam feel the effect of the curse denounced upon him. And
can we believe that the posterity of Cain alone, who committed such an
atrocious act, should escape punishment?

Ham committed a crime for which it pleased GOD to curse Canaan. How shall we
reconcile this to natural equity? Or, does it appear to be greater injustice to
punish the whole family of Ham for their father's crime, and yet I think, upon
a full investigation of this point, it will appear, that the whole of Ham's
posterity participated in the curse.

Much might be said to elucidate this subject; but the bounds prescribed to
this letter, will not admit of entering farther into it at present. I am,
however, of opinion, that upon a full investigation it will appear,

1. That slavery commenced soon after the curse was denounced upon Canaan.

2. That the name of Canaan may be interpreted, to imply the whole family of
Ham; without distorting scripture.

3. That the original settlement of Ham's family was in Africa, Arabia and
Babylon.

4. That the first instances of men being bought and sold, or held as
hereditary servants, were in the countries where Ham's family settled.

5. That this family, as has been observed, were particularly pointed out by
the law of Moses to serve the Israelites as slaves. They are called the heathen
round about them; but the mingled nations that descended from Abraham and Lot,
who were also round about the Israelites, and idolators too, yet were not in
that predicament.

6. That the commerce in slaves within the dominion of Great Britain is founded
upon, and supported by acts of parliament.

7. That this commerce in its various operations, is at present a great nursery
for seamen, and under proper regulations would be much greater, notwithstanding
some unfavorable circumstances attending the navigation.

8. And above all, That this trade, under suitable restrictions and
limitations, would be a more effectual means of civilizing negroes, than all
the visionary plans for establishing sugar colonies in Africa, Cochin China, or
New Guinea.

I am, etc. CANDIDUS.
December 10, 1787.
CASES RESPECTING NEGROE SLAVES, WITH OPINIONS THEREON.
DUDLY CROFTS, Esquire was possessed of a negroe slave in the West Indies, born on
his own plantation, who served him in the capacity of his servant. Mr. Crofts
was made a captain of the new raised forces in North America, for the
expedition against Canada. He, by the indulgence of the colonel, permitted the
said slave to act as a drummer in his company, though never inlisted, the
captain all the while receiving his pay as being his servant. On his returning
from that expedition to England, the captain and his slave were taken on board
a merchant ship by a French privateer, but the slave was returned to the
captain by the French commissary, as one of the king of England's officers,
though it seems the commissary's agent signed a passport (which the slave has
now in his hand) signifying that he was exchanged as a prisoner of war, and by
the commissary was returned to his master, the captain. Since this the captain
has thought fit to send this slave back to his plantation at Barbados,
ordering him on board a ship, where he was hand-cuffed, to prevent an escape;
however, by some means the fellow got to shore, and is commencing an action
against his master for this usage, alleging that as he was in England he is
become a freeman.

N. B. The slave, whilst in the West Indies had been baptized by the permission
of his master.

Query, Whether the captain's property is altered by his slave's being in
England, or whether the captain having appointed him his drummer or the
commissary's passport, alters the case?

2. Can the captain compel him to return to the West Indies, or does a slave,
by being in England, become a freeman, so as to maintain an action for his
wages, or can the owner sue any person who detains him for the loss of his
service?

A. I am of opinion that captain Croft's negroe, by his coming to, and residing
with his master in England, or by being baptized, does not gain his freedom;
and that the owner of a negroe in England has a right to send him to the
plantations, or wheresoever else he thinks fit; and that such owner, in case
the slave will not obey his commands, has a right to use all necessary force.

I am also of opinion, that the captain's negroe, by his serving as a drummer
in his company, did not thereby gain his liberty, as he never was inlisted in
his majesty's service, according to the articles of war; nor do I think that
the negroe's being returned by the French commissary, as one of the king's
officers, makes any alteration in the case; as in fact, he was not then an
officer of the king, nor could such negroe, if he had run away from that
service, have been punished by martial law, therefore I am of opinion, that
such negroe is the captain's property, and that he may sue any person who
detains him for loss of service.

EDMUND HOSKINS.
LINCOLN'S INN, 10th April, 1749.
A. Bought a slave in Jamaica and brought him to London, and from thence let
him out to a master of a ship. A. dies, making B. his executor, who received
from the master of the ship the wages the slave had earned in the lifetime of
the testator; the slave brings an action against the master of the ship for
these wages.

Query, Can he maintain the said action?

A. I am of opinion, that the executor is entitled to the wages. The right to
the slave on his coming to England not being altered, but remaining as it was
before, therefore the master or his representatives are entitled to his
service, and the profits which have been thereby made, and no action can be
maintained against the master of the ship.

P. ELLERS.

Sir John Strange's opinion, Master of the Rolls.
I am of opinion, that the executor is entitled to the wages, and that the
payment to the executor will be a proper defense and answer for the master of
the ship, to the action now depending against him.

J. STRANGE.

The opinions of the Lords Chancellors, Hardwicke and Talbot.
In order to rectify a vulgar error, that slaves become free by their being in
England or Ireland, or from being baptized, the Attorney and Solicitors
Generals opinions were taken, which were as follows:

We are of opinion, that a slave coming from the West Indies to Great Britain
or Ireland, with or without his master, does not become free, and that his
master's property or right in him is not thereby determined or varied; and that
baptism does not bestow freedom on him, or make any alteration in his temporal
condition in these kingdoms. We are also of opinion, that his master may
legally compel him to return again to the plantations.

P. YORK. C. TALBOT.

Since which, on the strength of these opinions, in the year 1763, a black boy,
the property of one Rice, a broker, against whom a commission of bankrupt had
been awarded and issued, was publicly sold by auction, by the assignees, under
the commission, as part of the bankrupt's effects.

A copy of Lord Mansfield's speech in the case of Somerset and Knowles.
On Monday, the 22d June, in Trinity term, 1772, the Court of King's Bench
proceeded to give judgment in the case of Somerset and Knowles, upon the return
of the Habeas Corpus. Lord Mansfield first stated the return; and then spoke to
the following purport:

We pay due attention to the opinion of Sir Philip York and Mr. Talbot, in the
year 1729, by which they pledged themselves to the British planters for the
legal consequences of bringing negroe slaves into this kingdom, or their being
baptized; which opinion was repeated and recognized by Lord Hardwicke, sitting
as chancellor, on the 19th of October 1749, to the following effect: he said,
That trover would lay for a negro slave: that a notion prevailed, that if a
slave came into England, or became a christian, he thereby became emancipated;
but there was no foundation in law for such a notion: that when he and Lord
Talbot were attorney and solicitor general, this notion of a slave becoming
free by being baptized prevailed so strongly, that the planters industriously
prevented their becoming christians: upon which their opinion was taken; and
upon their best consideration they were both clearly of opinion, that a slave
did not in the least alter his situation or state toward his master or owner,
either by being christened or coming to England: that though the statute of
Charles II. had abolished tenure so far, that no man could be a villein
regardant; yet if he would acknowledge himself a villein in gross in any court
of record, he knew of no way by which he could be entitled to his freedom,
without the consent of his master. We feel the force of the inconveniences and
consequences that will follow the decision of this question: yet all of us are
so clearly of one opinion upon the only question before us, that we think we
ought to give judgment without adjourning the matter to be argued before all
the judges, as usual in the habeas corpus, and as we at first intimated an
intention of doing in this case. The only question then is, Is the cause
returned sufficient for the remanding him? If not, he must be discharged. The
cause returned is, the slave absented himself and departed from his master's
service, and refused to return and serve him during his stay in England;
whereupon, by his master's orders, he was put on board the ship by force, and
there detained in secure custody, to be carried out of the kingdom and sold. So
high an act of dominion must derive its authority, if any such it has from the
law of the kingdom where executed. A foreigner cannot be imprisoned here on the
authority of any law existing in his own country. The power of a master over
his servant is different in all countries, more or less limited or extensive,
the exercise of it therefore must always be regulated by the laws of the place
where exercised. The state of slavery is of such a nature, that it is incapable
of being now introduced by courts of justice upon mere reasoning, or inferences
from any principles natural or political; it must take its rise from positive
law; the origin of it can in no country or age be traced back to any other
source. Immemorial usage preserves the memory of positive law long after all
traces of the occasion, reason, authority, and time of its introduction, are
lost, and in a case of so odious a nature as the condition of slaves must be
taken strictly. The power claimed by this return was never in use here: no
master ever was allowed here to take a slave by force to be sold abroad because
he had deserted from his service, or for any other reason whatever; we cannot
say, the cause set forth by this return is allowed or approved of by the laws
of this kingdom, and therefore the man must be discharged.

Parish of Thames Ditton, against St. Luke's, Chelsea.
A special case reserved at the sessions came on for the determination of the
court of King's Bench, in Easter term last.

The case was, Charlotte How, a negroe girl, was bought in America by Captain
How as a slave, and by him brought to England in 1781: that in November 1781,
Capt. How went to live in the said parish of Thames Ditton, and took this girl
with him, and she continued with him there in his service till the 7th June
1783, when he died, soon after which she was baptized at Thames Ditton, by the
name of Charlotte How. That she continued after his death to live with Mrs.
How, his widow and executrix, who afterward removed to Chelsea, and she
continued to live with her there as before, for five or six months, when she
left Mrs. How; that she was all this time childless, and unmarried, and
removed by Ditton to Chelsea, as having served the last 40 days in that parish.

In this case Lord Mansfield very particularly took occasion to declare, that
the public were generally mistaken in the determination of the court of King's
Bench, in case of Somerset the negroe, which had been often quoted, for nothing
more was then determined, than that there was no right in the master forcibly
to take the slave and carry him abroad. That the general question, whether the
master might not sue any one who entertained him in his service, or for wages,
was not before the court, nor was it held that the baptizing such slave made
any alteration in his freedom, or that on setting foot in this country he
instantly became emancipated. Therefore the only question on the habeas corpus
in that case was, whether the master might forcibly compel the slave to go out
of this kingdom? when it was determined he could not.

Blackstone, v. i. c. 14. p. 425.
The law of England acts upon general and extensive principles. It gives
liberty, rightly understood, that is, protection, to a Jew, a Turk, or a
Heathen, as well as to those who profess the true religion of Christ; and it
will not dissolve a civil obligation between master and servant, on account of
the alteration of faith in either of the parties: but the slave is entitled to
the same protection in England before, as after, baptism; and whatever service
the heathen negroe owed to his American master, the same is he bound to render
when brought to England and made a Christian.

FINIS.

