AN EXAMINATION OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, SUBMITTED
TO THE PEOPLE BY THE GENERAL CONVENTION, At Philadelphia, the 17th. Day of
September, 1787, AND SINCE ADOPTED AND RATIFIED BY THE CONVENTIONS OF ELEVEN
STATES, CHOSEN FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSIDERING IT, BEING ALL THAT HAVE YET
DECIDED ON THE SUBJECT.

BY AN AMERICAN CITIZEN. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE JAMES
WILSON, ESQUIRE, ON THE SAME SUBJECT.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNR. IN FOURTH-STREET, BETWEEN
MARKET AND ARCH-STREETS. MDCCLXXXVIII.

TO THE CANDID READER.
EVERY person, who desires to know the true situation of the United States of
America, in regard to the freedom and powers of their governments, must
carefully consider together the constitution of the state in which he lives and
the new constitution of foederal or general government. The latter alone is
treated of in the following pages. The former, it is presumed, are sufficiently
understood by the citizens who live under them.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE CONSTITUTION FOR THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, etc.
NUMBER I. On the Foederal Government, and first on the safety of the people,
from the restraints imposed on the President.
IT is impossible for an honest and feeling mind, of any nation or country
whatever, to be insensible to the present circumstances of America. Were I an
East Indian, or a Turk, I should consider this singular situation of a part of
my fellow creatures as the most curious and interesting. Intimately connected
with (...) country, as a citizen of the union, I confess it entirely engrosses
my mind and feelings.

To take a proper view of the ground on which we stand, it may be necessary to
recollect the manner in which the United States were originally settled and
established. Want of charity in the religious systems of Europe, and of justice
in their political governments, were the principal moving causes, which drove
the emigrants of various countries to the American continent. The
Congregationalists, Quakers, Presbyterians and other British dissenters, the
Catholics of England and Ireland, the Hugonots of France, the German Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Moravians, with several other societies, established themselves
in the different colonies, thereby laying the ground of that liberality in
ecclesiastical affairs, which has been observable since the late revolution.
Religious liberty naturally promotes corresponding dispositions in matters of
government. The constitution of England, as it stood on paper, was one of the
freest, at that time, in the world, and the American colonies considered
themselves as entitled to the fullest enjoyment of it. Thus, when the
ill-judged discussions of late times in England brought into question the
rights of this country, as it stood connected with the British crown, we were
found more strongly impressed with their importance, and accurately acquainted
with their extent, than the wisest and most learned of our brethren beyond the
Atlantic. When the greatest names in parliament insisted on the power of that
body over the commerce of the colonies, and even the right to bind us in all
cases whatsoever, America, seeing that it was only another form of tyranny,
insisted upon the immutable truth, that taxation and representation are
inseparable; and, while a desire of harmony and other considerations induced
her into an acquiescence in the commercial regulations of Great Britain, it was
done from the declared necessity of the case, and with a cautious, full, and
absolute saving of our voluntarily-suspended rights. The parliament was
persevering, and America continued firm, till hostilities and open war
commenced, and finally the late revolution closed the contest for-ever.

It is evident, from this short detail, and the reflections which arise from
it, that the quarrel between the United States and the parliament of
Great Britain did not arise so much from objections to the form of government,
though undoubtedly a better one by far is now within our reach, as from a
difference concerning certain important rights, resulting from the essential
principles of liberty, which their constitution actually preserved to all the
subjects residing within the realm. It was not asserted by America, that the
people of the island of Great Britain were slaves, but that we, though
possessed absolutely of the same rights, were not admitted to enjoy an equal
degree of freedom.

When the declaration of independence completed the separation between the two
countries, new governments were necessarily established. Many circumstances led
to the adoption of the republican form, among which was the predilection of the
people. In devising the frames of government, it may have been difficult to
avoid extremes opposite to the vices of that we had just rejected;
nevertheless, many of the state constitutions we have chosen are truly
excellent. Our misfortunes have been, that in the first instance we adopted no
national government at all; but were kept together by common danger only; and
that in the confusions of a civil war, we framed a foederal constitution, now
universally admitted to be inadequate to the preservation of liberty, property,
and the union. The question is not, then, how far our state constitutions are
good, or otherwise -- the object of our wishes is, to amend and supply the
evident and allowed errors and defects of the foederal government. Let us
consider a while, that which is now proposed to us -- let us compare it with
the so much boasted British form of government, and see how much more it
favors the people, and how completely it secures their rights, remembering, at
the same time, that we did not dissolve our connection with that country so
much on account of its constitution, as the perversion and mal-administration
of it.

In the first place, let us look at the nature and powers of the head of that
country, and those of the ostensible head of ours.

The British king is the great bishop or supreme head of an established church,
with an immense patronage annexed. In this capacity he commands a number of
votes in the house of lords, by creating bishops, who, besides their great
incomes, have votes in that assembly, and are judges in the last resort. These
prelates have also many honorable and lucrative places to bestow, and thus from
their wealth, learning, dignities, powers, and patronage, give a great luster
and an enormous influence to the crown.

In America, our president will not only be without these influencing
advantages, but they will be in the possession of the people at large, to
strengthen their hands in the event of a contest with him. All religious funds,
honors and powers, are in the gift of numberless unconnected, disunited and
contending corporations, wherein the principle of perfect equality universally
prevails. In short, danger from ecclesiastical tyranny, that long standing and
still remaining curse of the people -- that sacrilegious engine of royal power
in some countries -- can be feared by no man in the United States. In Britain,
their king is for life -- in America, our President will always (...) one of
the people at the end of four years. In that country, the king is hereditary,
and may be an idiot, a knave, or a tyrant by nature, or ignorant from neglect
of his education, yet cannot be removed, for "he can do no wrong." This is a
favorite maxim of their constitution. In America, as the President is to be one
of the people at the end of his short term, so will he and his fellow citizens
remember, that he was originally one of the people; and that he is created by
their breath. Further, he cannot be an idiot, probably not a knave or tyrant,
for those whom nature makes so discover it before the age of thirty-five, until
which period he cannot be elected. It appears, we have not admitted that he can
do no wrong, but have rather pre-supposed he may and sometimes will do wrong,
by providing for his impeachment, his trial, and his peaceable and complete
removal.

In England the king has a power to create members of the upper house, who are
judges in the highest court, as well as legislators. Our President not only
cannot make members of the Senate, but their creation, like his own, is by the
people, through their representatives: and a member of Assembly may and will be
as certainly dismissed at the end of his year, for electing a weak or wicked
Senator, as for any other blunder or misconduct.

The king of England has complete legislative power, while our President can
only use it when the other servants of the people are divided. But in all great
cases affecting the national interests or safety, his modified and restrained
power must give way to the sense of two-thirds of the legislature. In fact it
amounts to no more, than a serious duty imposed upon him to request both houses
to re-consider any matter on which he entertains doubts or feels apprehensions;
and hers the people have a strong hold upon him from his sole and personal
responsibility.

The President of the upper-house (or the chancellor) in England, is appointed
by their king, while our Vice President, who is chosen by the people, through
the electors and the Senate, is not at all dependant on the President, but may
exercise equal powers on some occasions. In all royal governments, an helpless
infant or an inexperienced youth may wear the crown. Our President must be
matured by the experience of years, and being born among us, his character at
thirty-five must be fully understood. Wisdom, virtue and active qualities of
mind and body can alone make him the first servant of a free and enlightened
people.

Our President will fall very much short indeed of any prince in his annual
income, which will not be hereditary, but the absolute allowance of the people,
passing through the hands of their other servants from year to year, as it
becomes necessary. There will be no burdens on the nation, to provide for his
heir, or other branches of his family. It is probable, from the state of
property in America, and other circumstances, that many citizens will exceed
him in show and expense, -- those dazzling trappings of kingly rank and power.
He will have no authority to make a treaty, without two thirds of the senate,
nor can he appoint ambassadors or other great officers without their
approbation, which will remove the idea of patronage and influence, and of
personal obligation and dependence. The appointment of even the inferior
officers may be taken out of his hands by an act of congress at any time; he
can create no nobility or titles of honor, nor take away offices during good
behavior. His person is not so much protected as that of a member of the house
of representatives; for he may be proceeded against like any other man in the
ordinary course of law. He appoints no officer of the separate states. He will
have no influence from placemen in the legislature, nor can he prorogue or
dissolve it. He will have no power over the treasures of the state; and,
lastly, as he is created through the electors, by the people at large, he must
ever look up to the support of his creators. From such a servant, with powers
so limited and transitory, there can be no danger, especially when we consider
the solid foundations on which our national liberties are immoveably fixed, by
the other provisions of this excellent constitution. Whatever of dignity or
authority he possesses, is a delegated part of their majesty and their
political omnipotence, transiently vested in him by the people themselves, for
their own happiness.

NUMBER II. On the safety of the people, from the restraints imposed upon the
Senate.
WE have seen that the late honorable convention, in designating the nature of
the chief executive office of the United States, have deprived it of all the
dangerous appendages of royalty, and provided for the frequent expiration of
its limited powers -- As our president bears no resemblance to a king, so we
shall see the senate have no similitude to nobles.

First, then, not being hereditary, their collective knowledge, wisdom, and
virtue are not precarious, for by these qualities alone they are to obtain
their offices; and they will have none of the peculiar follies and vices of
those men, who possess power merely because their fathers held it before them,
for they will be educated (under equal advantages, and with equal prospects)
among and on a footing with the other sons of a free people. If we recollect
the characters, who have, at various periods, filled the seats of congress, we
shall find this expectation perfectly reasonable. Many young men of genius, and
many characters of more matured abilities, without fortunes, have been honored
with that trust. Wealth has had but few representatives there, and those have
been generally possessed of respectable personal qualifications. There have
also been many instances of persons not eminently endowed with mental
qualities, who have been sent thither from a reliance on their virtues, public
and private -- As the senators are still to be elected by the legislatures of
the states, there can be no doubt of equal safety and propriety in their future
appointment, especially as no further pecuniary qualification is required by
the constitution.

They can hold no other office civil or military under the United States, nor
can they join in making provision for themselves, either by creating new
places, or increasing the emoluments of old ones. As their sons are not to
succeed them, they will not be induced to aim at an increase or perpetuity of
their powers, at the expense of the liberties of the people, of which those
sons will be a part. They possess a much smaller share of the judicial power
than the upper house in Britain, for they are not, as there, the highest court
in civil affairs. Impeachments alone are the cases cognizable before them, and
in what other place could matters of that nature be so properly and safely
determined? The judges of the foederal courts will owe their appointments to
the president and senate, therefore may not feel so perfectly free from favor,
affection and influence, as the upper house who receive their power from the
people, through their state representatives, and are immediately responsible to
those assemblies, and finally to the nation at large -- Thus we see, when a
daring or dangerous offender is brought to the bar of public justice, the
people, who alone can impeach him by their immediate representatives, will
cause him to be tried, not by judges appointed in the heat of the occasion, but
by two-thirds of a select body, chosen a long time before, for various
purposes, by the collected wisdom of of their state legislatures. From a
pretense or affectation of extraordinary purity and excellence of character,
their word of honor is the sanction, under which these high courts, in other
countries, have given their sentence -- But with us, like the other judges of
the union, like the rest of the people, of which they are never to forget they
are a part, it is required that they be on oath.

No ambitious, undeserving or inexperienced youth can acquire a seat in this
house by means of the most enormous wealth, or most powerful connections, till
thirty years have ripened his abilities, and fully discovered his merits to his
country -- a more rational ground of preference surely than mere property.

The senate, though more independent of the people, as to the free exercise of
their judgment and abilities, than the house of representatives, by the longer
term of their office, must be older and more experienced men, and are vested
with less effective power; for the public treasures, the sinews of the state,
cannot be called forth by their original motion. They may indeed restrain the
profusion or errors of the house of representatives, but they cannot take any
of the necessary measures to raise a national revenue.

The people, through the electors, prescribe them such a president as shall be
best qualified to control them.

They can only, by conviction on impeachment, remove and incapacitate a
dangerous officer, but the punishment of him as a criminal remains within the
province of the courts of law, to be conducted under all the ordinary forms and
precautions, which exceedingly diminishes the importance of their judicial
powers. They are detached, as much as possible, from local prejudices in favor
of their respective states, by having a separate and independent vote, for the
sensible and conscientious use of which every member will find his person,
honor and character seriously bound -- He cannot shelter himself, under a vote
in behalf of his slate, among his immediate colleagues. As there are only two,
he cannot be voluntarily or involuntarily governed by the majority of the
deputation -- He will be obliged, by wholesome provisions, to attend his public
duty, and thus in great national questions must give a vote, of the honesty of
which he will find it is necessary to convince his constituents.

The senate must always receive the exceptions of the president against any of
their legislatve acts, which, without serious deliberation and sufficient
reasons, they will seldom disregard. They will also feel a considerable check
from the constitutional powers of the state legislatures, whose rights they
will not be disposed to infringe, since they are the bodies to which they owe
their existence, and are moreover to remain the immediate guardians of the
people:

And lastly, the Senate will feel the mighty check of the House of
Representatives -- a body so truly popular and pure in its election, so
intimately connected, by its interests and feelings, with the people at large,
so guarded against corruption and influence -- so much, from its nature, above
all apprehensions, that it must ever be able to maintain the high ground
assigned to it by the foederal constitution.

NUMBER III. On the safety of the people, from the nature of the House of
Representatives.
IN pursuing the consideration of the new foederal constitution, it remains now
to examine the nature and powers of the House of representatives -- the
immediate delegates of the people.

Each member of this truly popular assembly will be chosen by about six
thousand electors, by the poor as well as the rich. No decayed or venal borough
will have an unjust share in their determinations -- no old Sarum will send
thither a representative by the voice of a single elector. This is the case
with that British Borough.
As we shall have no royal ministers to purchase votes, so we shall have no
votes for sale; for the suffrages of six thousand enlightened and independent
freemen are above all price. When the increasing population of the country
shall render the body too large at the rate of one member for every thirty
thousand persons, they will be returned at the greater rate of one for every
forty or fifty thousand, which will render the electors still more
incorruptible. For this regulation is only designed to prevent a smaller number
than thirty thousand from having a representative. Thus we see a provision
follows, that no state shall have less than one member, for if a new and
greater number than thirty thousand should hereafter be fixed on, which should
exceed the whole of the inhabitants of any state, such state, without this
wholesome provision, would lose its voice in the House of Representatives -- a
circumstance which the constitution renders impossible.

The people of England, whose House of commons is filled with military and
civil officers and pensioners, say their liberties would be perfectly secured
by triennial Parliaments. With us, no placeman can sit among the
representatives of the people, and two years are the constitutional term of
their existence. Here, again, lest wealth, powerful connections, or even the
unwariness of the people should place in this important trust an undeserving,
unqualified, or inexperienced youth, the wisdom of the Convention has proposed
an absolute incapacity till the age of twenty-five. At twenty-one a young man
is made the guardian of his own interest, but he cannot, for a few years more,
be entrusted with the affairs of the nation. He must be an inhabitant of the
state that elects him, that he may be intimately acquainted with their
particular circumstances -- The house of Representatives is not, as the senate,
to have a President chosen for them from without their body, but are to elect
their Speaker from their own number -- They will also appoint all their other
officers. In great state cases, they will be the grand inquest of the nation,
for they possess the sole and uncontrollable power of impeachment. They are
neither to wait the call, nor abide the prorogations and dissolutions of a
perverse or ambitious Prince, for they are to meet at least once in every year,
and to sit on adjournments to be agreed on between themselves and the other
servants of the people. Should they differ in opinion, the President, who is a
temporary fellow servants, and not their hereditary master, has a mediatorial
power to adjust it for them, but cannot prevent th^^ constitutional meeting
within the year. They can (...) the attendance of their members, that their
public duty may not be evaded in times of difficulty or danger -- The vote of
each representative can be always known, as well as the proceedings of the
house, that so the people may be acquainted with the conduct of those in whom
they repose so important a trust. As was observed of the Senators, they cannot
make new offices for themselves, nor increase, for their own benefit, the
emoluments of old ones, by which the people will be exempted from needless
additions to the public expenses, on such sordid and mercenary principles --
They are not to be restrained from the firm and plain language, which becomes
the independent representatives of freemen, for there is to be a perfect
liberty of speech. Without their consent, no moneys can be obtained, no armies
raised, no navies provided. They, alone, can originate bills for drawing forth
the revenues of the union, and they will have a negative upon every legislative
act of the other house. -- So far, in short, as the sphere of foederal
jurisdiction extends, they will be controulable only by the people, and, in
contentions with the other branch, so far as they shall be right, they must
ever finally prevail.

Such, my Countrymen, are some of the cautionary provisions of the frame of
government your faithful convention have submitted to your consideration --
such the foundations of peace, liberty and safety, which have been laid by
their unwearied labors -- They have guarded you against all servants but those
"whom choice and common good ordain," against all masters, "save preserving
Heaven."

NUMBER IV. The security for national safety and happiness, resulting from
other parts of the foederal Government.
IN considering the respective powers of the President, the Senate and the
House of Representatives, under the foederal constitution, we have seen a part
of the wholesome precautions, which are contained in the new system. Let us
examine what further securities for the safety and happiness of the people are
contained in the general stipulations and provisions.

The United States guarantee to every state in the union a separate republican
form of government. From thence it follows, that any man or body of men,
however rich or powerful, who shall make an alteration in the form of
government of any state, whereby the powers thereof shall be attempted to be
taken out of the hands of the people at large, will stand guilty of high
treason; or should a foreign power seduce or overawe the people of any state,
so as to cause them to vest in the families of any ambitous citizens or
foreigners the powers of hereditary governors, whether as Kings or Nobles, that
such investment of powers would be void in itself, and every person attempting
to execute them would also be guilty of treason.

No religions test is ever to be required of any officer or servant of the
United States. The people may employ any wise and good citizen in the execution
of the various duties of the government. In Italy, Spain, and Portugal, no
protestant can hold a public trust. In England every Presbyterian, and other
person not of their established church, is incapable of holding an office. No
such impious deprivation of the rights of men can take place under the new
foederal constitution. The convention has the honor of proposing the first
public act, by which any nation has ever divested itself of a power, every
exercise of which is a trespass on the Majesty of Heaven.

No qualification in monied or landed property is required by the proposed
plan; nor does it admit any preference from the preposterous distinctions of
birth and rank. The office of the President, a Senator, and a Representative,
and every other place of power or profit, are therefore open to the whole body
of the people. Any wise, informed and upright man, be his property what it may,
can exercise the trusts and powers of the state, provided he possesses the
moral, religious and political virtues which are necessary to secure the
confidence of his fellow citizens.

The importation of slaves from (...) foreign country is, by a clear
implication, held up to the world as equally inconsistent with the dispositions
and the duties of the people of America. A solid foundation is laid for
exploding the principles of negro slavery, in which many good men of all
parties in Pennsylvania, and throughout the union, have already concurred. The
temporary reservation of any particular matter must ever be deemed an admission
that it should be done away. This appears to have been well understood. In
addition to the arguments drawn from liberty, justice and religion, opinions
against this practice, founded in sound policy, have no doubt been urged.
Regard was necessarily paid to the peculiar situation of our southern
fellow-citizens; but they, on the other hand, have not been insensible of the
delicate situation of our national character on this subject.

The people will remain, under the proposed constitution, the fountain of power
and public honor. The President, the Senate, and the House of Representatives,
will be the channels through which the stream will flow -- but it will flow
from the people, and from them only. Every office, religious, civil and
military will be either their immediate gift, or it will come from them through
the hands of their servants. And this, as observed before, will be guaranteed
to them under the state constitutions which they respectively approve; for they
cannot be royal forms, cannot be aristocratical, but must be republican.

The people of those states which have faithfully discharged their duty to the
union will be no longer subjected alone to the weight of the public debts.
Proper arrangements will call forth the just proportion of their sister states,
and our national character will again be as unstained, as it was once exalted.
Elevation to independence, with the loss of our good name, is only to be
conspicuous in disgrace. The liberties of a people involved in debt are as
uncertain as the liberty of an individual in the same situation. Their virtue
is more precarious. The unfortunate citizen must yield to the operation of the
laws, while a bankrupt nation too easy annihilates the sacred obligations of
gratitude and honor, and becomes execrable and infamous. I cannot refrain from
reminding my fellow-citizens of our near approach to that deplorable situation,
which must be our miserable condition, if the defects of the old confederation
remain without amendment. The proposed constitution will cure the evil, and
restore us to our rank among mankind.

Laws, made after the commission of the fact, have been a dreadful engine in
the hands of tyrannical governors. Some of the most virtuous and shining
characters in the world have been put to death, by laws formed to render them
punishable, for parts of their conduct which innocence permitted, and to which
patriotism impelled them. These have been called ex post facto laws, and are
exploded by the new system. If a time of public contention shall hereafter
arrive, the firm and ardent friends to liberty may know the length to which
they can push their noble opposition, on the foundation of the laws. Should
their country's cause impel them further, they will be acquainted with the
hazard, and using those arms which Providence has put into their hands, will
make a solemn appeal to "the power above."

The destruction of the ancient republics was occasioned in every instance by
their being ignorant of a great political position, which was left for America
to discover and establish. Self-evident as the truth appears, we find no friend
to liberty in ancient Greece or Rome asserting, that taxation and
representation were inseparable. The Roman citizens, proud of their own
liberty, imposed, in the freest times of the commonwealth, the most grievous
burdens on their wretched provinces. At other times we find thousands of their
citizens, though residing within the walls of Rome, deprived of legislative
representatives. When America asserted the novel truth, Great Britain, though
boasting herself as alone free among the modern nations, denied it by her
legislature, and endeavored to refute it by her arms -- the reasoning of
tyrants. But the attempt was vain, for the voice of truth was heard above the
thunders of the war, and reached the ears of all nations. Henceforth the people
of the earth will consider this position as the only rock on which they can
found the temple of liberty, that taxation and representation are inseparable.
Our new constitution carries it into execution on the most enlarged and liberal
scale, for a Representative will be chosen by six thousand of his
fellow-citizens, a Senator by half a sovereign state, a President by a whole
nation.

The old foederal constitution contained many of the same things, which from
error or disingenuousness are urged against the new one. Neither of them have a
bill of rights, nor does either notice the liberty of the press, because they
are already provided for by the state constitutions; and relating only to
personal rights, they could not be mentioned in a contract among sovereign
states.

Both the old and new foederal constitutions, and indeed the constitution of
Pennsylvania, admit of courts in which no use is made of a jury. The board of
property, the court of admiralty, and the high court of errors and appeals, in
the state of Pennsylvania, as also the court of appeals under the old
confederation, exclude juries. Trial by jury will therefore be in the express
words of the Pennsylvania constitution, "as heretofore," -- almost always used,
though sometimes omitted. Trials for lands lying in any state between persons
residing in such state, for bonds, notes, book debts, contracts, trespasses,
assumptions, and all other matters between two or more citizens of any state,
will be held in the state courts by juries, as now. In these cases the foederal
courts cannot interfere. Trials between a state and its own Citizens, and
between Citizens of the same state, involving questions concerning state laws
that infringe this constitution, may be carried by appeal, it is presumed, into
a foederal court.
But when a dispute arises between the citizens of any state about lands lying
out of the bounds thereof, or when a trial is to be had between the citizens of
any state and those of another, or the government of another, the private
citizen will not be obliged to go into a court constituted by the state, with
which, or with the citizens of which, his dispute is. He can appeal to a
disinterested foederal court. This is surely a great advantage, and promises a
fair trial, and an impartial judgment. The trial by jury is not excluded in
these foederal courts. In all criminal cases, where the property, liberty or
life of the citizen is at stake, he has the benefit of a jury. If convicted on
impeachment, which is never done by a jury in any country, he cannot be fined,
imprisoned or punished, but only may be disqualified from doing public mischief
by losing his office, and his capacity to bold another. If the nature of his
offense, besides its danger to his country, should be criminal in itself --
should involve a charge of fraud, murder or treason -- he may be tried for such
crime, but cannot be convicted (...) a jury. In trials about property in the
foederal courts, which can only be as above stated, there is nothing in the new
constitution to prevent a trial by jury. No doubt it will be the mode in every
case, wherein it is practicable. This will be adjusted by law, and it could not
be done otherwise. In short, the sphere of jurisdiction for the foederal courts
is limited, and that sphere only is subject to the regulations of our foederal
government. The known principles of justice, the attachment to trial by jury
whenever it can be used, the instructions of the state legislatures, the
instructions of the people at large, the operation of the foederal regulations
on the property of a president, a senator, a representative, a judge, as well
as on that of a private citizen, will certainly render those regulations as
favorable as possible to property; for life and liberty are put more than ever
into the hands of the juries. Under the present constitution of all the states,
a public officer may be condemned to imprisonment or death on impeachment,
without a jury; but the new foederal constitution protects the accused, till he
shall be convicted, from the hands of power, by rendering a jury the
indispensible judges of all crimes.

The influence which foreign powers may attempt to exercise in our affairs was
foreseen, and a wholesome provision has been made against it; for no person
holding an office under the United States is permitted to enjoy any foreign
honors, powers or emoluments.

The apprehensions of the people have been excited, perhaps by persons with
good intentions, about the powers of the new government to raise an army. Let
us consider this point with moderation and candor. As enemies will sometimes
insult us, invade our country and capture our property, it is clear a power in
our government to oppose, restrain or destroy them, is necessary to our honor,
safety and existence. The military should, however, be regarded with a watchful
eye; for it is a profession that is liable to dangerous perversion. But the
powers vested in the foederal government do not go the length which has been
said. A standing army is not granted or intended, for there can be no provision
for its continuing three years, much less for its permanent establishment. Two
years are the utmost time for which the money can be given. It will be under
all the restrictions which wisdom and jealousy can suggest, and the original
grant of the supplies must be made by the House of representatives, the
immediate delegates of the people. The Senate and President, who also derive
their power from the people, appoint the officers; and the heads of the
departments, who must submit their accounts to the whole legislature, are to
pay and provide them, as shall be directed by the laws that shall contain the
conditions of the grant. The militia, who are in fact the effective part of the
people at large, will render many troops quite unnecessary. They will form a
powerful check upon the regular troops, and will generally be sufficient to
overawe them -- for our detached situation will seldom give occasion to raise
an army, though a few scattered companies may often be necessary. But whenever,
even on the most obvious reasons, an army shall be raised, the several states
will be called, by the nature of things, to attend to the condition of the
militia. Republican jealousy, the guardian Angel of these states, will watch
the motions of our military citizens, even though they will be the soldiers of
a free people. There is a wide difference however between the troops of such
commonwealths as ours, founded on equal and unalterable principles, and those
of a regal government, where ambition and oppression are the profession of the
king. In the first case, a military officer is the occasional servant of the
people, employed for their defense; in the second, he is the ever ready
instrument to execute the schemes of conquest or oppression, with which the
mind of his royal master may be disturbed.

Observations have been made on the power given to the foederal Government in
regard to the elections of Representatives and Senators. The regulations of
these elections are, by the first part of the clause, to be prescribed by the
state legislatures, who are certainly the proper bodies, if they will always
execute the duty. But in case the union or the public safety should be
endangered by an omission of this duty, as in the case of Rhode Island, then
the legislature of the United States can name for the people a convenient time,
and do other matters necessary to ensure the free exercise of their right of
election. The exception, in regard to the places of choosing Senators, was made
from due respect to the sovereignty of the state legislatures, who are to elect
the Senators, and whose place of meeting ought not to be prescribed to them by
any authority, except indeed, as we always must, by the authority of the
people. This power given to the foederal legislature is no more than what is
possessed by the governments of all the states. The constitution of
Pennsylvania permits two-thirds of such cities and counties, as shall elect
representatives, to exercise all the powers of the General Assembly, "as fully
and amply as if the whole were present," should any part of the state neglect
or refuse to perform their duty in this particular. In short, it is a power
necessary to preserve the social compact of each state and the confederation of
the United States.

Besides the securities for the liberties of the people arising out of the
foederal government, they are guarded by their state constitutions, and by the
nature of things in the separate states. The Governor or President in each
commonwealth, the Councils, Senates, Assemblies, Judges, Sheriffs, Grand and
Pettit Juries, Officers of Militia, Clergy and Lay Officers of all churches,
state and county Treasurers, Prothonotaries, Registers, Presidents and other
officers of Universities, Colleges and Academies, Wardens of ports and cities,
Burgesses of towns, Commissioners of counties, County Lieutenants, and many
other officers of power and influence, will still be chosen within each state,
without any possible interference of the foederal Government. The separate
states will also choose all the members of the legislative and executive
branches of the United States. The people at large in each state will choose
their foederal representatives, and, unless ordered otherwise by the state
legislatures, may choose the electors of the President and Vice President of
the Union. And lastly, the legislature of the state will have the election of
the Senate, as they have heretofore had of the Members of Congress. Let us
then, with a candor worthy of the subject, ask ourselves, whether it can be
feared, that a majority of the Representatives, each of whom will be chosen by
six thousand enlightened freemen, can betray their country? -- Whether a
majority of the Senate, each of whom will be chosen by the legislature of a
free, sovereign and independent state, without any stipulations in favor of
wealth or the contemptible distinctions of birth or rank, and who will be
closely observed by the state legislatures, can destroy our liberties,
controuled as they are too by the house of representatives? or whether a
temporary, limited, executive officer, watched by the foederal Representatives,
by the Senate, by the state legislatures, by his personal enemies among the
people of his own state, by the jealousy of the people of rival states, and by
the whole of the people of the Union, can ever endanger our Freedom. There is
one grand operation of the new foederal constitution, favorable to general
liberty, which I do not remember to have heard from any of its friends. It is
well known, that in most of the states the members of their Houses of
Representatives are chosen in equal numbers from each county, and in the
eastern states, in equal numbers from each town, without any regard to the
number of taxable inhabitants, or the number of souls. Hence it is very
frequent for a county, with ten thousand souls, to send only the same number of
members to the state house of representatives, as a county with two thousand
souls, by which each person in the least populous county has five times as
great a voice in electing representatives, as his fellow citizen of the most
populous county. This is clearly a departure from the principles of equal
liberty, and ought to be altered in the several states. I speak the more
plainly because our state constitution is free from that fault in the formation
of our house of Assembly. Now the new constitution expressly declares, that the
foederal Representatives shall be in the proportion of one to every thirty
thousand, which accords with reason and the true principles of liberty. This
house, therefore, so far as national matters go, will remedy the evil spoken of
in the several states, and is one more great step toward the perfection of
equal liberty and genuine republicanism in America. It must strongly recommend
the foederal constitution to the serious reflecting patriot, even though he may
formerly have had doubts, and it will suggest to the several states the
propriety of reconsidering that point in their respective constitutions.
Pennsylvania, though right in the principles on which her legislative elections
are and will be held, is less safe from the existence of this fault in the
adjoining sister states of Virginia, Maryland, Jersey, Delaware and New York,
and in others more remote.


Permit me, my fellow-citizens, to close these observations by remarking, that
there is no spirit of arrogance in the new foederal constitution. It addresses
you with becoming modesty, admitting that it may contain errors. Let us give it
a trial; and when experience has taught its mistakes, the people, whom it
preserves absolutely all powerful, can reform and amend them. That I may be
perfectly understood, I will acknowledge its acceptance by all the states,
without delay, is the second wish of my heart. This first is, that our country
may be virtuous and free.

AN AMERICAN CITIZEN.

SUBSTANCE OF AN ADDRESS TO A MEETING OF THE CITIZENS OF PHILADELPHIA:
DELIVERED, OCTOBER SIXTH, MDCCLXXXVII, BY THE HONORABLE JAMES WILSON, ESQUIRE,
ONE OF THE DELEGATES FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA TO THE LATE CONTINENTAL
CONVENTION.
Mr. CHAIRMAN and FELLOW CITIZENS,
HAVING received the honor of an appointment to represent you in the late
convention, it is, perhaps, my duty to comply with the request of many
gentlemen, whose characters and judgments I sincerely respect, and who have
urged that this would be a proper occasion to lay before you any information,
which will serve to elucidate and explain the principles and arrangements of
the constitution that has been submitted to the consideration of the United
States. I confess that I am unprepared for so extensive and so important a
disquisition: but the insidious attempts, which are clandestinely and
industriously made to pervert and destroy the new plan, induce me the more
readily to engage in its defense: and the impressions of four months constant
attendance to the subject, have not been so easily effaced, as to leave me
without an answer to the objections which have been raised.

It will be proper, however, before I enter into the refutation of the charges
that are alleged, to mark the leading discrimination between the state
constitutions, and the constitution of the United States. When the people
established the powers of legislation under their separate governments, they
invested their representatives with every right and authority which they did
not in explicit terms reserve: and therefore upon every question, respecting
the jurisdiction of the house of assembly, if the frame of government is
silent, the jurisdiction is efficient and complete. But in delegating foederal
powers, another criterion was necessarily introduced: and the congressional
authority is to be collected, not from tacit implication, but from the positive
grant, expressed in the instrument of union. Hence, it is evident, that in the
former case, every thing which is not reserved, is given: but in the latter,
the reverse of the proposition prevails, and every thing which is not given, is
reserved. This distinction being recognized, will furnish an answer to those
who think the omission of a bill of rights, a defect in the proposed
constitution: for it would have been superfluous and absurd, to have stipulated
with a foederal body of our own creation, that we should enjoy those
privileges, of which we are not divested either by the intention or the act
that has brought that body into existence. For instance, the liberty of the
press, which has been a copious subject of declamation and opposition: what
control can proceed from the foederal government, to shackle or destroy that
sacred palladium of national freedom? If, indeed, a power similar to that which
has been granted for the regulation of commerce, had been granted to regulate
literary publications, it would have been as necessary to stipulate that the
liberty of the press should be preserved inviolate, as that the impost should
be general in its operation. With respect, likewise, to the particular district
of ten miles, which is to be the seat of government, it will undoubtedly be
proper to observe this salutary precaution, as there the legislative power will
be vested in the president, senate, and house of representatives of the United
States. But this could not be an object with the convention: for it must
naturally depend upon a future compact; to which the citizens immediately
interested, will, and ought to be parties: and there is no reason to suspect,
that so popular a privilege will in that case be neglected. In truth, then, the
proposed system possesses no influence whatever upon the press; and it would
have been merely nugatory, to have introduced a formal declaration upon the
subject: nay, that very declaration might have been construed to imply that
some degree of power was given, since we undertook to define its extent.

Another objection that has been fabricated against the new constitution, is
expressed in this disingenuous form -- "the trial by jury is abolished in civil
cases." I must be excused, my fellow citizens, if, upon this point, I take
advantage of my professional experience, to detect the futility of the
assertion. Let it be remembered, then, that the business of the foederal
convention was not local, but general -- not limited to the views and
establishments of a single state, but co-extensive with the continent, and
comprehending the views and establishments of thirteen independent
sovereignties. When, therefore, this subject was in discussion, we were
involved in difficulties, which pressed on all sides, and no precedent could be
discovered to direct our course. The cases open to a jury, differed in the
different states: it was therefore impracticable, on that ground, to have made
a general rule. The want of uniformity would have rendered any reference to the
practice of the states idle and useless: and it could not, with any propriety,
be said, that "the trial by jury shall be as heretofore:" since there has never
existed any foederal system of jurisprudence, to which the declaration could
relate. Besides, it is not in all cases that the trial by jury is adopted in
civil questions: for causes depending in courts of admiralty, such as relate to
maritime captures, and such as are agitated in the courts of equity, do not
require the intervention of that tribunal. How, then, was the line of
discrimination to be drawn? The convention found the task too difficult for
them: and they left the business as it stands -- in the fullest confidence,
that no danger could possibly ensue, since the proceedings of the supreme court
are to be regulated by the congress, which is a faithful representation of the
people: and the oppression of government is effectually barred, by declaring
that in all criminal cases, the trial by jury shall be preserved.

This constitution, it has been further urged, is of a pernicious tendency,
because it tolerates a standing army in the time of peace. This has always been
a popular topic of declamation: and yet I do not know a nation in the world,
which has not found it necessary and useful to maintain the appearance of
strength in a season of the most profound tranquillity. Nor is it a novelty with
us; for under the present articles of confederation, congress certainly
possesses this reprobated power: and the exercise of it is proved at this
moment by the cantonments along the banks of the Ohio. But what would be our
national situation, where it otherwise? Every principle of policy must be
subverted, and the government must declare war before they are prepared to
carry it on. Whatever may be the provocation, however important the object in
view, and however necessary dispatch and secrecy may be, still the declaration
must precede the preparation, and the enemy will be informed of your intention,
not only before you are equipped for an attack, but even before you are
fortified for a defense. The consequence is too obvious to require any further
delineation; and no man, who regards the dignity and safety of his country, can
deny the necessity of a military force, under the control, and with the
restrictions which the new constitution provides.

Perhaps there never was a charge made with less reason, than that which
predicts the institution of a baneful aristocracy in the foederal senate. This
body branches into two characters, the one legislative, and the other
executive. In its legislative character, it can effect no purpose without the
cooperation of the house of representatives: and in its executive character,
it can accomplish no object, without the concurrence of the president. Thus
fettered, I do not know any act which the senate can of itself perform: and
such dependence necessarily precludes every idea of influence and superiority.
But I will confess, that in the organization of this body, a compromise between
contending interests is discernible: and when we reflect how various are the
laws, commerce, habits, population, and extent of the confederated states, this
evidence of mutual concession and accommodation ought rather to command a
generous applause, than to excite jealousy and reproach. For my part, my
admiration can only be equalled by my astonishment, in beholding so perfect a
system formed from such heterogeneous materials.

The next accusation I shall consider, is that which represents the foederal
constitution as not only calculated, but designedly framed, to reduce the state
governments to mere corporations, and eventually to annihilate them. Those who
have employed the term corporation, upon this occasion, are not perhaps aware
of its extent. In common parlance, indeed, it is generally applied to petty
associations for the ease and convenience of a few individuals; but in its
enlarged sense, it will comprehend the government of Pennsylvania, the existing
union of the states, and even this projected system is nothing more than a
formal act of incorporation. But upon what pretense can it be alleged that it
was designed to annihilate the state governments? For, I will undertake to
prove that upon their existence depends the existence of the foederal plan. For
this purpose, permit me to call your attention to the manner in which the
president, senate, and house of representatives, are proposed to be appointed.
The president is to be chosen by electors, nominated in such manner as the
legislature of each state may direct; so that if there is no legislature, there
can be no senate. The house of representatives is to be composed of members
chosen every second year by the people of the several states, and the electors
in each state shall have the qualifications requisite to electors of the most
numerous branch of the state legislature -- unless, therefore, there is a state
legislature, that qualification cannot be ascertained, and the popular branch
of the foederal constitution must likewise be extinct. From this view, then, it
is evidently absurd to suppose, that the annihilation of the separate
governments will result from their union; or, that, having that intention, the
authors of the new system would have bound their connection with such
indissoluble ties. Let me here advert to an arrangement highly advantageous;
for you will perceive, without prejudice to the powers of the legislature in
the election of senators, the people at large will acquire an additional
privilege in returning members to the house of representatives -- whereas, by
the present confederation, it is the legislature alone that appoints the
delegates to congress.

The power of direct taxation has likewise been treated as an improper
delegation to the foederal government; but when we consider it as the duty of
that body to provide for the national safety, to support the dignity of the
union, and to discharge the debts contracted upon the collective faith of the
states, for their common benefit, it must be acknowledged that those, upon whom
such important obligations are imposed, ought, in justice and in policy, to
possess every means requisite for a faithful performance of their trust. But
why should we be alarmed with visionary evils? I will venture to predict, that
the great revenue of the United States must, and always will, be raised by
impost; for, being at once less obnoxious, and more productive, the interest of
the government will be best promoted by the accommodation of the people. Still,
however, the object of direct taxation should be within reach in all cases of
emergency; and there is no more reason to apprehend oppression in the mode of
collecting a revenue from this resource, than in the form of an impost, which,
by universal assent, is lest to the authority of the foederal government. In
either case, the force of civil constitutions will be adequate to the purpose;
and the dread of military violence, which has been assiduously disseminated,
must eventually prove the mere effusion of a wild imagination, or a factious
spirit. But the salutary consequences that must flow from thus enabling the
government to relieve and support the credit of the union, will afford another
answer to the objections upon this ground. The state of Pennsylvania,
particularly, which has encumbered itself with the assumption of a great
proportion of the public debt, will derive considerable relief and advantage;
for, as it was the imbecility of the present confederation, which gave rise to
the funding law, that law must naturally expire, when a complete and energetic
foederal system shall be substituted -- the state will then be discharged from
an extraordinary burden, and the national creditor will find it to be his
interest to return to his original security.

After all, my fellow-citizens, it is neither extraordinary nor unexpected,
that the constitution offered to your consideration, should meet with
opposition. It is the nature of man to pursue his own interest, in preference
to the public good; and I do not mean to make any personal reflection, when I
add, that it is the interest of a very numerous, powerful, and respectable
body, to counteract and destroy the excellent work produced by the late
convention. All the officers of government, and all the appointments for the
administration of justice and the collection of the public revenue, which are
transferred from the individual to the aggregate sovereignty of the states,
will necessarily turn the stream of influence and emolument into a new channel.
Every person, therefore, who either enjoys, or expects to enjoy a place of
profit under the present establishment, will object to the proposed innovation?
not, in truth, because it is injurious to the liberties of his country, but
because it effects his schemes of wealth and consequence. I will confess,
indeed, that I am not a blind admirer of this plan of government, and that
there are some parts of it, which, if my wish had prevailed, would certainly
have been altered. But, when I reflect how widely men differ in their opinions,
and that every man (and the observation applies likewise to every state) has an
equal pretension to assert his own, I am satisfied that any thing nearer to
perfection could not have been accomplished. If there are errors, it should be
remembered, that the seeds of reformation are sown in the work itself, and the
concurrence of two thirds of the congress may at any time introduce alterations
and amendments. Regarding it, then, in every point of view, with a candid and
disinterested mind, I am bold to assert, that it is the BEST FORM OF GOVERNMENT
WHICH HAS EVER BEEN OFFERED TO THE WORLD. The candid Reader will suppose Mr.
WILSON here means, that it is the best form of foederal government, which has
ever been offered to the world -- and it is surely true that the foederal
constitution, considered in due connection with the state constitutions, is the
best form of government that has ever been communicated to mankind.


FINIS.

