Mr. BASCOM's EXECUTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE EXECUTION OF ABIEL CONVERSE, Who was executed at
Northampton for the Murder of her Infant Bastard Child, JULY 6th, 1788.

By AARON BASCOM, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in CHESTER.

NORTHAMPTON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM BUTLER. M, DCC, LXXXVIII.

AN Execution SERMON.
PROVERBS, viii.36. But he that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: All
they that hate me, love death.


THROUGH the exceeding deceitfulness of sin, wicked people are insensible of
what they are doing against GOD, and the dreadful mischief they are bringing
upon themselves. " Their foolish heart is darkened -- they will not come to the
light -- they know not, neither will they understand -- they walk on in
darkness." It must give every one much pain who has come to himself, and has
suitable feelings toward GOD and his law, to see multitudes of his fellow
creatures around him living in their sins, and at ease in open rebellion
against JEHOVAH, and either imagining that it is very easy for them, by and by,
to move the divine compassion, by their cries and professions of sorrow; or
flatter themselves that their wickedness is rather a calamity, than an evil
infinitely hateful and odious to GOD; and renders them justly deserving of his
eternal wrath. What is more difficult for any of us to do, than to make wicked
people believe that they hate GOD -- ere enemies to him -- are continually
heaping up mischief upon themselves, and in effect love hell (for they love the
way to it exceedingly) although HE that cannot lie, says in my text, -- he that
sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me, love death.
Our text presents to view two observations, which merit our attention at this
time.

1st. The great evil of sinners lies in their opposition to GOD, and enmity
against him.

2d. Sinners by their opposition to GOD, do exceedingly wrong themselves.

1. The great evil of sinners lies in their opposition to GOD, and enmity
against him. This is very evident from the holy scriptures, and especially from
the following texts. " Wherefore do the wicked contemn GOD -- The carnal mind
is enmity against GOD -- If when we were enemies we were reconciled to GOD by
the death of his son." It is further evident that the great evil of sinners
lies in opposition to GOD, from the confession and declaration of true
penitents recorded in the divine oracles, says Joseph, how shall I do this
great evil and sin against GOD? -- says the Psalmist, against thee, and thee
only, have I sinned, and done this evil. And furthermore, on the account of the
wicked being opposed to GOD, and unlike him, they are often called ungodly in
the holy word.

2. It is further evident that the evil of sinners lies in opposition to GOD,
because sin is a violation of the divine law. All sins whatever that people
commit, are a violation of GOD's law; therefore, a contempt of his authority,
and wholly opposed to him. All sins against society, against rulers, parents,
Masters, and guardians; yea all sins of thought, word and deed, are violations
of GOD's holy law; therefore express opposition, and enmity against him.

3. That sinners are opposed to GOD, and hate him, is evident from plain facts.

1. It is evident that sinners hate GOD, because they will not believe what he
says to them. " He speaks once, yea twice, but they regard him not." GOD speaks
excellent and important things, very often to sinners, for a long season, but
they will not believe a word he says. " He that believes not GOD has made him
a liar." Now, what great evidence of dislike do we show to a fellow creature,
when we make him a liar? and how exceeding worthless, do we view him, whose
word is not worth regarding? Therefore, what greater evidence of enmity, can we
exhibit against GOD, than to pay no regard to what he says?

2. Another evidence of hating GOD, is, their being unwilling to have him do as
he pleases. -- They dislike what he does and are unwilling to trust him. GOD
wills many things which sinners are displeased with. They had rather have the
management of all matters which respect them, than to have GOD manage them.
They had rather trust themselves, than trust GOD. They have a better opinion of
themselves, than they have of GOD; and think that they can manage affairs
better than he does. Hence it is, that sinners are so often complaining as we
read in the Proverbs of Solomon, -- The foolishness of man perverteth his way,
and his (...) fretteth against the Lord.

3. Another evidence of sinners hating GOD, is their being so exceeding averse
to an acquaintance with him. They choose to keep at a distance from GOD; and are
not fond of his company. Their language is, (as we read in the lively oracles,)
(...) from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Wicked people are not
fond of admitting thoughts of GOD, and his character. They are fond of
admitting vain, foolish, covetous, and unclean thoughts, they are fond of
letting such thoughts dwell within them: but they will reject serious, godly,
and religious thoughts, and cannot endure them. They are fond of knowing many
things which are exceeding hurtful and dangerous to them; but are not fond of
knowing GOD, JESUS CHRIST and the way to heaven. They will not take proper
pains to know these things. Thoughts of GOD, his ways, and doings are a burden
to them; but they delight exceedingly in evil thoughts, and in evil companions.

4. Another evidence of sinners hating GOD, is their being averse to speaking
in his praise. They can easily speak in praise of GOD's enemies; they can
easily speak in favor of them that do wickedly: But, when they see the holy
name of GOD profaned, and his honor trampled in the dust, they cannot find it
in their hearts to say any thing for him. They are willing to stand up for evil
doers; but are not willing to stand up for GOD against evil doers. When persons
are not disposed to say any thing in favor of a neighbor, or ever to take his
part, although they see him despised and most shamefully abused; it is an
evidence that they are destitute of all true love for him, even so when people
will say nothing in GOD's praise -- will never take his part against evil
doers, when he is awfully and dreadfully dishonored -- it is an evidence that
they have no true love for him.

5. Another evidence of sinners hating GOD, is, their being so exceedingly
averse to serving him, and doing that which is pleasing in his sight. The
service of GOD, is such a burden to wicked people that they cannot bear it. They
^^ll not pray to GOD -- they cannot endure this part of divine service -- they
can see no pleasure, or no profit in religious services. Hence, we read in the
divine oracles -- The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek
after GOD. Who is the Lord that we should serve him? and what profit is it if
we pray unto him?

Now, when a servant is exceedingly averse to the service of his master, cannot
bear it, and will not try to please him; this is an evidence that he hates him.
Even so, when wicked people hate the service of GOD, hate to please him, and
even delight in doing what is very displeasing to him; it is manifest that they
have enmity against him.

6. Another evidence of sinners hating GOD, is, their holding fast their sins,
and refusing to repent, and turn to him; although he gives them many calls and
invitations, and uses blessed means with them to promote their eternal
salvation. He tells them what a great evil sin is -- that it is the troubler of
the whole creation -- that it brings temporal and eternal misery. He also tells
them what sinners they are -- that they have treasured up much sin, made
themselves exceedingly vile, and deserve to be eternally banished from his
presence. Yet assures them, " that there is forgiveness, and plenteous
redemption, if they will put away the evil of their doings from before his eyes
-- that he has la^^ help on one mighty to save, whose blood cleanses from all
sin." He also assures them that they are welcome to come to Christ by faith,
and have pardon, peace and eternal life. He gives them repeated calls and
warnings. He reasons with them -- Will thou never be made clean, when shall it
once be? -- turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die? forsake the foolish and
live, and go in the way of understanding.

The blessed Lord exercises great patience toward sinners, therefore says,
behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come unto him and sup with him and he with me. Yet, " after all,
they set at naught his counsels and will none of his reproofs." They have such
a love for their lusts that they will not part with them. They choose to hold
communion and fellowship with GOD's enemies -- they will nourish and support
them -- they will have their sins, let GOD do as he pleases. They make nothing
of all the good which GOD holds up to their view: they set at naught his love,
faithfulness and most tender compassions. -- From such conduct as this it is
very apparent that sinners hate GOD.

7. The enmity of sinners against GOD is manifest from their conduct toward
the Lord JESUS CHRIST who is GOD, and was manifest in the flesh. The Lord JESUS
is the illustious personage, who speaks in my text; and one whom sinners hated
so much while upon earth, that they would not suffer him to live. They hated
him to such a degree, that they prefered a murderer before him; and would not
be easy till they had put him to the accursed death of the cross, between two
thieves. But let it be further observed, that nothing can be so vile and base
as the enmity of sinners against GOD, and JESUS CHRIST the express image of the
Father's person: Therefore, he says to sinners, this comes to pass that it
might be fulfilled that is written in their law, they hated me without a cause.

Sinners don't hate GOD, because he has injured them, or done them the least
injustice, or given them the least provocation. But they hate him for the same
reason that St. Paul's hearers hated him, viz. because he told them the truth.
GOD tells sinners the truth which they cannot endure, therefore they hate him.
GOD abhors the wicked works of sinners and opposes them; and on this account
they hate him. GOD cannot bear with their " whorish heart which departs from
him; and their eyes which go whoring after their idols;" therefore opposes them
and threatens their destruction: on this account they hate him. GOD is an
exceeding good master, full of love, wisdom, justice and the most tender
compassions: but sinners say that he is a hard master, and they will not have
him to rule over them. The service of GOD is an exceeding good service;
pleasant and reasonable; calculated to make us comfortable and happy in time,
and to eternity. But wicked people hate and contemn GOD, because he requires
them to serve him. Upon the whole, it appears from the holy word, from sinners
not believing GOD -- disliking what he does -- aversion to an acquaintance with
him -- not speaking in his praise -- unwilling to serve him -- not repenting --
and their cruel treatment of the LORD of GLORY, that they hate him, and that
their great evil lies in opposition to him.

II. I am to show that sinners by their opposition to GOD, do exceedingly wrong
themselves. Sin and punishment are inseparably connected. Sinners by their
enmity against GOD, and opposition to him, procure much mischief to themselves:
for they greatly incense the divine wrath, and move the righteous GOVERNOR of
the world to visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with
stripes. By the holy appointment of Him who always does right, evil pursues
sinners in this world, and without true repentance to all eternity*

1. Sinners by their opposition to GOD, destroy the peace of their own minds,
and procure to themselves terrors. Sinners are haunted with a guilty
conscience, which produces fear where no fear is. -- They know in their
consciences that they deserve punishment for their unreasonable opposition to
the great and holy GOD; no wonder then, that they travel in pain, and are like
the troubled sea, whose waters cast forth mire and dirt. Can a soul abide in
sacred peace when defiled with fleshly lusts? Will a life of irreligion, and
debauchery, produce solid peace and quietness of mind? -- Will covetousness,
pride, envy, malice, hatred, deceit, hypocrisy, and a whorish heart produce
sweet peace, and consolation of soul? We may as well expect to gather grapes of
thorns and figs of thistles, or that a fountain will send forth at the same
place sweet water and bitter.

What injury then do sinners do to themselves by their opposition to GOD? What
a life of bondage do they lead? how are they consumed with terrors.

2. Distressing pain, and bodily sickness, are the productions of sin. Sinners
by the gratification of their lusts, and the works of the flesh, bring painful
and dangerous diseases upon themselves. Hence we read in the lively oracles,
that men are chastened with pain upon their beds; and the multitude of their
bones with strong pain, till their flesh consumes away, and their bones stick
out -- and for this cause many are sickly and weakly among you, and many fallen
asleep. How many by their unclean practices and intemperate living procure to
themselves loathsome, and dangerous diseases, and wearisome days and nights;
Both scripture, and observation teaches us, that a life filled up with
God-provoking sins is not favorable to health and length of days.

^. Poverty and shame, are often the productions of a wicked life, or a life of
rebellion against GOD. How many by riotous living, waste their substance and by
unclean practices are brought to a morsel of bread and, by such a line of
conduct how many plunge into shame and disgrace? How many by their fondness for
evil companions, and the counsels of the wicked become exceeding poor and
despicable in the world? Hence, says Solomon, he that follows after vain
persons shall have poverty enough. -- Poverty and shame shall be to him that
refuses instruction -- The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. How
many by a slothful, indolent and stupid way of living, are ensnared and reduced
to beggary? Many there are among mankind who do exceedingly debase themselves,
by ungodly and wicked practices, and become despicable beyond all comparison.
Such persons make themselves brutish, yea, worse than brutish, for they fit
themselves for sudden destruction.

4. Sinners by their rebellion against the LORD of HOSTS, procure to themselves
sore, wasting and desolating judgments of a public nature. GOD is pleased in
his holy providence, to bring the iniquities of sinners upon themselves, and to
cut them off in their own wickedness. Wickedness often overthrows sinners in
this world. The vengeance of Heaven often pursues and overtakes the ungodly, in
this world -- takes from them their various comforts at one awful stroke; and
sweeps them away by a sudden death and dreadful overthrow. Witness the waters
of Noah -- the slames of Sodom -- Pharaoh and his hosts in the red Sea -- the
plagues of Egypt -- the earth expanding her jaws, and swallowing up Korah and
his accomplices -- the fire from heaven which destroyed those who invaded the
sacred function -- the plague that went out from the LORD and destroyed
fourteen thousand who murmured and fretted against the LORD and Moses -- the
destruction of the nations of Canaan -- the destruction of Jerusalem -- the
Babylonian captivity -- the destruction of the Jews by the Roman army -- yea,
the pestilence -- the many famines wars and rumors of wars, and garments
rolled in blood; which have been in every age, and in every place, sweeping
mankind from the earth; are witnesses of the dreadful wrong and injury sinners
bring upon themselves by their opposition to GOD.

5. Sinners by violating the law of GOD, and seting themselves against him:
bring upon themselves the sword of the civil magistrate, which is ordained for
their punishment. Hence we read in Romans xiii. for he is the minister of GOD to
thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid for he bears not
the sword in vain: for he is the minister of GOD a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil. Many there are, who make themselves so intolerable to
society by their crimes, that the Lord will not allow them to live in peace,
and prosper in their wickedness: but commands the civil magistrate to be upon
them with his sword, and execute the sentence of the law. Many there are who
are great troublers of society, and the LORD has commanded the civil magistrate
to trouble them. There are many whose conduct is so dangerous and intolerable,
that the laws of GOD and man will not admit of their being at liberty, but
require their immediate confinement in a dark and dreary prison; where alas!
they have many days and nights of adversity. But this punishment is not in many
cases sufficient. Justice requires them to be conducted from the prison to the
stake, the pillory and the gallows; and there, like brutes to receive corporal
and ignominious punishment. But this mode of punishment is too light for many,
on the account of their attrocious crimes. The law of GOD and man, will not
suffer them to live; but requires that they be immediately put to death. " He
that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed -- and the murderer
shall surely be put to death." If by all the mischief and distress which
sinners bring upon themselves in this world, they might be brought to true
repentance; have a new heart, and a new spirit given them, happy, unspeakably
happy for them! for then like the thief upon the cross, they might go from the
gallows, or place of execution, to be forever with CHRIST in the paradise of
GOD! Their troubles would be forever at an end, when they leave this world, and
their state exceedingly blissful to all eternity! But alas! how many will not
be content with all the dreadful mischief they bring upon themselves in this
world, by their God-provoking sins; will not repent -- will not reform -- will
not lay aside their enmity against GOD: but will keep their sins and die in
them; therefore can have no better portion than an eternal confinement in the
prison of hell. As they will not hearken unto GOD, and cease from their
rebellion against him -- as they hate GOD, and will not have him to rule over
them -- as they are incorrigible, and will not come unto CHRIST and have life
-- they shall die in their iniquities; go to their own people in the regions of
horror and keen despair -- where the smoke of their torment ascends up
forever and ever. -- This is the second death, eternal death, and as sinners
love the way to it, and will not have any other way -- so death they must have;
it is the fruit of their own way, and their own devices.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. We learn from the subject, that sinners must experience a very great and
important change, before they can reasonably hope to go to Heaven. -- They must
forsake their evil ways* and their evil thoughts and cease from their most
unreasonable enmity against GOD. They must lay aside their relish for sin, and
their unclean heart, which goes whoring after their idols. Yea, they must
become new-creatures; for if any man be in CHRIST he is a new creature, all old
things are done away and all things are become new." They must love what they
before hated, and hate what they before loved. They must hate sin with an
implacable hatred, and love God supremely for his holiness. They must esteem
the service of GOD to be a most excellent service, and be pleased with his
government. They must delight exceedingly in his laws, because they are holy,
just and good; and be willing to trust GOD; and leave all their concerns with
him, both for time and for eternity. This is a great and important change
indeed; which the scriptures hold up to our view, as necessary for every
person, who would have any rational hope of being admitted into the heavenly
world when they die. " Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of
Heaven."

2. Seeing sin is so great an evil, and brings so much trouble upon mankind;
what matter of grief and lamentation is it, that there is so much sin cleaving
to us. No evil can be worse than sin, for it is the source of all misery and
distress. If therefore we have reason to be grieved and sorry for any thing, it
is, that we have so much of the evil of sin within us. Above all things in the
world we should dread the evil of sin; and be more afraid of sinning than of
suffering. When we consider that it is against GOD, and him alone that we have
sinned, and done great evil; and how poisonous, shameful, destructive and
dangerous an evil sin is; how can we refrain from many tears, and help being
pained at our very hearts?

3. Seeing sin is so great an evil, as it is against GOD, and brings so much
mischief upon mankind; how thankful should we be to GOD, for r^^^^aining grace;
whereby we have been kept from many sins, which others have been guilty of, to
their great damage. It is not because others who have committed more open and
shameful sins; and brought more trouble upon themselves, than we have; are
worse by nature than we are: for undoubtedly we have the same corrupt and
depraved natures as they have. -- But our not doing as they have done is owing
to that restraining grace granted us which has not been granted them. It has
been very justly withheld from them, and might have been very justly withheld
from us; for who of us have not long since forfeited all right to it? How much
scandalous and abominable wickedness should many of us have committed, had we
not been helped by divine restraints? And how many troubles should we soon
bring upon ourselves, if left to fall a prey to our own lusts? Let us then
adore that almighty being who has kept us back from many dangerous sins: by
means of education, religious instructions, counsels and reprooss, gentle
rebukes of providence, and the strivings of the holy spirit.

4. We learn that sinners, are the greatest fools that can be found in the
whole creation. They are fools for seting themselves against GOD; for they
cannot prosper -- can maintain no strength against him. -- They are fools for
treating GOD as they do, for they say the LORD does not see nor hear them. If
they can sin out of the sight of man, they care not how many sins they commit;
as if the great eternal was not worth regarding. But alas! his eye is
continually upon them and knows all their secret abominations, even every
thought and will make them known that he is the LORD. Not one of their sins can
be forgotten, all shall be brought into judgment against them -- and they cannot
escape -- " There is no darkness nor shadow of death where the workers of
iniquity can hide themselves." What fools must they be who set themselves
against the GOD of infinite power, majesty, worth and dignity, who can by one
frown send them all to Hell! What fools are they, for rising up against him
whose wrath they cannot escape and cannot endure, under which they must eternally
sink! What fools for fighting against the most amiable and excellent being in
the uinverse -- who most earnestly invites them to lay down the weapons of
their rebellion, and come to him and possess all good things! What fools, to
stand a moment against a holy GOD, lest he tear them in pieces and there be
none to deliver!

Sinners are guilty of the most egregious folly by wilfully bringing so much
trouble upon themselves* their enmity is turned against themselves: and they
don't at all regard their own interest. They will go on to bring mischief upon
themselves, even while they are fairly and plainly warned of what is coming
upon them. They will go on to trouble themselves by their sins, even while they
are not only warned and besought by the ministers of CHRIST, and their dear
friends, but even while they are warned and besought by the great JEHOVAH
himself. They bring so many troubles upon themselves by their own wickedness;
that they have a hell upon earth of their own making. But they don't choose to
stop here; for in addition to the hell which they procure to themselves in this
world, by their God-provoking sins -- they go on seeking and preparing for that
dreadful prison of hell, beyond the grave, where there is no rest, day nor
night, forever and ever The folly and madness which sinners run into, are not
parelleled in the whole creation. -- I must closewith one or two addresses
generally expected on such an occasion.

1st. To the Prisoner before us.

Unhappy woman. As time is just about to leave you, and eternity to receive
you; what shall I say? Who is sufficient for the arduous talk of addressing
you, upon this awful occasion? For the horrid wickedness of murder, you are
condemned to die, by the law of GOD and man. You are verily guilty concerning
your infant child, in that you saw him, a helpless defenseless babe; who had
neither injured you nor any of your fellow creatures: your own child, born of
your own body, whom you had been wickedly instrumental of bringing into the
world; yet you hardened your heart against him, and determined that you would
not exercise so much compassion toward him as the sea monsters, who draw out
their breasts, and give suck to their young ones; but with violent hands you
put him to death. Be astonished O earth at the wickedness of your heart! You
have thought that this crime of murdering your child, was not so great as the
murder of an adult person. But, let me tell you, that the murder you are guilty
of, is attended with more dreadful aggravations than common murder. In many if
not most instances of murder, there is either some provocation, or injury
received from the person murdered, or a prospect of considerable gain, or there
is no relation by kindred blood, or the person is capable of making some
defense: -- but in this murder of yours, there is none of these things to
excuse you. You are guilty of a most horrid, monstrous, and unnatural crime.

I am sensible that persons in your situation, need a more skillful hand than I
am to deal with them; yet as you are one of the precious souls committed to my
charge, and desired that I should speak to you upon this occasion; I must be
allowed to speak the truth to you, and act the part of an honest dying man, who
must give an account to the JUDGE of quick and dead as well as you. Therefore
when I plainly set your sins before you, believe, that I mean not to reproach
you, but seek your eternal good. -- My earnest desire is now in this last
important hour that you may be truly sensible of your sins, brought to true
repentance, and through the merits of CHRIST obtain forgiveness. You must
consider that by nature you are a sinner prone to iniquity, and, that your life
has been exceedingly wicked. You have cast off fear, and have restrained prayer
before GOD -- You have set at naught his counsels, and would none of his
reproofs. You have been exceedingly fond of profane, wicked company, and
rejected GOD. You have been fond of entertaining GOD's enemies, but would not
entertain him. You have hardened your heart againnst the LORD JESUS, who has
given you repeated calls and warnings; urged you by the calls of the gospel,
ministers, friends, and providence; to turn from your evil ways and not die.
Although you have been frequently called, and urged, yet you would not come
unto CHRIST that you might have life. Rebellion against GOD, has been the
delight of your soul. What abominable uncleanness and whoredom, have you been
guilty of? and to hide this awful wickedness, what horrid lies have you told in
denying repeatedly that you was in a state of pregnancy, just before the birth
of your child? But the horrid wickedness of whoredom and lying, were not
sufficient for you; to these you have added the crying sin of murder
repeatedly. You must consider that in all your wickedness you have hated GOD,
and been fighting against Him. GOD has been good to you, told you the truth,
and bestowed numberless blessings upon you. In the day of your distress, has
repeatedly helped you, and used blessed means with you to reclaim you from sin,
and deliver you from the wrath to come. But you cared for none of his mercies,
hated him without a cause, and would not have (...) to rule over you. You have
set GOD at naught because he is good, and always done that which is right
toward you. O then unless you now repent, are deeply humbled for your sins,
and fly to the LORD JESUS by faith; what will you do when GOD arises up, and
when he visits what will you answer? Can your hands be strong or your heart
endure when GOD shall deal with you? Very great sinners may repent and turn to
GOD, and he will have mercy on them. As great sinners as you have had a true
sense of their sins, been deeply humbled before God, cried to him with a broken
heart, and obtained forgiveness. GOD is ready to hear prayer. The sacrifices of
a broken heart he will not despise. There is forgiveness and plenteous
redemption, for those who will repent and give themselves to the LORD JESUS.
Your sins are not too great to be forgiven. Although you have lived in dreadful
wickedness, yet the door of mercy is not shut against you: for GOD now calls
upon you to come to him that you may have life. O then let not a moment be
lost. Lay aside your enmity against GOD immediately -- be reconciled to him --
fight against him no longer -- lift your soul to him in humble penitent groans.
The Lord will hear from (...), and through the infinite merits of the glorious
REDEEMER who died on the accursed tree; you may have an entrance administered
to you in the kingdom of Glory. The Lord Jesus came into the world to save
sinners -- He suffered the just for the unjust that he might bring us to God.
If then, you believe in him, give yourself to him humbly, penitently and
sincerely, you shall not perish but have everlasting life. Love the Lord JESUS
CHRIST in sincerity, and you need not fear. We read of a woman in the gospel,
notoriously wicked and vile; who came to our Lord with a humble heart; weeping
and mourning for her sins; and washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them
with the hairs of her head. The Lord had mercy on her, and granted pardon. She
became a new creature, loved the Lord much and hated sin exceedingly. Some of
the wicked Jews, who crucified the LORD of Glory, were brought to repentance,
became the real friends of GOD, and were forgiven. The thief upon the cross
became a new creature in his last moments, and the Lord said to him, this day
shall thou be with me in paradise. If you can now find yourself reconciled to
GOD's character, are pleased with his perfections, and are not afraid to trust
in him; you shall be forever happy with him. May the GOD of infinite mercy and
grace interpose for you; and give you repentance and remission of sins, and an
inheritance among the saints in light. Leaving you in the hands of GOD, who
will do you no injustice; -- I must bid you a long and mournful farewell.

A few words to this great assembly, shall conclude the discourse.

What a melancholy scene is now opened before you. You plainly see, that sin
brings distress, and that wickedness overthrows the sinner. Let me entreat
you all to take warning by the awful spectacle presented before you. Be afraid
of sin, and a life of ungodliness. If you do that which is evil you may well be
afraid; for the ruler bears not the sword in vain; -- for he is the minister
of GOD, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. It is dangerous
to venture upon those sins, which are called not so great as others: for sins
are all linked together like a chain, which leads to temporal and eternal
distress. Take warning from what is presented before you this day* to avoid the
sin of uncleanness. We see from plain facts (...) sin is very dangerous, and
God-provoking. 'Twas (...) led the poor prisoner before us, to murder, and now
she must die. She is not alone, for many others have been ruined by this kind
of wickedness. Many awful instances we have of late of persons being led on to
death by the sin of uncleanness and whoredom. Not long since a woman was
executed in this town for murder, which was brought on by whoredom. -- Within
about a week after the unhappy prisoner before us committed the sin of murder;
in the same town, an unclean and whorish woman was led on by this abominable
wickedness, to murder herself: deliberately, designedly, without hope of any
mercy* and without desiring the good wishes or prayers of any friend whatever.
Some unclean persons may feel secure and unconcerned, because they never had
any thoughts of committing murder: -- but let me tell such persons; that those
who have undone themselves by going from uncleanness to murder; were once in
the depth of security, being under no fearful apprehensions of committing
murder: -- yet they plunged into this wickedness and perished. The truth is, a
holy GOD is so angry with unclean person; that he gives them up to their own
lusts (...) mankind do when left to themselves* Let not therefore unclean
persons feel secure and unconcerned; for such are provoking a holy GOD to give
them up to work out their own destruction. Be afraid of the detestable
wickedness of whoredom; -- for the feet of such go down to death, and their
steps take hold on hell. As you ought all to be afraid this; so you should
abhor every practice which leads and exposes to it. The practice of young
people of both sexes keeping company together, with no view of entering into a
family ^^te, and living like rational creatures, I think it a detestable
practice: It is carried on in many instances no doubt, to gratify lust: and the
best that can be said of it, is, that it greatly exposes to uncleanness. Let
all parents take warning from the example before them; and see, that they are
faithful in holding up light and truth before their children, and that they
cease not to warn them from every evil practice. How much are all parents
concerned to set good examples before their children, and administer to them
the most useful instructions? Parents should inure their children to
subjection, and obedience, and endeavor to instill into their minds, an
abhorrence of every evil practice. -- How many children are undone for the want
of good examples, good government and instructions from their parents? Who can
describe the feelings which you who are parents would have* if a child of yours
was in the melancholy situation of the prisoner now before us? O then, let
parents spare no proper and lawful pains, to secure the temporal and eternal
peace and rest of those committed to their care. Let all young persons, and
especially young women take warning from the present spectacle; and see that
they don't consent when sinners entice them. Enter not (...) to the path of the
wicked, go not in the way of evil persons, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from
it and pass away. Let us all remember, that we must die as certain as the
prisoner, and go to judgment as well as she; and all meet at GOD's tribunal*
(...) we die impenitently, there will be no escaping (...) sentence -- Depart
ye cursed into ever^^^^ing ^ire prepared for the devil and his angels. O Then
prove thankfully, and wisely the (...) of grace granted to you, but denied to
the unhappy prisoner. Let us all remember that we need an interest in the
pardoning mercy of GOD, as well as the prisoner. By nature we all the ^^me vile
creatures as she -- and it may be that GOD* who knows our hearts, and ways,
knows, that many of (...) more vile no guilty than she, who now must fall by
the hand of justice. ^^en if we have any bowels of compassion, and our hearts
no ha^^er than a rock; and destitute of all suitable feelings toward GOD and
man: let us lift up our souls to him who hears prayer, and pour out our (...);
-- humbly begging that in his great mercy, he wo^ld pour (...) into the heart
of the prisoner. That great and (...) we profess to worship, can easily give
her a new heart and spirit, and make her exceedingly glad with his countenance.
May the GOD of all grace and consolation, give us a spirit of grace and
supplication for ourselves and for her: and in his great compassions, hear, for
give, and prepare us all for the solemn hour of death, hastening upon us: that
we may die in the LORD and be admitted to eternal rest with the Saints in
light. AMEN.

ERRATA.
IN the Title Page -- instead of July 6th, 1788, read July 17th, 1788.


