REMARKS ON THE PROPOSED PLAN OF A FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, ADDRESS^^^ THE CITIZENS
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, AND PARTICULARLY TO THE PEOPLE OF MARYLAND,
(...) ARISTIDES.

(...) ^nfederate government is composed of petty re^^^^^s, it enjoys the
internal happiness of each; and with regard to its external situation, by means
of the association, it possesses all the advantages of extensive monarchies.

MONT. SP. of LAWS, B. 9, Chapter 1. ANNAPOLIS: PRINTED BY FREDERICK GREEN. PRINTER
TO THE STATE.

To GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire,
NOT AS A TRIBUTE TO THE WORTH, WHICH NO ACKNOWLEDGEMENT TO DISTINCTIONS, CAN
REWARD; BUT TO DO HIMSELF AN HONOR, WHICH, BY LABORING IN THE SAME COMMON
CAUSE, HE FLATTERS (...), IN SOME DEGREE, HE ^^TH DESERVED; THE AUTHOR BEGS
L^^^^ TO INSCRIBE THE FOLLOWING ^^^^FECT ESSAY.

REMARKS, etc.
IT is my intention, with all possible plainness, to examine the proposed plan
of a federal government. Its enemies and its advocates have laid particular
stress on the names, wherewith it is subscribed. As one side would obtain your
implicit assent, (...) a re^^^nce to characters, and as the other wou^^ ^efeat
measures, by exciting your jealousy of men, per^^me, in the first place to make
some general observations on the persons who ^^^posed the late memorable
convention. --

In general, they had been distinguished by their talents and (...)* They were
not principally the m^^ to whom the (...) convention first suggested itself,
and it is noto^ (...) they accepted their appointments (...) would seem,
however, according to some (...) ^^^nuasions, that, no sooner did they find
thems^^^^^ conven^^^ (...) their natures became changed; and (...) they
continued for the destruction of your liberti^^ (...) ^ow this altogether
shocks my says. I should sooner in (...) the sacredness of the trust, the
unparalleled (...) the occasion, and the fellowship of the great (...) ^ight
have elected the soul of the most aban^^ed (...) had it (...) possible for such
to obtain a seat in that illustrious assemblage.

If those, who would inspire suspicion and distrust, can suggest ^^y precise
idea, it must be this, that the members of the convention will be elected into
the first federal congress, and there combining again will compose a body
capable of bearing down al opposition to their own aggrandisement.

By their scheme, however, thus deeply concerted, the house of representatives
is to be chosen by the people once in two years; and if they have acted so as
to warrant any reasonable apprehension of their designs, it will be easy, at any
time, to prevent their election. The truth is, that very few of them either
wish to be elected, or would consent to serve, either in that house, or in the
senate. I have exercised my imagination to devise in what manner they, or any
other men, supposing them to bear full sway in both houses, could erect this
imaginary fabric of power. I request any person to point out any law, or system
of laws, that could be possibly contrived for that purpose, obtain the final
assent of each branch, and be carried into effect, contrary to the interests
^^d wishes of a free, intelligent, prying people, accustomed to the most
unbounded freedom of inquiry. To begin by (...) attempt to restrain the press,
instead of promoting their d^sign^ would be the most effectual thing to prevent
them.

I am app^^^ed of the almost universal disposition for the increase and abuse
of authority. But if we are to withold power because there is a possibility
of its perversion, we must abolish government, and submit to those evils, which
it was inten^^^ to prevent. The perfection of politic science consists chiefly
in providing mutual checks amo^^^^ ^^e several departments of power, preserv^^
(...) the dependence of the greatest on the (...) with reference to a single
government. The ^^^^sity of another species of government, for the mut^^l
defense and protection of these American states, no man of fo^^^ (...) honesty,
that I know of, has ever yet denied.

The convention had the above principle constantly (...) their view. They have
contrived, that it shall (...) difficult, if not altogether impracticable, for
any (...) exceed or abuse his lawful authority. There is nothing in their plan
like the clothing of individuals with power, for their own gratification.
Every delegation, and every advantage that may be derived to individuals, has a
strict reference to the general good. --

To examine their constitution, by arti^e and section, would be a painful and
needless undertaking. I shall endeavor to answer such objections, as I have
already heard, to anticipate others; to point out some advantages not generally
known; and to correct certain errors, with respect to construction. When the
convention was appointed, I much feared, that the numerous seeds, and
principles of discord amongst the states, would, for ever, prevent them from
agreeing to any efficient system whatever. I apprehended, in particular, that
the dispute about representation would be the rock, on which the vessel
containing all our hopes would be dashed. When, therefore, I discerned that
equitable compromise between the larger and lesser states, my anxiety was
instantly removed, and my soul enlightened by a sudden ray.

How then was I, some months after, disgusted at the repetition of the
arguments, respecting the inequality of repre^^^^^^ives in the first branch. We
were told, that the mi^^^ity in convention reasoned upon first principles,
that, as all ^^n, in a state of nature, are equal with re^^^^^ to rights, so
also are equal all separate and distinct states; that, when individuals form a
free government, they must all have equal suffrage, either in framing laws by
themselves, or in choosing representatives, although one man be ten times
stronger, richer or wiser, than another; so also, when ^^^eral states unite,
(...) common convenience, they must meet on terms of per^^^ ^^lit^ though one
be ten times more wealthy, (...) ^s, ^an another; -- that, under our present
(...) states are equal, and that no injury has resulted from the equality. --

(...) these arguments, we may imagine, was opposed something like the
following: "You talk of first principles, and, at the same time, would let
180,000 free inhabitants of ^^^aryl^ (...) have no more to do in the choice of
representa^^^^ (...) only 30,000 inhabitants of Delaware. Do you propose, that
these 30,000 shall bear an equal part of burdens and impositions? As to no
injury having resulted from the equality, as you call it, under the articles of
confederation, we think the reverse; and that this pretended Against what is
called equality in representation, the great Montesquieu seems to have declared
by the strongest implication. In his Spirit of Laws, b^ (...), that the
confederate republic of Lycia con^ (...) ^e associated towns: that, in the
common council, the (...) towns had three votes, the middling towns two, and
the lesser only one; that they contributed to the common expense according to
the proportion of suffrages; and, that were he to give the model of an
excellent confederate republic, it should be that of Lycia. Could the immortal
spirit of Montesquieu revisit the earth, and behold the model now offered to
America, how quickly would his favorite republic sink in his estimation. In a
new quarter of the globe scarcely heard of by the greater part of Europeans in
his day, and since the commencement of the present century, he would see men
who have attained a perfection in the science most conducive to hunan
happiness, in that study which was the principal occupation of his life, in
which his predecessors had acquired only a few glimmering lights, and of which
it was reserved for him to develope most of the true first principles.
equality was a poison, which pervaded all our affairs."

The anticipation of arguments like these had raised those apprehensions of an
irreconcilable difference. It were needless to repeat more. Had an angel been
the umpire, he could propose no expedient more equitable, and more politic, not
only as a compromise, but to establish such a decided difference between the
two branches of congress, as will make them indeed two distinct bodies,
operating by way of mutual balance and check. --

By this expedient, is safety secured to the lesser states as completely as if
the senate were the only legislative body. It is possible (if such a thing can
be devised) that, from the inequality in the first branch, propositions will be
made to give the larger states some advantage over the lesser; but the equality
in the senate will, for e^^^^ preclude its adoption. It is well worthy of
remark, that not more than three of (...) thirteen a^^ ^t present, deemed
larger states, in the peculiar sense of the word. There is no reason for
supposing, in the federal, like a state, legislature, the senate will be
intimidated o^ overawed, by the more numerous branch. A demagogue may declaim,
rave, menace and foam, with as little impression as the roaring billows produce
upon t^^ soli^ beach. Were it not for this equality in one, and inequality in
the other, a jealousy might be entertained of too perfect a coincidence of
sentiment. --

The convention has been censured for an excess of its authority. But with no
other power was it invested, than is possessed by every free citizen of the
states. Its office was to advise, and no further has it proceeded. Had it been
even invested with full powers to amend the present compact, their proposed
plan would not have exceeded their trust. Amendment, in parliamentary language,
means either ^^dition, or diminution, or striking out the whole, and
substituting something in its room. The convention were not limited. The states
did not tell them, this article must stand, this must be struck out, and this
may be altered. The avowed object of a convention was to consult on the
additional powers necessary to be vested in ^^^gress. But the members of this
convention perceiving, (...) the experience of these states, from the history
of ancient and modern states, and, I may add, from the principles of human
nature, that the same body of men ought not to make and execute laws; and that
one body alone ought ^ot to do the first, have separated the executive, so far
as was proper, from the legislative; and this last they have divided into two
branches, compose of different materials, distinct from, and total (...) ^ent
of, each other. --

The ho^ (...) representatives Whether the state of Maryland shall be divided
into six districts, for each to choose one man, or the people at large give
their suffrage for the whole six, is hereafter to be settled by the assembly.
The latter mode, on a variety of occasions, would be preferable.
is to be the immediate choice of the people, and one man is to represent
30,000 souls. In an affair of so much importance, and in districts containing
so many suffrages, it is not to be supposed, that a worthless character will
succeed by those arts, which have, sometimes, prevailed in county elections. It
is to be expected, that, in general, the people will choose men of tal^^^s and
character. Were they even so inclined, they can ch^^se none but men of ripe
age, who have been, at least, seven years citizens of the United States, and,
at the time of election, residents of the respective state. Whatever laws shall
be proposed, or assented to, by these men, are to bind themselves, their
children, and their connexions. If a single man, or a party, shall propose a
measure, calculated to pro^^cute private interest, at the expense of public
good, is it (...) ^de, that the whole house will be brought into the measure*
Suppose it should. The measure cannot be adopted into a law, without the
concurrence of another house, consisting of men still more select, possessing
superior qualifications of residence and age, and equally bound by the laws.
After ga^^ing the assent of the senate, the bill must be submitted to the
objections of the president. He is not in any manner dependent on the
legislature, which can, in no manner, punish him, except for some crime known
to the laws. He is elected by persons chosen for that special purpose. He
^^^^^^es a compensation, which cannot be diminished or in^^^sed, during his
continuance in office. The term of his commission is limited to four years,
unless he shall have acted so as to merit the people's favor. From the mode of
his election, it is impossible he can intrigue to advantage; and, from the
nature of other things, he will never succeed by bribery and corruption. Like
any other individual, he is liable to punishment. Finally at the expiration of
his office, he returns into the mass of the people. --

In spite of all these circumstances, a (...) amongst the enemies of the plan,
and they labor to impress it on your minds, that whatever power may be
exercised by these delegates of the people, will be used contrary to the
interests of their constituents. This is a supposition, so repulsive to my
mind, that I wonder any man of the (...) ^^nerosity, or reflection, can
possibly adopt it. The (...) of Maryland, with respect to internal regulations,
is almost omnipotent. And yet, is there a man who supposes the assembly would,
intentionally, pass laws injurious to the people? Why then should we distrust
the federal assembly, chosen for a short term, bound by the same ties, and
selected on account of their talents and patriotism? --

But, say the objectors, although we might probably confide with safety in
congress, it is not consistent with prudence, without a manifest necessity, to
empower any men to do us an injury.

Whenever the proposed plan delegates authority, which you imagine might safety
be denied, be assured, that a little reflection will suggest abundant reason
for granting it. At the same time you may be convinced, that, as some powers
were not intended to be exercised, so they never will be exercised, without
absolute necessity.

I have been amused by the writings of an avowed friend to the plan. "Let no
man," says he, "think of proposing amendments. Should each person object, and
should his objections prevail, not a tittle of the system will be left. You are
to accept the whole, or reject the whole." (...) speaking in this very sensible
way, he advises the states (...) reject with unanimity and firmness, the
following provision.

Art. 1, sect. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for
senators and representatives, shall be prescribed in each state, by the
legislature thereof; but the congress may, at any time, by law, make or alter
such regulations, except as to the places of choosing senators.

Can this writer imagine, that congress will presume to use this power, without
the occurrence of some one or more of the cases, (...) contemplation whereof
induced the conve^ (...) it. These are the cases of invasion by a (...) of
neglect, or obstinate refusal, in a state le^^^at^; of the prevalence of a
party, prescribing so as to (...) ^nister purpose, or injure the general
government. Others might perhaps occur to the convention. But these (...)
office to evince the propriety of such a power in the (...). It was never
meant, that congress should at (...) interfere, unless on the failure of a
state legislature, (...) alter such regulations as may be obviously improper.
The exercise of this power must at all times be so very invidious, that
congress will not venture upon it without some very cogent and substantial
reason. Let congress, even officiously, exert every power given by this clause,
the representatives must still be chosen by the people, and the senate by the
state legislatures. The provision cannot by any possibility admit of a
different construction. --

Should the bare appointment to congress have the magic to pervert the tempers
and principles of men, I perceive not the temptation for abusing this, or any
other of their powers. There are bad men to be found at times, in every
numerous assembly. But, under all circumstances, I predict, that, in congress,
their party will be small. Should there be thither sent the most prostituted
character, that ever acte^, like a pest, to his own state; should he possess
talents superior to the rest, I should have little dread of his influence,
unless I could suppose, that a majority of like characters may be chosen. Even
then, I repeat it -- they will be under no temptation sufficient to influence a
sensible mind; and no man of ripe age was ever yet wicked for the sake of
wickedness (...)

You have heard, that, by the privilege of nominating persons to office, the
president will find the congress ob^^quious enough (...) pass any laws, he
shall think fit to propose. It is incumbent on the authors of this suggestion
to show some interest in the president, inducing him to propose prejudicial
measures. I have remarked, that under the constition, his salary can be neither
augmented nor curtailed, during his commission; and, to change the
constitution, is not in the power of congress. Should he, however, devise, and
endeavor to procure, some dangero^^ (...) of that body, can we conceive, that
this lure will be powerful enough to corrupt a majority in each house. No
member can be appointed to an office, created, or of which the profits (...)
increased, during the time for which he was elected. (...) expectation of such,
as may fall vacant, within fou^ (...) will hardly corrupt even the smallest
number, that (...) any possible case, be a majority in the two houses (...)
make the members of each house ineligible to any other office whatever, would
be even impolitic, on account of its precluding these states from the services
perhaps of its best men. And it would be unjust to deny men the possibility of
benefits, which might be attained by others less deserving.

In ascertaining and defining the powers of congress, the convention evidently
pursued this obvious principle, that all things, which concern the union in
general, should be regulated by the federal head; and that each state
legislature should regulate those things, which concern only its own internal
government, together with the separate interests of its citizens. The enemies
of the proposed constitution have deemed it material to show, that such a one
never existed before. It does not indeed agree with definitions in books, taken
from the Amphyctionic council, the United Netherlands, or the Helvetic body.
They would therefore infer, that it is wrong. This mode of reasoning deserves
not a serious refutation. The convention examined those several constitutions,
if such they can be called. It found them either woefully defective, as do
their own particulars, object, or inapplicable to ours. Peradventure, our own
article (...) confederation, in theory, appear more perfect than any of (...).
These articles were made according (...) rule; the legislative and executive
authorities being vest^^ in one assembly. The extreme caution of its framers to
secure the independence of the several states, on account of its principle, was
much to be commended. But experience having fully demonstrated this
constitution to be inadequate to the purposes for which it was framed, and a
general conviction of its defects having occasioned the convention, it is
astonishing, that attempts are now made to prefer still a theory, not founded
on the nature of things, but derived merely from a ^ew deplorable examples. If
two branches in a state legislature be proper, why, in the name of common
sense, ^^^^th^^ ^ot so in a confederate legislature? -- Many instances of hasty
unadvised proceedings of congress, as a legislature have by other writers been
adduced; and so long (...) shall remain under the influence of passion or
interest, there will be such proceedings in every numerous assembly of men.

It is universally, by good writers, agreed, that where any one political body
possesses full powers, legislative and executive, whether it be a single man,
or a select say, or a numerous assembly, it matters not; -- the government
must, in a short time, become despotic. That in a free government, therefore,
the legislative and executive ought to be ever distinct and separate, is a
position in the Maryland declaration of rights. This hackneyed principle has
been urged, with great confidence, against constituting the senate a council to
the president. It has been urged too, even by the men who would have the whole
powers of the federal gevernment centered in a single assembly. I mean the men
who insist that the convention ought to have done no more than advise in what
manner the powers of the present congress should be increased. Let us
understand the principle in its proper extent. It does not follow, that a body,
whose assent is required in making laws, but who cannot, by themselves, do any
legislative act, may not be a fit council to the supreme executive magistrate,
deriving his authority, like them from the people, in no manner dependent on
them, o^ the immediate representatives of the people, for any pri^^^^
advantage, and possessed of no share in legislation except that of offering his
advice.

The objection to this part of the constitution, I confess, at first, appeared
formidable. The reasons which I now conjecture to have influenced the
convention, did not then occur. But I have long adhered to a maxim, which I
warmly recommend to others -- never to condemn, absolutely, even within myself,
any one kind, until I can hit upon some other kind which I conceive better. As
no human institution can possess absolute perfection, it is an ^as^ matter to
espy some fault or defect in almost every thing, which the wit of man can
contrive, or, at least, to reason plausibly against it. But this faculty of
finding faults is by no means sufficient to constitute the politician or
statesman. I delib^rated, what kind of council might be preferable, under (...)
circumstances, to the senate. The plainest thing in ^^^ture! Exclaims he, who
solves all difficulties at once, Why not appoint a body to act as council and
nothing else?

One reason, and that not very unpopular, is the great additional expense.
However, this reason I deem the lightest of all; and the general proposition
involves a great variety of other considerations. --

It is essential to a council, that the members be free, as possible, from all
bias, or improper influence. This separate and distinct council must be elected
by the people, or by special electors; by the legislature, or by one of its
branches; or by some other department; or by the president. --

That the people should either make laws to bind themselves, or elect persons,
without whose consent, no laws shall be made, is essential to their freedom.
But universal experience forbids, that they should also immediately choose
persons for the execution of the laws. Shall the legislature then, or the
senate, or the house of representatives, have this appointment? A council thus
chosen would be dependent on its electors; and is (...) be the same thing, in
many respects, as if the legislature should execute its own laws. Can you
believe, that a council, chosen actually, or once in two or three years, would
dare to pursue, in all cases the dictates of its own judgment, contrary to the
known will of those, who will soon have an opportunity (...) removing them?
Would they not be emulous to please leading men; and would there not be opened,
at every period of election, a fine field for intrigue and cabal? There would
be one way only of rendering a council, thus chosen, independent of their
electors; and that is, the choosing them for life, with salaries, not to be
augmented or diminished.

Against choosing an executive for life the reasons are weighty indeed. Should
they then hold their commissions during good behavior, there must be some
tribunal to determine on that good behavior; and what body it can be, except
the congress, would be difficult to decide. Besides (...) behavior in a member
of council is not determinable, (...) that of a judge, which has relation to
the laws, and things universally known. In the office of the former, there is
so much lest to discretion, that I cannot perceive with what propriety he can
hold it on the condition of good behavior. There can be no sure criterion, and
the decision must therefore unavoidably depend on the discretion, or mere
opinion, of his judges, founded on no established principles whatever. --

A council, chosen by the president himself would probably consist of creatures
devoted to his will. I can discern no reason, wherefore any other officers of
the government should make the appointment. There remains then only the
people's choosing electors, and placing the council of the president on the
same footing with himself. Here occurs the objection of expense; and here again
would arise the controversy respecting equality of representation. --

The senate will, in all human likelihood, consist of the most important
characters, men of enlightened minds, mature in judgment, independent in their
circumstances, and not deriving their principal subsistence from their pay, as
probably would the members of a board, distinct and separate from all other
public employments. --

I am not, therefore, barely reconciled to the article in question* It commands
my wa^^est admiration, and entire ^^^use. --

Is there any power improperly trusted to that select assembly, in which all
the states have equal interest, and to which they will assuredly make a
determined point of sending their best men? It is this equality, almost as much
as any other circumstance, which recommends it as an executive council. The
senate are to try impeachments. By their advice only, may the president make
treaties, appoint ambassadors, ministers, consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and officers, not otherwise provided for in the constitution. Let us reflect,
whether these things could be better done, by any other body, and whether it be
proper for any one man (suppose even the savior of his country to be immortal)
to have the appointment of all those important officers. It has always appeared
to me, that neither one man, nor many men should possess this transcendent
authority, in a republic (...) single man in high power, if he always mean
right, ^an with difficulty discern the true characters of men. Continual
efforts are made to impose on his judgment. But, indeed, a single man generally
confers offices by favor. In a large assembly the^ is perhaps equal
partiality; and elections are conducted by intrigue and cabal. A select
assembly is not so open to direct application; and although each may be
supposed to entertain his partialities, he cannot recommend his favorites,
without pointing out their essential qualifications, and becoming, in some
measure, responsible for their conduct. It is here, that characters are most
fairly investigated, and appointments most deliberately made. I appeal to
universal experience, whether these remarks be not strictly founded on fact,
and whether the most judicious appointments have not been made by small select
assemblies. I confess, that, the number of the senators for this purpose only
is excessive. But I can confidently ^^ly on the extraordinary selection to
compensate for the excess.

THE power of the president is alarming peculiarly to that class, who cannot
bear to view others in possession of that fancied blessing, to which, alas!
they must themselves aspire in vain. They ^ell you, this supreme magistrate,
although he be called (...) the modest name of president, and elected for only
four years, will, in every essential, be an emperor, king, or stockholder at
least; and that his dignity, in a few years, will become hereditary. Let us
examine the foundation of this alarming prediction. --

Before this appointment can be entailed, and before even the term can be
enlarged, the constitution must be changed, by consent of the people. By what
method, then, shall the president effect this alteration? Every citizen in the
union will be a censor on his conduct. Not even his person is particularly
protected; and the means of oppression are little in his power. Let the
jealousy of the people once take the alarm, and, at the expiration of his term,
he is dismissed as inevitably as light succeeds to darkness. The electi^^^ of a
president is not carried on in a single assembly, ^^nere the several arts of
corruption, may be essayed. He is elected by persons chosen by the people; and
those electors give their suffrages on the same day, in thirteen different
assemblies, in thirteen different states. An elective monarchy has long been
severely reprobated. But had the countries, where it prevailed, enjoyed
regulations like these, they would perhaps, at this time, be preferred to the
rules of hereditary succession, which have so often placed fools and tyrants on
the throne.

It seems, however, that the president may possibly be continued for life. He
may so, provided he deserve it. If not, he retires to obscurity, without even
the consolation of having produced any of the convulsions, attendant usually on
grand revolutions. Should he be wicked or frantic enough to make the attempt,
he attones for it, with the certain loss of wealth, liberty or life. --

I return to the powers of congress. They are almost universally admitted to be
proper for a federal head, except only the sweeping clause, and the power of
raising fleets and armies, without any stint or limitation, in time of peace.
The clause ru^^ thus:

Art. 1, sect^^^, par. the last. To make all laws, which shall (...) necessary
and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers, and all other
powers vested by this constitution, in the government of the United States, or
in any department or officer thereof.

It is apprehended, that this sweeping clause will afford pretext, for freeing
congress from all constitutional restraints.

I will not here again insist on the pledge we enjoy, in the common interest,
and sure attachment of the representatives and senate; setting aside the little
probability of a majority in each branch lying under the same temptation.
Consider the import of the words.

I take the construction of these words to be precisely the same, as if the
clause had proceeded further and said, No act of congress shall be valid,
unless it have relation to the foregoing powers, and be necessary and proper
for carrying them into execution. But say the objectors, The congress, being
itself to judge of the necessity and propriety, may pass any act, which it may
deem expedient for any other purpose. This objection applies with equal force
to each particular power, defined by the constitution; and, if there were a
bill of rights, congress might be said to be the judge of that also. They may
reflect however, that every judge in the union, whether of federal or state
appointment, (and some persons would say every jury) will have a right to
reject any act, handed to him as a law which he may conceive repugnant to the
constitution.

It may nevertheless strike you at first view, that a provision, so obviously
apt to excite distrust, might have wel^ been omitted. So indeed it might, were
there a possibility of providing every thing, necessary and proper, for
carrying into effect the various powers, intended to be conferred. Without this
general clause, it were easy to suppose cases, wherein a particular clause
might be incompetent to its own purpose. --

For want of some plain and obvious distinctions, there has been vented so much
senseless clamor against standing armies, that they are become a political
bugbear. A limited monarch, with the means of maintaining, at all times, an
army devoted to his will, might soon tr^mple on the natural and civil rights of
his subjects. Could the present congress find means of augmenting the force,
which it now maintains, which of you, on that account, would experience the
slightest anxiety? Which of all the European powers is destitute of an army?
Which of them, if they were free, could be secure of remaining so, without a
standing force? I might go further, and demand, whether any of them have lost
their liberties, by means of a standing army? The troops, continually kept up
in Great Britain, are formidable to its neighbors, and yet no rational
Englishman apprehends the destruction of his rights. It is true, that he knows,
these troops cannot be maintained, without the consent of his representatives,
annually obtained. But the necessity of an army he readily conceives; and the
number he leaves to the discretion of parliament. Ought then an American to
have greater fears of a president, than an Englishman has of his king? Or may
he not trust his representatives and the senate, with as much confidence, as
the Englishman reposes in the commons and lords?

Let the federal head be constituted as it may, there can be no perfect
security, without both a land force, and naval armament. It is impossible to
say how much will, at all times of peace, be sufficient. We have the same
security against the abuse of this, as of any other authority. The expenses of
an army might indeed raise fears of a different kind, -- that we shall not be
able to maintain force enough for the most proper occasion.

Suppose a limitation in time of peace. What then is to be done on the prospect
of a war? Should you make the distinction between profound peace, and a
threatened war, who is there, but congress, to determine on the exigency? If
you make no distinction, then will it be expedient to declare war, at the
instant in which the danger shall be conceived, in order that it may be lawful
to prepare for only a just defense. In fine, I consider this grand objection,
as a ^^ere pretext for terrifying you, like children, with specter and
hobgobblins. It may be material here to remark, that although a well regulated
militia has ever been considered as the true defense of a free republic, there
are always honest purposes, which are not to be answered by a militia. If they
were, the burden on the militia would be so great, that a free people would,
by no means, be willing to sustain it. If indeed it be possible in the nature
of things, that congress shall, at any future period, alarm us by an improper
augmentation of troops, could we not, in that case, depend on the militia,
which is ourselves. In such a case it would be ridiculous to urge, that the
federal government is invested with a power over the whole militia of the
union. Even when congress shall exercise this power, on the most proper
occasions, it is provided in the constitution, that each state shall officer,
and train its own militia. --

The objections against the judiciary are probably more sincere. The article
has been generally misconceived, or (...) presented; and after bestowing much
attention, I am (...) ^ertain, that I fully comprehend it. I am, however, at
length satisfied, that no rational construction can be given to this part of
the proposed plan, either to warrant a rejection of the whole, or to place
matters on a worse footing, than they are at present.

The judiciary power is to be vested in one supreme court, fixed at the seat of
government; and, for the advantage of government, with the ease and convenience
of the people, the congress may hereafter appoint inferior courts in each of
the states. The jurisdiction of this supreme court is to be partly original,
and partly appellate. With respect to the extent of either, there can be no
possible doubt, as there is neither ambiguity nor uncertainty in the relative
expressions.

The original jurisdiction of the supreme court extends

1. To all case, in which may be concerned an ambassador, any other public
minister, or a consul.

2. To all cases whatever, in which a state may be a party. -- This second
division may be branched into 1. Cases between the United States, and one or
more of the individual states. 2. Cases between two or more states. 3. Cases
between a state, and its own citizens. 4. Cases between a state, and the
citizens of another state. 5. Cases between a state, and a foreign state. 6.
Cases between a state, and the citizens, or subjects, of a foreign state.

The appellate jurisdiction of the supreme court extends

1. To all cases whatever between parties of every kind, in law and equity,
arising under this constitution, and the laws of congress, passed agreeably
thereto, and to treaties already, or hereafter to be, made.

2. To all cases of admiralty or maritime jurisdiction.

3. To all cases, in which the United States shall be a party.

4. To all cases between citizens of different states.

5. To all cases between citizens of the same state, claiming lands under the
grants of different states.

6. To all cases between citizens of a state, and foreign states, or their
citizens or subjects.

One doubt arising on the judiciary article is, whether in these cases of
appellate jurisdiction, the appeal has both from the state courts, and the
inferior federal courts, or only from the former, or only from the latter.

Another doubt is, whether the inferior federal courts are to be branches of
the supreme court, constituted for convenience, and having equal jurisdiction,
both original and appellate, with the supreme court; or whether the inferior
courts are to be confined to an original jurisdiction in those cases, wherein
the supreme court has appellate jurisdiction.

I shall not presume to decide absolutely on the genuine construction of an
article, which is said to have caused much private debate and perplexity. I am
however fully persuaded, that, as the article speaks of an original and
appellate jurisdiction, of a supreme court, and inferior courts; and, as there
is no intimation of appeals from the several state tribunals, the inferior
federal courts are intended to have original jurisdiction in all cases, wherein
the supreme court has appellate jurisdiction; and the appeal lies only from
them. I can, almost, with confidence, maintain, that, as there is no express
clause, or necessary implication, to oust the jurisdiction of state courts, an
action, after the adoption of the plan, may be instituted in any court, having,
at this time, a jurisdiction. And if an action be brought in a state court, I
do not, at present, perceive, that it can, in any manner, be transferred to the
supreme or inferior federal court.

According then to the best of my judgment the affair stands thus. The supreme
federal court will have an exclusive original jurisdiction in all cases
relative to the rights of ambassadors, other ministers, and consuls; because,
as I humbly conceive, the several state governments have at this time nothing
to do with these cases. With respect to the cases, in which a state may be
party, the supreme federal court, and the several state courts, will have, I
conceive, concurrent original jurisdiction, provided a state may, at this time,
institute an action in its own name, in the courts of another state. The
inferior federal courts, and the state courts, will, I conceive, have
concurrent original jurisdiction in all the enumerated cases, wherein all
appeal lies to the supreme court, except only the cases created by or under the
proposed constitution, in which, as they do not now exist, the inferior federal
courts will have exclusive jurisdiction. From the state inferior courts, I
further apprehend, that an appeal will lie, in all cases, to their own high
courts of appeal, as heretofore.

A choice of jurisdictions has been ever esteemed a valuable right, even where
there are both of the same kind. The purpose of extending so far the
jurisdiction of the federal judiciary, is to give every assurance to the
general government, of a faithful execution of its laws, and to give citizens,
states, and foreigners, an assurance of the impartial administration of
justice. Without this salutary institution, the federal government might
frequently be obstructed, and its servants want protection. It is calculated
not as an engine of oppression, but to secure the blessings of peace and good
order. The provisions respecting different states, their citizens, and
foreigners, if not absolutely necessary, are much to be applauded. The human
mind is so framed, that the slightest circumstance may prevent the most upright
and well known tribunal from giving complete satisfaction; and there may happen
a variety of cases, where the distrust and suspicion may not be altogether
destitute of a just foundation. --

On these principles, an appeal as to fact is no less proper, than the appeal
from judges of law. A jury, whose legal qualifications are only property and
ripe age, may more probably incur the imputation of weakness, partiality, or
undue influence. But in regard to appeals, it is very material to remark, that
congress is to make such regulations and exceptions, as upon mature
deliberation, it shall think proper. And indeed, before such regulations and
exceptions shall be made, the manner of appeal will not be ascertained. Is it
then to be presumed, that, in making regulations and exceptions, this appellate
jurisdiction shall be calculated as an engine of oppression, or to serve only
the purposes of vexation and delay. --

As the rod of Aaron once swallowed up the rods of the Egyptian magi, so also
is it feared, that these federal courts will, at length, swallow up the state
tribunals. A miracle, in one case, is as necessary, as in the other.

But let not the officers of state courts be overmuch alarmed! The causes,
which, by possibility, may be The importance of having the western territory
determined a common stock, needs only to be mentioned, to excite attention. --

As the articles of confederation contain no provision, for adjusting the
dispute between the United, and particular, states, Maryland, for a long time,
refused her ratification. An adequate provision is made by the proposed plan.
That the United States will assuredly institute actions against two of the
states, setting up claims equally wild and extensive, may appear from the
following statement.

New Hampshire, Rhode Island, New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland, have been
always interested in making good the common claim; as they never laid any
particular claim to the territory in question. --

Massachusetts, if the province of Main be separate, is likewise become
interested in the ^^^^on claim.

Connecticut, and New York, have both made cessions, which congress has
accepted. These two are therefore become interested.

Pennsylvania, although very extensive, has her limits ascertained. She
likewise is interested. --

Virginia, having made a cession to congress, has since relinquished a part of
the reserved lands, or at least offered independence, to Kentucky. --

North Carolina, having once made a cession, thought proper, in the omnipotence
of her distinct sovereignty, to repeal the act. Will not the cession be
determined valid, and the repeal void?

South Carolina also, it is said, has ceded part of that territory, which
lately she disputed with Geo^^^^. In this case the United States have their
claim fortified. --

But Georgia, the weakest of all, lays claim to an immense tract of country. In
this territory there are warlike and independent tribes of the aborigines, now
carrying terror and desolation toward the heart of the country occupied by the
whites. It is expected, that this circumstance, with a consciousness of the
weak foundation of her claims, will dispose Georgia to give up without a suit,
and consent to be circumscribed within narrower limits, so soon as a proper
tribunal shall have power to enter upon a rational investigation. --

N. B. For the above statement I am principally indebted to a member of the
late continental convention, and who for a considerable time, was a member of
congress, a gentleman of established honor and accuracy.


instituted in the federal courts bear no comparison to the rest. In the course
of ten years, not one action, that I know of, in Maryland, has concerned either
another state, or an ambassador, consul, or other minister. It is hoped, that
actions by foreigners will, in a few years, become much rarer than at any time
heretofore, and these may still be determined in the state courts. --

A gentleman, as it is conjectured, in the law department of a neighboring
state, has been pleased to infer, that fictions, similar to those in the king's
bench and exchequer of England, will be contrived, to draw causes into the
federal courts. He seems not aware, that, even in England, the established
fictions of law are not of modern date. They were ingenious devices, to remedy
defects in the common law, without the aid of parliament. The fundamental
principle however, with respect to their adoption, was, that they consist with
equity, and be requisite for the advancement of justice. Now every man, who
would establish over his cause a jurisdiction in a federal court, must show,
that such cause comes under the description of the constitution. If he do not,
there will be wanting that equity, which is the support of legal fiction. But
can any man seriously imagine, that fiction will be permitted, to give the
judges a power of legislation, denied to congress itself? Wherefore should the
judges, holding their commissions during good behavior, be guilty of such
gross falsehood, perjury, and breach of trust? Would there not be a general
revolt against such barefaced impudent innovations? Away then with your
trumpery of fictions! Accuse not the illustrious members of the convention of
having in their contemplation such sophistry, pettifogging and chicane! But
another fear is, that whatever actions may be instituted in the federal courts
will there seek an admission, on account of a more speedy decision. That man
alone, "on whose brow shame is ashamed to sit," will avow his opposition to a
more speedy administration of justice.

The institution of the trial by jury has been sanctified by the experience of
ages. It has been recognized by the constitution of every state in the union.
It is deemed the birthright of Americans; and it is imagined, that liberty
cannot subsist without it. The proposed plan expressly adopts it, for the
decision of all criminal accusations, except impeachment; and is silent with
respect to the determination of facts in civil causes.

The inference, hence drawn by many, is not warranted by the premises. By
recognizing the jury trial in criminal cases, the constitution effectually
provides, that it shall prevail, so long as the constitution itself shall
remain unimpaired and unchanged. But, from the great variety of civil cases,
arising under this plan of government, it would be unwise and impolitic to say
ought about it, in regard to these. Is there not a great variety of cases, in
which this trial is taken away in each of the states? Are there not many more
cases, where it is denied in England? For the convention to ascertain in what
cases it shall prevail, and in what others it may be expedient to prefer other
modes, was impracticable. On this subject, a future congress is to decide; and
I see no foundation under Heaven for the opinion, that congress will despise
the known prejudices and inclination of their countrymen. A very ingenious
writer of Philadelphia has mentioned the objections without deigning to refute
that, which he conceives to have originated "in sheer malice." --

I proceed to attack the whole body of anti-federalists in their strong hold.
The proposed constitution contains no bill of rights.

Consider again the nature and intent of a federal republic. It consists of an
assemblage of distinct states, each completely organized for the protection of
its own citizens, and the whole consolidated, by express compact, under one
head, for their general welfare and common defense.

Should the compact authorize the sovereign, or head, to do all things it may
think necessary and proper, then is there no limitation to its authority; and
the liberty of each citizen in the union has no other security, than the sound
policy, good faith, virtue, and perhaps proper interests, of the head.

When the compact confers the aforesaid general power, making nevertheless some
special reservations and exceptions, then is the citizen protected further, so
far as these reservations and exceptions shall extend.

But, when the compact ascertains and defines the power delegated to the
federal head, then cannot this government, without manifest usurpation, exert
any power not expressly, or by necessary implication, conferred by the compact.

This doctrine is so obvious and plain, that I am amazed any good man should
deplore the omission of a bill of rights. When we were told, that the
celebrated Mr. Wilson had advanced this doctrine in effect, it was said, Mr.
Wilson would not dare to speak thus to a CONSTITUTIONALIST. With talents
inferior to that gentleman's, I will maintain the doctrine against any
CONSTITUTIONALIST who will condescend to enter the lists, and behave like a
gentleman. --

It is, however, the idea of another most respectable character, that, as a
bill of rights could do no harm, and might quiet the minds of many good people,
the convention would have done well to indulge them. -- With all due deference,
I apprehend, that a bill of rights might not be this innocent quieting
instrument. Had the convention entered on the work, they must have comprehended
within it every thing, which the citizens of the United States claim as a
natural or a civil right. An omission of a single article would have caused
more discontent, than is either felt, or pretended, on the present occasion. A
multitude of articles might be the source of infinite controversy, by clashing
with the powers intended to be given. To be full and certain, a bill of rights
might have cost the convention more time, than was expended on their other
work. The very appearance of it might raise more clamor than its omission, --
I mean from those, who study pretexts for condemning the whole fabric of the
constitution. -- What! (might they say) did these exalted spirits imagine, that
the natural rights of mankind depend on their gracious concessions. If indeed
they possessed that tyrannic sway, which the kings of England had once usurped,
we might humbly thank them for their magna charta, defective as it is. As that
is not the case, we will not suffer it to be understood, that their newfangled
federal head shall domineer with the powers not excepted by their precious bill
of rights. What! If the owner of 1000 acres of land thinks proper to sell one
half, is it necessary for him to take a release from the vendee of the other
half? Just as necessary is i^ for the people to have a grant of their natural
rights from a government, which derives every thing it has, from the grant of
the people. --

The restraints laid on the state legislatures will tend to secure domestic
tranquillity, more than all the bills, or declarations, of rights, which human
policy could devise. It is very justly asserted, that the plan contains an
avowal of many rights. It provides, that no man shall suffer by expost facto
laws, or bills of attainder. It declares, that gold and silver only shall be a
tender for specie debts; and that no law shall impair the obligation of a
contract.

I have here perhaps touched a string, which secretly draws together many of
the foes to the plan. Too long have we sustained evils, resulting from
injudicious emissions of paper, and from the operation of tender laws. To bills
of credit, as they are now falsely called, may we impute the entire loss of
confidence between men. Hence is it, that specie has, in a great degree, ceased
its proper office, and been confined to speculations, baneful to the public,
and enriching a few enterprising sharp-sighted men, at the expense not only of
the ignorant, slothful, and needy, but of their country's best benefactors.
Hence chiefly are the bankruptcies throughout America, and the disreputable
ruinous state of our commerce. Hence is it principally, that America has lost
its credit abroad, and American faith become a proverb. The convention plainly
saw, that nothing short of a renunciation of the right to emit bills of credit
could produce that grand consummation of policy, the RESTORATION of PUBLIC and
PRIVATE FAITH.

Were it possible for the nations abroad to suppose Great Britain would emit
bills on the terms whereon they have issued in America, how soon would the wide
arch of that mighty empire tumble into ruins? In no other country in the
universe has prevailed the idea of supplying, by promissory notes, the want of
coin, for commerce and taxes. In America, indeed, they have heretofore served
many valuable purposes. ^^^s this consideration, which has so powerfully
attached to (...) many well meaning honest citizens; and they talk of ^^^titude
to paper money, as if it were a sensible benefactor, entitled to the highest
rank and distinction; and as if, to abandon it, would be a deadly sin. But when
every thing demonstrates the season to be past; when the credit of America, in
all places, depends on the security (...) had ^^e to contracts, it would be
madness in the states to be tenacious of their right. So long as Europe shall
believe we regard not justice, gratitude and honor, so long will America
labor under the disadvantages of an individual, who attempts to make good his
way through the world with a blasted reputation. To the man, who shall say, it
is of no consequence to consult national honor," I only answer thus, -- If thy
soul be so narrow and depraved, as to believe this, it were a needless attempt
to cure thee of thy error.

On this subject, there is no necessity for enlarging, to the people of my
native state; their conduct on a recent occasion having acquired them great and
deserved applause. Is it necessary to enlarge on the propriety of giving more
efficient powers to a federal head? At this moment, congress is little more
than a name, without power to effect a single thing, which is the object of a
confederate republic. Reflect on the recent period, when, in a sister state, a
numerous body of her frantic citizens appeared armed for the destruction of a
government, framed by the people. When that unhappy state was devoted to the
miseries of a civil war, did congress even dare to interpose? Conscious of its
inability to protect, it could only await the result, in silence and in terror.
It indeed ventured to make application to the states for a small body of
troops, under the poor pretext of another, and a necessary, destination. But,
notwithstanding the universal contagion of the alarm, did the states, on that
occasion, comply with the requisition? Suppose even an invasion by a foreign
power, -- in what manner could congress provide for its own defense? In the
contemptible light, in which America has lately stood, is it reasonable to
expect she will be suffered to remain long in peace? The distance between the
two continents is the only circumstance, on which we can rely. All Europe is
now in suspense; and the result of your deliberations will instruct her in the
part she shall act.

With amazement, her nations contemplate a scene; of which the world is too
young to furnish a parallel. We assembled our sages, patriots, and statesmen,
to consult what mode of government is capable of producing the greatest sum of
general good, with the least mixture of general, and partial evil. Not that
each individual in this august assembly was expected to offer a system; but
that the product of their joint wisdom should be referred to the several
states, to be adopted, or rejected, as the great body of the people shall
determine on a free and full deliberation.

As the occasion was unparalleled, so also is the plan, which, after many
months of painful investigation, is submitted, with an unanimity, also
unparalleled.

If there be any man, who approves the great outlines of the plan, and, at the
same time, would reject it, because he views some of the minute parts as
imperfect, he should reflect, that, if the states shall think as he does, an
alteration may be hereafter effected, at leisure. When the convention
determined, that the whole should be received, or the whole fail, they did it
not on an arrogant conceit of their own infallibity, but on the soundest
principles of policy and common sense. Were each state legislature, or
convention, to take it up, article by article, and section by section, with the
liberty of adopting some, and rejecting the rest, in all probability, so small
a part would be approved by nine states, on the narrow view which each has of
the subject, and attached as each is to its own supposed interest, that, in its
mutilated condition, it would be worse than the present confederation. For
thirteen different assemblies, in that way, to approve so much of any plan
whatever, as might merit the name of system, the convention well knew to be
impossible. Were there any one body of men, invested with full power, in behalf
of the whole United States, to consider, and amend the plan, then would it be
proper to debate it by sections, in the same manner as it was originally
debated.

With a view to defeat totally the plan, another general convention is
proposed; not with the power of giving a finishing hand to a constitution; but
again to consider objections, to strike out, to add, and again to make their
report to the several states.

In this way, there can never be an end. We must at last return to this, --
that whatever is agreed on, by the assembly appointed to propose, must be
either adopted in the whole, or in the whole rejected.

The idea of a new convention is started by some men, with the vain expectation
of having amendments made to suit a particular state, or to advance their own
selfish views. Were this fatal idea adopted, I should bid a last adieu to that
elevated hope, which now inspires me, of living under the happiest form of
government which the sun ever beheld. Recollect again and again, that almost
every state in the union made a determined point of delegating its first
characters to this grand convention. Reflect upon the time spent in the arduous
work, and the sacrifices which those distinguished persons made to their
country. Should the same men be deputed again, would they not, think you, with
the same unanimity, subscribe and recommend the same plan? So far as I have
been informed, those members, who, in the progression of the plan, had opposed
certain parts, and yet afterward subscribed cheerfully to the whole, have,
with the candor which becomes them, acknowledged their errors in debate. Even
an illustrious character, who was of the minority, consisting only of three, I
have been told, has since regretted his refusal.

Suppose then a second convention, with a different choice of delegates. These
too would either speedily subscribe, or they might propose some other system,
to be debated, paragraph by paragraph, in thirteen different assemblies; and
then there would be the same probability of a mutilated plan; or they would
propose something, to be adopted or rejected in the whole; and there would be
the same necessity of another convention. Besides, as the second convention, if
it consist of different men, must inevitably be inferior to the first, there is
little probability that their work will be superior. Never again, in an
assembly constituted as that was, will there be found the same liberality of
sentiment, "the same spirit of amity, and the same mutual deference and
concession."

If it be contended, that the second, being possessed of the various objections
from the several states, must be better able to determine, I would ask, what
conduct this second convention should adopt? Are they to take the proposed
plan, and strike out every thing objected to by nine states, or by seven
states, or by any one of the states? Or may they like wise adopt and recommend
the entire plan? In short, to appoint a second convention, merely to consult
and propose, would be the most absurd expedient, that ever, in a matter of this
amazing magnitude, was proposed. Does any man then entertain the thought of
another kind of convention, invested with full powers to consult, amend, adopt,
and confirm? A scheme like this was never yet, I trust, in agitation. But, if
it were, I would propose this single question. Whether is it better to amend,
before it be tried, that plan, which may be termed the result of the wisdom of
America, or leave it to be amended, at leisure, as mature experience shall
direct?

Although a very great variety of sensible objections have been publicly
offered, the real and sincere objections are hardly ever disclosed in private.
There is a class, opposed to the union of thirteen different states, and the
reason they assign, is the vast extent of our territory. Let us consider well
their objection.

To consolidate the whole thirteen states into a single organization, was out
of the convention's contemplation, -- for two unanswerable reasons. In the
first place, they were satisfied, that not one of the states would renounce its
sovereignty. In the next place, they considered, that, in a single government,
with a great extent of territory, the advantages are most unequally diffused.
As the extreme parts are scarcely sensible of its protection, so are they
scarcely under its domination. It is generally agreed, that a great extended
nation can long continue under no single form of government, except a
despotism, into which, either a republic, or a limited monarchy, will be
certain to degenerate. And hence, if I understand the man who styles himself a
Sentinel, he insinuates, that, if these states will persist in remaining under
one head, they must soon fall under the dominion of a despot. But, my
fellow-citizens, in a confederate republic, consisting of distinct states,
completely organized within themselves, and each of no greater extent than is
proper for a republican form, almost all the blessings of government are
equally diffused. Its protection extends to the remotest corner, and there
every man is under restraint of laws.

A true federal republic is always capable of accession by the peaceable and
friendly admission of new single states. Its true size is neither greater nor
less than that, which may comprehend all the states, which, by their
contiguity, may become enemies, unless united under one common head, capable of
reconciling all their differences. Such a government as this, excels any single
government, extending over the same territory, as a band of brothers is
superior to a band of slaves, or as thirteen common men, for the purposes of
agriculture, would be superior to a giant, enjoying strength of body equal to
them all.

The idea of a balance has long influenced the politics of Europe. But how much
superior to this almost impracticable balance would be a general league,
constituting a kind of federal republic, consisting of all the independent
powers in Europe, for preventing the impositions and encroachments of one upon
another! A true and perfect confederate government, however, in her situation,
is not to be attained; although the great soul of HENRY THE FOURTH is said to
have conceived the idea.

Shall America then form one grand federal republic? Or shall she, after
experiencing the benefits of even an imperfect union, and when a union the most
perfect is requisite for her permanent safety; -- shall she, in this situation,
divide into thirteen contemptible single governments, exposed to every insult
and wrong from abroad, and watching each other's motions, with all the
captiousness of jealous rivals? Or shall she divide into two or more federal
republics, actuated by the same malignant dispositions? In either of these
cases, after struggling through infinite toils, difficulty, and danger, should
the thirteen single states be, at last, delivered from foreign foes, they will
fall upon each other; and no man can predict, what forms of government, or
division of territory, shall finally obtain --. Two or three federal republics
might possibly retain their independence. But they would be in the same
situation, with respect to each other, as France, England, and Spain, scarcely
ever free from war; practicing the arts of dissimulation and intrigue; in vain
striving to impose, by endless negotiation; and, after all, relying only on the
immense naval and land forces, which they continually maintain.

Let us, then, my countrymen, embrace those blessings, which Providence is
ready to shower on us. Open and extend your views! Let the prospect comprehend
the present and future generations, yourselves, your children, your relatives,
your fellow-citizens, dwellers on the same continent, and inhabitants of the
whole terraqueous globe. --

With the prospect of my country's future glory, presented to my glowing
imagination, it is difficult to resist the strong impulse of enthusiasm. But it
is neither my talent, nor desire, to mislead. I wish only to impress the
genuine advantages of the proposed plan; and, if possible, to rouse every man
from that supineness, into which he is lulled by the present deceitful calm. To
acquit themselves, like men, when visible danger assails; and, when it is
repelled, to sink like savages, into indolence, is said to be the
characteristic of Americans. I am not, however, one of those, who imagine a
necessity for embracing almost any scheme, which the convention might have
devised, for giving to the union more efficient powers. Had the plan, they have
proposed, contained the seeds of much, though distant, evil, perhaps a faithful
patriot might address you thus:

Let us not, my friends, in a fit of unmanly apprehension, betray that immense
charge, with which Americans, at this day, are entrusted! Let us confide in the
wisdom of our great men, with the assistance of Heaven, to establish yet our
safety and happiness! Let us, in the mean time, sustain all our evils, with
resignation and firmness! Let us hope, that no foreign power, or lawless
internal combinations, shall do us a mighty injury! Let us be frugal,
economical, industrious! Let us suspend the cruel collection of debts! Let
commerce continue to droop! Let us awhile submit even to infamy; and turn a
callous ear to the indignant reproaches of our late faithful and affectionate
servants, friends and benefactors.

To this purpose might a man plausibly declaim; provided the proposed plan
contained many and great faults; provided it were not calculated to promote the
general good, without violating the just rights of a single individual; and
provided it were not the best, which, under all circumstances, could be
reasonably expected. It was the parting declaration of the American NESTOR, to
his exalted fellow laborers, that he would subscribe, because he thought it
good, and because he did not know, but it was the best that could be contrived.
My own declaration, which would be the same, were I now standing on the verge
of eternity, is, that if the whole matter were left to my discretion, I would
not change a single part. On reflection, I was pleased with the conduct of the
Virginia and Maryland assemblies, in appointing distant days for the meeting of
their state conventions. Not that I greatly admired the supposed motive; but
because I sincerely wished every man might have time to comprehend and weigh
the plan, before the ultimate decision of these two states should be
pronounced. The longer it is contemplated, after it is understood, the greater,
I am persuaded, will be the approbation of those, who wish the public good, and
to whose private views and expectations, nothing, which tends to promote that
good, can be greatly detrimental. --

But alas! My fellow-citizens, on the adoption of this fatal plan, and when
every part of the great complicated machine shall be put in motion, the luster
of our state assemblies will be diminished by the superior splendor of the
federal head. This single consideration, although many hesitate to avow it,
will cause more opposition, than all the rest united. Weigh well the objection.
If ever it be material to inquire, by whom reasons are adduced, it is on this
peculiar occasion. From the objection itself, may perhaps be discerned the
danger we are exposed to, from the secret views and selfish considerations of
the objector.

What at this moment to the nations abroad is the state of Maryland? The poor
member of a defenseless system of petty republics --. In what light is she
viewed by her sister states? -- Whatever rank she now possesses, will remain
after the great alteration of the system. They will all rise or fall in the
proportion which now exists --. What then are the powers an individual state
will lose? -- She will no longer be able to deny congress that, which congress,
at this moment, has a right to demand. She will have no power to enter into a
treaty, alliance, or confederation. She shall, in time of war, grant no letters
of marque and reprisal. She shall coin no money, emit no bills of credit, nor
make any thing but gold and silver a tender in payment of debts. She shall pass
no bill of attainder, or ex post facto saw, or law impairing the obligation of
a contract. She shall grant no title of nobility. She shall not, without
consent of congress, lay any duty on imports or exports, except what may be
necessary for executing her inspection laws. She shall not, without consent of
congress, lay any duty on tonnage, keep troops or The advantage derived from
this to the southern states, is easily perceived. Have not serious
apprehensions been entertained on account of the vast superiority of the
eastern states by sea?
ships of war, in time of peace; enter into any agreement, or compact, with
another state, or with a foreign power; or engage in war, unless actually
invaded, or in such imminent danger, as will not admit of delay.

Of the several powers, from which an individual state is thus restrained, some
are improper to be used at all; others belong not even now to the individual
states; and the rest are strictly proper for only the federal head. The
avertion from ceding them to congress, is just as reasonable as in a state of
nature would be the reluctance of an individual to relinquish any of his
natural rights, upon entering into a state of society. The principle, on which,
at length, he surrenders, is the necessity of every one's making a cession of
some rights, to enable the sovereign to protect the rest. Each state is fully
sensible, that she cannot protect herself; and yet she would enjoy the
advantages of an union, without making the necessary contributions. To discern
how preposterous is the idea, requires not more than a moment's reflection.

For the honor of my countrymen, I hope this extreme reluctance to surrender
power is confined to those, whose ambition, or private interest, would have all
things subservient to the omnipotence of assembly. In the few years that the
state constitutions have endured, has not every one seen pregnant proofs of the
vain love of domination? Has he not also seen decisive marks of overbearing
secret influence? Where are the instances of exalted patriotism? -- But I
forbear. Far from me is the wish to cast wantonly one stinging or disagreeable
reflection. The subject naturally required the general remark, and I hope, this
short hint may be excused. --

Is there a possible advantage to be derived to the public, from a single
state's exercising powers proper only for the federal head; suppose even each
state should use them properly and alike; which, in the nature of things, is
not to be expected? If there be men, who delight in parliamentary warfare; who
choose a fair wide field for displaying their talents; who wish to see every
servant of the public prostrate before them; whose ears are soothed by humble
supplication; they may still enjoy rich sources of gratification. Are not the
regulations of property, the regulations of the penal law, the protection of
the weak, the promotion of useful arts, the whole internal government of their
respective republics; are not these the main objects of every wise and honest
legislature? Are not these things still in their power; and, whilst free from
invasion or injuries abroad, are not these almost the only things, in which
sovereignty is exercised?

That the state legislatures will soon "drop out of sight," is an idea most
extravagant and absurd; because, in addition to the importance of their duties,
the very existence of the congress depends upon them. That they will, at least,
dwindle into something like city corporations, is an apprehension, founded on
no better principle. May the Ruler of the universe inspire them with wisdom to
discharge those numerous and extensive duties, which they will find remaining.
To do this, as they ought, will be far proferable to the Is it possible to
reflect, without indignation, on the fate of the five per cent. impost scheme?
breaking all useful national measures, and marring the concerns of a
continent. To do this, as they ought, will afford more true pleasure to a good
mind, than the carrying, by consummate eloquence and address, the most
interesting federal measure, which can now be contrived by an enlightened
honest politician, in a state assembly, possessing all its darling
sovereignties!

You have been assured, that, soon as this fatal plan shall succeed, an host of
rapacious collectors will invade the land; that they will wrest from you the
hard product of your industry, turn out your children from their dwellings,
perhaps commit your bodies to a jail; and your own immediate representatives
will have no power to relieve you. -- This is the mere phrenzy of declamation,
the ridiculous conjuration of specter and hobgobblins!

To the five per cent. impost most of the states have more than once given
their assent. This is the only tax which congress wishes immediately to impose.
Of the imposition of assessment, capitation, or direct taxes of any kind, the
congress entertains no idea at present; and although it be proper for the
federal head to possess this power in reserve, nothing but some unforeseen
disaster will ever drive them to such ineligible expedients. Setting aside the
immediate advantages of revived credit and trade, and the increased value of
your property and labor, you will be delivered, in a great measure, from that
load of direct taxation, which has been so unequally borne, and produced so
little substantial good.

Permit me to demand, what mighty benefit has resulted from the exercise of
those sovereign rights, that, in general, you should be loath to resign them?
Has not a perpetual clamor been kept up (it matters not whether justly or
otherwise) concerning the enormous impositions on the people? And what are the
advantages derived to the people of the respective states, to the union, or to
meritorious individuals? Has not the far greater part of a state's internal
expenses been owing to the extreme length of sessions? Have not these sessions
been consumed in disgusting altercation, and in passing laws, serving to little
better purpose, than to swell the statute book, encourage a negligence of duty,
and obstruct the administration of justice?

To trace each real and ostensible objection up to its proper source, would be
a task equally invidious, irksome and unnecessary. The characters of the
principal advocates and opponents are well known. To him who declines not a
public avowal of his sentiments, some credit is due, for his candor; and he is
entitled to your patient attention. But, he that prefers a secret corner, for
dealing forth his objections, and expositions, should be heard with caution and
distrust. It is in a land of slavery alone, where truth shuns the open day --.
Each side has imputed to the other illiberal and selfish motives. Consider then
the particular interests of each; and bear this in your minds, that an interest
may be either honorable and praise worthy, or directly the reverse.

You have been told, that the proposed plan was calculated peculiarly for the
rich. In all governments, not merely despotic, the wealthy must, in most
things, find an advantage, from the possession of that, which is too much the
end and aim of all mankind. In the proposed plan, there is nothing like a
discrimination in their favor. How this amazing objection is to be supported,
I am at a loss to conjecture. Is it a just cause of reproach, that the
constitution effectually secures property? Or would the objectors introduce a
general scramble? In eligibility to office, in suffrage, and in every other
civil right, all men are on terms of perfect equality. And yet, notwithstanding
this just equality, each man is to pay taxes in proportion to his ability, or
his expenses. --

A still more surprising objection remains to be considered. This new
constitution, so much be praised and admired, will commence in a moderate
aristocracy. To a corrupt and oppressive one the transition is easy, and
inevitable, unless some Caesar, or a Cromwell, in their stead, shall make a
seizure of your liberties. As to the house of representatives, they will either
be insignificant spectators of the contest between the president and the
senate, or their weight will be thrown into one of the scales.

No man, indeed, has exactly used these words; but they contain the sum and
scope of several recent publications.

In the course of my remarks, I have already said enough to expose the futility
of certain objections, which are ushered to the world, under the auspices of a
pair of honorable names. Notwithstanding the care and pomposity, with which
they are circulated, it is not worth while to draw an invidious comparison. One
gentleman, whose name is thus freely used, I think, calls the house of
representatives a mere shred, or rag of representation. Does he consider the
distinction between the objects of a confederate republic, and of a single
government? It is a poor return for that singular respect, which the convention
paid to the majesty of the people, in contriving, that congress shall not only
be a representation of states, as heretofore, but also an immediate
representation of the people. Were 5, 10, or even 20,000, the ratio proposed,
then peradventure the honorable objector might clamor about the expense of a
mobbish legislature. The fact is, that the new government, constructed on the
broad basis of equality, mutual benefits, and national good, is not calculated
to secure a single state all her natural advantages, at the expense of the
natural and acquired advantages of her respectable brethren of New England. --

His real objection against constituting the senate an executive council
arises, I conceive, from the equality of representation. As to the trite maxim,
that the legislative and executive ought ever to be distinct and separate, I
would, in addition to my foregoing observations on this head, refer him to
Montesquieu's chapter on the English government. I could wish, the writings of
that great man, and of judge Blackstone, so often either copied, or cited for
conclusive authority, were better understood. Should a second, or a third
convention, be obtained, the aforesaid honorable gentlemen can never be fully
indulged in their main object of a proportionate representation.

The examples of a genuine aristocracy are rare. They were founded in times of
profound ignorance, and when the mass of property was in the hands of a few,
whilst the rest pined in want and wretchedness. One European aristocratic
government, if such it can be called, has grown out of an original defective
form, the offspring of necessity, and commenced amidst the horrors of a civil
war. Although the people of that country fought, and intended, to be free,
their compact of government never was complete; they did not attend to the
principle of rotation, and checks; and a genuine representation did never there
prevail. --

An aristocracy can perhaps subsist only with a moderate extent of territory
and population. -- But it is a farce to talk of an aristocracy; when there are
two branches, so differently formed; when the members of each are chosen for a
reasonable term; and when their re-appointment depends on the good opinion of
their countrymen. It is not in nature, that a man with the least portion of
common sense can believe, the people of America will consent to such a
deplorable change in their constitution, as shall confine all power to a few
noble families, or that, without their consent, the change will be effected, by
internal policy, or force.

Whilst mankind shall believe freedom to be better than slavery; whilst our
lands shall be generally distributed, and not held by a few insolent barons, on
the debasing terms of vassallage; whilst we shall teach our children to read
and write; whilst the liberty of the press, that grand palladium, which tyrants
are compelled to respect, shall remain; whilst a spark of public love shall
animate even a small part of the people; whilst even self-love shall be the
general ruling principle; so long will it be impossible for an aristocracy to
arise from the proposed plan. -- Should Heaven, in its wrath, inflict blindness
on the people of America; should they reject this fair offer of permanent
safety and happiness; -- to predict, what species of government shall at last
spring from disorder, is beyond the short reach of political foresight.

Believe me, my fellow-citizens, that no overweening self-conceit, no vain
ambition, no restless meddling spirit, has produced this address. Long had I
waited to see this vast question treated, as it deserves; and the publication
disseminated in my native state. Many judicious observations had appeared in
newspapers and hand-bills. But no publication, that I have seen, has gone
fully into the merits, considered the objections, and explained that, which is
doubtful and obscure. On this account I, at length, made the attempt. That my
performance is equal to my wishes, I can by no means believe. I have, however,
a consolation in reflecting, that it will be difficult for any man to
demonstrate, that, in this business, I have a particular interest. -- In many
of my remarks, I have been anticipated by writings, which I have seen; and I
have collected materials, wherever I could find them. Could I be convinced,
that I have sa^d nothing, which had not before been said or thought by
thousands, the reflection would yield far less mortification than pleasure.

ANNAPOLIS, January 1, 1788. ARISTIDES.

FINIS.

