OBSERVATIONS ON THE New CONSTITUTION, AND ON THE FOEDERAL AND STATE
CONVENTIONS.

BY A COLUMBIAN PATRIOT.

SIC TRANSIT GLORIA AMERICANA.

BOSTON PRINTED, NEW YORK REPRINTED, M,DCC,LXXX,VIII.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
MANKIND may amuse themselves with theoretic systems of liberty, and trace its
social and moral effects on sciences, virtue, industry, and every improvement
of which the human mind is capable; but we can only discern its true value by
the practical and wretched effects of slavery; and thus dreadfully will they be
realized when the inhabitants of the Eastern States are dragging out a
miserable existence only on the gleanings of their fields; and the Southern,
blessed with a softer and more fertile climate, are languishing in hopeless
poverty; and when asked, what is become of the flower of their crop, and the
rich produce of their farms -- they may answer in the hapless style of the Man
of La Mancha -- "The steward of my Lord has seized and sent it to Madrid." --
Or, in the moral literal language of truth -- the exigencies of government
require, that the collectors of the revenue should transmit it to the Federal
City.

Animated with the firmest zeal for the interest of this country, the peace and
union of the American States, and the freedom and happiness of a people who
have made the most costly sacrifices in the cause of liberty -- who have braved
the power of Britain, weathered the convulsions of war, and waded through the
blood of friends and foes to establish their independence, and to support the
freedom of the human mind, I cannot silently witness this degradation without
calling on them, before they are compelled to blush at their own servitude, and
to turn back their languid eyes on their lost liberties -- to c^^sider, that
the character of nations generally changes at the moment of revolution. And
when patriotism is discountenanced, and public virtue becomes the ridicule of
the sycophant -- when every man of liberality, firmness, and penetration, who
cannot lick the hand stretched out to oppress, is deemed an enemy to the State
-- then is the gulf of des^otism set open, and the grades to slavery, though
rapid, are scarce perceptible -- then genius drags heavily its iron chain --
science is neglected, and real merit flies to the shades for security from
reproach -- the mind becomes enervated, and the national character sinks to a
kind of apathy, with only energy sufficient to curse the breast that gave it
milk, and as an elegant writer observes, "To bewail every new birth as an
increase of misery, under a government where the mind is necessarily debased,
and talents are seduced to become the panegyrists of usurpation and tyranny."
He adds, "That even sedition is not the most indubitable enemy to the public
welfare; but that its most dreadful foe is despotism, which always changes the
character of nations for the worse, and is productive of nothing but vice; that
the tyrant no longer excites to the pursuits of glory or virtue; it is not
talents, it is baseness and servility that he cherishes, and the weight of
arbitrary power destroys the spring of emulation." HELV^^^US.
If such is the influence of government on the character and manners, and
undoubtedly the observation is just, must we not subscribe to the opinion of
the celebrated Abbe Mable? "That there are disagreeable seasons in the unhappy
situation of human affairs, when policy requires both the intention and the
power of doing mischief to be punished; and that when the senate proscribed the
memory of Caesar they ought to have put Anthony to death, and extinguished the
hopes of Octavius." Self defense is a primary law of nature, which no
subsequent law of society can abolish; this primoeval principle, the immediate
gift of the Creator, obliges every one to remonstrate against the strides of
ambition, and a wanton lust of domination, and to resist the first approaches
of tyranny, which at this day threaten to sweep away the rights for which the
brave sons of America have fought with an heroism scarcely paralleled even in
ancient republics. It may be repeated, they have purchased it with their blood,
and have gloried in their independence with a dignity of spirit which has made
them the admiration of philosophy, the pride of America, and the wonder of
Europe. It has been observed, with great propriety, that the virtues and vices
of a people, when a revolution happens in their government, are the measure of
the liberty or slavery they ought to expect. An heroic love for the public
good, a profound reverence for the laws, a contempt of riches, and a noble
haughtiness of soul, are the only foundations of a free government. ABBE MABLE.
Do not these dignified principles still exist among us? Or are they
extinguished in the breasts of Americans, whose fields have been so recently
crimsoned to repel the potent arm of a foreign Monarch, who had planted his
ensigns of slavery in every city, with design to erase the vestiges of freedom
in this his last asylum. It is yet to be hoped, for the honor of human nature,
that no combinations, either foreign or domestic, have thus darkened this
Western hemisphere. On these shores freedom has planted her standard, dipped in
the purple tide that flowed from the veins of her martyred heroes; and here
every uncorrupted American yet hopes to see it supported by the vigor, the
justice, the wisdom, and unanimity of the people, in spite of the deep-laid
plots, the secret intrigues, or the bold effrontery of those interested and
avaricious adventurers for place, who, intoxicated with ideas of distinction
and preferment, have prostrated every worthy principle beneath the shrine of
ambition. Yet these are the men who tell us, republicanism is dwindled into
theory -- that we are incapable of enjoying our liberties -- and that we must
have a master. Let us retrospect the days of our adversity, and recollect who
were then our friends; do we find them among the sticklers for aristocratic
authority? No -- they were generally the same men who now wish to save us from
the distractions of anarchy on the one hand, and the jaws of tyranny on the
other; where then were the class who now come forth importunately urging that
our political salvation depends on the adoption of a system at which freedom
spurns? Were not some of them hidden in the corners or obscurity, and others
wrapping themselves in the bosom of our enemies for safety? Some of them were
in the arms of infancy, and others speculating for fortune, by sporting with
public money, while a few, a very few of them were magnanimously defending
their country, and raising a character which I pray heaven may never be sullied
by aiding measures derogatory to their former exertions. But the revolutions in
principle which time produces among mankind, frequently exhibit the most
mortifying instances of human weakness; and this alone can account for the
extraordinary appearance of a few names, once distinguished in the honorable
walks of patriotism, but now found on the list of the Massachusetts assent to
the ratification of a Constitution, which, by the undefined meaning of some
parts, and the ambiguities of expression in others, is dangerously adapted to
the purposes of an immediate aristocratic tyranny; that from the difficulty, if
not impracticability of its operation, must soon terminate in the most
uncontrouled despotism.

All writers on government agree, and the feelings of the human mind witnesses
the truth of these political axioms, that man is born free, and possessed of
certain unalienable rights -- that government is instituted for the protection,
safety, and happiness of the people, and not for the profit, honor, or private
interest of any man, family, or class of men. That the origin of all power is
in the people, and that they have an incontestible right to check the creatures
of their own creation, vested with certain powers to guard the life, liberty,
and property of the community: And if certain selected bodies of men, deputed
on these principles, determine contrary to the wishes and expectations of their
constituents, the people have an undoubted right to reject their decisions, to
call for a revision of their conduct, to depute others in their room, or, if
they think proper, to demand further time for deliberation on matters, of the
greatest moment: it therefore is an unwarrantable stretch of authority or
influence, if any methods are taken to preclude this reasonable and peaceful
mode of enquiry and decision. And it is with inexpressible anxiety, that many
of the best friends to the Union -- to the peaceable and equal participation of
the rights of nature, and to the glory and dignity of this country, behold the
insidious arts, and the strenuous efforts of the partisans of arbitrary power,
by their vague definitions of the best established truths, endeavoring to
envelope the mind in darkness -- the concomitant of slavery; and to lock the
strong chains of domestic despotism on a country, which, by the most glorious
and successful struggles, is but newly emancipated from the scepter of foreign
dominion. But there are certain seasons in the course of human affairs, when
Genius, Virtue, and Patriotism, seem to no^ over the vices of the times, and
perhaps never more remarkably than at the present period, or we should not see
such a passive disposition prevail in some, who we must heartily suppose have
liberal and enlarged sentiments; while a supple multitude are paying a blind
and idolatrous homage to the opinions of those, who, by the most precipitate
steps, are treading down their dear-bought privileges, and who are
endeavoring, by all the arts of insinuation and influence, to betray the
people of the United States into an acceptance of a most complicated system of
government, marked on the one side with the dark, secret, and profound
intrigues of the statesman, long practiced in the purlieus of despotism; and on
the other, with the ideal projects of young ambition, with its wings just
expanded to soar to a summit which imagination has painted in such gaudy
colors as to intoxicate the inexperienced votary, and send him rambling from
State to State, to collect materials to construct the ladder of preferment.

But as a variety of objections to the heterogeneous phantom, have been
repeatedly laid before the public, by men of the best abilities and intentions,
I will not expatiate long on a Republican form of government, founded on the
principles of monarchy -- a democratic branch with the features of aristocracy
-- and the extravagance of nobility pervading the minds of many of the
candidates for office, with the poverty of peasantry hanging heavily on them,
and insurmountable, from their taste for expense, unless a generous provision
should be made in the arrangement of the civil list, which may enable them with
the champions of their cause, to " sail down the new Pactolean channel." Some
gentlemen, with labored zeal, have spent much time in urging the necessity of
government, from the embarrassments of trade -- the want of respectability
abroad, and confidence in the public engagements at home: These are obvious
truths which no one denies; and there are few who do not unite in the general
wish for the restoration of public faith, the revival of commerce, arts,
agriculture, and industry, under a lenient, peaceable, and energetic
government: But the most sagacious advocates for the party have not, by fair
discussion, and rational argumentation, evinced the necessity of adopting this
many-headed monster; of such motley mixture, that its enemies cannot trace a
feature of Democratic or Republican extract; nor have its friends the courage
to denominate it a Monarchy, an Aristocracy, or an Oligarchy, and the favored
bantling must have passed through the short period of its existence without a
name, had not Mr. Wilson, in the fertility of his genius, suggested the happy
epithet of a Federal Republic. But I leave the field of general censure on the
secrecy of its birth, the rapidity of its growth, and the fatal consequences of
suffering it to live to the age of maturity, and will particularize some of the
most weighty objections to its passing through this continent in a gigantic
size. -- It will be allowed by every one, that the fundamental principle of a
free government, is the equal representation of a free people. -- And I will
first observe with a justly celebrated writer, That the principle aim of
society is to protect individuals in the absolute rights which were vested in
them by the immediate laws of nature, but which could not be preserved in
peace, without the mutual intercourse which is gained by the institution of
friendly and social communities. -- And when society has thus deputed a certain
number of their equals to take care of their personal rights, and the interest
of the whole community, it must be considered that responsibility is the great
security of integrity and honor; and that annual election is the basis of
responsibility. -- Man is not immediately corrupted, but power, without
limitation, or ameanability, may endanger the brightest virtue -- whereas a
frequent return to the bar of their constituents is the strongest check against
the corruptions to which men are liable, either from the intrigues of others of
more subtle genius, or the propensities of their own hearts -- and the
gentlemen who have so warmly advocated in the late Convention of the
Massachusetts, the change from annual to biennial elections; may have been in
the same predicament, and perhaps with the same views that Mr. Hutchinson once
acknowledged himself, when in a letter to Lord Hillsborough he observed, that
the grand difficulty of making a change in government against the general bent
of the people had caused him to turn his thoughts to a variety of plans, in
order to find one that might be executed in spite of opposition, and the first
he proposed was, that "instead of annual, the elections should be only once in
three years:" But the minister had not the hardiness to attempt such an
innovation, even in the revision of colonial charters: Nor has any one ever
defended biennial, triennial, or septennial elections, either in the British
house of commons, or in the debates of provincial assemblies, on general and
free principles: But it is unnecessary to dwell long on this article, as the
best political writers have supported the principles of annual elections with a
precision that cannot be confuted, though they may be darkened by the
sophistical arguments that have been thrown out with design, to undermine all
the barriers of freedom.

2. There is no security in the proffered system, either for the rights of
conscience, or the liberty of the press: -- Despotism usually, while it is
gaining ground; will suffer men to think, say, or write what they please; but
when once established, if it is thought necessary to subserve the purposes of
arbitrary power, the most unjust restrictions may take place in the first
instance, and an imprimator on the press in the next, may silence the
complaints, and forbid the most decent remonstrances of an injured and
oppressed people.

3. There are no well defined limits of the judiciary powers, they seem to be
left as a boundless ocean, that has broken over the chart of the supreme
lawgiver, " thus far shall thou go and no farther," and as they cannot be
comprehended by the clearest capacity, or the most sagacious mind, it would be
an Herculean labor to attempt to describe the dangers with which they are
replete.

4. The executive and the legislative are so dangerously blended as to give
just cause of alarm, and every thing relative thereto, is couched in such
ambiguous terms -- in such vague and indefinite expressions, as is a sufficient
ground without any other objection, for the reprobation of a system, that the
authors dare not hazard to a clear investigation.

5. The abolition of trial by jury in civil causes. -- This mode of trial, the
learned judge Blackstone observes, has been coeval with the first rudiments of
civil government, that property, liberty and life, depend on maintaining in its
legal force the constitutional trial by jury. He bids his readers pause, and
with Sir Matthew Hale observes, how admirably this mode is adapted to the
investigation of truth beyond any other the world can produce. Even the party
who have been disposed to swallow without examination, the proposals of the
secret conclave, have started on a discovery that this essential right was
curtailed* and shall a privilege, the origin of which may be traced to our
Saxon ancestors -- that has been a part of the law of nations, even in the
seudatory systems of France, Germany, and Italy -- and from the earliest
records has been held so sacred, both in ancient and modern Britain, that it
could never be shaken by the introduction of Norman customs, or any other
conquests or chance of government -- shall this inestimable privilege be
relinquished in America -- either through the fear of inquisition for
unaccounted thousands of public moneys in the hands of some who have been
officious in the fabrication of the consolidated system, or from the
apprehension that some future delinquent, possessed of more power than
integrity, may be called to a trial by his peers in the hour of investigation?

6. Though it has been said by Mr. Wilson, and many others, that a standing
army is necessary for the dignity and safety of America, yet freedom revolts at
the idea, when the Divan, or the despot, may draw out his dragoons to suppress
the murmurs of a few, who may yet cherish those sublime principles which call
forth the exertions, and lead to the best improvement of the human mind. It is
hoped this country may yet be governed by milder methods than are usually
displayed beneath the bannerets of military law. Standing armies have been the
nursery of vice, and the bane of liberty, from the Roman legions, to the
establishment of the artful Ximenes, and from the ruin of the Cortes of Spain,
to the planting the British Cohorts in the capitals of America. -- By the
edicts of authority vested in the sovereign power by the proposed constitution,
the militia of the country, the bulwark of defense, and the security of
national liberty, is no longer under the control of civil authority; but at
the rescript of the monarch, or the aristocracy, they may either be employed to
extort the enormous sums that will be necessary to support the civil list -- to
maintain the regalia of power -- and the splendor of the most useless part of
the community, or they may be sent into foreign countries for the fulfillment of
treaties, stipulated by the president and two thirds of the senate.

7. Notwithstanding the delusory promise to guarantee a republican form of
government to every state in the union -- if the most discerning eye could
discover any meaning at all in the engagement, there are no resources left for
the support of internal government, or the liquidation of the debts of the
state. Every source of revenue is in the monopoly of Congress, and if the
several legislatures in their enfeebled state, should against their own
feelings be necessitated to attempt a dry tax for the payment of their debts,
and the support of internal police, even this may be required for the purposes
of the general government.

8. As the new Congress are empowered to determine their own salaries, the
requisitions for this purpose may not be very moderate, and the drain for
public moneys will probably rise past all calculation; and it is to be feared,
when America has consolidated its despotism, the world will witness the truth
of the assertion -- that the pomp of an eastern monarch may impose on the
vulgar who may estimate the force of a nation by the magnificence of its
palaces; but the wise man judges differently, it is by that very magnificence
he estimates its weakness. He sees nothing more in the midst of this imposing
pomp, where the tyrant sets enthroned, than a sumptuous and mournful decoration
of the dead; the aparatus of a fastuous funeral, in the center of which is a
cold and lifeless lump of unanimated earth, a phantom of power ready to
disappear before the enemy, by whom it is despised!

9. There is no provision for a rotation, nor any thing to prevent the
perpetuity of office in the same hands for life; which by a little well timed
bribery, will probably be done, to the exclusion of men of the best abilities
from their share in the offices of government. -- By this neglect we lose the
advantages of that check to the overbearing insolence of office, which by
rendering him ineligible at certain periods, keeps the mind of man in
equilibrio, and teaches him the feelings of the governed, and better qualifies
him to govern in his turn.

10. The inhabitants of the United States, are liable to be dragged from the
vicinity of their own county, or state, to answer to the litigious or unjust
suit of an adversary, on the most distant borders of the continent: In short,
the appellate jurisdiction of the supreme federal court, includes an
unwarrantable stretch of power over the liberty, life, and property of the
subject, through the wide continent of America.

11. One representative to thirty thousand inhabitants is a very inadequate
representation; and every man who is not lost to all sense of freedom to his
country, must reprobate the idea of Congress altering by law, or on any
pretense whatever interfering with any regulations for the time, places, and
manner of choosing our own representatives.

12. If the sovereignty of America is designed to be elective, the
circumscribing the votes to only ten electors in this state, and the same
proportion in all the others, is nearly tantamount to the exclusion of the
voice of the people in the choice of their first magistrate. It is vesting the
choice solely in an aristocratic junto, who may easily combine in each state to
place at the head of the union the most convenient instrument for despotic sway.

13. A senate chosen for six years, will in most instances, be an appointment
for life, as the influence of such a body over the minds of the people, will be
coeval to the extensive powers with which they are vested, and they will not
only forget, but be forgotten by their constituents; a branch of the supreme
legislature thus set beyond all responsibility, is totally repugnant to every
principle of a free government.

14. There is no provision by a bill of rights to guard against the dangerous
encroachments of power in too many instances to be named: But I cannot pass
over in silence the insecurity in which we are left with regard to warrants
unsupported by evidence -- the daring experiment of granting writs of
assistance in a former arbitrary administration is not yet forgotten in the
Massachusetts; nor can we be so ungrateful to the memory of the patriots who
counteracted their operation, as so soon after their manly exertions to save us
from such a detestable instrument of arbitrary power, to subject ourselves to
the insolence of any petty revenue officer to enter our houses, search, insult,
and seize at pleasure. We are told by a gentlemen of too much virtue and real
probity to suspect he has a design to deceive -- "that the whole constitution
is a declaration of rights," -- but mankind must think for themselves, and to
many very judicious and discerning characters, the whole constitution, with
very few exceptions, appears a perversion of the rights of particular states,
and of private citizens -- But the gentlemen goes on to tell us, that the
primary object is the general government, and that the rights of individuals
are only incidentally mentioned, and that there was a clear impropriety in
being very particular about them. But, asking pardon for dissenting from such
respectable authority, who has been led into several mistakes, more from his
predilection in favor of certain modes of governmens, than from a want of
understanding or veracity, the rights of individuals ought to be the primary
object of all government, and cannot be too securely guarded by the most
explicit declarations in their favor. This has been the opinion of the
Hampdens, the Pyms, and many other illustrious names, that have stood forth in
the defense of English liberties; and even the Italian master of politics, the
subtle and renowned Machiavel acknowledges, that no republic ever yet stood on
a stable foundation without satisfying the common people.

15. The difficulty, if not impracticability, of exercising the equal and
equitable powers of government by a single legislature over an extent of
territory that reaches from the Missisippi to the western lakes, and from them
to the Atlantic ocean, is an insuperable objection to the adoption of the new
system. -- Mr. Hutchinson, the great champion for arbitrary power, in the
multitude of his machinations to subvert the liberties of this country, was
obliged to acknowledge in one of his letters, that "from the extent of country
from north to south, the scheme of one government was impracticable." But if
the authors of the present visionary project, can by the arts of deception,
precipitation and address, obtain a majority of suffrages in the conventions of
the states to try the hazardous experiment, they may then make the same
inglorious boast with this insidious politician, who may perhaps be their
model, that "the union of the colonies was pretty well broken, and that he
hoped never to see it renewed."

16. It is an indisputed fact, that not one legislature in the United States
had the most distant idea when they first appointed members for a convention,
entirely commercial, or when they afterward authorized them to consider on
some amendments of the federal union, that they would, without any warrant from
their constituents, presume on so bold and daring a stride, as ultimately to
destroy the state governments, and offer a consolidated system, irreversible
but on conditions that the smallest degree of penetration must discover to be
impracticable.

17. The first appearance of the article which declares the ratification of
nine states sufficient for the establishment of the new system, wears the face
of dissension, is a subversion of the union of the consederated states, and
tends to the introduction of anarchy and civil convulsions, -- and may be a
means of involving the whole country in blood.

18. The mode in which this constitution is recommended to the people to judge
without either the advice of Congress, or the legislatures of the several
states, is very reprehensible -- it is an attempt to force it upon them before
it could be thoroughly understood, and may leave us in that situation, that in
the first moments of slavery the minds of the people, agitated by the
remembrance of their lost liberties, will be like the sea in a tempest, that
sweeps down every mound of security.

But it is needless to enumerate other instances, in which the proposed
constitution appears contradictory to the first principles which ought to
govern mankind; and it is equally so to enquire into the motives that induced
to so bold a step as the annihilation of the independence and sovereignty of
the thirteen distinct states. -- They are but too obvious through the whole
progress o the business, from the first shutting up the doors of the Federal
Convention, and resolving that no member should correspond with gentlemen in
the different states on the subject under discussion; till the trivial
proposition of recommending a few amendments was artfully ushered into the
convention of the Massachusetts. The questions that were then before that
honorable assembly were profound and important, they were of such magnitude
and extent, that the consequences may run parallel with the existence of the
country; and to see them waved and hastily terminated by a measure too absurd
to require a serious refutation, raises the honest indignation of every true
lover of his country. Nor are they less grieved that the ill policy and
arbitrary disposition of some of the sons of America, has thus precipitated to
the contemplation and discussion of questions that no one could rationally
suppose would have been agitated mong us, till time had blotted out the
principles on which the late revolution was grounded; or till the last traits
of the many political tracts, which defended the separation from Britain, and
the rights of men were consigned to (...) oblivion. After the severe conflicts
this country has suffered, it is presumed, that they are disposed to make every
reasonable sacrifice before the altar of peace. But when we contemplate the
nature of men, and consider them originally on an equal footing, subject to the
same feelings, stimulated by the same passions, and recollecting the struggles
they have recently made, for the security of their civil rights; it cannot be
expected that the inhabitants of the Massachusetts, can be easily lulled into a
fatal security, by the declamatory effusions of gentlemen, who, contrary to the
experience of all ages, would persuade them there is no danger to be
apprehended from vesting discretionary powers in the hands of man, which he
may, or may not abuse. The very suggestion, that we ought to trust to the
precarious hope of amendments and redress, after we have voluntarily fixed the
shackles on our own necks, should have awakened to a double degree of caution.
-- This people have not forgotten the artful insinuations of a former governor,
when pleading the unlimited authority of parliament before the legislature of
the Massachusetts; nor that his arguments were very similar to some lately
urged by gentlemen who boast of opposing his measures, " with halters about
their necks."

We were then told by him, in all the soft language of insinuation, that no
form of government of human construction can be perfect -- that we had nothing
to fear -- that we had no reason to complain -- that we had only to acquiesce
in their illegal claims, and to submit to the requisitions of parliament, and
doubtless the lenient hand of government would redress all grievances, and
remove the oppressions of the people: -- Yet we soon saw armies of mercenaries
encamped on our plains -- our commerce ruined -- our harbors blockaded -- and
our cities burnt. It may be replied, that this was in consequence of an
obstinate defense of our privileges; this may be true, and when the " ultima
ratio" is called to aid, the weakest must fall. But let the best informed
historian produce an instance, when bodies of men were entrusted with power,
and the proper checks relinquished, if they were ever found destitute of
ingenuity sufficient to furnish pretenses to abuse it. And the people at large
are already sensible, that the liberties which America has claimed, which
reason has justified, and which have been so gloriously defended by the sword
of the brave, are not about to fall before the tyranny of foreign conquest; it
is native usurpation that is shaking the foundations of peace, and spreading
the sable curtain of despotism over the United States. The banners of freedom
were erected in the wilds of America by our ancestors, while the wolf prowled
for his prey on the one hand, and more savage man on the other; they have been
since rescued from the invading hand of foreign power, by the valor and blood
of their posterity; and there was reason to hope they would continue for ages
to illumine a quarter of the globe, by nature kindly separated from the proud
monarchies of Europe, and the infernal darkness of Asiatic slavery.

And it is to be feared, we shall soon see this country rushing into the
extremes of confusion and violence, in consequence of the proceedings of a set
of gentlemen, who, disregarding the purposes of their appointment, have assumed
powers unauthorised by any commission, have unnecessarily rejected the
consederation of the United States, and annihilated the sovereignty and
independence of the individual governments. The causes which have inspired a
few men, assembled for very different purposes, with such a degree of temerity
as to break with a single stroke the union of America, and disseminate the
seeds of discord through the land, may be easily investigated, when we survey
the partisans of monarchy in the State Conventions, urging the adoption of a
mode of government that militates with the former professions and exertions of
this country, and with all ideas of republicanism, and the equal rights of men.

Passion, prejudice, and error are characteristics of human nature; and as it
cannot be accounted for on any principles of philosophy, religion, or good
policy, to these shades in the human character must be attributed the mad zeal
of some to precipitate to a blind adoption of the measures of the late federal
convention, without giving opportunity for better information to those who are
misled by influence or ignorance into erroneous opinions. Literary talents may
be prostituted, and the powers of genius debased to subserve the purposes of
ambition or avarice; but the feelings of the heart will dictate the language of
truth, and the simplicity of her accents will proclaim the infamy of those who
betray the rights of the people, under the specious and popular pretense of
justice, consolidation, and dignity.

It is presumed the great body of the people unite in sentiment with the writer
of these observations, who most devoutly prays, that public credit may rear her
declining head, and remunerative justice pervade the land; nor is there a
doubt, if a free government is continued, that time and industry will enable
both the public and private debtor to liquidate their arrearages in the most
equitable manner. They wish to see the Confederated States bound together by
the most indissoluble union, but without renouncing their several sovereignties
and independence, and becoming tributaries to a consolidated fabric of
aristocratic tyranny. They wish to see government established, and peaceably
holding the reins with honor, energy, and dignity; but they wish for no
federal city, whose " cloud cap'd towers" may screen the state culprit from the
hand of justice; while its exclusive jurisdiction may protect the riot of
armies encamped within its limits. They deprecate discord and civil
convulsions, but they are not yet generally prepared, with the ungrateful
Israelites, to ask a King, nor are their spirits sufficiently broken to yield
the best of their olive grounds to his servants, and to see their sons
appointed to run before his chariots. It has been observed, by a zealous
advocate for the new system, that most governments are the result of fraud or
violence, and this with a view to recommend its acceptance; but has not almost
every step toward its fabrication been fraudulent in the extreme? Did not the
prohibition, strictly enjoined by the general Convention, that no member should
make any communication to his constituents, or to gentlemen of consideration
and abilities in the other States, bear evident marks of fraudulent designs?
This circumstance is regretted in strong terms by Mr. Martin, a member from
Maryland, who acknowledges he had no idea that all the wisdom, integrity, and
virtue of the States was contained in that Convention, and that he wished to
have corresponded with gentlemen of eminent political characters abroad, and
give their sentiments due weight. He adds, so extremely solicitous were they,
that their proceedings should not transpire, that the members were prohibited
from taking copies of their resolutions, or extracts from the journals, without
express permission, by vote. And the hurry with which it has been urged to the
acceptance of the people, without giving time, by adjournments, for better
information and more unanimity, has a deceptive appearance; and if finally
driven to resistance, as the only alternative between that and servitude, till
in the confusion of discord, the reins should be seized by the violence of some
enterprising genius, that may sweep down the last barrier of liberty, it must
be added to the score of criminality with which the fraudulent usurpation at
Philadelphia may be chargeable. Heaven avert such a tremendous scene! and let
us still hope a more happy termination of the present ferment: -- may the
people be calm, and wait a legal redress; may the mad transport of some of our
infatuated capitals subside; and every influential character through the
States, make the most prudent exertions for a new general Convention, who may
vest adequate powers in Congress for all national purposes, without
annihilating the individual governments, and drawing blood from every pore by
taxes, impositions, and illegal restrictions. This step might again
re-establish the Union, restore tranquillity to the ruffled mind of the
inhabitants, and save America from distresses dreadful even in contemplation.
The great art of governing is to lay aside all prejudices and attachments to
particular opinions, classes, or individual characters; to consult the spirit
of the people; to give way to it; and, in so doing, to give it a turn capable
of inspiring those sentiments which may induce them to relish a change which an
alteration of circumstances may hereafter make necessary. The education of the
advocates for monarchy should have taught them, and their memory should have
suggested, that monarchy is a species of government fit only for a people too
much corrupted by luxury, avarice, and a passion for pleasure, to have any love
for their country, and whose vices the fear of punishment alone is able to
restrain; but by no means calculated for a nation that is poor, and at the same
time tenacious of their liberty -- animated with a disgust of tyranny -- and
inspired with the generous feelings of patriotism and liberty, and at the same
time, like the ancient Spartans, have been hardened by temperence and manly
exertions, and equally despising the fatigues of the field, and the fear of
enemies; -- and while they change their ground they should recollect, that
Aristocracy is still a more formidable foe to public virtue, and the prosperity
of a nation -- that under such a government her patriots become mercenaries --
her soldiers cowards, and the people (...). Though several State Conventions
have assented to, and ratified, yet the voice of the people appears at present
strong against the adoption of the Constitution. By the chicanery, intrigue,
and false coloring of those who plume themselves more on their education and
abilities, than their political, patriotic, or private virtues -- by the
imbecility of some, and the duplicity of others, a majority of the Convention
of Massachusetts have been flattered with the ideas of amendments when it will
be too late to complain -- While several very worthy characters, too timid for
their situation, magnified the hopeless alternative between the dissolution of
the bands of all government, and receiving the proffered system in toto, after
long endeavoring to reconcile it to their consciences, swallowed the
indigestible p^nacea, and, in a kind of sudden desparation, lent their
signature to the derelection of the honorable station they held in the Union,
and have broken over the solemn compact by which they were bound to support
their own excellent constitution, till the period of revision. Yet Virginia,
equally large and respectable, and who have done honor to themselves by their
vigourous exertions from the first dawn of independence, have not yet acted
upon the question; they have wisely taken time to consider, before they
introduce innovations of a most dangerous nature. Her inhabitants are brave,
her burgesses are free, and they have a Governor who dares to think for
himself, and to speak his opinion (without first pouring libations on the altar
of popularity) though it should militate with some of the most accomplished and
illustrious characters.

Maryland, who has no local interest to lead her to adopt, will doubtless
reject the system. I hope the same characters still live, and that the same
spirit which dictated to them a wise and cautious care against sudden
revolutions in government, and made them the last State that acceded to the
independence of America, will lead them to support what they so deliberately
claimed: Georgia, apprehensive of a war with the Savages, has acceded, in order
to insure protection. Pennsylvania has struggled through much in the same
manner as the Massachusetts, against the manly feelings and masterly reasonings
of a very respectable part of the Convention: They have adopted the system, and
seen some of its authors burnt in effigy -- their towns thrown into riot and
confusion, and the minds of the people agitated by apprehension and discord.

New Jersey and Delaware have united in the measure from the locality of their
situation, and the selfish motives which too generally govern mankind. The
Federal City and the seat of government will naturally attract the intercourse
of strangers, the youth of enterprise, and the wealth of the nation to the
central States.

Connecticut has pushed it through with the precipitation of her neighbor,
with few dissentient voices; but more from irritation and resentment to a
sister State, perhaps partiality to herself in her commercial regulations, than
from a comprehensive view of the system as a regard to the welfare of all. But
New York has motives that will undoubtedly lead her to a rejection, without
being afraid to appeal to the understanding of mankind to justify the grounds
of their refusal to adopt a Constitution, that even the framers dare not risque
to the hazard of revision, amendment, or reconsideration, last the whole
superstructure should be demolished by more skilful and discreet architects. I
know not what part the Caro^^nas will take; but I hope their determinations
will comport with the dignity and freedom of this country: their decisions will
have great weight in the scale. But equally important are the small States of
New Hampshire and Rhode Island: -- New York, the Carolinas, Virginia, Maryland,
and these two lesser States, may yet support the liberties of the continent. If
they refuse a ratification, or postpone their proceedings till the spirits of
the community have time to cool, there is little doubt but the wise measures of
another Federal Convention will be adopted, when the members would have the
advantage of viewing at large, through the medium of truth, the objections that
have been made from various quarters; such a measure might be attended with the
most salutary effects, and prevent the dread consequences of civil feuds. But
even if some of those large states should hastily accede, yet we have
frequently seen, in the story of revolution, relief spring from a quarter least
expected.

Though the virtues of a Cato could not save Rome, nor the abilities of a
Padilla defend the citizens of Castile from falling under the yoke of Charles,
yet a Tell once suddenly rose from a little obscure city, and boldly rescued
the liberties of his country. Every age has its Bruti and its Decii, as well as
its Caesar's and Sejani. The happiness of mankind depends much on the modes of
government and the virtues of the governors; and America may yet produce
characters who have genius and capacity sufficient to form the manners and
correct the morals of the people, and virtue enough to lead their country to
freedom. Since her dismemberment from the British empire, America has, in many
instances, resembled the conduct of a restless, vigorous, luxurious youth,
prematurely emancipated from the authority of a parent, but without the
experience necessary to direct him to act with dignity or discretion. Thus we
have seen her break the shackles of foreign dominion, and all the blessings of
peace restored on the most honorable terms. She acquired the liberty of
framing her own laws, choosing her own magistrates, and adopting manners and
modes of government the most favorable to the freedom and happiness of
society. But how little have we availed ourselves of these superior advantages:
The glorious fabric of liberty, successfully reared with so much labor and
assiduity, totters to the foundation, and may be blown away, as the bubble of
fancy, by the rude breath of military combinations, and the politicians of
yesterday.

It is true this country lately armed in opposition to regal despotism --
impoverished by the expenses of a long war, and unable immediately to fulfill
their public or private engagements, have appeared in some instances with a
boldness of spirit that seemed to set at defiance all authority, government, or
order, on the one hand, while on the other, there has been not only a secret
wish, but an open avowal of the necessity of drawing the reins of government
much too taught, not only for republicanism, but for a wise and limited
monarchy. But the character of this people is not averse to a degree of
subordination: the truth of this appears from the easy restoration of
tranquillity, after a dangerous insurrection in one of the states; this also
evinces the little necessity of a complete revolution of government throughout
the Union. But it is a republican principle, that the majority should rule; and
if a spirit of moderation could be cultivated on both sides, till the voice of
the people at large could be fairly heard, it should be held sacred: And if, on
such a scrutiny, the proposed constitution should appear repugnant to their
character and wishes -- if they, in the language of a late elegant pen, should
acknowledge that no confusion, in my mind, is more terrible to them, than the
stern disciplined regularity and vaunted police of arbitrary governments, where
every heart is depraved by fear, where mankind dare not assume their natural
characters, where the free spirit must crouch to the slave in office, where
genius must repress her effusions, or, like the Egyptian worshippers, offer
them in sacrifice to the calves in power, and where the human mind, always in
shackles, shrinks from every generous effort. Who would then have the
effrontery to say, it ought not to be thrown out with indignation, however some
respectable names have appeared to support it. But if after all, on a
dispassionate and fair discussion, the people generally give their voice for a
voluntary dereliction of their privileges, let every individual, who chooses
the active scenes of life, strive to support the peace and unanimity of his
country, though every other blessing may expire; and while the statesman is
plodding for power, and the courtier practicing the arts of dissimulation
without check; while the rapacious are growing rich by oppression, and fortune
throwing her gifts into the lap of fools, let the sublimer characters, the
philosophic lovers of freedom, who have wept over her exit, retire to the calm
shades of contemplation; there they may look down with pity on the
inconsistency of human nature, the revolutions of states, the rise of kingdoms,
and the fall of empires.

FINIS.

