

MEMOIRS OF A PEGTOP.

BY THE AUTHOR OF ADVENTURES OF A PINCUSHION.

Those Trifles that amuse in life,
Promote a higher end,
Since Reason in this lighter dress
With Pleasure we attend.
THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

PRINTED at WORCESTER, Massachusetts, BY ISAIAH THOMAS, And SOLD, Wholesale and
Retail, at his Bookstore.

MDCCLXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
THE different inclinations, employments, and amusements which engage the
attention of boys and girls, suggested to the Author of the following trifling
performance, that such a design might not be useless to fill up those intervals
of leisure, which may occur to the former from their more important studies.
With this view therefore, it is now submitted to the candor of public
inspection, trusting for a favorable reception, more to the utility of the
plan than the merit of its execution. The indulgent attention with which the
Adventures of a Pincushion has been honored, flattered the writer with an
opinion, that a work like the present might meet with equal success; as the aim
in both has been to promote the cause of virtue, and to blend the hints of
instruction with incidents of an amusing nature. The former work was designed
chiefly for the use of young Ladies, this is evidently calculated for young
Gentlemen: For although the laws of justice, probity and truth, are of general
obligation, yet it was imagined, that by consulting different amusements and
pursuits, and recommending the accomplishments separately, in which each sex
were more particularly concerned, the subjects would become more interesting to
those readers to whom they were immediately addressed, and have, in
consequence, a better chance for approbation.

MEMOIRS OF A PEGTOP.
AS I have heard that a Pincushion, a Dog, a Halfpenny, and a Bank Note have
each written a history of their adventures, I thought to myself one morning,
when I was left upon a writing desk, that it would be a convenient opportunity
for me to immitate such examples, and that the memoirs of a Pegtop might prove
equally entertaining with any of the beforementioned histories. So resolving to
recollect the various scenes I had passed through, I determined to present my
adventures likewise to the world, and share in the fame of those Authors, who
had bestowed their labors to immortalize a particular animal or toy, while the
rest of their species were consigned to neglect or oblivion.

I was completed, gentle reader, into my present form on a Friday morning, and
surveyed with great satisfaction by the workman who had accomplished me, as the
best top he had ever produced. In the afternoon of the same day he carried me,
with a number of my brethren, to a large toy shop in Boston; where I was
presented to the master; and after being examined, and having received great
commendation from the mechanic who brought me thither, was tossed, with very
little ceremony into a large drawer with the companions who had accompanied me,
and some whom I never before saw. As we were all new, and had not as yet seen
any thing beyond our present abode, and the bag in which we were conveyed to
it, we remained extremely silent and reserved; for you must allow me the
privilege of supposing, I can make known my sentiments to other inanimate
substances, though I have not the powers of articulation; as in effect if you
can imagine a top to be capable of writing and composition, there will remain
little difficulty in granting to it the license of speech; all these talents
being entirely inconsistent with truth and reality, but may be allowed to exist
by the force of imagination. Thus far having premised, as a necessary
preliminary to my history, I shall continue to inform you, that we had very
little conversation with each other. A few indeed wished to make their escape
from this place of confinement; and a poor top who had a piece broken off from
one of its sides, very pathetically lamented, that it had seen three drawers
full disposed of, while it had lain always neglected on this account, (...) had
been rolled out on the counter, and taken up as often as any purchaser
appeared; and although offered to sale for half the price of its companions,
had been tossed back with contempt, and was likely to remain in that situation
forever. I felt a great degree of sympathy for this unfortunate brother, and
was just going to express my pity for his condition, when the drawer which
contained us, was suddenly pulled out, and a very genteel lady selected some of
us to present to a little boy in scarlet clothes, who appeared to be about ten
years old. The youth, however, desired leave (...) choose for himself, telling
the lady, whom he called mamma, that she did not understand which would be a
good spinner: after handling almost all that he saw, he selected me as the best
of the whole collection. The lady paid the price which was asked for me, and I
was put into master's pocket, who walked off, not a little pleased with his
purchase.

When we reached the house he was going to which was a handsome building in
Summer Street, he took me out to show to another child in petticoats, who cried
sadly to possess me; but was told by his mamma, that I was his brother's
property, and that Henry must keep me, because, on Monday he was going to a
boarding school. Some company soon after coming into the apartment, the lady
desired her son to take care of me until a more convenient opportunity.

I soon found by their conversation, my new master had been brought up with
great tenderness by his mother, who was a widow; and was to go to school on the
day abovementioned for the first time. That a great number of toys had been
purchased to allure him into this measure, and to sooth his sorrows at the
thoughts of a separation.

As he had no opportunity to play with me the remainder of the evening. I lay
snug in his pocket until he went to bed: when he took me out, and expatiated to
a footman, who (...) to undress, on the pleasure he should (...) himself (...)
wished the next day had not been Sunday, as it would prevent his enjoyment.
This was certainly a fault, but he was very young and inconsiderate; and it is
to be hoped, that when he grew older he acquired more wisdom. The next day he
did not play with me indeed; but he took me out of his pocket a great number of
times to look at; and even while he was at church (which was highly blameable)
felt, to know if I was secure: A proof he was but too inattentive to his
employment. But greatly as I had been favored by his notice, the time was now
come when I was to experience his entire neglect.

His mother, who had cautiously avoided the mention of his departure, in the
evening pressed his hand with some emotion, and told him, she hoped that now he
was going to a distance from her instructions, he would not forget what she had
taken such pains to inculcate. I am afraid, my dear Henry, added she, wiping
her eyes, as if some dust had flown into them, though in reality to clear them
from those tears she could not restrain, I am sadly afraid, that when you have
left home, you will pay but little attention to those admonitions which you
have hitherto so much regarded. There may, amongst the number of boys you will
meet with at the large school to which you are going, be some, who will
wickedly laugh at your observance of those duties, which I flatter myself, you
will always continue to respect. But remember there are some obligations, my
dear boy, which nothing on earth can dispense with. Among these is a strict
regard to truth and sincerity. However your interest may lead you so the
commission of deceit, be assured you will reap no fruit from its indulgence;
but remorse in your own mind, and contempt from every one around you. If you
are guilty of a fault, let me persuade you, rather to submit to the punishment
which it deserves (and which may be often mitigated by an honest confession)
than to endeavor to conceal it by a lie. You have always hitherto been above
the commission of such an (...) meanness, and I only design to caution you now,
because you will be exposed to those temptations from which I have ever been
careful to secure you. I trust likewise that you will be assiduous to cultivate
a peaceable and kind disposition; for however fighting and revenge may be
wrongly accounted the marks of spirit, believe me, that true courage can never
consist (...) a willingness to offend, or a captious inclination to be
displeased. These maxims which you have hitherto been taught to reverence, will
perhaps be derided by your schoolfellows, as the weak advice of a mother, who
can know nothing of boyish contentions. But I trust, that you, my son, whose
affection for that mother is undoubted, will not so ill repay my solicitude as
to despise these instructions when you are at a distance from my embraces. Be
assured that I am your best friend, and would never desire you to do, or
forbear any thing, which will tend to make you beloved and respected. Henry,
who had been holding me in his hand without any design of playing, from the
time his mother began her discourse; but had merely been rubbing me about with
his fingers, now laid me hastily on the table, and throwing his arms round her,
sobbed forth an assent to her advice; assuring her, that he would never forget
her admonition, and that he loved her too well to disobey them: while the lady,
overcome by her son's emotion, joined her tears to his, and embraced him with
an equal ardour of tenderness and affection. As to your learning, said she,
after a pause, I am persuaded that emulation, and desire to equal, if not
exceed your companions, will inspire you with application; and I shall be much
disappointed to hear you are remiss in that article. I hope, that without
considering it as a task, your affection will dispose you to write frequently
to me, as you well know nothing can give me equal pleasure. The young gentleman
was here summoned to supper, and left me on the table, from which place I was
not removed until the next morning, when a servant hastily carried me down
stairs to my master, who was in a post chaise with two gentlemen, and who put
me with a melancholy air into his pocket. I shall not detain my readers with
any account of our journey, or the reception he met with from Mr. Verber, the
person who kept the school; but proceed to inform them, that Master Henry was
conducted by this gentleman into the play yard, where he left him; telling him
to amuse himself with his new companions. He wanted courage to advance, and had
rather have retired to give vent to the affliction which he felt at a
separation from his beloved mother (and the desertion of his uncles who had
accompanied him) that lady having declined that office from a fear of
increasing his distress. Some of the boys surveyed him in silence, and quietly
marched off: the older ones took no notice of a child so much their inferior,
and some of the young ones proclaimed the arrival of a new boy. with a noise to
which he was quite unaccustomed. Several however, whose diffidence was seldom
any restraint, accosted him with an enquiry after his name, family, and place
of abode; and concluded with asking, in the technical term of the school,
whether he had brought any prog. To this last question, as he really did not
understand it, Henry returned no answer until it was explained to mean, whether
he had any cakes, etc. to dispose of. He replied in the affirmative; but his
baggage was not in his possession, and therefore he could not satisfy their
demand. At last, however, he took me from, his pocket, and was going to play
with a greater degree of freedom than he had yet assumed, when, with some
surprise, he heard the boys address him and each other by their surname,
without any distinction of Master, or Sir, to which terms he had always been
accustomed. He made this observation the next day to one of his playfellows,
and was, in consequence of it, ridiculed with the appellation of Sir Master, an
epithet which was intended to convey peculiar derision.

Henry soon found that his skill in spinning a top, was greatly inferior to
his companions; and a great boy one day who liked my appearance, told him, he
would exchange tops with him, or offered to toss up for me, to which he
ignorantly consented. A halfpenny was produced, and Henry twice called out
heads, and it turning up the reverse, I was declared the property of Frank
Powel, to the great disappointment of my master, who did not like to resign me,
and who had not understood the intention of the proposal; but wanted much to
keep me in his possession. All the boys, however, being unanimous in the
opinion, that matters had been fairly conducted, I was reluctantly delivered by
poor Henry to a new owner. Powel was near fourteen, remarkably sprightly and
active, and esteemed by his companions one of the clevereth boys in the school.
He surveyed me with great pleasure, and ran to a number of his playmates, who
were playing at pegtop in a circle. My master soon entered me in the list, and
I was unfortunately so little acquainted with the game, that I did not
understand how to extricate myself. I met here with two of my brethren, who
informed me, that all our species who were introduced into this fatal
enclosure, would attempt to split us, and make their own escape: and I had a
melancholy proof of the truth of this intelligence in the very top who
communicated it, as it immediately experienced the fate abovementioned; and, I
saw with horror, one which belonged to my own master cleave it through the
middle. The peg, which was a valuable one, as it was of ten acorns, was
immediately declared to be his prize, and he took it up with an air of triumph
and satisfaction. It is impossible to describe the uneasiness I felt at this
spectacle, which was increased when another was thrown in, which approached so
near as twice to assault my sides with great violence; the third time, however,
effected my deliverance, and drove me beyond the limits which had been marked
for the contest. Powel snatched me up with an ardour of joy, and the bell
ringing for supper, he hastened in doors, and devoted the rest of the time
until he went to bed, to execute the task which Mr. Verber had allotted him.

The quick manner in which he dispatched, and the facility with which he
comprehended his learning, gained him the favor of his master, and excited the
envy of his school fellows. But the constant good nature with which he behaved
to them, inclined them at the same time to love and respect him. His invariable
honor, and uncorrupted honestly had been so often distinguished, that Mr.
Verber deputed to his charge, the payment of their weekly allowance to about
twenty boys. His commissions he had executed with universal credit and
satisfaction; until one day, when Jack Growler, who was of a most wicked and
malignant disposition, declared that he had been cheated, of sixpence, and that
he would appeal to his master for redress.

Powel. whose only fault was in general to be too passionate in the vindication
of his conduct, disdained on the present occasion to answer the charge, and
treated (...) with the most provoking contempt* ^elling him, that he was
welcome to make what complaints he pleased, since he neither scared (...) cared
for his accusation.

This behavior inflamed Jack to much, that though he soon after found the
money, which he had dropped when he received it, he was yet determined to be
revenged; and both going up to show their exercise to Mr. Verber at the same
time, (...) the sixpence in deb^te* and (...) Frank's pocket, and soon after
alleging, that when Powel had paid him nine pence, which was the sum due to
him, he had taken back the sixpence, and refused to restore it, declaring that
he had paid the whole.

Mr. Verber immediately summoned the accused party to defend himself, who very
warmly retorted upon Growler the charge of meanness, malice, and detraction,
and declared that he had delivered him the whole; protesting in the most solemn
manner, that he had never touched or seen it since. His companions joined in
this account, and confirmed it by saying, the money was as remarkable as I
described. Upon which their master ordered them both to be searched, which
afforded no small degree of pleasure to Growler, who first submitted to the
command, and escaped with greater honor than fell to the share of the innocent
Powel, in whose possession the sixpence was found. Amazed, confounded, and
provoked to the highest degree at this unexpected accident, my poor master
could not contain his indignation. He loudly repeated his protestations of
innocence, and laid the blame of treachery and deceit with great justice on his
accuser. But still appearances were so much in his disfavour, that Mr. Verber
sternly told him, his passions rising to such excess, was a confirmation of his
guilt; (...), that unless he could clear himself from the imputation, he must
expect the severest punishment, as his crime appeared of the most complicated
nature; comprehending a charge of deceit, lying, and fraud; crimes of such
magnitude, as he never did, nor ever would pardon. He then ordered him to
deliver up the money with which he had been entrusted, as he was not worthy the
office of his secretary, until his character was cleared, and his innocence
made manifest. He was likewise ordered to confinement in a small room, which
was called the Bastile, because it had but one window, which was a sky light;
and whoever was thought deserving this punishment, was banished from all the
rest of his companions, and secluded from every amusement. All the toys which
were found in his pocket were confiscated to Mr. Verber, who took me as part of
that number, and deposited me in a drawer in his own study; where I remained in
a state of quietness and inaction for some time. The companions of my secluded
state were a teatotum, which had been seized from a boy who spun it in school
time when he ought to have been writing; a bag of marbles that had forfeited
their liberty from their master's having rolled them on the seat of the pew at
church; together with an exceeding good ball, which had been thrown up against
the house, and made its way through the parlour window; and a drum battledore,
and curious shuttlecock, which the owner had used in school time, when he was
dispatched on another errand; and which had prolonged his stay until Mr. Verber
had discovered his employment. After some time this gentleman took me out, and
presented me once more to his favorite Powel, whose character had been fully
vindicated, as I soon learned; and who was now reinstated in his master's
favor, and restored to his former distinction. With a smile of complacence,
Mr. Verber gave me back to my master, and assured him, it was with the greatest
pleasure he congratulated him on the complete manifestation of his innocence:
at the same time, said he, I must blame you for that indiscreet warmth, with
which on all occasions, you are apt to defend yourself; and which will ever be
an injury to the best cause; and, I assure you, more inclined me to imagine you
to be guilty, than any other argument could have done. Be convinced, Powel,
that virtue can never be assisted, but may be often hurt by the indulgence of
passion. However, I trust that you will have so much good sense as to improve
from the consciousness of past failings; and I do insist upon your giving up
all thoughts of personal revenge against your accuser, whose punishment I shall
take into my own hands; and I hope that you are too generous to think of
bearing future ill will and enmity against him, since the best way to prove
your own superiority and merit, will be by a generous forgiveness; and I should
be extremely sorry to be obliged, through your violence to him, to involve you
in a similar condemnation. Powel expressed his satisfaction at his master's
approbation, and thanking him for the continuance of his confidence, with a low
bow left the room.

Jack Growler, as I afterward found, had discovered his treachery, by boasting
of (...) to one of his friends; and rejoicing in that plan of revenge, which
had involved the innocent Powel in disgrace. But being overheard by his master,
he had punished his wickedness by a severe flogging, and obliged him publicly
to ask pardon, and likewise for some weeks deprived him of his allowance, as
that had been the instrument of malevolence. And indeed I have often had
occasion to remark in the scenes in which I have been engaged, that however
vice may triumph for a time, it is generally discovered in the end, and meets
with its deserved retribution.

Soon after I was restored to my master, he went with four other boys (who had
likewise obtained leave so to do) to a neighboring village, in order to
purchase whipcord, gingerbread, marbles, and such other things as they wanted.
Just as they set out for this purpose, Powel came behind one of the party,
whose name was Tom Swallowell, tossed his handkerchief over his head, and asked
him how he should like to walk all the way blindfold? Why I should not mind it
a straw, returned he, and could find the path, I warrant you, without any
assistance. I will lay you sixpence to be spent in cheesecakes, which we will
buy of the old pie woman, said Powel, that you cannot go as far as the turnpike
without assistance, if your eyes are bound up. Done! replied Tom, and I will
bet you sixpence that I can! but you shall promise that you will not let me run
into danger without telling me of it neither by going in the way of horses, or
tumbling into a ditch. These articles agreed to, Swallowell stood still while
they bound a handkerchief close over his eyes, and he groped forward on his
way. Tom, you must know, was remarkably fond of eating, and spent all his money
in the purchase of tarts, fruit, and such kind of things; and at this time his
cash was reduced to one poor two pence only; so that he could not have
immediately discharged his wager had he lost it. As he was so fond of good
things, he would make trial of whatever came in his way, and taste all that was
offered him; by which means he was often disappointed, and sometimes made
extremely sick. He had pursued his course in various directions, to the great
entertainment of his companions; sometimes on one side of the road and
sometimes on the other; one minute feeling for a post which he thought he had
arrived at, against the rails of a house; at another groping for a tree in the
middle of the highway; and in short, appeared entirely ignorant at which part
of his journey he was arrived. When they had got near half way, mother Mixwell,
the pie woman, met them, and Tom was very earnest to taste some of the contents
of her basket. Grinmore determined to purchase a laugh on the occasion, and
offered to give him a custard if he could eat without his eyes. That Tom agreed
to be no impediment, and Will, with the assistance of the rest, prepared his
present, by mixing with it a good quantity of cow dung, which lay very
opportunely in the road, some cattle having just passed in their way to a
neighboring farm. Swallowell, whose greedy disposition always engaged him to
take a large mouthful, very eagerly received the custard; had soon occasion to
repent his haste, and without thinking of his wager (one of the conditions of
which was, that he should on no occasion remove the bandage) he hastily pulled
off the handkerchief, and began spitting and sputtering in a manner truly
diverting. Powel soon demanded his sixpence, as the forfeit of unbinding his
eyes; but Tom very angrily refused; declaring that he had been cheated, and
that the filthy custard had been given him as a concerted measure to make him
lose the wager. Powel denied the charge; but resented such an affront to his
honor: and Grinmore having diverted himself some time with the anger of both
parties, at length avowed that it was entirely his doing, and that Frank was
wholly innocent of such an insiduous design.

This, however, did not satisfy the displeased Swallowell, who still retained
the taste of the cow dung strongly in his mouth. He, therefore gave Powel a
blow on his head as he was stooping to buckle his shoe. This dastardly trick
was soon returned by Frank with some violence, who declared himself unwilling
to fight; but that he would not tamely stand still to be thrashed in such a
cowardly manner, by a boy to whom he was superior. After drubbing him some
time he walked on with his companions, and left battered Tom rolling in the
middle of the road, to taste a second time, the cow dung which had occasioned
the quarrel, and into the midst of which his antagonist had thrown him.

Just as he was rising, and trying to wipe off the dirt and dust which his
clothes were covered with, he was overtaken by Mr. Verber; who was taking a
walk with Powel's father, that gentleman having arrived a short time before on
a visit to his son.

The master enquired of Swallowell the cause of his being in that dirty and
wounded condition; of which being informed, he sent him home, and pursued his
walk in quest of his adversary. These particulars I learned from a friend of my
master's to whom Tom communicated them on his return.

Powel in the mean time arrived at the village, and having purchased the
necessaries he set out to procure, sat down on a style to eat some gingerbread;
after which he took me out, and was just going to try my skill in pegging*
halfpenny, when Mr. Verber and his father arrived. This unexpected sight
afforded him great pleasure, and he accompanied the latter to an inn in the
abovementioned village where he had bespoke a dinner, promising to return with
his son, and drink tea with Mr. Verber; that gentleman after mutual
compliments, leaving us to return home. I shall pass over the numberless
enquiries which my master made after every individual of his family, not
forgetting Bull the black coach horse, and his companion Smiler; together with
a great many questions after Rover the young pointer, and old Honesty the great
yard dog, all which his father answered very kindly, and much to his
satisfaction. But as the reader is not acquainted with Miss Polly his sister,
or Miss Patty his little cousin, and a thousand Jacks, Toms, and Harrys, about
whose welfare he appeared to be extremely solicitous, I shall omit these
particulars to give some account of the advice which his father afterward
thought proper to give him, previous to their separation. He began by enquiring
into the character of Swallowell; and Powel told him that he was a good natured
boy enough, but so greedy, that he was the jest of the whole school, every one
taking pleasure to cheat him into a trial of some disagreeable taste. And I
find you have this morning been of that number, replied his father, which I
should not be much inclined to blame, as such a hog like disposition is a just
subject of ridicule. But I am very sorry Frank, the warmth of your temper has
hurried you to add offense to raillery, and that you have concluded by
fighting, what you began in play. You well know, my dear boy, the frequent
caution I have given you upon this subject. I would by no means have you a
coward, or afraid of being hurt; but to be ever ready to strike, or return a
blow, is a proof of the violence of your passion, but no argument of the
justice of your cause. If the boy you engage with is younger than yourself, it
is the highest degree of meanness to take such an unfair advantage of his
inferiority; and if he is older, you stand but a bad chance. Nor do I think
such contests either prudent or honorable between equals in age and strength.
To forgive an injury, and overlook an affront, is a much higher instance of
true magnanimity, than to obtain the most complete conquest; and, in general,
those are most ready to fight, who have been the aggressors, and commenced the
dispute: but an ill action is not rendered more excusable, or an unfair
advantage reconciled to justice by the blows of passion, or the taunts of
provocation. Let me persuade you, therefore, to forbear this ungenerous use of
that strength, which was bestowed for nobler purposes; and endeavor to make
yourself beloved for your kindness, rather than feared for your resentment.
"But if it was known, replied my master, that a boy would not fight, he would
be subject to the insults of every urchin in the school, and might stand still,
like a cock on a Shrove Tuesday, to be thrown at by every coward who was not
afraid to be thrashed in return; and I do maintain it to be impossible to keep
up one's character without it." You are much mistaken, young man, returned his
father. I know what being at school is, and have been more years there than
yourself, and if you will petulantly take offense at every little
misunderstanding, and be soon subject to receive an affront, you may then find
the cultivation of peace impossible. But if on the contrary, you determine
never to strike the first blow, and never return it but in self defense, you
will find, that those occasions will but seldom happen; and there will other
instances arise, to prove your contempt of pain, and for the exertion of your
courage. In short, I think a boy who is afraid of being hurt, shows a very weak
mind; but one that delights to hurt others, proves that he has a very wicked
one.

Powel colored at the keenness of this reproof, and assured his father, that
he would endeavor for the future to avoid quarrelling as much as he could.
With this assurance the conversation was concluded, as they arrived at Mr.
Verber's gate. What passed in their interview with that gentleman, I cannot
tell; as on entering the house, I was borrowed of my master by Ben Playful, and
accompanied him into the yard. He was just going to engage with another, in
what might be called a race: which was, to try which of the two could first
chip a halfpenny from the middle, to the wall of the play ground. My
antagonist, either from a defect in its form, or from a want of skill in its
owner, in vain essayed to make the money advance; two or three times it just
removed it to a little distance, but more frequently failed of touching it at
all. While my new master (for such he afterward became) with the most expert
dexterity, guided me forwards to the spot he wished; and, at four spins the
halfpenny bounded forcibly against the wall. In a second and third game I met
with equal success, and Ben exulted in having borrowed the most excellent Top
he had ever met with. I was next engaged with one of my associates, whom I
remember to have seen in the very drawer which I mentioned in the beginning of
these memoirs, as the first place I was introduced to. We had not much time for
conversation, as we were each alternately pegged at an old brass button, with
an intention to determine its progress different ways. I sought to impel it to
the right, and my adversary with great assiduity, endeavored to force it to
the left hand; while the successful labors of each, impressed the looks of our
employers, with alternate joy or regret. At length, however, when the distance
had nearly thrown me into despair, Playful, who was an adept in every game,
with great judgment threw me upon the button, and struck it with such force,
that it flew so great a distance as to secure the expectation of victory, which
the next attempt put beyond a doubt. This matter being thus decided, he was
counting my acorns with great attention, when Powel joined him, and desired to
have me restored; but Playful offered to give him a bat and ball in exchange,
and begged he might keep me; to which Powel consenting, I became Ben Playful's
property. I was now eternally in use; for my new master thought but little of
his studies, though his neglect met with frequent disgrace.

In the morning he was continually in such a hurry, that he scarce knew which
of his lessons to attend; and it was no usual thing, to see him employ the
little time he had in searching for his books, which were generally thrown by
with careless indifference the moment school hours were over. It may be easily
imagined, that in this situation he made greater proficiency in his play than
his learning; and indeed he was surpassed in the one by many boys of ten,
though he was himself thirteen years old: While in every amusement he was
considered as the first leader, and the most expert of the whole society. I had
soon reason to repent the disposition of my new master, for although he
commended me extremely, yet he complained that I was too heavy, and proposed a
plan for my improvement, which I shudder to relate.

It was on a Saturday afternoon, that he began to put in execution his cruel
project. And, ah! gentle reader! will you not sympathize with my sufferings,
when I inform you, that this detestable scheme was no other than to extract my
peg, and insert it in another top? My apprehensions on hearing such a dreadful
intention were beyond description; and had I been capable of tears, to be sure
I should have wept most plentifully. This relief was however denied, and all I
could do, was patiently to expect my fate. Nor indeed would the prospect have
been at all improved, by the indulgence of those lamentations which are
peculiar to the human species. No one I suppose likes to be in pain; but it is
surely a great degree of weakness, and extremely unmanly, to cry and blubber
upon every occasion, as I have seen some boys do, while they at the same time
refuse the necessary means of relief, and endure that uneasiness of which they
are so impatient, because they want resolution to take some nauseous medicine
which is prescribed as a cure for their disorder. I felt with the most dreadful
apprehension, the string twisted tight round my peg, while several boys stood
by as unfeeling spectators of my agony. They soon retired to the distance of a
few paces to (...) themselves from the danger of a blow, while they justly
apprehended I might be the occasion of; nor indeed had this precaution been
omitted could I possibly avoid such an accident. My master likewise took care
to retreat behind a tree, while he swang me with all his force against its
sides; until at length overpowered by the blows, I felt myself divided, and my
head flew off with impetuosity to a considerable distance, and lighting on a
large bell glass (which the gardener had put down, while he opened a gate
through which he wanted to pass) broke it into a thousand pieces. The
consternation which this misfortune caused, for a time suspended the attention
of my tormentors, and Playful appeared to be extremely apprehensive of the
consequence. The gardener immediately seized on his shoulder, and declared he
should appear before his master, and answer for the accident, which would
otherwise be imputed to his negligence. To this Ben had great objections;
first, because he expected Mr. Verber to be displeased with the fracture of the
glass, and for a second reason, as he had omitted, for the sake of performing
the above operation, to learn a task which he had been ordered to get perfectly
before night. His resistance was however in vain; so putting my peg into his
waistcoat pocket, and the gardener taking my head in his left hand, while with
the right he dragged my master along, we proceeded to the great parlour, where
we found Mr. Verber, two ladies and a gentleman. The complaint was soon
preferred against my larger part, which very narrowly escaped from certain
destruction; Mr. Verber, at the conclusion of the account, tossing me, without
the least concern, into the fire; which, fortunately for me, happened to have a
large quantity of fresh coals just laid on; so that I did not immediately
suffer from that conflagration, of which I was terribly afraid. My case
however, seemed to be desperate; and although the reader may be anxious to hear
the fate of my master, he must remember, that it is the memoirs of a Pegtop he
is reading, and that therefore I consider myself as the principal object of his
attention. I shall consequently take the liberty of first informing him what
were my own reflections in this dismal situation; before I concern myself to
release Ben Playful, who is all this time standing in a state of frightful
suspense before his master, and listening to the accusation of the gardener.



As a top when divided, as I then was, is just as capable of thought, as when
in the most perfect condition, both parts having the power of imagination when
separated, if such is the will of fancy to bestow; because as none but human
beings can possess these properties which I now suppose, so it is equally easy
to imagine, that the peg and the head can both understand a language, and
reflect or fear, or rejoice and anticipate an event when apart, as if they were
united. In other words any thing which a man can possibly make must be
incapable of understanding. And therefore, when a story is written or told
where things inanimate are represented as talking or acting, it must be known
to be only supposition; as in reality wood cannot feel, nor ^ron think. So if
the Author of this volume chooses to make both parts of me comprehend at the
same time, you can just as well imagine that, as any thing else which you are
told of the like kind. To continue then the account of my adventures, I must
inform you, that I lay on the summit of a hill of coals in dreadful
apprehension that the blaze of two or three flames, which had made their way in
different parts around, would some one of them reach and consume me. The force
of my fall had sunk a kind of bed, as it were, in which I partly reposed; but
every moment as it increased my danger, added to the dread which I experienced;
and I had certainly been destroyed in a few moments, as I felt the coals which
supported me give way, the fire having burnt a hollow space underneath, and a
large cake falling in, I had unavoidably perished, but for the kind assistance
of the gentleman abovementioned; who going to stir the fire, took me out with
the tongs, saying, that it was a pity such a nice top should be lost, as there
were so many children in the house who would be glad to possess it.

From this instance a moral reflection or two is so obvious, that I cannot
persuade myself to omit them. As I was strongly impressed at the time with the
consideration, that however innocence may be exposed through the folly of
others to misfortune and danger, yet some method will be ever found for its
rescue and protection. And this should incline those who are in an uneasy
situation, to bear with patience the vexations which may occur; as they may be
well assured, if they act with propriety themselves, they will in the end be
enabled to surmount every difficulty, and rejoice in the comforts of a more
agreeable state. While those who neglect a proper attention to their necessary
business, from an inclination to present pleasure, will frequently meet with
some accident to obstruct their wishes, and punish them effectually for their
disobedience.

Ben Playful had at this time reason to be sensible of the truth of what is
here advanced, as his master declared, that after paying for the glass, which
he thought in justice he was obliged to do, he should have been no ways
displeased, had not his fondness for play constantly been the occasion of
neglecting his studies; he therefore kept him confined the rest of the evening,
until he had, in some degree, made amends for his former omission. When it was
bed time, and he had repeated the lesson which he had since been very diligent
to learn, he begged that I might be restored, promising to behave with more
caution for the future. I am sorry, Playful, replied Mr. Verber, that your
idleness does so frequently oblige me both to blame and to punish you. For my
own credit I should certainly be desirous to have you improve; but it is not of
equal consequence to any person, as it will in future be to yourself. To
acquire a competent knowledge of different languages, but especially of your
own and the latin tongue, is so essential to the character of a gentleman, that
without it, you will certainly (be your fortune ever so large) meet with
derision and contempt. A man who has the advantage of good sense, improved by a
liberal education, may with assiduity and diligence, raise himself in the
world, and be universally respected although destitute of riches; but the
greatest affluence cannot purchase esteem, when the possessor is illiterate or
ill bred. Bad spelling, or bad English are certain indications of meanness, and
will be always considered as such; and if you are not attentive to acquire a
thorough knowledge of your grammar, you will never at any age be able to speak
with propriety, or write with elegance. The farther you advance in learning,
the more agreeable you will find it; but by deferring your business for the
sake of playing a little longer, you multiply your troubles, and introduce such
confusion into the disposition of your time, as involves you in perpetual
difficulty. Young people are seldom to be persuaded, that the first part of
their days is the only season for the attainment of knowledge; but believe me,
Playful, if you neglect the present opportunity of improvement, you will have
reason to repent your folly to the latest hour of your life.

My master very seriously attended to the conclusion of this good advice; but
before he retired, again entreated to have me restored. I was accordingly
delivered to him with repeated charges to behave better, which be promised
faithfully to comply with.

The next morning he rose very early with an intention of keeping his word. But
unluckily in feeling for a handkerchief, my head rolled out at the same time
from his pocket. The temptation of completing his top before school time became
too great to be resisted, and going to some of his companions who had been of
his party the preceding day, a consultation was held to determine to what top
my peg should be joined; when after various experiments with several others, it
was decreed, that my divided parts should be again reunited; and Playful
hastily taking his hat, scraped off a little as it lay on his knee, and
applying it to the end of my peg, in hopes of making it spin lighter, thrust it
once more into its former position. As he had laid aside his books for the sake
of finnishing the improvement in his top, which the day before he had begun, he
found it impossible to withstand the inclination of at least trying how I
should spin; and finding me much lighter than before, he went on with another,
and another trial, intending each one should be the last, his conscience
suggested all the time, the danger to which he exposed himself, of offending
his master by the violation of his promise. He was twisting the string round as
quick as he could move his fingers, telling one of his school fellows, that he
actually would play no longer than I kept up, before he went in to his studies,
when the school bell rang, and obliged him to attend its dreaded but
unavoidable summons.

With a heavy heart he put me into his pocket, and going to a bench in the yard
where he had left it, took up his book, reading his lesson over as he slowly
crept along, until stopping a considerable time at a window in a passage which
led to the school, one of the ushers came softly behind, and giving him a
hearty stroke with a cane upon his shoulders, told him to quicken his pace, for
he was always lag last. The distress which he afterward experienced on account
of his neglect, was a deserved punishment, for his disobedience to his father's
advice, after a given promise to the contrary. But so it will ever happen,
where a fondness for amusement is suffered to prevail to such excess, as to
engross that portion of time, which ought to be more usefully employed.

Children are apt to think, that a few minutes added to their diversions can
make no difference; and minutes slip away insensibly into a quater of an hour;
their play becomes more interesting, the game is nearly concluded, or the kite
will soon be down, it is a pity to stop its flight! a race will shortly be
determined, or some such reason prevails, until the time is elapsed in which
their business should have been attended; and they are left to bewail in
sorrow, and regret the folly of their negligence. It would be more prudent,
therefore, at first to secure the essentials, and do what is necessary before
they begin to engage in those diversions, which, however laudable in their
proper season, may frequently ensnare them into error, and subject them to
future punishment.

Poor Playful! who would have had time sufficient to have finished his job, and
might have quietly enjoyed me when school time was over, by an indiscreet use
of his morning hours, was confined all the rest of the day, and had an
additional task given him to learn, upon pain of a severe flogging if it was
neglected. Whether he underwent any punishment, or what afterward became of
him, I cannot tell, as I slipped through a hole in his pocket as he was
standing at the yard gate after breakfast, whither he had been sent by the
latin usher to fetch one of his companions who was at play in the road. I did
not however remain long in a state of freedom, but was picked up by a baker's
boy, who brought bread to Mr. Verber's. He surveyed me with great joy, and we
soon mounted together into his cart, and jolted on to several other houses in
the neighborhood; at one of which my new master met with a companion, who
begged to ride to the next village, which was about half a mile distance. This
boy, who was near twelve years old, had been to carry a letter from a charity
school, to which he belonged, to one of the gentleman who was a benefactor to
it.

Charles Heedmore (which was the name my master called him by) was soon made
acquainted with the treasure which George Mealwell had found, and I was
produced in consequence; and both parties agreed to make trial of my merit on
the spot. Old Trot was accordingly stopped, and they adjourned to a piece of
ground which suited with their intention; from whence they could watch the
cart, and where they quietly played for some time. At length a drove of geese,
which were on their journey to Boston, in passing by alarmed honest Trot so
much, that he set off with uncommon agility, and galloped away with the cart
and its contents; a^^thing which was very unusual, as he seldom, without a
great deal of whipping, would move faster than at the rate of three miles an
hour. As it happened, however, the humor seized him, to make a hasty
conclusion to his journey; which he soon did, by oversetting the cart upon a
hillock of dirt, that had been raised on one side of the road. My master and
his companion, who perceived their horse set off with such uncommon speed,
immediately followed him with all the haste they could make, and were just time
enough to be witnesses (...) (though not to prevent) the overthrow, which they
most sadly deplored. To their great sorrow, they soon found that one of the
shafts was broken in two, and the top of the cart had received considerable
damage; while poor Trot lay floundering and kicking, having entangled himself
in the harness. They in vain endeavored to set him free, and were so
terrified, especially George Mealwell, with the apprehension of returning to
his master, that he was incapable of using the proper methods of procuring him
liberty; at length however, with the assistance of a countryman who was coming
from a potatoe field, the horse was extricated, and the cart pronounced
incapable of proceeding. The point was now to be determined, whether they
should go home with the horse, and inform his master of the accident, or first
endeavor to get a cartwright who lived in the village, to come and inspect the
damage, and try to repair it. But to this last proposal, George very justly
objected, that if the man would consent to come, and even if he should be so
fortunate as to accomplish their wishes, the time of their stay would certainly
betray them; and if that could be managed, he had not money to satisfy the
charge which it would necessarily occasion. The only alternative then was, to
take home honest Trot, on whom they both bestowed many angry invectives, and to
tell the best account they could of the accident to Mr. Bakeall, his owner.
George, who was in general a tolerable good boy, felt on this occasion his
fears prove too great for his honor; and proposed to his companion, to inform
his master, that he had never left the cart but upon account of his business,
and that the appearance of a man suddenly starting out of a hedge, had
frightened the horse, who had ran away with him, and nearly killed him by the
overset of the cart, which all his endeavors could not prevent; adding, that
he would contrive to get a bruise on his shoulder, and a scratch on the face,
to prove the truth of his assertion, and which would incline his master to pity
his sufferings and mitigate his anger. For to say that Trot had been frightened
at a drove of geese, would appear highly improbable, and subject the reality of
his tale to be doubted.

Heedmore represented to his friend, that to speak the truth on all occasions,
was, in his opinion, the safest way; as he would certainly live in continual
dread of detection, and if that happened, incur a greater degree of punishment,
and expose himself to unavoidable contempt; that the word of a liar is at all
times liable to suspicion, and that it was to add wickedness to folly, to
pursue the scheme he had mentioned. He therefore concluded with a concurrence
with the old maxim, that come what might, in his mind, " honesty would be the
best policy." George agreed to the force of his arguments in general, but
opposed in this particular instance, the dread he was in of his master's
displeasure. That as to any discovery, he thought it utterly impossible, as no
one was witness to the accident, or could confront him with a falsehood. That
he had as great a dislike to lying, as Heedmore, but really he did not relish
the thoughts of thrashing, which a confession of the truth would certainly
bring him, and in short, he was resolved to tell the story according to the
above plan.

Charles repeated his reasons to dissuade him from so wrong a determination,
and enforced them by saying, if he was asked any questions about the affair, he
would certainly declare the truth; which must involve Mealwell in disgrace, and
reveal the deceit. George, in consequence of this speech, grew extremely angry,
and called his opponent a mean spirited, ill natured, treacherous fellow;
declared he should scorn to betray a friend, and incur the odious character of
a mischief making tell tale. That if he did use him so basely, he would fight
with him wherever he met him, and never speak or play with him again. To these
threats Charles replied, that he was extreme sorry to perceive he was so much
displeased, but he did not think he had behaved amiss, or given any just cause
of offense; and, continued he, I cannot agree to lie for you, though I would do
every thing to serve you. My father, George, said he, though he is but a poor
shoemaker, and has, as you know, a large family, yet has been very kind to us,
and taken great pains to teach us as much as he can; and has got me into the
charity school, because he says it is a fine thing to be able to read and
write: And my eldest brother, who is two years older than I am, was taken a
great while ago, into farmer Wood's family, who would have provided for him,
and did find him in clothes; and gave him several presents. But Jack, like a
simpleton, one day when he was sent with a letter to the post office, forgot to
carry it, and afterward being afraid his master would be angry, said he had
delivered it, and threw it into the fire, to prevent being discovered. While it
was burning, he was called away, and Mr. Wood found a piece which had dropped
on the hearth, and which he produced to Jack, and scolded him heartily for
telling such a falsity. Some time after that, he was sent to the next market
town, to fetch a parcel which was to be left there from London; He staid very
late to see a puppet show, and when he came home, said, he had lost his way
(the night being very soggy) and that had detained him so long; adding a story
of his own invention of the places he had wandered to. In short, his lies were
discovered, and Mr. Wood sent him home, declaring he would have nothing further
to do with so naughty a boy: And he has never since got into place, no one
being willing to take him with such a character. This example, which I would
not have mentioned, but to persuade you how wicked and foolish it is to be
guilty of such a crime, may be a warning to you, to avoid falling into such a
state as poor Jack has done; who has in vain tried to regain his lost name. But
do as you will, I am determined to speak the truth, if I suffer for it at
present; since I never did otherwise but once, and then I was so unhappy, that
I resolved never to do the like again. For after all, George, if we are not
found out, yet God sees and knows whether we speak truth or not; and I do
always think of a chapter of the Acts, which I had a good while ago for my
lesson at school, where a man and his wife dropped down dead for telling a lie:
And I remember my master told Tom Hide, that though he might not die about it,
he would certainly be punished, both in this world and the next. I am sure,
said George, I shall be punished now with a vengeance, if I speak the truth:
But I am not such a liar as Hide neither, so if you will promise not to betray
me unless you are asked, and not to tell any body you was with me, why I will
do as I told you, and go you home now, and leave me to come presently, if your
conscience is not too squeamish for that. Heedmore endeavored to dissuade his
friend once more, from his purpose; but finding his arguments were ineffectual,
left him with regret. My new master for some time employed himself in thumping
his shoulder against a mile stone, with an intent to bruise it as he had
projected, but having a great objection to every kind of pain, his knocks were
so gentle, as to make but little impression. He afterward attempted to scratch
his face, first with his nails, which he wanted resolution to use effectually,
and afterward with a piece of bramble which he tore out of a hedge, and which
succeeded better than he wished, as a thorn got into his eye, and occasioned
the most violent agony: A just reward for the wickedness of his intention, in
so wilfully resolving to deceive his master. His endeavors to extract it,
proving quite ineffectual, he stood screaming with the pain for some time, and
at last hurried home, leaving Trot to graze along the side of the road, which
he did very quietly.

As soon as he reached Mr. Bakeall's, he went into the kitchen, where the whole
family were sitting down to dinner on a shoulder of mutton and potatoes, which
came smoking from the oven as he entered. George told a pitiful, but false
tale of the accident which had hurt his eye, and the situation in which he had
left the cart, declaring he could not see to find old Trot; but imagined he was
at no great distance from the cart. His master, mistress, their daughter, and
the man who assisted in the baking, all by turns endeavored to extract the
thorn: But he kept his eye close shut, by which mean it worked its way still
farther, and made the misfortune more dangerous. The anguish growing almost
insupportable, his master took him to a Mr. Keen, a surgeon in the village, who
declared the case to be a very bad one, and though he got it out at last, it
was with the greatest degree of difficulty.

He then enquired by what means it had happened, and Mr. Bakeall gave the
account which he had received from George, adding, that his man was gone to see
what was become of the horse and cart. At the conclusion of the history, Mr.
Keen hoped there was no lie in the case, as he saw Mealwell at play with
another boy at pegtop; and the horse and cart standing without a driver in the
road, as he came from visiting a patient. He said likewise, that he knew the
other boy by sight, and believed it to be Charles Heedmore, the shoemaker's son.

George, who was now in a terrible fright, yet was unwilling to confess that he
had told an untruth; so to prove the veracity of his former assertion, was
obliged to support it by repeated lies. Thus does the commission of one error
lead to numberless crimes; and his first fault in leaving his business to
attend unseasonably to his play, was the occasion of such a train of wickedness
and guilt.

Mr. Bakeall, who before the present event, had never any reason to suspect the
veracity of his apprentice, was strongly inclined to give credit to the history
he had related; yet, at the same time, thought it necessary to discover the
truth, that the success of a lie, if it proved to be one, might not encourage
him to any future deceit. He accordingly first searched his pocket, and finding
me there, was rather staggered in his good opinion of Mealwell, as he knew he
had not a top in his possession in the morning, having heard him at breakfast
wish he could afford to purchase one. Taking me, therefore, in his hand, he
left George in charge of Mr. Keen, and proceeded to Heedmore's father, in hopes
of learning further about the affair. Having told his business, the old man
desired him to walk into a little room behind his shop, and he would as soon as
his son came home, whom he every moment expected, make the enquiries he wished,
and that the door being left open between, he might be ear witness to his
replies. This proposal being assented to, Mr. Bakeall seated himself in
readiness, and Charles very soon entered the shop. His father immediately
enquired what had occasioned his not being at home at dinner? To which question
he at first return no answer; but upon its being repeated, he honestly said, he
did not like to tell, because another person was concerned with him on the
occasion of his stay; however, said he, I will acknowledge thus far, that I
foolishly loitered away my time, for the sake of a game with the best Pegtop I
ever saw. And was you at school as soon as you ought to have been? said his
father. Why I cannot say that I was, replied he: and my master was extremely
angry, and would know the cause; and he blamed me very much for my idleness;
but in consideration of having told the truth, he did not punish me; which, he
said, he should otherwise have done. But I am afraid, father, when you know
what has been the consequence of my folly, you will be less merciful. Why pray
what has? said Mr. Heedmore, in a voice sufficiently stern to have intimidated
a boy of less honor than honest Charles. Do not be angry, replied the poor
fellow in a tremulous accent! Do not be angry, and you shall know all! The pair
of shoes which I was to have delivered to farmer Trudgman, I lost while I was
at play. I laid them down on the mile stone, and until I came home, never once
thought of them again; and though I then ran back to them place as fast as I
could, they were gone. You lost the shoes? returned his father. Why child, you
never had them! I gave them to Jack to carry home; and you cannot have had
them, for you have never been in the house since. Here was a subterfuge, by
which Charles, had he been so inclined, might for the present have saved
himself, and laid the blame on his brother. But disdaining such an ungenerous
and base artifice, he added, that he was very sorry for his fault, but he had
lost the shoes; for Jack had met him when he first came from school, and
desired him as he was going with the circular letters, to carry them with him.
His father then insisted upon knowing with whom he had been at play, as
probably they had been stolen by his companion. Charles assured him that could
not be the case; and afterwa^s in vindication of his friend's character,
declared it was George Mealwell; but entreated his father on no account to
reveal what he had told him to any one. What is your reason, Charles, rejoined
Mr. Heedmore, for requiring silence? was there any great crime in playing with
you at pegtop? To be sure you was wasting the time you should have been getting
ready for school; but why is Mealwell so much afraid of its being known? Ah!
Father, replied Charles, shaking his head, I wish he may have no more to answer
for than I have; but in confidence I will tell you, that when we parted, he was
determined to tell his master such a shocking lie about the cart, which the one
eyed horse ran away with and broke, and to hurt his own eyes, and bruise his
shoulder, to prove the truth of his story, that it has quite altered my opinion
of him; though I believe him to be strictly honest, and that he would not cheat
any body for the world. Those who are so wicked as to lie, returned Mr.
Heedmore, will be guilty (at least are to be suspected) of any crime, since to
forfeit your word, is to break every tie of honor; it is like the hemp with
which we sew shoes, Charles; if that fails, they will come in pieces, you know,
and be rotten, and good for nothing. So if people say one thing, and mean
another, there is no knowing when you may trust their tale. But pray, how came
the beast to set off? he looks staid and steady enough! I should never suspect
him of a prancing freak! Why, father, replied Charles, we were busy on the
ground upon the left hand side of the road, and George had just taken up the
Top in a wooden spoon, which he had in his pocket, and as ill luck would have
it, a noisy drove of cackling geese came waddling along, with two men with
those abominable long sticks and a rag at the end; so that altogether
frightened Trot, and he took to his heels before we were aware, and though we
directly made after him, yet away he galloped with the cart, until he came
close to farmer Ploughwell's great dunghill and on a hillock of dirt, tumbled
himself down, and overset bread and every thing else. The quartern loaves, and
threepenny, and pecks, and two bags of flour, all rolled into the middle of the
road; but as it is a dry day, that was no great harm; the worst matter of all
was, the cart was broken, and the harness much damaged, and so for fear his
master should be angry, as he certainly would be, Mealwell was resolved to lie,
and get off if he can that way. And did you endeavor (enquired his father) to
persuade him not to do so? (...) know that was his mind, and leave (...) follow
it, was not much like an honest fellow. Yes, that I did, answered Charles! but
he would have his own way, and desired me to march home, and so I did at last
when I found all I could say was to no purpose. Well, you are a good boy, said
Mr. Heedmore, but I hardly think it right to know he is telling such a
falsehood, without letting it be known; and I think his master ought to be
acquainted with his tricks. He then concluded with lamenting the loss his son's
carelessness had occasioned; but said, he would convince him that he was not
less merciful than his school master, by pardoning his fault for the sake of
encouragement to his veracity; assuring him, that truth would be at all times
its own reward. After receiving his father's acquital, Charles walked away with
the cheerful appearance of conscious innocence, and Mr. Bakeall came forward to
take his leave. He soon returned to the terrified Mealwell, who in the mean
time (...) ^^ffered all the uneasiness of a guilty (...) being afraid of
detection, punishment and contempt. His master informed Mr. Keen of the success
of his visit, and concluded with high commendations of Charles Heedmore; and
after which, turning to George, he said very calmly, you had good reason to
think I should have been angry at an accident which has happened entirely from
your idleness and folly. But you shall find, my lad, that your trimming shall
be pretty handsomely increased, for the lies you have told about it! So saying,
he took him by the shoulder, and turned him toward the door.

Mr. Keen hoped his eye would soon be well, and said, he was sorry he had
behaved in so wicked a manner as to deserve chastisement; but hoped, it would
be a warning to him in future, that in doing a wrong action no one can be sure
of secrecy; and that to be faithful to truth upon all occasions, is the only
way to be secure from evil. He then took his leave, and his visitors ^^parted.
George trudged silently on with a heavy heart behind his master, who had
misunderstood Mr. Keen's expression abovementioned, of a warning, and called
out to him to quicken his pace, adding, yes, yes, as the surgeon says, I will
give you a warming with a vengeance! you shall not be cold again in a hurry, I
will warrant you! Come along you lying dog! I will try whether you can feel my
horse whip as soon as you get home; and as for your eye, if you had quite lost
it, it would have been but what you deserved. This threat it may be well
imagined did not make George more willing to proceed. So taking hold of his
arm, Mr. Bakeall, who was near the house, dragged him on, and first examined
the bruise on his shoulder, which was scarcely visible, but which he promised
his strokes should much increase; and then leading him to a tree in a little
yard, where the man was entering with old Trot and the shattered cart, he
snatched his whip in a hurry, and tying him up with some rope, which had
fastened the broken harness, thrashed him so violently, that the blood followed
his strokes before he concluded; which was sufficiently visible, as he had
taken off his clothes before he began. Thus ended an affair of which I had been
the innocent occasion, and which George imagined he in some measure revenged a
short time after, when finding me on the feat of an old easy chair, where Mr.
Bakeall had thrown me, he took me up, and abused me with as much warmth as if I
had been able to defend myself; concluding with a declaration, that I should
never again get him a thrashing; and that but for me, he had been in a whole
skin. So saying, he whirled me with great violence into the high road, where I
narrowly escaped falling on a sharp stone, which must inevitably have split and
rendered me useless; but fortunately I rolled on the edge of an opposite path
way where I was soon after picked up, for the first time in my life, by a young
lady, who was walking home with her maid from a boarding school, at some little
distance. While I lay in this situation a reflection naturally arose, on the
anger which children often express against inanimate things; which by making a
wrong use of, have proved, as in the present case, the mean of subjecting them
to disgrace. Had George when he found me at Mr. Verber's, been content to put
me in his pocket until his business was finished, he might have played without
fear or blame. But by doing what his conscience told him was improper, he
carlessly left the cart to the care of old Trot, who finding himself free from
the restraint of a driver, occasioned the mischief, which Mealwell's care ought
to have prevented. But was the poor Pegtop to blame in all this? Did the Pegtop
make him tell a lie, and forfeit his honor and reputation? Was that all
accountable for his perseverence in an untruth? or, for the thorn which he put
into his eye? In short, I think it will be evident to every reader, that the
fault was all his own; and that the poor Pegtop could not justly be charged
with any share of his guilt. But to return to my new mistress, who was a girl
about ten years old, and who appeared greatly pleased with what she had found.
Taking me up, and showing me to the servant who attended her, said with much
glee, "See, Betty, what I have got! I shall now have a Top as well as my
brothers, who will not lend me theirs, because they say it is not a girl's play
thing." She then hopped along, first on one leg, and then on the other, until
we came to a handsome house, where two genteel looking boys were sitting on a
chain, which enclosed a round plot of glass before it. Your servant, Miss! said
the eldest; what, are you just returned from school? and how do all the young
ladies do? And what, interrupted the other, have you got in your hand, Sophy?
Whose Top is that? I dare say it is the one I bought last Tuesday at the fair,
and you must not have it, I assure you. It is my own, Sir? replied my mistress
with an air of triumph, and I do not want yours again, I promise you! So
saying, she was walking in doors; but they both in an instant pursued her, and
forced away the top, to examine whether it was the one they suspected. Just at
this instant a gentleman, whom I afterward found was their father, came up,
and taking hold of the youngest, "Pray, young man," said he, "what are you
about? Is this behaving properly to your sister? I am quite ashamed of you!
what is the matter, Sophy?" The young lady was going to speak, but Frederick,
the youngest, without waiting for her answer, called out to Mr. Jackson, She
has got one of our tops, Sir, and we are going to take it from her, that is
all. It is not theirs, I assure you, Sir, replied my mistress: I found it just
now in my way from school, and indeed it does not belong to them. The gentleman
accordingly took me from his son, and presenting me again to Miss Jackson, she
ran into the house, and asked a servant whom she met in the hall, for a piece
of cord; which she soon twisted round me, and began to make trial of my
abilities. I soon found she was ignorant of the art, as she slung me down so
awkwardly, that I only rolled about, without being at all able to spin.

Her brothers, who were not long before they paid her a visit were much
diverted at her unsuccessful attempt, and begged they might be permitted to try
whether the fault was in me or their sister; to which she consented, upon their
promise of returning me immediately. Edward, who was the eldest, kept me up for
near a minute; and I spun so well, as to sleep more soundly than I had ever
done before. In short, he declared he would give her any thing to possess me,
and delivered me to Frederick with the highest commendations; adding, it was a
shame that any girl in the world should be suffered to keep such a top. His
brother afforded me as much satisfaction; for a Pegtop of any emulation is as
happy as its owner, when it is spun by a skilful hand, and when it is so
fortunate as to excel, "will share with its Lord the pleasure and the pride" of
those praises which are bestowed on its merit. I was soon returned to Sophia,
who seemed to be much mortified that she could not make me spin; and rejoiced
exceedingly, when I once staggered round for two or three times, though I
immediately after fell down, to the entertainment of her brothers, who offered
her any thing in their possession in exchange for me. The following verses
however, at last effected, what no other arguments had the power to accomplish,
and she gave me to master Edward for a landscape, which his father had the sa^e
morning presented him with.



To Miss JACKSON.
WHY, Sophy! you had better the trial give over,
As you still disappointment are like to deplore;
Some other amusement attempt to pursue,
For a top, my dear girl, is ill chosen for you.
Go take up your doll, to your baby house go,
And there your attention much better bestow!
Leave the Pegtop behind, and behave like a miss,
And I Will give you this picture, these nuts and a kiss,
Like the dog in the manger, our sport you destroy,
Nor receive for yourself either pleasure or joy;
From a motive so cross, if you offer to stay,
I declare I will toss all your gewgaws away.
Should I sit on a stool with a needle and thread,
And dress up Miss Dolly and put her to bed?
Or do you not think 'twou'd be pleasant to see,
Master Neddy turned fribble, and pouring out tea?
And a boy just as well, sure, might trundle a mop,
As for you to attempt to be spinning a top;
I never yet saw a lady at cricket engage,
Although you just now flounc'd away in a rage;
When you took up my bat with so awkward an air,
And I told you such toys were not made for the fair:
Then let me persuade you the Top to resign,
Since 'twill spin in my fingers much better than thine.
Just as the exchange was agreed upon, Mr. Jackson entered; the above verses
laying upon the table, he took them up and read them; after which, addressing
himself to his eldest son, I see, Edward, said he, by the hand writing, that
this is your composition, and perhaps the poetry, when your age is considered,
may not be thought much amiss. But I am very sorry to say, the sentiments which
they contain are deficient in a very essential point, and are so much wanting
in good nature, that whatever credit may be derided to your head, they will
certainly do no honor to your heart.

A talent for ridicule is a very dangerous accomplishment, as it is seldom
exerted under the influence of good humor; at least the feelings of those
against whom it is levelled are seldom considered; and he deserves but little
of our esteem, who, to prove his wit, would say, or write any thing, which
might give uneasiness to a friend. In the present instance, though your satire
may be justly pointed against such girls as forget the delicacy of their sex,
and behave improperly; yet, to address them to a sister, who is not guilty of
this fault, and who was by no means to blame in keeping what was her own
property, is, as I before said, no proof of your affection or kindness. To
exult with a pretended superiority over the girls, as you are apt with an air
of insult to express yourself, and to sneer at their amusements, while you deny
them to share in yours is a proof of the weakness of your understanding; but
will never exalt you in the opinion of men of sense.

A coxcomb, Edward, is a despicable character; and those who are most proud of
their fancied advantages, will be commonly found to have the least real merit.
Never, therefore, pretend to boast of your learning, or despise women in
general, or your sister in particular, under the idea that you are so much
wiser, because you understand a little Latin and Greek, since such an
affectation of superiority is equally despicable in men or boys.

To disregard the learned languages is a proof of an illiterate and uninformed
mind, which from not knowing, is unacquainted with their necessity and use; but
to imagine, that wisdom is centered in the ancients, and that a knowledge of
Homer, Virgil, Terence, or any other author you may read, will constitute you a
respectable character, is a mistake which can only arise from ignorance.

The true use of learning is to improve the understanding, and enlarge our
ideas; that is, to show the reader in the example of former times, what virtues
made a man useful to society, and acquired him reputation; and what vices
rendered him hateful to others, and unhappy in himself. If therefore you
neglect to make this use of your studies, you have but little reason to be
proud of the advantage of a good education, since learning is to little
purpose, if it will not teach you to govern your temper, and to behave with
honor and justice upon all occasions. As to the verses which have occasioned
me to speak to you upon this subject, they would have been more justifiable,
had the top been taken from you by Sophia. In which case the allusion to the
dog in the fable would have been more perfect and your threat of throwing away
her gewgaws, as you call them, have been made with greater justice. But as the
toy, be it ever so improper for a girl, was yet her own property, and she did
not refuse to lend, though she wished not to part with it entirely, she
certainly was (...) from your accusation of being cross, and deserved not to
meet with that disdain with which she is treated in the conclusion. I do not
wish to discourage any attempt which your genius may incline you to make of
writing either in verse or prose, but I would advise you to let your subject be
better chosen, and never to support your cause by ridicule, when you cannot
maintain it with reason and truth. I believe, continued he, I have got a copy
of verses that your friend Charles Goodwin sent to his sister, in answer to a
letter, in which she expressed herself afraid that her correspondence might be
troublesome, and that he would disdain to take notice of a sister, who could
not boast of equal knowledge with himself. The poetical merit of the lines is
small, but the tenderness they manifest, and the grateful remembrance of her
past attention which they imply, make them worthy of your imitation.

To Miss G --
THE letters, my Harriot, you deign for to send,
With joy I peruse, and with pleasure attend;
Delighted the day to receive them expect,
And till they arrive each amusement neglect.
Then say, from what cause are you ever inclined,
To think that your image is banished my mind;
Why imagine, that as I in learning improve,
My heart must grow cool to the sister I love?
Those examples which history points to my view,
I think, my dear girl, will be models for you:
My Harriot (with joy to myself I exclaim)
My Harriot will shine in the annals of fame;
Like Penelope, faithful, industrious and kind,
Be polite in her manners, with sense most refined;
Or like Hector's fair consort her virtues shall rise,
For who but must gentle Andromache prize!
Thus when of past times I the records peruse,
Whatever be the subject, or author I choose;
If more masculine virtues with pleasure I trace,
And think naught shall the sacred impression deface;
Each action heroic my breast does inspire,
And emulous kindles the (...) desire,
To reach that perfection, that recompense find,
Which is ever the meed of a generous mind.
Often I think on the days which in infancy fled,
When thy lap my loved sister, has pillow'd my head:
When soft in thy arms I have sunk to repose,
And soothed by thy cares, have forgotten my woes,
For do thou not, Harriot, remember the day,
When my favorite, Towser, was stolen away;
How I ran over the lawn and the grove to pursue,
A dog which had suddenly started in view?
How his footsteps my hopes still determined to trace,
Though my feet were fatigued, and grew tired of the chase,
At length when he turned, then my joy was complete,
I expected poor Towser once more at my feet.
But, alas! 'twas a turnspit, my Towser, to thee*
For thy shaggy likeness I never shall see.
Then returning in sorrow I told my sad tale,
And thou did with me for my Towser bewail;
The kindest compassion thy words did bespeak,
Thy soft hand with pity thou stroak'd over my cheek;
A thousand such scenes now occur to my mind,
Which prove to thy Charles thou have ever been kind:
Then think not he ceases thy love to respect,
Or will treat thy attention with churlish neglect!
He remembers the minutes, and reckons them over,
Which again to his sister her Charles shall restore.
Then Leicester! thy shades he will quit with delight,
For a time to enjoy the affectionate fight,
Of those friends, who though distant, still dwell in his heart,
Who are near his regard, though in person apart.
This performance, continued Mr. Jackson, when he had read to them the
abovementioned verses, I do not recommend as a model in any respect, except in
the good natured intention with which it is manifestly written; but come, added
he, I see the coach is ready, and your mother is waiting to accompany us to
Boston. So saying, he went out of the room, and Edward took me up, and putting
me into his pocket, accompanied his father and brother to the carriage.

Nothing worth recording occured until we reached the metropolis, when a cart
laden with wine stood opposite to a tavern, and hindered our progress for some
time; as on account of a fire which had lately happened, the ruins were
enclosed, and the street was too narrow to make room for two carriages abreast.
The young gentlemen showed their impatience at this delay, by kneeling upon the
seat to look through the front glass; then putting their heads out of the side
window; and Edward taking me out to beguile the time, expressed his uneasiness
that the coachman would not proceed. At length an affair, which happened on the
path way close to the place where they were detained, engrossed their
attention, and furnished them with a subject of conversation for the remainder
of the day. An old woman in a red cloak and tattered gown, was selling oranges,
apples, and chestnuts on a wheelbarrow; some of which were roasting in a little
fire pot contrived for the purpose; when two genteel looking boys came up and
demanded the price of some golden pippins. The woman, as she was going to
answer them, discovered that her child, who had been sitting by her on a little
wooden stool, had wandered to some distance, and was going to cross the street
by itself; to prevent which, she ran immediately to overtake it, and in the
mean time, one of the mischievous boys, with a kick overset her wheelbarrow,
and tumbled its contents into the mud. The laugh of exultation which these
young miscreants set up on the occasion, and the sight of the rolling oranges,
and mashed half roasted apples, swimming down the kennel, exceedingly diverted
my master and his brother; until the unfortunate owner at her return, began her
pity moving complaints. A crowd having gathered round her, many of them laughed
at the accident, and some ran away with the spoils, and began peeling the
oranges they had picked up. Others blamed the unlucky monkey (as they called
the boy) who had occasioned the mischief. Matters, however, being once more
quiet, Mr. Jackson called the poor woman, and enquired into her situation. Why,
sir! said she, I will tell you the truth! You see me reduced to the last
farthing I have in the world; for this morning I laid out four shillings, which
was all the money I was worth, in these oranges, apples, and chestnuts, and I
declare I have taken but threepence to day; and I have three children, the
eldest but six years old, besides this little one, whom I was going to run
after when that wicked boy kicked down my barrow. It is a hard case, Sir! said
she, the tears running down her cheeks, which she wiped off with an old rag of
colored apron; and I owe for my rent, Sir! and shall be turned with all my
babes into the street, as I have now lost the two shillings, which I promised
to carry home to my landlord; and he told me before I came out, that should be
the case, as he would not trust me any longer. But it is a shocking thing to
see my children cry for a mouthful of victuals, and not have it to give them;
and so I bought last night a quartern loaf, instead of paying him, which I did
intend, but now I have nothing to give him; and we must go to the parish, after
all my labor to get an honest livelihood, having endeavored all my life not
to be a burden to any body. Mr. Jackson, however made up her loss, and the
coach once more proceeded on its journey. Frederick declared, he thought the
boy was to blame to injure the woman; but added, that he could not help
laughing to see the distance to which some of the pippins had rolled, and the
scramble (...) they occasioned among the mob; that a chimney sweeper had
slipped down over an orange, which he kicked away to prevent a girl from
seizing; and with his bag of foot, had fallen against a lady in a white jacket,
and made her as black as himself; and that the gentleman who was with her, had
rapped the boy's head with his cane, and set him a howling like a cur. In
short, continued he, it was rare fun! and I think, had not the woman been so
very poor, it was worth the money to see the confusion which it occasioned.

I am sorry, replied his father with a (...) air, that the pleasure with which
you surveyed that confusion, has made you forget the sufferings which it might
have caused to the person, whose living depends upon the success of her little
trade. Every one has a right to justice, be their situation in life ever so
low; and it is an additional degree of guilt to injure those, who stand most in
need of protection. It cannot therefore, in my mind, be considered as any proof
of cleverness or wit, to see a boy throw down a barrow of fruit, overset a
stall of gingerbread, trip up an old woman's heels, or perform any of those
feats of dexterity, which are apt to afford mirth to the giddy and
inconsiderate; since to do a fellow creature a material injury, for the sake of
sporting with their misfortunes, is to be wicked and inhuman; but is by no
means entitled to commendation and applause. If you had been one of the
children who was to be turned out of doors, or to loo^^ your day's victuals in
consequence of this (...) exploit, I am apt to think you would form a different
judgment of its merit, and be ready to execrate that wantonness of invention,
which can so unthinkingly sport with the uneasiness of others. Never,
therefore, let the fun, or entertainment of such jokes make you insensible to
the serious mischiefs they may produce; and remember, that what, like the fable
of the boys and frogs, may be play to you, is misery perhaps to those whose
property you so abuse. I recollect, added he, an instance of this kind, when I
was at school, which produced such a dismal event as I shall never forget.

An old woman who lived in a cottage in the neighborhood, and whose character
was as quiet, good, and inoffensive as you can imagine; was nevertheless,
singled out by the boys, as a proper subject for their fun. She was very short
and a little crooked, bent down with age and infirmities, and was guilty of the
shocking crime of wearing a high crowned hat: which had perhaps been in vogue
in the days of her youth. This was so high an offense, that they gave her the
appellation of the Old Witch, and by this name she was universally known.
Stigmatized with such an epithet of derision, they thought there was no harm in
making her life unhappy, by every art which their invention could devise. They
broke the only window of her cot, and as soon as it was repaired, repeated the
offense. A couple of she asses which she kept to supply the neighbors with
milk, and which were her chief support, they drove every day to a distance,
into such places as they thought she would least think of searching for them;
and this, as she was lame, was a constant uneasiness to her. Several times they
nailed up the door of her hut, and when she was absent, would pile up all the
rubbish they could procure, to obstruct her entrance; and when she made any
complaints of these insults to their masters, they considered it as an
unpardonable provocation, and vowed their vengeance for her ill nature. At
length they determined on a scheme, which they thought would effectually
frighten the Old Witch, and make her fears afford them a subject of mirth.

This was, after she went to bed (which was usually at an early hour) to make a
bonfire before her window; the flames of which would confirm her in the
apprehension, that her dwelling was on fire, as they intended to make an outcry
to that purpose. Accordingly the poor creature, who had fatigued herself in the
day with washing, was soon asleep; and they came with washing, was soon asleep;
and they came with much satisfaction to execute their project. The fuel they
had brought was soon in a blaze; and several of them knocked with violence at
the door, and cried out that she would be burnt to death if she did not make
her escape. She immediately jumped out of bed, and in her haste and surprise,
stumbled over a small washing tub, in which she had left some unfinished
clothes: by which accident she broke her leg, and was so ill in consequence of
it, that though she lingered above a twelvemonth after, it was thought to be,
in some degree, the cause of her death. The design of these boys, by no means
extended so far as to do her a real injury; but there is no certainty that a
mischievous intention will stop exactly where it was projected; and therefore a
good natured disposition, will rather lose the enjoyment of a joke than run the
hazard of hurting a fellow creature.

As Mr. Jackson concluded this sentence, they arrived at the end of their
journey. They were immediately introduced into a handsome drawing room, where a
large party was assembled; among which was a boy about the age of master
Edward, with whom he and his brother soon quitted the apartmant, and retired to
the dining parlour, where I was produced, with great praises of my merit. But a
difficulty now (...), as I could not spin upon the carpet. This therefore, they
agreed to turn back and without considering the holes my peg would make in the
floor, they began to spin me by turns, and continued to entertain themselves,
until a footman came to lay the cloth for dinner. He blamed the young gentlemen
for the liberty they had taken, and said, his mistress would be much
displeased, and insisted upon their finding a more proper place for their
amusement. After debating the matter some time, they agreed to adjourn to the
library; where, as soon as they arrived, I was laid on a writing desk, as their
attention was engaged by the pictures of a folio, which was open on a table.
The pleasure they found in this examination made them forget me; and when they
were summoned to attend the company, they, in their haste, left me behind; and
the leisure I there enjoyed, suggested the idea of communicating an account of
myself to the world. Whether the recital will afford any satisfaction to the
youthful readers, I must leave with them to determine.

THE END.

