AN ESSAY ON MARRIAGE, OR, The lawfulness of DIVORCE, IN CERTAIN CASES,
CONSIDERED.

ADDRESSED TO THE FEELINGS OF MANKIND.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ZACHARIAH POULSON, JUNIOR, ON THE WEST SIDE OF
FOURTH-STREET, BETWEEN MARKET AND ARCH-STREETS. MDCCLXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
THE writing of the following pages was occasioned by seeing a paragraph in a
news paper, relative to a woman in the city who had destroyed herself on
account of some infelicity in marriage. The author reflecting how many there
might probably be, who were completely wretched, and who, notwithstanding, did
not plunge themselves into another world to avoid the miseries of this, thought
it might be a subject worthy the consideration of every humane person; and
therefore has, in the subsequent pages, set forth the misery of marriage in
those who are unsuitably united together, and endeavored to show the causes of
such infelicity, and the lawfulness and necessity of divorce, in other cases
beside those at present admitted. And although no essay on this subject has yet
appeared in this country, that he has seen, yet this does not prove it
unnecessary; and, whatsoever may be the merits of the work, if it opens a way
for abler discussion of the subject, the writer will not think his labor
entirely lost.

ALL that he can say of his performance, is, that he was induced to undertake
it from a strong sympathetic feeling for the weakness and distresses of human
nature; and has endeavored to execute it in a manner most likely to
communicate the same to his Readers. He has chiefly aimed at brevity and
perspicuity, and if he has advanced any thing new, it is in the way of opinion
only, and therefore requests the attention of his Readers to the matter, and
not to the manner, of his remarks. But if any should think any thing in the
former worthy of making objections to, the writer has more to say, but in
regard to the latter, he only requests of the Public a favorable reception.

AN ESSAY ON MARRIAGE; OR, The lawfulness of DIVORCE, IN CERTAIN CASES,
CONSIDERED.
CHAPTER I.
AMERICA has been famous for her love of liberty, and hatred of tyranny of
every kind; she has not only by arms expelled her foreign foes, but generously
extended her liberality, in a great measure, even unto the African slaves.
Therefore, it is hoped, the same spirit of indulgence will extend still further
-- to those unhappy individuals, mixed among every class of mankind, who are
frequently united together in the worst of bondage to each other; occasioned by
circumstances not in their power to foresee, or prevent, at the time of their
union; which should entitle them to relief from humane legislators and the rest
of mankind. We believe it will be readily admitted, that there is no
circumstance in life, on which our happiness so much depends, as being suitably
united together in marriage; and that no foresight that people are capable of,
at that time, is sufficient to foresee, or prevent, the many causes that are
likely to destroy the felicity of that union; and that it is equally certain,
that various causes do destroy it, and render them completely miserable; from
hence arises the necessity of divorce in such situations, under such
restrictions as may be deemed necessary.

The large portion of moral essays generally taken up in lectures on the
subject of marriage, shows of what consequence that single, important action of
our lives is esteemed to be to mankind; which could not be of so much
importance if we were allowed to rectify past errors by future experience. But
the whole of our instruction, on that head, generally amounts to little more
than if such instruction as this should be given to a traveller in a strange
country: that in the midst of the highway, that he must unavoidably pass, there
is a deep and dreadful pit, curiously covered from view, into which, if he
falls, he can never extricate himself therefrom, but must inevitably die a
miserable death. And truly such is the marriage lot at present to many, and to
more than can easily be conceived, because the greatest sufferers thereby, for
the most part, conceal their situation, to keep themselves from being despised
by the rest.

We shall recite, in the first place, the probable causes of such infelicity;
in the next place, the miserable prospect of an unhappy couple, and the evil
they are the occasion of, not only to themselves but others; and lastly, of the
lawfulness and necessity of divorce. The cases we shall briefly state, by way
of example, will be taken from the middling class of mankind, as the nearest
representation of the others. And we shall only mention the leading and
principal dispositions, and leave the judicious reader, from observations and
reflections in his own mind, to pursue the description more minutely.

In the first place, the unsuitableness arising from circumstances: as when a
gentleman from the country, or farmer's son, marries a young woman educated in
the city, perhaps of smaller fortune, but of genteel family, he takes her home;
after the first formality of visiting being over, the appearances of every
thing around displeases her; she cannot help, after a while, making remarks;
sometimes, perhaps, such as these: of his want of nearness in his dress, of the
furniture of his house, of the requisites that are wanting on his table, of the
indecency of his servants and domesties, of the rusticity of his neighbors and
acquaintance. He thinks himself justified in retaliating, in some degree, in
remarks on the needless formality, appearances, dress and address, of the
citizens; for the present it passes off, but the scene is again often renewed
with more dislike than before on each part: from remarks they go to dispute,
after a while to jest, ridicule and contempt, and these, by imperceptible
degrees, from time to time, as occasion occurs. The servants, neighbors and
relatives of the husband, mock and sneer at all the wife says or does; she has
the dairy, poultry and housewisery to manage and conduct in a manner she never
saw in her life, and is unable to perform; her husband complaining of her doing
needless things and leaving the necessary undone, which equally displeases him.
They disagree in their humors about dress, table, recreations, servants and
every thing. From the repetition of disputes (which are the effect of their
different feelings only) passions are exited in each, which were before unknown
to either. They then mutually torment, thwart, plague, revile, and hate one
another; and this, perhaps, takes place in no long time after marriage. I need
not add more. It is easy to conceive a great many different degrees of
unsuitableness, arising from the same cause, that is, in the manner of their
education, that sooner or later has the same effect. But if they are well-bred
people they conceal their situation from the world as much as possible.

If a gentleman of good rank and education marries a woman of mean birth, but
superior fortune, the case is no better: she despises him for his notions of
dignity and elegance that she cannot comprehend; and he reproaches her for her
mean, low conceptions and appearances, in every thing; she censures him for his
want of wealth, and he retorts upon her for the want of every thing else.

Secondly, those who marry of different professions in religion, although they
may not be so zealous themselves as to differ about it much at first; yet, when
the warmth of their passion has abated, they will each of them feel their
former prejudices, and their respective relatives, on each side, in all their
separate conversations with them, will imperceptibly, without design, inspire
each of them by degrees, with disapprobation, dislike, and contempt of the
manners, customs, appearances and principles of each other; and each of them
will be more and more inclined to vindicate their own. All the errors, faults,
and misfortunes will be magnified and misrepresented, and charged upon each
other by the friends of each party; which will, by degrees, create reflections;
sourness, dislike and contempt will increase, especially if there is any
harshness of temper in either party, and falsehood, for the most part, will not
be wanting on one side or other to keep up a ferment, until a steady hatred
ensues. A steady hatred will always begin, as soon as the pain they receive
from each other is greater than the pleasure.


Thirdly, if a young couple marry without consent of parents on each side, the
consequence is nearly the same as the last; the animosity of the friends of
each party is greater; they refuse to assist their children in a settlement in
the world, but reflect on each other, and foment uneasiness and sourness in
their children, which increases with their strait circumstances in the world;
each of them become weary of their situation; their company grows painful with
each other, for the same reason as in the last case; they conceive an aversion
to each other they know not why, and their tempers are soured toward others
they know not for what; this creates enemies; poverty, contempt and aversion
follows.

Thus it is with the passions of the human soul, as with the strings of a
musical instrument: one being disordered, spoils the music of the whole, and
produces nothing but disharmony.

Fourthly, when a couple, with mutual assection, and naturally good
dispositions, agree to unite in marriage; but, through warmth of passion, or
affection, that would not perhaps wait until a settlement, or means of a
living, could be provided; they misconduct, or make what is called a misstep:
they are then without remedy not only disowned, but exposed to the world; and
now they are not only looked upon as children of sin and disobedience, but as
malcontents and enemies to the society in which they were educated. In this
situation, deprived of the confidence of their fellow citizens, they are left
to provide for themselves; -- their parents Though as children have nothing but
what they receive by nature and education from their parents, tutors and
companions, the infamy rests ultimately on their parents and those who have the
care of their education, (especially when they live among those of their own
profession) and not on themselves, who are ignorant of their own weakness and
of the evil consequences that will attend, until it is too late to prevent
them. The Chinese laws make communities answerable for offenses committed
within their respective authorities; parents for the misbehaviour of their
children; concluding that they must have neglected their education, and
magistrates are severely punished for those crimes committed within the
districts of their authority. Modern Universal History, vol. viii. p. 153, 172.
Ancient Universal History, vol. viii. p. 266.
choose rather to give or trust their property in the hands of children who
have conducted better; a coldness and shyness takes place among all their
acquaintance; they seem as if they belonged to nobody, and nobody to them; they
must associate with inferiors, or none at all. Visits are made into the
neighborhood, and enquiries into every part of their conduct, and how they
behave, and if they are like to make out in the world. And those visitors being
fully prepossessed with the above opinion, they operate as sieves, or skimmers;
they take away all the dross, and leave the good behind; their characters are
too respectable to be questioned; they sow their tares as they go, the opinion
of the world is soon formed in regard to their worthlessness, and they are
accordingly treated with contempt.

The unthinking couple cannot help murmuring at those from whom they receive
unmerited affronts; this never fails of creating a number of real enemies, who
constantly magnify their faults, and misrepresent all they say or do; they find
themselves not only deserted by their acquaintance, but their nearest and
dearest friends are hostily armed to do them every injury.

In this situation, unconscious of any fault, they reflect on each other as the
cause of their misfortune, by some indiscretion or other. They tire each other
with complaints they cannot relieve, and in this state of sourness and
discontent, every tale of calumny and falsehood, makes deep impression on them;
and lowness of spirits, and inactivity of body ensues, when the contrary is
most requisite for their support; then poverty and ill-humour, and all the
train of evils and calamities that can befall human creatures in distress,
attend them to the end of their days. See page 12, 13, 1^.
For the honor of human nature we could wish the above representation was
entirely groundless; yet we believe this will not be found an imaginary
description by those who will be at the pains to examine what becomes of many
of those who are thus disowned.

And here we cannot help making a reflection, though not immediately relating
to the subject.

O ye pastors of flocks and heads of societies, what sentence do you expect to
receive at the last day, for making these numerous sacrifices of your most
innocent lambs? The powers of nature are strong in the most perfect parts of
the creation; youth may plead ignorance of the consequence, but age cannot; you
know well, by experience, what you are about and what will be the consequence
of your doings; neither does it deter from these offenses, because they know
not their punishment until it arrives, nor even then from whence it springs.
Their crime certainly hurts not you; but it is not the ruin and destruction of
their perishable beings and livings here alone you seek or effect; but perhaps
of their precious, immortal souls for ever hereafter, at least as far as you
are capable of effecting it.

How differently did the Savior and Judge of mankind sentence the woman taken
in adultery: "Neither do I condemn thee, go and sin no more," was all his
reproof to her, when she told him no man had condemned her. Not so his sentence
when he pronounced condemnation, and so many woes, on the teachers of that day,
that bound grievous burdens on other men's shoulders that themselves would not
move with one of their fingers; think to yourselves if this be not a parallel
case, and how you will answer for it; think where the rich man lifted up his
eyes in torment, and how you will abide a like situation, if the scene should
be changed for you. But if you are more innocent than these victims, heaven
will regard you, and this reflection will not hurt you.

But to return from this digression: the observations we shall make next, are,
upon unsuitableness of temper. If a man of a subtle, proud, unforgiving temper,
marries a woman of a passionate, provoking, unreserved disposition, he
accidently affronts her; she immediately, in the most unreserved manner,
affronts him in return; he conceals his resentment, but will frequently
afterward sting her with his witty sneers, in a manner she cannot guard
against nor easily bear; her anger is over; she bears it for a while; but at
last she affronts him still worse where he can least bear it: he now never
omits any opportunity of exercising his malicious wit upon her; they soon grow
intolerably weary and hateful to each other.

There are many other bad tempers and dispositions that would tend to make any
unhappy if indulged to extreme: such as incessant scolding, abusive and
indecent language, cruelty to children, excessive fretfulness and impatience
about things unavoidable; many of these qualities would become moderated on a
change of companions, so as to become agreeable accomplishments: as when a
compassionate man of fortune marries a tender and weakly woman that is ever
complaining; he affectionately sympathizes with her in all her complaints, and
exercises a very sensible and peculiar pleasure of his own, in giving her those
constant proofs of his affection, in the attention he shows to her wants; and
receiving hers in return, which he could not do in a woman otherwise
constituted. Also a very good-natured man married to a passionate,
severe-tongued, though otherwise good wife; when she is suddenly provoked, he
is remarkably pleased with those sudden sallies of her wit and eloquence,
although it should be directed against himself; he looks upon them as marks of
her wit and spirit, and attention to her business.

A very passionate couple that sometimes vent their full rage at each other on
certain occasions, having fully satisfied their resentment, their assection
returns again to each other, like a tide, with more fondness than before, and
rather increases than abates affection.

Cruelty to children is so unnatural, one would be tempted to think it could
not exist, did not experience evince it: it must proceed from affections wholly
misplaced on objects quite distinct from the human being, and themselves
tormented with some kind of passions or desires unlawful, unsatisfactory, or
impossible to be enjoyed; or what will be found to be the same thing, when kind
and natural affection on companions to each othr is lost, and bitterness and
cruelty succeed.

A liberal and a mercenary, a polite and an impolite, a candid and a deceitful
disposition, are unhappy united together; but happy if their qualities are
alike. But more unsuitable still are those of religious and irreligious
principles when they are united together.

A couple kept low in the world by the hand of Providence only, go through a
series of trials, hardships and difficulties together in raising a family;
their affections and attachments increase, like two cast away seamen, or
unfortunate soldiers, that have been companions, and shared the same toils,
travels, dangers, and distresses together, and mutually assisted each other for
a long series of time, have a greater attachment to each other than they can
possibly have to any else whatever.

Moreover there are incidental circumstances that will entirely destroy the
happy marriage-union; lying, that father and mother of all wickedness, because
it screens and protects it, is yet unrestrained and unpunished by any law,
civil or religious; and hateful as it is to God and man, doubtless prevails
among some of those esteemed the best, as well as the worst of mankind: I say
lying is in full practice among us, and one judicious, well framed tale, by a
malicious person, will excite such secret jealousy, uneasiness, and doubts of
each other, and open the way for so many more of the same kind, of whatever
kind they may be; they seldom or never are got over, but foment, by degrees, to
the greatest hatred and rancour.

Some are compelled to marry through the force, fraud, deception, or artifice
of their friends or others, and conceive the greatest aversion immediately. We
do not say these will not ever be reconciled to each other, but that much
smaller matters of disturbance, such as we have described, will render them
thoroughly irreconcilable.

The last instance we shall mention, is, a violent, unchangable affection for
some other person besides those unto whom they are married. William Penn,
somewhere says, marry a woman thou love, or thou will love a woman thou never
married; this may be equally true when we cease to love those unto whom we are
married.

It may be thought needless, perhaps, to mention those incidents that so seldom
happen, but we believe it very often happens, sometimes to our certain
knowledge, perhaps much oftener than can easily be conceived; and when that is
the case very great disturbance must ensue; in public places they are likely to
happen most frequently, but it is not likely they should often come to any ones
knowledge, much less to the public: more especially when we consider the
powerful effect of shame, and the propensity it has to conceal what is thought
to be a disgraceful passion. Read the accounts physicians sometimes give of
modest women, of otherwise unblemished character, actually expiring in
childbirth, in the most excruciating tortures, rather than own their
situation, although camestly urged to it with promises of secrecy, and this is
because they were unmarried, and thought it would be a disgrace they could
never survive.

Plutarch relates an anecdote of the Milesian virgins, which merits the
attention of the philosopher: "Multitudes fell by their own hands, doubtless in
that trying age when nature, giving birth to restless and turbulent desires,
inflames the imagination, and when the heart, astonished at new wants which
virtue forbids to gratify, feels pining melancholy succeed to the sportful
tranquillity of childhood. Nothing could stop the contagion; a law was made
condemning the first who should be guilty of self-murder, to be brought naked
and exposed in the market place; those young women were not afraid of death,
but they were afraid of shame even after death. Not one of them, henceforth,
made an attempt on her life."

It had more became the wisdom and goodness of the legislature to have
prevented, if possible, the temptation, than to have inflicted a punishment
worse than death, on a crime that proceeded from the powerful effect of nature
only, and that in its most innocent state and stage of life.

We have had accounts lately of the Reverend Mr. Hackman, falling violently in
love with a Miss Ray; a lady who lived sixteen years in the family of lord
Sandwich by whom she had nine children; he grew so insupportable to himself,
that he meditated the destruction of both her and himself; he loaded two
pistols, and as she was entering a coach he discharged one at her and shot her
dead, and the other at himself, without effect; then delivered himself up to
justice and was executed. This appears to have been the case by his confession,
in the pathetic speech he made at his trial.

And here we might fill a chapter with quotations, but as they generally
mislead the Reader, we will omit them. But to what other account can we so
reasonably attribute the strange disturbance of mind we see people undergo,
without knowing the cause: the many disorders besides melancholy, dejection of
spirits, distraction and suicide, physicians tell us, proceed from a
disturbance of mind. All our passions increase with age though more concealed;
this, as well as others; and we believe the most gentle, mild and friendly
dispositions, are the most likely to be liable thereto.

Thus we have recited a great many causes; More causes might be enumerated,
especially in second marriages, but those we have recited are sufficient for
our present design.
any one of them may be sufficient to destroy the felicity of marriage, and
render perfectly miserable that union, that should, of all things in this
world, yield us the most perfect enjoyment; or, at least, sweeten the bitter
potion that so frequently falls to the lot of human nature.

But it often happens that many of these causes do unite and join in one and
the same effect, and proportionably increase the mischief they tend to create;
and when that is the case, who can conceive the disturbance they may probably
give, or a remedy equal to the disease, other than a separation.

And now we are come to the second part of our observations.

CHAP. II. Of the miserable Prospects of an unhappy Couple.
BUT it may not be improper, in the first place, to set forth the blessings and
advantages of an happy union in marriage, in order that the different
consequences may appear more distinctly in the comparison.

When each party with sincere, mutual affection, and good dispositions, nearly
equal in fortune, and with the approbation of parents and friends, the same in
education and way of life and religion; are fortunately joined together in
marriage, all things seem then to strengthen the union and not destroy it; such
appear to every one as if actuated by one soul, a most consummate pleasure,
joy, and satisfaction appear in the countenance of each; their presence, and
all their behavior to each other, seem to inspire a kind of inexpressible
pleasure to the beholder, like the joys of the blessed; for good, as well as
evil, is communicative by sympathy or example, and such being perfectly happy
themselves, it gives full and free exercise for all the gentle, kind and
friendly dispositions of the human soul toward themselves and others, even of
their enemies, if they have any; but as their friendliness appears on all
occasions, there is none but those perfectly overcome with evil dispositions
themselves, have any inclination to injure them, but on the contrary, a kind of
zeal to do them good. Their relatives by marriage, on each side, instead of
detracting from, are commending them to each other, and assisting them in the
world; and the bulk of mankind appear to them as the most upright and friendly
beings in nature. And as their passions and desires are moderate, they see
things nearly as they are, and plan their conduct more wise accordingly; and as
they feel their spirits lively, they are active in business, and if their
circumstance is but middling in the world, their gains are sure and constant,
and in a few years are increased beyond expectation.

Their good example not only spreads a kind of luster round them, and
communicates its likeness every where, but operates as an impenetrable guard to
their character; if malice or ill will should raise a tale of calumny against
them, it dies where it begins, and its author is detested. Their children
partake of the good qualities of the parents, both by nature and example. Thus
it will appear, if the above case is truly stated, that happiness causes virtue
and not virtue happiness, as is generally supposed; and whoever will be
sufficiently attentive to what passes in his own breast, will be satisfied of
the truth of the observation.

But now let us reverse the scene: a man and a woman of good dispositions
naturally, but who unfortunately marry under one, or all, of the
beforementioned disadvantages, have all the evils resulting from them; their
little comforts leave them one, by one, and peace and tranquillity become
strangers to their breasts; and sinding themselves miserable at home, they must
and will seek enjoyment somewhere; we have mentioned the danger of an
unchangeable affection where it cannot be indulged, and surely we need not
mention the many wandering imaginations and desires of every kind; the many
pastimes, amusements, and, perhaps, vices that must and will ensue; the
continual increase and exercise of all the vicious. irritating passions and
pleasures; we need not be particular, the bad example they set to others, and
the many innocent people they draw into their practices; the loss of time,
neglect of economy, disregard of their worldly interests; or, if restrained
from these by religion, the fear of loosing their reputation, or of
excommunication; then melancholy, extreme avarice, or passionate desires after
worldly possessions and honors alone, as their only enjoyment, frequently take
place: here they have the men of the world to contend with and oppose; interest
against interest, and honor against honor; a thousand crosses and
disappointments, unavoidably intersere and irritate them; every affront makes
an incurable wound; every virtuous feeling is sacrificed for the smallest gain;
the greatest severity is used in their families to gain an estate, and the
greatest oppression and dishonesty abroad; in either case their vices are so
conspicuous that the virtuous part of mankind become their enemies; their
enjoyments are precarious, unnatural and unsatisfactory, and their souls still
wandering in search of what they cannot find, and being extremely wretched
themselves, they cannot help striving to make others so by detraction, from
envy, selfishness and views of competition: all mankind are interested in
opposing them in their own kind, and do it accordingly; which makes the whole
mass appear to them as a race of devils, and the unhappy wretch is viewed in
the same light by others. Their children are mis-used and mis-taught, both by
precept and example; and all the evil they intend others is generally returned
back on themselves tensold. As old age advances and naturally draws them toward
their latter end, their pleasures of sense are abated; they can only exercise
reflection on what is past and what is to come; weakness and diseases increase,
and give them warning the awful period is not far off, when their being and
existence here must cease, and they must give way to another generation. Alas,
on what can they reflect but on a long life past of extreme wretchedness and
pain, amidst surrounding felicity? On the many ways and means they have used to
afflict others, and others them, more especially those who should have been the
dear companion of their lives? and also of the manifold sins and transgressions
they have committed, in consequence thereof? And lastly, on what is to come?
How shall we describe it, seems it not like a dark and hedious monster
stretching forth her dreadful jaws to close upon the trembling wretch forever?
And this is the final end and final hope of him, or her, who but a sew years
before thought, that binding themselves in the bands of wedlock, was leaping
into the lap of Paradise, and entering in the sure road to heaven and
happiness, and the joy of angels. And yet, unwelcome as this prospect of final
dissolution appears, it seems it is more welcome, oftentimes, than a being in
this world under the beforementioned disagreeable circumstances. But
nevertheless, we do not pretend to say, that all this is the certain
consequence of infelicity in marriage; but only that it most frequently is so.
Notwithstanding constant private devotion, frequent conversation with sincere
friends, or engagement in some very pleasing study or employment, will in a
good degree supply the deficiency of marriage bliss, and prevent, in a measure,
the evil consequences. But are we to expect every one wise, or fortunate enough
to obtain them? if they are not, their misfortunes are without remedy. And here
the scene is changed; misfortunes produce vice, instead of vice producing
misfortunes, as is mostly supposed; or rather that they go hand in hand, and
promote each other.

Thus, if the foregoing observations are just, there appears to have been one
general mistake, that teachers in religion, moralists, and mankind in general
have adopted; that is, that reason does, or ought, to preside over our
affections, when the fact in reality is otherwise; our reason, commonly so
called, neither can, does, nor ought to govern our affections, but only
regulate them, and govern our actions and contrive and contribute means to
indulge them; if our affections did not rule, neither man nor woman would ever
marry, or propagate their kind, labor for posterity, or hazard their lives in
defense of their friends without reward, or do any thing through pity,
compassion, or disinterested regard to their kind; or, in other words, be good
or virtuous; but exceed beasts in savageness and yet be less wise. And our
affections, if strong, will be found, in reality, rather to increase, in
proportion to the endeavors we use to suppress them; because it causes us to
meditate on the object of our affection or aversion, and by constant meditation
to fix our love or hatred more durable than before: neither can we easily expel
from our thoughts, the object of our attention, if a lively sensation of the
good or evil we have received from them be often present. And it is the duty of
rulers and instructors, to lead and direct our good affections, and to indulge
them in good and worthy objects, and not to force them, otherwise they will be
found to exert themselves like forced waters and break the strongest bounds; or
secretly undermine the works of the workman, to their great damage and hurt.
For our evil affections are frequently no other than our good affections
forced, or misled from their proper objects; and this indulgence of our good
affections is the only sure way of preventing our evil ones, otherwise one
mischief begets another, and we punish misfortune instead of vice; it is like
an unskilful surgeon that cuts off a limb he can not cure, to hide his
ignorance and save his credit.

And now we are come to the last part of our essay.

CHAP. III. Of the lawfulness and necessity of Divorce, and the Benefits
deriving therefrom.
THE reflections that naturally and unavoidably arise from the above recited
facts and considerations, are: does God require this sacrifice of our
happiness, or in other words, accomplishment of our destruction? or, would not
this supposition be more applicable to the enemy of mankind, who, they say,
goes about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour? If our Creator
seeks or rejoiceth in our infelicity, for what purpose did he pour forth in
the creation such a profusion of ornaments and delights? delightful objects for
sensation and reflection; such multitudes of fruits and and flowers, meats and
drinks, pleasing objects for the eyes, and sounds for the ears, and grateful
smells for the nostrils, and ten thousand pleasing subjects of contemplation
for the understanding; and herbs for food and for medicine, and remedies for
almost every disease, so various and numerous, that it is impossible to
enumerate them in every part of the creation.

The pangs of childbirth are to give life and joy to the child and parent; the
pains of sickness and wounds to confine the patient to his bed until he is
healed, and to warn him to take especial care of that tender frame his Maker
has been pleased to give him, and his sensations of pain and pleasure are his
motives to action and means of happiness. But for what end was unhappy
matrimony instituted or compelled to be born, when there is an easy remedy
always at hand, and not denied to the meanest slave, that of changing his or
her master?

And as slave-keeping is justly becoming detestable in this country, it may not
be improper, in this place, to make a comparison between a slave and an
unhappy, married free person: so that a relief may appear as necessary to the
one as to the other, if the married person, as such, may be esteemed equally
worthy of our attention and regard.

Slaves, Alluding to the slaves of Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
almost always, by complaint or remonstrance to their master or others, may
change their master, until they have found out the most moderate. And although
always at call to come and go, yet their common portion of labor is seldom
equal to that of a free person; they mostly eat the same kind of food with
their master, their clothes are sufficient to keep them from suffering; they
are relieved from the care and concern of providing for themselves and
samilies: bodily correction they can mostly avoid by submission and fair
promises, and this they often regard no longer than it smarts. which is soon
over; they are not confined to their master's apartment, to be always tormented
and abused; they have frequent holidays of sport, recreation, and pastime, at
which they contrive to crib for a feast, and revel the whole night in
merriment; where the most unrestrained liberty and joy abounds; they are under
no restraint from religion, morality or fear of losing their reputation, or of
excummunication; their love is all delight; they feel no dread from future
consequences; they marry with whom, and for as long as they please, and no
longer.

They are all of one sentiment in morality and religion; they are always
esteemed by their masters and others, if they perform their service faithfully,
and when age comes on they are sure of subsistence for life, as good and much
easier than when young.

But where is there any relief to the miserable, hen-pecked husband, or the
abused, and insulted, despised wife? We forbear to recite the many ways and
means they take to afflict and torment one another. That the pains of the mind
exceed those of the body we may learn from hence: heroes, martyrs and those
persecuted for religion, receive the greatest bodily torments not only with
patience, but tokens of pleasure, and seek occasions of receiving them when
they think the cause they are suffering for redounds to their honor or glory.
But the most delicate fare of the most voluptuous person, yields him not the
least pleasure whenever so little galled or fretted in his mind.
They are not only confined like a criminal to their punishment, but their
confinement must last till death.

But perhaps it may be said, that if mankind were at liberty to separate and
marry again, the matrimonial tie would become less binding; one separation
would make way for another, and men and women would change from one to another
like beasts and their families and kindred would be unknown and unprovided for,
and their names and destinctions lost.

We should not propose to set men and women wholly at liberty to separate and
marry at pleasure; but only on complaint of each or either party, and the cause
inquired into, and their children, if any, provided for out of their estate
equally, and liberty given to marry again and their estate divided between
them; but not at liberty to repeat the like often. This much might serve for a
trial. But we do not suppose an inclination to part would often happen, or any
inconvenience arise, if they were left wholly at liberty in this respect.

For we see, in the order of the creation, those creatures who bring forth
their young quite helpless into the world, where the female alone is unable to
defend and provide for them, nature has impelled them, by secret and powerful
instinct, to pair together in couples for their mutual defense, and support,
without which it would be impossible for them to exist; as we see remarkably in
birds and some beasts, that are helpless when young; it is not so in cattle
that are able to shift and provide for themselves immediately.

And mankind, in a state of nature, all of one religion, custom, and manners,
never incline to separate, although not compelled to remain together; there
appears to have been no incitement thereto, as has arisen through the various
stages and changes of our civilized state, without a change of custom, as was
necessary in this respect; civilization having, in a manner, changed our
natures, by introducing new kinds of sensations, as described in the foregoing
part of this essay.

And as there is no creature nearly so helpless as the human species in
infancy, so neither is their any nearly so violently attached to each other;
not in the way of sudden passion, but unchangable affection. Providence having
wisely proportioned their affections, in such a degree as the necessity of
their nature and situation requires, in order to go through and bear a series
of trials, troubles, anxieties, and cares, needful to raise and support their
otherwise helpless offspring.

And when the human species are confined, in their choice, to those of the same
way of life, manners, religion, or education, and unite through mutual
affection, they are directed by secret instinct to those whose tempers,
qualities and dispositions are most suitable to their own. Or if it does not,
it is mostly owing to some separate views, such as the prospect of an estate or
other circumstances, or perhaps, when too much confined in their choice, as is
the case with some young people restrained by their parents, (to use my former
similie) like confined waters breaking bounds, too sudden a flow of passion
ensues toward those objects whom chance presents to their view and
acquaintance, and overcomes and precipitates them into a union, before they
have time to examine their own breasts; or, in other words, passion overcomes
their judgment, when both should unite together in forming the happy connection.

Living together as man and wife, is, doubtless, as old as the creation; but
many ages passed away before any form of marriage was instituted, and the man
took the woman with the parents' consent, and lived with her, and she became
his wife.

Thus we read of Abraham sending his servant to take a wife for his son Isaac;
he did according to his instructions and brought her home with the consent of
her parents, and Isaac received and took her into his Mother's tent, and he
loved her and she became his wife; and this was all the ceremony; the whole of
the transaction is very particularly related by the historian, and so material
a circumstance as marriage would not have been lest out. It was nearly the same
with Jacob; he agreed to serve Laban seven years for his daughter Rachel, and
they seemed to him but a sew days for the love he had to her, and at the end of
the time he said, give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled.

Moses allowed a man to put away his wife at pleasure, yet we do not find that
it was often practiced; but on the contrary, they had the greatest difficulty
to separate those who married into strange nations in the time of the Jewish
captivity, as may be seen in Ezra, chapters ix. and x. and we read in Nehemiah,
on the same occasion, in the xiiith. chap. and 25th. verse, that he contended
with them; and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their
hair, and caused them to swear by God, saying, you shall not give your
daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for
yourselves. So sensible were the Jews of the impropriety of strange marriages;
yet we do not read that a separation was really essected. These instances show
how little danger there is of separations becoming too frequent.

But it is probable they will become more necessary, and frequent as our
manners shall become changed and varied from those of the primitive ages: but
never, in no age or nation, was marriage esteemed any other than a civil
contract, or any thing so divine, holy, or sacred in it that it might not be
dissolved by the parties contracting, until Christianity took place, which
leads us naturally to consider of Christ's command in this respect: if there
was any thing in the Christian doctrine that would tend to destroy the peace
and happiness of mankind, we should be apt to reject it entirely, as something
that had got in by mistake. But perhaps it may appear otherwise.

The Pharisees came unto him, tempting him; saying, Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wise for every cause? The question is doubtful in every sense, for
they came to him, tempting him. It is impossible, without hearing the words
spoken, to determine the full meaning of the question, for if the emphasis of
the speaker should be placed on the words lawful; the question would then be,
not concerning who might put her away, or for what cause, but if a separation
at all was lawful. If the emphasis of the speaker should be placed on the word
man, the question would then be, not concerning the lawfulness of the
separation, or for what cause, but if the husband alone, without consent of his
wife or any other person, might put her away.

But if the emphasis should be placed on the word cause, the question would
then be, not concerning who might put her away, or the lawfulness of the
separation, but whether she might be put away for every cause, or only some
causes, and as the question is doubtful, so is the answer. He tells them, in
the beginning God created male and female, for which cause a man should leave
father and mother, cleave unto his wife, and they twain should be one flesh;
what therefore God has joined together let not man put asunder. That Moses
indulged them in putting away their wives on account of their hard hearts; that
it was not so in the beginning, that whosoever put away his wife, except for
fornication, and married again, committed adultery.

In the fore part of his discourse he undoubtedly referred to that secret and
powerful instinct, or strong mutual affection, that joined men and women
together as at the beginning, in a state of nature; such as we before observed
united Jacob unto Rachel when seven years seemed but as a few days, for the
love he had unto her, and these he calls those whom God has joined together;
and such let not man put asunder, he could not mean the priest, the magistrate,
or themselves, for they are not God.

In the next place, he sorbids the cruel custom of the husband alone putting
away his wife for every cause; without regarding her seeling or situation, and
declares, such as do and marry again, commit adultery.

The whole of the discourse amounts to this, that such as are joined together
by strong, mutual affection, let none cause their separation, and let the
husband alone put away his wife for no cause but fornication.

Neither of which declarations affects our argument in the least, that men and
women may not part by mutual consent, or laws of the land, or when mutual
hatred has taken place, and marry again when God shall join them together as at
the beginning. But it seems as if this passage had been the occasion of all
those scruples, concerning the separation of man and wife, in the early ages of
Christianity, and handed down to us until this day.

And so it should seem from the three succeeding verses of of the same chapter,
Matthew xix. from verse the 10th. to the 13th. compared with Matthew, chapter
v. from the 27th. to the 31st. verse, as if emasculation was advised; and as
such, some of the first fathers of the church believed it, and received it; but
surely such doctrines need not a serious refutation.

And here we submit to the judicious Reader, what merit is due to those (the
greater part of mankind) who implicitly sollow guides; and what to those who
reject them, in many cases, in favor of common sense and their own
understandings.

If our Creator, as we before observed, seeks or requires our infelicity, he
has then no longer the attribute of a God, but of a devil. But if our good
affections are misled by our instructors, they are converted into evil
affections, and drawn from their proper objects, while we ourselves have eyes
to see and hearts to understand, then is our Creator guiltless. For if we,
having eyes and understanding, freely give them to our guides and walk without,
then are our selves only accountable for our stumbling and the pains and
bruises we feel in consequence thereof.

It will be next said, what has been the universal custom for so many ages,
must have had some great advantage or benefit arising therefrom; sound out by
the experience of past ages that we cannot immediately apprehend, but upon a
trial, otherwise would be found extremely injurous to society. This obliges us,
as far as we know, to relate the customs of other countries.

The Indians of America and Negroes of Africa, and savage nations of various
kinds, live according to nature, that is, they unite or part, as pleases them,
without compulsion; generally unite and live as man and wife, and are faithful
to each other as long as they live agreeably to natural instinct.

In France and Italy every man has but one wife, but every wife has, if she
pleases, a lover that constantly visits and attends her, with her husband, to
all public places, and the husband looks upon him as his friend, and esteems
his wife in proportion to the rank and quality of her lover; this gives him no
uneasiness, because he act in the same capacity to another lady, if he pleases.

In England, it is said, the nobility marry to add to their rank and estates,
but indulge separate pleasures afterward, at plays, balls, masquerades,
dancing matches, and other diversions, without offense taken on either side.

In Turkey a man may have four wives and as many concubines as he pleases, but
if a complaint comes to a magistrate that he does not perform the duty of an
husband once a week, he is obliged to put some of them away. In Persia a man
takes as many wives as he pleases, and for what time they agree.

In India the women are compelled, by the custom of the country, to burn
themselves alive with their diseased husband, in honor to their memory. As
some of our Readers may incline to doubt the truth of this account, we refer
them to Doctor Hard's History of the Religion of different Nations, where they
may see the practice largely and particularly related. Also Marius D'Assigny,
in his History of the Heathen Deities, faith it is a custom of the indians in
Asia to this day to sacrifice and bury the dearest wives of Princes with them;
for they believe in the immortality of the soul, and therefore send such
persons as have been dear to them, to serve them in another world, and keep
them company; but later (...) say the practice is falling into disuse all over
(...)
This is fulfilling the text literally, what God has joined together, let no
man put asunder; and shows the impropriety of adhering too strictly to the
letter, in matters of great importance to our welfare.

Here are two extremes, and it is most probable, that there are different
degrees of practice between them. And if we may judge reasonably here, as in
most other cases, the best mark to stop at is the middle way, for the powers of
nature in all animate, as well as inanimate bodies, gravitate to a middle line,
like the vibrations of a pendulum, whose center of gravity is equidistant from
the extremes of (...) motion, and our present practice is but one degree
distant from the last mentioned worst extreme.

From the abovementioned instances it does appear, the sentiments of mankind
in general are very different from those of our present practice, and that
there are no inconveniences arising to the public from one custom more than
another, except the happiness the parties may receive themselves, and thereby
communicate to others; which surely themselves ought to be the best judges of.

Then the question will finally terminate here, are they, or are they not,
judges of their own happiness? If they are, why are they restrained by law and
religion from exercising it? if they are not, why are they allowed the liberty
of exercising it in other things? why are they not compelled to follow the same
calling, live on the same land, and possess the same property they have
received by gift or purchase during their lives, or the (...) of said property?
are not the reasons for the one as strong as for the other?

We would not, by any means, be understood, by proposing divorce, that we
desire to lessen the solemnity of marriage, or weaken the sacredness of the
marriage promise in any respect, during their union; but only, that a sincere
union of hearts do accompany a union of hands, from which alone, all our other
enjoyments, as from a secret source, are derived: as streams flowing from a
sweet, clear, and pure fountain, without which every thing is lifeless, insiped
and disagreeable; and that in proportion to the disharmony that subsists here,
or on the contrary, all is pleasing.

And here we beg leave to communicate our sentiments on marriage in the lines
of that elegant and sublime poet, who is said once to have employed his pen in
vindicating the same cause we do now.

"Hail wedded Love, misterious law, true source
Of human offspring, sole propriety
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adult'rous lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure,
Relations dear, and all the charities
Of father, son, and brother first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think the unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used.
Here love his golden shafts employs, here lights
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of harlots, loveless, joyless unindear'd,
Casual fruition; nor in court amors,
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings
To his proud fair, best quited with disdain."
But all the arguments hitherto used in favor of divorce to procure
matrimonial bliss, will doubtless militate greatly against us with a great
number of devout persons, who believe that the rewards they will receive in
another life, will be in proportion to the voluntary punishment they shall
receive in this. To such we must freely own that all our wits are exhausted,
and arguments are at an end; we can only leave them to enjoy what they take to
be their greatest good, and assure them, they will not be envied or molested in
their so doing, if they do not molest others in the enjoyment of what they take
to be their good.

We beg the Reader's pardon for making one more quotation, from that solemn and
much admired poem, Young's Night Thoughts.

"Pleasure's the mistress of the etherial powers,
For her contend the rival Gods above:
Pleasure's the mistress of the world below;
And well it is for man, that pleasure charms;
How would all stagnate, but for pleasure's ray!
How would the frozen stream of action cease!
What is the pulse of this so busy world?
The love of pleasure: that through every vein,
Throws motion, warmth; and shuts out death from life,
Is naught but virtue to be praised, as good?
Why then is health preferred before disease?
What nature loves is good, without our leave,
And where no future drawback cries, "beware"
Pleasure, though not from virtue, should prevail.
It Is balm to life and gratitude to heaven;
How cold our thanks for bounties unenjoyed!
The love of pleasure is man's elder born,
Born in his cradle, living to his tomb;
Wisdom, her younger sister, though more grave,
Was meant to minister, and not to mar,
Imperial pleasure, queen of human hearts.
Pleasure came from heaven,
In aid to reason was the Goddess sent;
To call up all its strength by such a charm.
Pleasure, first succors virtue, in return,
Virtue gives pleasure an eternal reign.
What but the pleasure of food, friendship, faith,
Supports life; natural, civil and divine?
It Is from the pleasure of repast we live;
It Is from the pleasure of applause we please;
It Is from the pleasure of belief we pray.
All prayer would cease if unbeliev'd the prize.
It serves ourselves, our species, and our God;
And to serve more, is past the sphere of man.
Glide, then, forever, pleasure's sacred stream!
Through Eden as Euphrates ran it runs,
And fosters every growth of happy life;
Makes a new Eden where it flows."
The above must be understood to mean virtuous pleasure, in common occurrences
and occasions of life, as well as those of religion; and if such are its
salutary effects, what must be the effect of the contrary, I leave the Reader
to judge, by attending to his own feelings in some unhappy moments he may have
experienced.

We believe it will be readily admitted, that there is no portion of the lives
of mankind so extremely pleasant; as when about to take possession of a lovely
and agreeable companion: except the enjoyment they may receive afterward, in
finding their expectations fully satisfied: until some untoward circumstance,
incident, or misfortune puts an end to their felicity. And yet this blessing,
according to our present practice, can never be enjoyed by one of the parties,
but once in a lifetime. And if their joys should chance to be short, all the
rest is little better than distraction. In vain will they strive to find them
again in wealth, honors, or promotion; they may kindle the fires of hell, and
ransack nations, or destroy neighbors, according to their respective
situations and capacities in life, yet they will still meet with nothing but
disappointment in their enjoyments. Or if there is any thing in this world,
that would excite virtuous and amiable dispositions in men and women, it is the
thought and ambition of recommending themselves to virtuous and amiable
companions; more especially when in distress with one that is otherwise. The
expectation of such good fortune if it should never happen, would make them
incline more to good, virtuous, and worthy actions than otherwise they would do.

If divorce was declared not only lawful by the legislature, but honorable by
the ministers and elders of religious bodies, (without which, the law would not
have its full effect) it would probably remove one of the most melancholy
misfortunes of the human being -- suicide. We may observe, our Creator in
framing the passions of the human soul, has wisely preserved a balance between
our private and public affections; in order to secure the duty we owe to others
as well as ourselves; for where there is a strong propensity to private
assection, there is one equally strong to the public -- a love of reputation.
And when a strong private affection, no way interfering with the good of the
public, is rendered infamous by means of law and religion; then the soul is
exceedingly agitated by different Impulses; and strongly impelled different
ways and greviously tormented. And if the sensation is violent it will occasion
involuntary watching or waking, and when this is the case, body and mind
reciprocally act as a stimulus upon each other, increasing their sensations;
until the soul, inflamed with furious impatience, instantly bursts the
strongest bands and bounds of nature, and slings herself into the ocean of
spirits from whence she sprang. And the disaster speaks aloud to the world, in
the most pointed, explicit language, that may not be mistaken; that the laws of
men have perverted the laws of Providence, and these catastrophies are as
beacons set upon a hill that cannot be hid, to warn foreigners and all others
of the danger of breathing the tainted air of such a soil: for although the
body may escape destruction the soul or mind may not, if we may presume the
same causes to have the same effect, on the same kind of beings; and we believe
if the number of these in this country, were strictly taken and made public,
they would greatly exceed what can casily be imagined.
For certainly it is a most odious reproach to the rulers of any people, to see
their subjects go distracted and destroy themselves on account of their
mis-government, or misfortunes that might easily be removed.

Cruel men and women would then be afraid to misuse and abuse their good,
worthy partners, whom they know to be better than themselves; but would be
induced to act the lover instead of acting the tyrant.

It would probably prevent fraud and deception in courtship. It would tend
greatly to industry, as men and women would exert themselves much more to
support those they loved, than those they did not; this is plain in the change
we often see in young people, for the better or worse after marriage.

Parents might not then forever lament the loss of an only son, or an only
daughter, by an imprudent, precipitate marriage. Many bachelors might not then
remain so long unmarried, and disgrace religion and mankind with their vices.
Many young women would then become virtuous wives and mothers; comfortable to
their friends, useful and ornamental to society, who, as circumstances are at
present, do frequently bring disgrace upon themselves and their sex, and a
burden on others. And we believe the like of these would not so often be
forsaken by those who have deceived them, if the ideas of perpetual bondage did
not intimidate them. Every plea whatever for unlawful commerce between the
sexes would then be taken away. If reasonable liberty of parting was given, the
desire of it would be frequently removed. Continual enmity and ill will between
the relatives of the respective parties disagreeing in marriage would cease. It
would inculcate more friendly and beneficent ideas of the wisdom and goodness
of Divine Providence in the disposition of human affairs, and dispose mankind
more sincerely to reverence and adore the great Author of their being.

If the number of objects that wish for a change are but few, their liberty can
do no harm; if many, they ought to be the more regarded, and attention paid to
their situations.

The offspring of happy matches would be, by nature as well as by education and
example, less viciously inclined. For we believe the qualities and dispositions
that are contracted by habit, are propagated afterward by generation, as is
visible in the wildness and tameness of young animals from their respective
parents: also in the ferocity and docility of those persons descended from free
or enslaved nations: likewise the uncivilized nature of young savages, longing
to live the same sort of life of their parents, although otherwise educated.

Perhaps it might be a step toward restoring the golden age so much desired,
for certainly those countries approach the nearest to it where there are no
wars, but where agriculture and population are in their highest perfection, as
in China, where their customs are very different from ours in this respect.

Perhaps none would oppose this alteration but those who were conscious of
having companions better than themselves, and who might be apprehensive such
would become dissatisfied with their situation.

No distinction of preference in favor of either sex ought to be made when
nature has made none.

Thus, free citizens of America, we have briefly and without any ornament of
style, represented to you such of the many truths, relative to our situation in
respect to marriage, as must strike the apprehension of the most indifferent
observer. It would be doing injustice to your humanity and feelings, as men and
as Christians, to suppose you will not take the subject under your serious
consideration, and communicate your sentiments to each other; and finally
propose such alterations and amendments in the laws and customs of our country,
as will tend to the benefit of those unhappy individuals who have never
wilfully, in this respect, transgressed the laws of God or man; or, done any
thing to incur your resentment or displeasure, and whose infelicity calls yet
louder for relief than their failings call for censure; and that you will not
let other matters so much engross your care and attention, that you cannot
sympathize with, and feel for, the afflictions and distresses of such of your
worthy fellow-citizens, who are united to you by the strongest ties of affinity
and affection, and also as neighbors, friends, and members of the same
community with yourselves; neither suffer them to remain under that contempt
and disregard that ever is the lot of the unfortunate; nor let ignorance,
blgotry and superstition, any longer govern your understanding, by suffering
one doubtful text of scripture (which is evidently misunderstood) a means of
destroying the happiness of multitudes, without a prospect of redress, for
endless generations; therefore, we trust, that you will generously show an
example of liberality and wisdom to the rest of the Christian nations, by
immediately setting at liberty all those who suffer under the severe
restrictions of cruel, tormenting partners; which would make them valuable and
worthy members of society; a comfort to themselves and their friends, and an
ornament to human nature; and by so doing you will doubtless receive the
grateful thanks of such, and the honor and approbation of all good men.

We shall now conclude, with addressing a few words to those on whose behalf we
have been writing this essay.

O ye unhappy people, unto whom the bands of wedlock has entailed wretchedness
instead of joy! Perhaps your situations may be without remedy; it is so,
doubtless, without you seek it, which it is your duty to do both for yourselves
and for posterity. But it is not without hope if you exert yourselves according
to your ability; be not ashamed of your situation; it is your misfortune and
not your fault; either of you might have been completely blessed and happy with
another partner, had it been your good fortune to have united with one suitable
to your disposition and circumstances: but it is never too late to try to be
revenged on fortune. Let your situation in life be what it may, your
circumstances high or low, if you can but be thoroughly reconciled to those who
where once your fond choice, and renew the days of courtship and felicity you
once felt, not only by avoiding every thing that is found to be disagreeable to
your spouses, but also exerting yourselves in every thing that is servicable,
generous, kind and freindly; you will then be revenged on fortune, and heaven
will have blessings yet in store. But if this is not practicable, as is most
commonly the case, apply decently to the legislature for redress, to pass such
laws for your relief, and others in the like situation, as they shall think
necessary and proper; they certainly cannot refuse so reasonable a requisition
who have granted relief to a less respectable class of mankind, without
request, in a less painful situation. But nevertheless, as sudden innovations
from customs long established in any country, are not easily obtained, more
especially where it is a part of the established religion of the people. Those
of some rank and character in the world, who shall have virtue and resolution
enough, to set some examples of separating and marrying again, great part of
mankind would be more indebted to them for their liberty and happiness, than
unto those who delivered this country from British oppression. For their
virtuous courage, resolution and magnanimity, would break the way for others to
follow; and a law would at last be obtained in their favor. Thus we see the
first advocate for the liberty of slaves in America, Benjamin Lay, Succeeding
writers have ungenerously passed over this worthy person's name in silence, and
given the honor of the testimony to those people who excommunicated him from
their society, for this very conduct. See his own writngs.
a worthy and good man, gave away great part of his substance, when in Jamaica,
to relieve them; and wrote and testified, in all places, violently against the
practice of slave-keeping; and, when in America, would sometimes enter
meeting houses, and sprinkle blood upon the people, and tell them the blood of
the slaves was in like manner upon their heads, if they did not repent and free
their slaves.

It was by such remarkable exertions as these, that almost every sect in
religion has been established, without which the attention of mankind are not
roused or excited, but every thing goes on in its former course, and glides
down the stream of time unnoticed; and the misfortunes of a few are unregarded
and unrelieved; or, according to the expression of a poet, on another occasion,

"Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved ages of hopeless end." FINIS.

