FRONTISPIECE.


THE HOLIDAY PRESENT: CONTAINING ANECDOTES OF MR. and MRS. JENNET, AND THEIR
LITTLE FAMILY, -- VIZ. --

Master GEORGE, Master CHARLES, Master THOMAS, Miss MARIA, Miss CHARLOTTE, and
Miss HARRIOT.
Interspersed with instructive and amusing STORIES AND OBSERVATIONS.

THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

PRINTED at WORCESTER, Massachusetts.

By ISAIAH THOMAS, And SOLD, Wholesale and Retail, at his Book Store.
MDCCLXXXVII.

THE DEDICATION.
To all the young MASTERS and MISSES in the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
IT being customary for the Parents of all good little Masters and Misses, I
mean such Parents as are able, to give them a few Pennies to spend on Holidays;
I would recommended to you who have been so favored, instead of buying
gingerbread, and trifling toys, to visit the BOOK-STORE of your friend in
WORCESTER, who, though your money may be small, will be able to furnish you
with something valuable for it; something that will tend to make you wise and
good, and consequently more beloved and esteemed by your parents, and all your
friends.

In order to accommodate you with a Book suitable for a Holiday, I have
recorded the Anecdotes of Mr. and Mrs. JENNET, and their little family, which
you will find interspersed with instructive and amusing Stories and
Observations: -- Your friend, Mr. THOMAS, has told me it shall be printed with
a very neat type, and be a size larger than common, in honor of the day; and
he has also been at extraordinary expense, in having much larger cuts engraved,
and in a more elegant manner than usual: And although he has been at this great
cost, yet to encourage you in learning, he will sell this valuable book at the
small price of one shilling and two pence. Now if you have been careful of your
money, and have saved some of the pennies which from time to time have been
given you, you will be able, with the assistance of your papa's and mamma's
bounty, and with their permission, to furnish yourselves with this volume,
which if you should procure, I hope you will make a very good use of; and to
encourage you so to do, I now inform you, that I am writing the Adventures of a
Pegtop, and the Adventures of a Pinchushion, one for the amusement of little
good Masters, and the other for little good Misses, and they shall be printed
the same size with this book, have as elegant cuts, and be sold at the same
price.

Wishing you every blessing, attendant on the wise and good, I am your sincere
friend,

CHARLES CHEERFUL.

THE HOLIDAY PRESENT, etc.
CHAP. I.
MR. and Mrs. Jennet had six children, three boys, and three girls; the eldest
boy's name was George, the second Charles, and the third Thomas, and the girls
names were Maria, Charlotte, and Harriot. In this little book I intend to give
you some account of each of them; as, I dare say, you will like to read about
so many little boys and girls, and know which of them were good, and which
naughty.

Mr. and Mrs. Jennet were both extremely fond of their children, and took great
pains to educate them properly, and make them behave as all little boys and
girls should do; but, notwithstanding all their care, Master Charles would very
frequently give them a great deal of uneasiness, upon account of his bad
behavior, for he was not at all good-tempered, and used continually to be
getting into mischief, and quarrelling with his brothers and sisters. One day
when his papa had given George and Tom an apple, as a reward for their having
read, and written, and said their tasks very well, he asked for one likewise;
but his papa said, "No, Charles, I shall not give you an apple, I assure you,
you have not at all minded your book, nor your writing, if you had, I would
have given you one as well as your brothers; but I will not treat naughty boys
the same as if they were good; and if you do not behave better tomorrow than
you have done to day, I shall look you up in my study, and not suffer you to go
to play all day." Charles knew, that if he said any thing saucy, his papa would
certainly punish him I so he hold his tongue, though he looked exceedingly
cross and out of humor; and when he went into the garden he began to quarrel
with his brother. George, said he, give me your apple, for I have as much right
to it as you. Indeed Charles, you have not, replied George, for my papa gave it
to me, because I was good, and if you had been so, he would have given you one;
but I will give you half, if you please -- you are very welcome to half, though
I cannot spare it all. You shall spare it though, said he, for I will have it
all. If you say so, Charles, said George, you shall not have any: So will you
have half, or go quite without? I will have all, replied he. Then you shall not
have any, said George, and so good-bye to you, and away he ran, whilst Charles,
who ran after him, but could not overtake him, kept throwing stones after him,
one of which hit his leg, and bruised it very much.

Whilst he was running after George, his brother Tom passed by playing with his
apple, tossing it up and catching ^t again, like a ball. Tom, said Charles,
give me that apple! I will give you a bit of it, returned Tom, but I cannot
spare it all. But you shall give it all, said Charles, for I will have it; and
then he ran to him, and tried to get it out of his hand. Tom for a good while
kept it, by turning it about, and stooping and putting it in his pocket. At
last, Charles being stronger and older than his brother, threw him down upon
the ground, and took it from him, tied his legs together, and then walked off
eating the apple.

Tom was a good-natured little boy, and would not have minded parting with his
apple, if his brother would have asked prettily for it; but he did not like to
have it taken in such a manner, and to have his legs tied; so he could not help
crying, and called out, Charles! brother Charles! pray come, and untie my legs!
But Charles, like a naughty boy, did not attend to him, but only laughed at
what he had done, and ate up the apple, without returning poor little Tom one
mouthful, though it was his own.

Whilst they were in this situation, George came by, and asked Tom what he was
crying for? I cannot help crying, said he, Charles has taken away my apple; but
I would not mind that if he had not tied my legs together, so that I cannot
walk at all! O! don't cry, my dear, replied George, I will untie your legs; and
here, you may have my apple, if you please. No, thank you, brother, said Tom,
indeed I will not take yours. I don't mind going without my apple, only I
don't like to have it taken away as Charles took it. No body would like that
indeed, said George; but you shall have a bit of mine, so he took out his
knife, and after paring it, and taking out the core, gave little Tom half.

CHAP. II.
ALL the conversation which was related in the last chapter between George and
Tom, Mr. Jennet had overheard, as he happened to be walking the other side of
the hedge by which they were standing whilst they were talking together, and it
gave him great uneasiness to find, that his son Charles had been such a very
naughty boy, not only in neglecting his learning, but likewise so much worse in
his behavior to his brothers; for it was very wicked, you know, to quarrel
with them, throw stones, take away little Tom's apple, and tie his legs
together; and therefore Mr. Jennet thought it very necessary to punish him for
such behavior. He therefore called him, and asked how he came to be so
naughty? But Charles, instead of acknowledging his fault, and being sorry for
it, only said, he did it because he wanted an apple, and should do so another
time, unless he had one of his own. Why then, said Mr. Jennet, I think it is
very necessary you should be prevented from doing so again: I shall therefore
tie your hands behind you, and your legs together, as you did Tom's. Charles
then began to cry, and beg his papa not to punish him; but Mr. Jennet told him,
that as he thought he deserved punishment, he certainly should inflict it,
though he was very sorry to be obliged to do it. Accordingly he tied his hands
behind him, and his legs together, so that he could not walk, and made him
continue in that uncomfortable way all day, while George and Tom were enjoying
their liberty, and running about.

CHAP. III.
MASTER George, the last time he had played at cricket, had struck his ball
into a ditch and lost it. As therefore he wanted another, he went to his papa
to ask leave to go to a shop and buy one. And pray, Sir, said he, may my
brother Tom go with me? Yes, my dear, replied Mr. Jennet, if you will take
(...) of him, and not let him run into the road, and come back again as soon as
you have bought your ball. I will take care of him and come back directly, said
George; so away he went, and little Thomas along with him.

They had not gone far before they met a little girl, not quite three years
old, crying and sobbing most sadly. What Is the matter, little girl? said
George. What are you crying for? I want Will! said the child, crying so she
could scarcely be understood. Who, my dear? said George. I want Will! she
answered. Who is Will? said he. Brother Will I want! Where is Will? asked
George. He ran down that lane, and I don't know my way home. George then
inquired where she ^ived? To which she replied, at mammy's house. And where
does your mammy live? She lives at Daisy-Down, said the little girl. Well,
don't cry, said George, but stay here, and I will go and look for your brother.
So ^aking hold of Tom's hand, he ran down the ^^ne, through which the little
girl told him ^er brother went, calling Will! Will! all the way he ran, for he
did not know his surname. At last he found some boys at play. Pray, said
George, very civilly, is either of your names Will? Mine is, replied a boy of
about fourteen years old! what do you want? And pray, said George, have you a
little sister? Yes, half a dozen, answered the boy, do you want any of them?
And where, said George, is one about three years old? I left her in the road,
said Will! Did you so? said George, and who is to take care of her whilst you
are at play? are you not ashamed to leave such a poor little creature by
herself? she is crying enough to make her, sick: Pray go to her, and either
take her home, or else let her be with you, and don't leave her in the road,
perhaps she may be run over. I cannot help it if she is, replied Will! I shall not
go to her 'till I have finished my play; and if you are afraid she should be
lost, pray take care of her yourself; George then told him how naughty it was
not to take care of his sister. But he did not regard a word that was said, and
after laughing a^ Master George for his concern for his sister, went to play
again with the other boys.

George and Tom were very sorry to find he would not be prevailed with to help
his sister; and when they returned, they found her screaming still more than
when they left her; for a great dog was come to her, and was licking her face
and hands, not with a design to hurt her, but the poor little girl thought he
was going to bite her, and was terribly frightened indeed.



George, who was an exceedingly good-natured boy, could not bear to see her in
such distress, and he could not tell how to help her; for, to carry her home
would take up a long time, and his papa, you know, told him to return directly,
so he did not know what to do about it. At last, after thinking a little while,
he determined to take her back with him, and and desire his mamma to send her
home to her mammy. Come, little girl, said he, I will take care of you, don't
cry, I will take care of you; give me your hand, and I will lead you, I am so
tired, said she, I cannot walk any further. Then I will carry you, said George,
and very good-naturedly took her up in his arms, and walked home as fast as he
could; for he had been out longer than he ought to have been, and knew that his
papa would be wondering he did not return.

CHAP. IV.
BEFORE Master George and Tom had got home they met Mr. Jennet coming to seek
for them. George, said he, where have you been all this time? Did not you
promise me you would return directly? Sir, said George, I ask your pardon for
staying so long; but, I am sure, when you hear what has kept me, you will not
be displeased. This little girl we found alone in the road, and I have been
trying to comfort her, and send her home. He then told his papa all that had
passed between him and her brother; which, when Mr. Jennet heard, he was not at
all angry that George had not returned sooner. Well, said he, I am very glad to
hear you have been so well employed. I was afraid you had met with some
accident, or had forgot that you said you would return soon; and that made me
uneasy, for I should have been extremely sorry, either to have had you hurt, or
that you should not have kept your word; for that would have been still worse,
in my opinion, than being hurt: but you are a good boy, and it gives me great
pleasure to see you so. Come, bring your little child home, and we will give
her some victuals and drink, and then you shall conduct her to her mother, who,
I am sure, will be much obliged you for the care of her daughter.

George was much pleased to find his father approved of what he had done, and
with great good humor, carried the little girl all the way in his arms. See,
how kind he looks, wiping her eyes, whilst his brother Tom runs by his side,
and his papa follows him.



CHAP. V.
MRS. Jennet and her three daughters were in the parlour when Mr. Jennet and
the two young gentlemen returned.

Miss Charlotte was standing at the window, folding up a shirt of her papa's,
which she was making, and had just finished stitching on the shoulder straps,
and had left off work. Look, mamma, said she, there is my papa, and my
brothers; and George has got a child in his arms. Whom can he have found? I
don't know, indeed, my dear, said Mrs. Jennet, looking up as she spoke. I will
go and see, said Charlotte, and away she ran, and in her hurry the lock of the
door caught hold of her pocket hole, and tore her frock.

Charlotte was a very good-humoured girl, but was rather too great a romp, and
often would get herself into disgrace by means of her carelessness; for though
her papa and mamma liked to see their children cheerful and merry, yet they did
not like to see their little girls quite like little boys, and clamber over
gates, and chairs, and tear their clothes off their backs. It certainly is not
pretty for little girls to be so rude; but Charlotte was rather apt to forget
herself, and not always behave quite so well as her mamma wished her.

I was beginning to tell you of her going to see whom George had in his arms
when she tore her frock, which she never stopped to look at, when she was first
entangled, but ran heedlessly away, by which means the frock was torn quite to
the bottom. However she did not mind that, but called out to George, Who is
that, George? What little girl is that? O! it is a nice little girl! said
George, and carried her into the parlour. When he put her down, the poor little
thing seeing no body but strangers, burst out a crying, and said, I want my
mammy! I want my mammy! And who is your mammy? my dear, said Mrs. Jennet. She
is my own dear mammy! replied the little girl. But what is your name? said Mrs.
Jennet. Little Nance, said she. Little Nance, is it? said Miss Maria: Then come
to me little Nance, and don't cry, and I will give you an orange. Thank you,
Ma'am, said the child, and made a pretty curtesy. There Is a good girl, said
Mrs. Jennet. See, my dear, how good she is; she does not forget to say thank
you, Ma'am, for all she is such a poor little girl, and so very young. You,
Charlotte, though so much older, forget to say so: Are you not ashamed that
this little child should behave so much better than you do? and, see too how
nicely she holds up her head; I am sure she is a nice little girl.

Mrs. Jennet then went out of the room, and returned with a large piece of
bread, and some plumbs, which she gave to little Nance, who again remembered to
say thank you, Ma'am, and made another curtesy.

Harriot, who was an exceedingly good girl, and took great pleasure in seeing
children behave have well, was much pleased with her civility, and asked her,
whether she had any play-things? Yes, Ma'am, said she, mammy makes me a doll of
her handkerchief. And have you no other doll? asked Harriot. No, Ma'am. Then I
will give you mine. Shall I, Madam? said she, turning to her mamma as she
spoke. Yes, my dear, if you please, said Mrs. Jennet. I like to see you
good-natured, and willing to part with your play-things, to please poor little
girls who have none of their own. So Harriot ran up staris and fetched her own
down: it was dressed in a blue jacket, and black cap, and red shoes; it was a
very nice doll, and Harriot was very kind to give it to little Nance, and so
all children should be, if they wish to have any body love them.

After the little girl had eaten up her bread and plumbs, she began again to
cry for her mammy. Don't cry, my dear, said Mrs. Jennet; you shall go to her,
if you will be good. So she rang her bell, and desired the maid to carry her
home to her mother. But Master George begged he might go with her, and so did
all the young ladies. Mrs. Jennet, who never denied them any thing proper to be
granted, gave them leave to go; but Miss Charlotte, whose frock was in so
shabby a condition, could not possibly attend them. At first she began to cry,
when her mamma told her she might not go; but she soon wiped up her tears, as
she well knew, if she was seen to cry upon such a trifling affair, it would
much displease her mamma, and she would certainly be punished. Now, said her
mamma, you see the consequence of not taking more care of your clothes. You
cannot go out with your sisters. You know, Charlotte, you often suffer for it:
I wonder you don't take more care. You should have stopped when you found the
lock had caught hold of your frock; but you are very careless indeed; so now
you must take off your frock and mend it. I want to go to play now, said
Charlotte. You said I should leave off work when I had done the
shoulder-straps. Well, Charlotte, replied her mamma, I did let you leave off
then, and did not intend you should do any more; but you have so torn your
frock, that it must be mended: I cannot let you go so in rags. I therefore
insist upon it, that you go and change it immediately, and come and mend it.
Charlotte knew that her mamma must me minded, and therefore thought it was best
to do as she was bid at once, without saying any more about it: So she went up
stairs, put on another frock, and then brought the torn one to mend, which she
did before she went to play. Whilst Charlotte was thus employed at home, George
and Maria, Tom, Harriot, and the maid, went to carry little Nance to her
mother, who lived at Daisy-Down, a small village about two miles from Mr.
Jennet's house. When they came near the place where Nancy's mother lived, they
met the poor woman (whose name was Brown) in great distress, looking for her
little girl; for her son Will had returned home, and told her he had lost
little Nance: nor could he tell what was become of her. He set her down only
while he went to play, he said, and when he came to look for her she was gone.
When poor Mrs. Brown heard this account, she was in such distress she did not
know what to do with herself. Will too began to be very sorry he had not taken
more care of his sister, and the whole family were in great affliction; for she
was a very good little girl. When Mrs. Brown saw her child coming with the
Master Jennets, she ran to them, and begged to know how they got her? Master
George then told all about his finding her, and his wanting to persuade her
brother Will to take care of her; but that he could not, and, added he, I would
have brought her home at first, but I was afraid my papa would be uneasy at my
staying so long, for I knew he expected me very soon.

Mrs. Brown thanked him a thousand times for his care of her little girl, and
said, she did not doubt but that he would be a good man, as he was so good and
kind a boy. She likewise thanked the young ladies for their kindness, and
particularly Miss Harriot for the doll she had given her Nance. They then
wished her a good night, and returned home; and George bought himself a ball as
he went back. For though that was his business, when he first set out in the
morning, yet he had been so busy, taking care of the little girl, that he had
not had an opportunity of doing it.

When he was in the shop buying his ball, he saw a very good kite, which he
asked the price of, and finding he had money enough, he purchased it for his
brother Charles. Tom begged he might carry it home, which George gave him leave
to do, as he always tried to please every body.

The kite was almost as big as Tom, so that when he put it upon his back it
quite hid him, and the kite looked as if it was walking alone. Look, here is
the picture of Tom going home with the kite upon his back.



CHAP. VI.
AS soon as they got home, George and Tom went directly to carry their purchase
to Charles. Here, said George, I have bought you a kite, brother Charles; will
you be pleased to accept of it? I bought it on purpose for you. Yes, I will
have it! said Charles. I think I never heard such an ugly manner of receiving a
present in my life. Instead of saying, thank you, brother, I am much obliged to
you, but am sorry you have given yourself so much trouble, and put yourself to
any expense on my account, to say, Yes, I will have it. Could any thing sound
more unmannerly, and different to what he ought to have said, in return for his
brother's kindness? Charles then began to cry again, for you know his papa had
tied his hands and feet together: And now, when he saw such a nice kite, he
wanted sadly to be at liberty, and go to play with it.

George and Tom were very sorry to see him in such a state, and went to their
papa to beg him to release him. But Mr. Jennet said, No, my dear boys, I cannot
consent to that: I am very sorry to confine him; I don't like to punish any of
you; but if children will be naughty, they must suffer for it; it makes me very
uneasy to think that he should deserve it; but I should be as much to blame as
he is, if I did not endeavor to prevent his being so naughty again. If he will
behave as he should do, I will untie him when he goes to bed.

As Mr. Jennet never broke his word, George and Tom knew it would be useless to
urge it any farther. They therefore went back to sit with Charles, who, I am
sure, did not deserve their kindness in keeping him company, instead of playing
out of doors, and diverting themselves; as he only pouted, looked cross, and
said, it was owing to them that he was punished, because they would not give
him their apples.



George said all he could to persuade him to be good, and ask his papa's
pardon; but he would not mind, and only continued cross to every body all day,
and very uncomfortable to himself: For people who are out of humor, are always
uncomfortable and unhappy.

When night came, and it was time for the young gentlemen and ladies to go to
bed, Mr. Jennet was in hopes that Charles would acknowledge his fault, and ask
to be forgiven; but Charles, although he had been in a state of punishment all
day, was still not good enough to do that: So Mr. Jennet said to him, Charles,
I see you are determined to be a naughty boy, and as that is the case, I assure
you, I am determined to make you good; and if you will not be so without, you
must be punished 'till you are; and unless you will ask my pardon this moment
for being so naughty, and giving me so much trouble and uneasiness, you shall
go to bed with your legs tied together, and your hands tied behind you; and so
you shall continue all night.

Charles cried sadly when he heard his papa threaten him so much, but still
continued naughty, and would not ask forgiveness; so his papa had him put to
bed, and then went up and tied his legs and arms again, and so he lay all
night, and very uneasy he found it. By the time morning came, he was quite
tired of his confinement, and began to be sorry he had been so naughty, and
wished most heartily he had been good sooner. He could not get up because his
legs and arms were tied, but desired one of his brothers to go and tell his
papa that he was sorry he had behaved so.

Mr. Jennet, very kindly, went up stairs directly (which was more than he
deserved, as he had been obstinate so long, and therefore had no right to
expect to be heard the moment he chose to ask forgiveness) to hear what he had
to say.

Charles, when he saw his papa, burst out a crying, and said, he would be a
good boy, if he would be so kind as to untie him. If you will, said Mr. Jennet,
I will release you; for it is no pleasure to me to give you any punishment; I
wish to see you happy, but you never can be so, unless you are good.

He then untied his hands and feet, and sat by him all the time he was getting
up, talking to him, trying to persuade him to be good, and always kind and
obliging to every body; at the same time assuring him, if he was naughty, he
should certainly punish him the next time, with much greater severity than he
had now done.

When he was dressed he let him go down to breakfast, bidding him wipe his
eyes, leave off crying, and be a good boy. And indeed his papa was much pleased
to find Charles beginning to be good; for nothing gave Mr. Mrs. Jennet so much
joy, as to see their children all good and happy together.

CHAP. VII.
AS soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Jennet and his three sons went into the
study, as they constantly did for four or five hours, to read, write, and
repeat their tasks; whilst Mrs. Jennet, with the young ladies, spent the same
time in the parlour in reading, writing, needlework, and all their various
occupations.



Miss Maria was working a muslin apron for her mamma, which she did very
neatly, and took great pains to keep it clean, as it looks very ugly to have
work dirty. Miss Charlotte, as was said before, was making a shirt; and Miss
Harriot was stitching a pocket for her sister Charlotte; and when that was
finished, she was to begin one for herself. She was a very neat little work
woman, indeed every thing she undertook she did extremely well, for she took
uncommon pains with herself, and always tried to mind all the instructions
which either her parents, or any good friends were so kind as to give her. She
never, like some silly children, did those things out of their sight, which she
knew they would not approve of if they had seen her; but she very wisely
considered, that it was only for her benefit they troubled themselves to tell
her what was proper, or what not so, and therefore at all times endeavored to
follow their advice; and this made her improve faster than either of her
sisters, and consequently be much more admired and beloved than they were: For
though they were far from being such naughty girls as many are, yet they were
not so good as Miss Harriot, particularly Miss Charlotte, who, in this respect
I am now speaking of, used frequently to be very silly. I remember once I was
standing in the hall, whilst Miss Charlotte and Harriot were in the parlour.
They did not know any body was near them, and I overheard the following
dialogue.



CHARLOTTE. Pray, Harriot, while your mamma is out of the room, why do you keep
your feet in the stocks? Do you like to keep them so close confined?

HARRIOT. No, I do not much like it; but my mamma, you know, bid me put them in
when I first went to work.

CHARLOTTE. Yes, I know she bid you put them in; but now she is gone out of the
room she will not see you. I always take mine out when she goes away.

HARRIOT. I know you do, but I think that is very naughty. Don't you consider
that mamma loves us dearly, and only tells us what is right for the sake of
making us good and happy: It can be of no advantage to her I am sure, whether
we turn out our toes or not. If we behave ever so ungenteelly, people will not
accuse mamma on that account; but they will dislike us very much indeed: As
well they may. Besides, I think it is quite wicked not to do what my mamma
chooses I should. She is very kind to us, and, I am sure, we ought to mind her,
and be good always.

CHARLOTTE. Yes, we ought to be good, to be sure; but if we are good when she
sees us, I think that is quite enough.

HARRIOT. O! fie, fie, Charlotte! I wonder you are not ashamed of saying so! I
would not do what my mamma don't like, upon any account: That I would not.
Besides, you always get into some trouble or other when you behave so. You
know, the other day, when she bid you not touch her knife, that you cut your
fingers most sadly, playing with it when she went out of the room; and when you
clambered over the rail into the orchard, after she told you not, you know, how
you tore your stocking, and your leg too* Don't you remember it?

CHARLOTTE. Yes, that I do, for my leg is not well yet; nor more is my hand
that I cut, for it is very sore.

HARRIOT. I am sorry you should be hurt; but indeed, Charlotte, you deserve to
meet with such accidents, when you will not mind, and do what mamma likes,
because she don't (...) you.

Just as Miss Harriot said this, Mrs. Jennet returned into the room; and Miss
Charlotte, upon hearing her mamma coming, tried to put her feet into the
stocks; but, in her hurry she staggered against Miss Harriot, threw her off her
stool, and finding herself likewise in danger of falling, caught hold of a
little table which stood by her; but instead of being able to prevent the
accident by so doing, she pulled it down upon herself and sister, and very much
hurt and bruised them both; nor were those all the bad consequences which
ensued, for Mrs. Jennet had just been filling her little ink bottle from a
larger one, which she had set upon the table, and that falling down, had broke
and emptied itself over the young ladies; though, as Miss Charlotte had saved
her sister's clothes, by falling over them, most of the ink was poured upon
herself, and a terrible figure she made when she got up. The ink bottle fell
upon her head, so that it ran all down her hair, face and neck, and upon her
frock, and then upon her work (her papa's shirt) which she had in her hand.

As soon as Harriot could get up she ran out of the room to call somebody to
wipe her sister. The maid soon came in, and wiped her as dry as she well could,
and mopped up the ink from the carpet; but it left a sad black mark upon the
floor, which she could not get off. She then took Charlotte up stairs to wash
and undress her: But, with all her washing, she could not possibly make her
face and neck clean; the ink would not come off, and she looked exactly like a
tawny Moor for a great many days; so that (before their papa and mamma told
them it was not good natured) her brothers called her, Sister Tawny, and
Charlotte Blacky.

When she was clean dressed, her mamma called her to her, and very gravely said
to her, I hope, Charlotte, you now see the bad effects of not minding what I
say to you. All this mischief which you have done, is owing to your not keeping
your feet in the stocks when I went out of the room. Had you minded my words,
and done your duty by obeying my orders, you would not have been in such a
hurry at my return, to put your feet in the proper place: You would neither
have thrown down and hurt, either your sister or yourself: You would not have
broke the bottle, and wasted all the ink: Nor would you have spoiled your
papa's shirt, or your own clothes: But some bad consequence always follows when
little children will not mind what is said to them.

I will tell you a history of a little girl I once knew, who used to be guilty
of the same fault, and whose sufferings, I hope, will teach you to be more
obedient for the future.

The History of Miss POLLY INGRATE.
MISS Polly Ingrate was a little girl, whose papa and mamma were very fond of
her, and used to take great pains to instruct her in every thing which was
proper.

She was but seven years old, therefore it was impossible she should know what
was right or wrong so well as her parents; but though she was so young, still
she was foolish enough to think she knew as well as her friends; and whenever
they told her not to do any thing, she always stood and argued, and said, But
why may not I? What is the reason? Because it is not proper, they would tell
her. And then she would argue again, But why is it not proper?

To hear a child argue so, is certainly disagreeable, as it appears as if they
wished not to do as they are advised.

At the upper end of Mr. Ingrate's garden there was a fish pond: And as
children, when at play are apt to run too near the edge of the water, Polly was
desired never to go beyond a row of trees, which grew in the middle of the
garden. But why may not I? said she. Because I don't choose you should, said her
mamma. But why not? she asked again. Because, replied her mamma, I am afraid
you should go too near the water. No, I shall not! said she. I know I shall
not! I will take great care! I am sure I will not go too close! Say no more
about it, said her mamma, for I do insist upon it that you never go beyond the
trees. Now a good child would have minded at once, without arguing about it;
but after Mrs. Ingrate had so repeatedly told her not to go beyond the trees,
it certainly was extremely naughty to think of it: However, Polly was wicked
enough to do it; and one day, when her mamma was out of the way of seeing her,
she went beyond the trees to play at ball. She could play very well, and
sometimes caught above an hundred without once letting it fall; and the day she
so naughtily went to play, where she should not, she happened to play
remarkably well, and had caught it an hundred and thirty six times, without
once letting it tumble, so that she had been looking up a great while without
seeing where she went: And running to catch it, the hundred and thirty seventh
time, her foot slipped upon the edge of the pond, and in she fell.

When she found herself falling into the water, she recollected all which her
mamma had said to her, and wished most heartily that she had minded, and not
been so naughty, and screamed out, I will be good! pray pull me out! so loud,
that a gardner, who was digging at some little distance heard her, and ran to
help her. He just got time enough to save her, for had he been one minute
later, she would have been so low under the water he could not have seen where
she was, nor been able to have taken her out. She was so frightened and hurt by
the fall, that he scarcely knew whether she was alive or dead when he first
took her in his arms: However he carried her in doors, and she was put to bed,
where she was obliged to lay four days before she could get up, having caught a
most violent cold by being in the water.

Her papa and mamma were extremely sorry for the accident, and still more sorry
to think that she should have been so very naughty as not to mind what they had
said to her. They both talked to her a great deal, and tried to convince her of
the folly and sin of not taking good advice; and she appeared so conscious of
her fault, that they were in great hopes she would never be guilty of the same
again. But it was not a great while afterward before she forgot how much she
had suffered through the want of obedience, and went into a little dirty yard,
where she had been bid not to go, as the hogs were kept there, and it was not
at all a proper place for a young lady to play in. There was one of the sows
had a litter of twelve pigs. Polly stooped down to stroke them; but the sow,
fearing she was going to hurt them, bit her fingers so bad, that one of them
was obliged very soon to be taken off. She ran crying and screaming in doors,
but was afraid of seeing her papa or mamma, as she knew she deserved punishment
for going into the hog yard after she had been positively forbid.

Her papa and mamma again endeavored to convince her of her fault, and told
her, that had she minded them, the sow could not have bit her fingers, as she
never went out of her sty and little yard. I did not intend to hurt the pigs,
said Polly. Very likely not, replied her mamma; your fault was not in stroking
the pigs, but in going where you had been bid not to go. That is what I am
angry with you for? but I hope the punishment you have met with, from the sow's
biting you, will teach you not to do so, or any thing you are told not, any
more.

After having suffered twice so very severely from her disobedience, any body
would have thought that she would have grown good, and for the future minded
every thing that was said to her. But still that was not the case: And she
continually kept doing those things out of her parents sight, which she would
not dared to have done had they been present. Amongst the rest, one which she
was guilty of was eating fruit whenever she went into the garden to play. Her
mamma had many times charged her not to pick any, promising her, she should
have given to her as much as was proper and good for her health. But
notwithstanding all her mamma could say to her, she used, when in the garden
alone (and when every body was in the front part of the house, so that she was
not seen) to pick and eat it: The consequence of which was, that she grew
extremely sick, and had a terrible pain in her stomach, so that she was obliged
to take great quantities of very nasty physic to give her ease; but still she
was not broke of her naughty tricks; and one day when she was at play in her
mamma's chamber (though she had been told over and over again never to go to an
open window) she was looking out of it, and sliping a little farther than she
intended, fell out, and broke her backbone. At first, when they took her up
they thought she was dead; but she soon came to her senses again, and after
laying a great many months in bed, and suffering a prodigious deal of pain, was
able to get up; and after some months were past, could walk about: But she
never grew any taller, but continued most shockingly crooked indeed.

She is now a woman, and you cannot think how sadly she looks. She is never
well: Her back sticks out worse than any thing you can imagine, and her
shoulders are as high as her ears; and all this was the consequence of not
minding what had been said to her when her friends were out of sight. And had
you, Charlotte, continued Mrs. Jennet, just now been more hurt by the table's
falling upon you, it would have been your own fault for taking your feet out of
the stocks, after I had desired they might be kept in. Indeed, my dear, it is
not right to behave so. All good children who love their papas and mammas, will
always do as they wish them, and strive to deserve their savor and kindness by
a proper behavior and how happy should I be, if mine would do so. I will! I
will, said Charlotte, crying at the thought of her former folly. I will be
good, my dear mamma, and always do as you desire me. Then, said Mrs. Jennet, I
shall love you better than I can express; and every body will be as fond of
you, as they are of your sister Harriot. For my part, I shall love all my
children alike, if they will be all equally good, and so will your papa too, I
am sure, for we have no reason to love one better than another, unless they
behave better.

Charlotte listened to all her mamma said with great attention, and promising
to behave well, and always do as she was bid, made a curtesy and walked away.

CHAP. VIII.
AFTER Masters Jennet had finished their studies above stairs, and their three
sisters below, they all went to play together in the garden; and Charles, who
was then in good humor, took his kite, and, with the assistance of his
brothers, flew it very well. They were all much delighted to see it mount so
high in the air; and there is no saying how long they might have pursued the
amusement, had not a trifling accident happened, which put a stop to their
sport.

Little Tom, who was running as fast as he could, with his head tossed back,
looking at the kite, and not seeing where he went, ran with such force against
a large tree as knocked him down backwards, and not only stunned him with the
fall, but happened to hit his head a violent blow upon a sharp stone, cut so
large a gash upon the back of his head, as made it bleed very much indeed. All
his brothers and sisters ran to him, and tried to lift him up; but finding he
could not stand, they began to think he was dead; and when they saw the blood
run, they were all sure that was the case.

George and Charles took him up between them, whilst Miss Maria walked beside
them, holding her handkerchief to the wound in his head to stop the blood, and
Charlotte and Harriot made all the haste they could in doors, calling out, Tom
is killed! Tom is killed! Upon hearing this, Mr. and Mrs. Jennet, and two or
three of the servants, all came out together to see what was the matter, and
met poor little Thomas carried in the manner related, and his brothers and
sisters crying as they brought him in. As soon as ever they saw him they
perceived he was only stunned, and not dead.

Mr. Jennet took him in his arms, and said, do not cry, my dears, your brother
will be better presently, I hope; and having put (...) to his head to do it
good, laid him on the bed, where he had not been long before he began to open
his eyes, and speak, and soon afterward fell asleep, and when he awaked was
much better, and able to go down stairs to dinner. You cannot imagine how
greatly rejoiced his brothers and sisters were to see him so much recovered,
for they had all concluded he was dead. When, therefore, they found him well
enough to sit and eat a little dinner, they were so delighted they scarcely
knew how to express their joy.

CHAP. IX.
AS soon as dinner was over, Charles was in a hurry to go and look after his
kite, as he had left it without regarding what became of it to help his brother
Tom, when first he fell down; and was so taken up with the thoughts of him
afterward, that he never looked for it until after dinner, when he saw Tom so
much better. He went into the garden in hopes of finding it there; but no kite
was to be found, nor could he tell where to go and seek for it, as it possibly
might fly a great way after he left it before it fell to the ground. However,
he resolved to go the way the wind blew when he flew it, and enquire of all the
neighbors, whether it had fallen into any of their gardens? So having asked
his papa's leave, he set off in the search of it. He stopped at several of the
neighbors gates, and asked very civilly to go into the garden and look for his
kite, and they all very kindly permitted him to go; but no kite could he find.
At last as he was walking on, intending to ask one more lady to let him go into
her garden, he saw a great many boys standing together, and as he passed by,
turned his head toward them, and perceived they were just beginning to raise a
fine large kite; which, upon looking more earnestly at, he found was his own.
He directly ran up to them and called out, That is my kite! so pray give it me
directly! for I have been looking for it! Your kite? said the boy, who was
running with the string in his hand, in order to make it fly, I wonder what
made it yours! I am sure it is my own, and I wonder what made it yours!
replied Charles; for, I am sure, it is mine! That it is not, said the boy. That
it is, answered Charles! and I will have it! That you shall not said the boy,
for I found it, and will keep it, and not give it to you, I assure you. You
will not? said Charles, then I will give you that, striking him a blow in the
face. O! you choose to fight, do you, master? replied the boy; if that is the
case, I will fight with you with all my heart, and immediately he stripped and
began.

Charles (who, as has been said before, was not of a good temper) in a most
violent passion attacked the boy, who being rather stronger than himself,
presently conquered, and beat him most terribly indeed; whilst the blood ran as
plentifully from his nose and face, as before it had done from his brother
Tom's head. At last, with his eyes almomst beat out, and extremely hurt, he
begged the boy to leave off, saying, he did not choose to fight any more; upon
which the boy left him; and Charles seeing the kite in a little boy's hand, who
had been holding it during the battle, ran to it, and in a violent rage drove
his hand through it, and tore it all to pieces. There! said he, if you will not
let me have it, you shall never have it again. Upon Charles's offering this
violence to the kite, all the boys who had only stood and looked on before,
immediately began to resent it, and kicked, and cuffed, and beat him about
until he could scarcely crawl home: Where he was glad to return, as fast as in
his miserable condition he could; and had he stayed much longer, it is very
probable he might have been killed, for they not only thrashed him, but threw
stones at, and pelted him with mud and dirt all the way he went.



CHAP. X.
WHEN Charles came into the parlour, his papa and mamma, and all his brothers
and sisters, were quite amazed to see him; both his eyes were swelled as big as
eggs, and the blood from his nose had run into his mouth, and all down his chin
and throat, and over his waistcoat; and his coat and hair were all covered with
mud; so that he made a most shocking appearance indeed. What have you been
about, Charles? said Mr. and Mrs. Jennet; where have you been to? and what is
the matter with you? Charles answered, I have been fighting with a boy for my
kite! I am so provoked I don't know what to do with myself! I found my kite:
some boys had it, and they would not give it me. I wish I could kill them! O
fie, for shame! said Mr. Jennet, is that a proper manner of talking; because a
boy has offended you? I am ashamed of you indeed, Charles: but pray tell me all
about it. How did the boy get the kite? I don't know how he got it, said
Charles: but I am quite positive it was mine, and I told him so, and asked him
to give it me directly, but he would not. I am afraid, replied Mr. Jennet, you
did not behave right, and ask for it in a civil proper manner: If you had, I
think he would have returned it. Did you tell him how you lost it? No, not I
(said Charles) I told him it was mine, and I would have it; and when he would
not give it me I struck him; that was all; and then he thrashed me so
unmercifully; but he never will have the kite again however! I am glad of that!
I took care he should not have the pleasure of flying it any more, for I tore
it all to pieces, and broke the sticks, and then, like a parcel of cowards,
half a dozen boys fell upon me all at once, and threw stones and mud at me. I
shall not, said Mr. Jennet, pretend to justify the behavior of the boys for
throwing stones at you: but indeed, Charles, it is entirely your own fault,
that you are now in this sad, bruised, shabby condition; and had it not been
for your own hasty disposition, you might, in all probability have reigained
your kite, and saved yourself those blows you have received. How often have I
told you never to put yourself in a passion; but to enquire calmly and good
humouredly into things, before you allow yourself to be angry. Had you followed
my advice, and done so now, how much trouble and shame might you have saved
yourself: The boy, no doubt found the kite where it had fallen, therefore until
he met the true owner of it, was at liberty to keep it. When you saw him with
it, you should civilly have enquired whether he did not find that kite, as you
had lately lost it, and should be greatly obliged to him if he would return it.
Had you, Charles, made use of such kind of expressions, I doubt not but the boy
would have returned it: Or, had he refused to do so, you might have said, If
you think that I am mistaken, and that it is not mine, pray let my papa and
brother see it, and they will be able to tell you; for they know my kite. Had
you, I say, Charles, behaved in this manner, you might have been certain that I
would have taken care you should have had your kite again: But to put yourself
in a passion, and begin to fight! what could you expect but to be beaten, and
disgraced as you are? And then to destroy the kite, was surely the height of
folly and indiscretion; as it is now impossible for you to have it restored,
even though the boy should be convinced it really was yours. But people who
will be silly, and wicked enough to put themselves in such passions, will
always suffer for it; and it is very proper they should; but I cannot help
being very sorry, that any of my children should be so naughty; however, you
must go and be washed, and cleaned, though you really do not deserve to have
any care taken of your bruises. Had you been hurt like Tom, without being
guilty of a fault, I should have been extremely sorry for the pain you
suffered; but now, I think, you well deserve it all: And, I hope, the miserable
condition you are now in, will keep you from putting yourself in a passion, and
fighting again.

Charles listened to all his papa said, but it did not seem to have any very
good effect; for when Mr. Jennet ceased speaking, he muttered out, I am glad I
have spoiled the kite however!

Mr. Jennet again endeavored to convince him of the folly of such behavior.
How can you, Charles, said he, choose to act so much like the dog in the manger?
and because you could not enjoy the pleasure of playing with the kite yourself,
rejoice that nobody else can? I don't wonder, that you should be sorry to lose
so nice a plaything, after your brother had been so very kind as to give it to
you; but when once it is gone and you have it not, why should you be glad that
it cannot be of service to another boy? Indeed, Charles I am much concerned to
find you have so bad a disposition; and, I assure you, that unless you take
pains with yourself, to grow more good tempered, you will always be an unhappy,
miserable man; as it is impossible for any persons who are cross, selfish, and
passionate, ever to be happy, or make any body love them.

Charles made no reply to what his father said, but went out of the room to be
washed and cleaned.

CHAP. XI.
IN the evening, after the two wounded young gentlemen were gone to bed, Mr.
and Mrs. Jennet, Miss Maria, and Master George, went to take a walk, and seeing
a great many boys together, Mr. Jennet inquired whether either of them had
found a kite that day? Yes, Sir, said one of them very civilly, I found one
this morning. And pray, replied Mr. Jennet, what did you do with it? Why, Sir,
answered the boy, I will tell you. I and my playfellows were going to fly it,
when a boy came, and squalled out, that it was his, and he would have it; now
as I did not know by what right it was his, I said, he should not have it; but,
said he, I will! so I told him he should not! and upon my refusing to give it
him, without telling me that he had lost one, or giving me any reason to think
that it belonged to him more than to myself, he gave me a knock in the face, so
then I gave him another, and we went to fighting, and I beat him; and after I
left off, like a simpleton as he was, he tore and broke the kite all to pieces;
so that if it really was his own, he can never have it again. It was a thousand
pities to spoil it, for it was a charming good one. But, said Mr. Jennet, how
came you not to return it when he told you it was his? I would, Sir, answered
the boy, if he had asked me civilly, or told me he had lost it; but he demanded
it in so insolent a manner, that I assure you, I thought he deserved to go
without out it; and indeed I did not believe it was his; for I thought if it
had been, he would have given an account in what manner he lost it, and not
only have said, I will have it: Indeed said Mr. Jennet, I cannot wonder at you,
for when people will put themselves in a passion, instead of talking reasonably
upon any subject, there is no possibility of understanding what they mean. I do
not therefore blame you for refusing to deliver the kite 'till you was asked
civilly for it; but I think you did wrong by fighting about it. I did not want
to fight, Sir, said the boy; but I assure you, he began first, and was in such
a rage, that I was obliged to beat him as I would a wild beast, to keep him
from doing me some mischief. I am sure I don't like fighting; I would rather by
half live peaceably with every body, for I hate quarrelling, and my father and
mother say it is very wicked. I think so too, said Mr. Jennet, and then, after
wishing him a good night, returned home.

After they were seated, Mr. Jennet, took one of the hands of Master George,
and Miss Maria, in his own, and said, I hope, my dears, what you have this
afternoon seen and heard, will warn you from ever suffering yourselves to be in
a passion. You see how terribly your brother Charles is beat and hurt, owing to
his own violent temper, and because he would not give himself ^^^e to talk
coolly and reasonably with the boy, who you find would willingly have given him
the kite, had Charles asked properly for it. Not only with regard to your
playthings, whilst you are children, would you be able to manage much better,
if you would be aways calm and good humoured, and patiently wait to hear what
each had to say; but likewise when you are men and women, you will find that
nothing will succeed as you wish, if you suffer yourselves to be agitated and
discomposed when any circumstance happens different to what you like: And once
more I will repeat, for you cannot too well remember, that no one, whether
children, men or women, can ever be happy who are not good humoured. Here Mr.
Jennet stopped; and after George and Maria had kissed and wished their papa and
mamma a good night, made a bow and curtesy, and went to bed.

CHAP. XII.
THE next morning Master Tom's head was pretty well, but Master Charles's face
and eyes were very bad indeed, and frightfully ugly he did look; his eyes
black, his nose and mouth extremely swelled, and a great cut on one side of his
chin, which the point of a nail had torn in one of his falls, while he was
fighting; so that had any little boys seen him, I think they would have taken
care never to fight any more, had they ever been so silly before.

Whilst they were at break fast, a man came to the door with a box upon his
head, directed for Mr. and Mrs. Jennet. They ordered it to be brought in, and
then told the children to try and untie the cord that was round it, which after
a good deal of difficulty, they did, but then it was locked, and having no key,
(...) looked sadly disappointed, as they were in hopes to have found it open.
What shall we do now? said they. How shall we get it open? for it is locked,
and we have no key? O! said Mr. Jennet, here is a key, and your mamma has
another, so I hope we shall soon open it, and see its contents. Charles took
the key and opened the box, while they all stood round to see what was in it;
but how were they surprised to find three rods, a fool's cap, and four silver
medals, each tied through ^ ^ole with a yellow ribband. On one of them was the
following words, Whoever wears this, is a cross child: Upon another, Whoever
wears this, cannot be depended upon when out of sight: Upon a third, The wearer
of this has told a lie: And on the fourth, This medal is a badge of sloth and
idleness. All the Miss and Master Jennets were much disappointed to find the
box contain such disagreeable objects, and all of them looked very grave,
turned away, and walked to their seats. I find, my dears, said their papa, the
sight of what the box contains is very disagreeable to you; and no doubt, rods
and such kind of things, must be far from agreeable to any body: For my part, I
dislike the sight of them as much as any of you can, and shall be very glad
never to be obliged to open the box any more; but it is the duty of all parents
to make their children good; and if they will not be persuaded to mind without,
they must be punished. You may depend upon it, therefore, that these rods, this
ridiculous fool's cap, and these medals will be taken out, and used, if any of
you render it necessary, otherwise, the box shall never again be unlocked. He
then locked it up, and carried it out of the room; but soon returned with
another box of the same sort, though much larger than the first. Now, said he,
try my dears, and open that. They were all so disappointed at the contents of
the other, that they had no great inclination to open it; but upon their papa's
giving them the key, and telling them to do it, they unlocked it, and lifting
up the lid, discovered it to be filled with books, bats, balls, kites, nine
pins, marbles, work-bags, house wi^es, dolls, boxes, and a great variety of
pretty things, which I do not now recollect. They soon changed their
countenances, and each one* smiled at so pleasing a prospect. Well, how do you
like the contents of this box, said Mr. Jennet? They all replied, they liked it
very well. And which, said he, should you choose to receive some of; what is now
before you, or what you saw in the other box? They all again replied, that they
should much prefer what they now saw, and never desired to have another sight
of the other as long as they lived. Neither do I, replied their papa; and I
assure you, it entirely depends upon yourselves, whether it is ever opened
again or not. If you are good, and behave as you ought, as you all very well
know how to do, this box (touching the one before them) is the only one that
shall ever be unlocked, and, from this I will reward you according to your
merits; but if you are naughty, and will not mind what is said to you, I again
repeat, that the other must be opened, and what is in it, used upon you, with
great severity.

CHAP. XIII.
FOR the whole week following the arrival of the two boxes, all the Miss and
Master Jennets behaved extremely well indeed; so that their papa and mamma
thought proper to reward them out of the good child's box, as it was called,
the other being named the naughty child's box: and as they thought books would
not only amuse, but at the same time instruct them, they gave each of them a
book. To Master George they gave one entitled the Father's Gift; to Miss Maria,
the Mother's Gift; to Charles, the History of the Holy Bible; to Charlotte,
Virtue and Vice; to Harriot, the Lilliputian Masquerade: and to Thomas, the
Juvenile Biographer: all of them very pretty, entertaining, instructive books,
very well worth your reading, and sold by Mr. Thomas, at his Book-store, near
the Courthouse, in Worcester, and by all the booksellers in town and country.
This particular direction is given, in case any good little children should
wish to read them, and not know where to buy them; and, no doubt, their papas
and mammas will willingly assist them in the purchase, if they will take pains
with their reading, and mind the good advice which is given in those pretty
books.

All the Miss and Master Jennets were exceedingly well pleased with their
different books, and after thanking their parents in an handsome manner, went
to read them. As soon as they had read through, and looked at all the pretty
pictures in their own, they lent them to each other, and, by that means, had
the pleasure of seeing six entertaining books apiece; and indeed it employed
them several days, before they could read them through. After they had enjoyed
this amusement for four days, and all had very good humoredly lent them to one
another, whenever desired to do so, Charles, who seldom continued good long
together, began to grow naughty again; and when his sister Harriot desired him
to lend her his book, he very rudely, and crossly refused, and said, No, indeed
I will not* Are you going to read it, brother Charles? said Harriot. If you are, I
do not desire it: but if you are not making any use of it, I should be much
obliged to you for it, for a little while, and you shall have it the moment you
want it. But although Harriot spoke so very prettily, he only answered, "That
she should not have it! and though he was not reading it now, he could not tell
how soon he should! besides, whether he read it or not, he liked to keep it in
his own pocket, and she should not have it at all!" Mr. Jennet did not
interrupt him, till he had done speaking, and then he said, Charles, you know I
always keep my word, and never promise what I do not perform. I told you if you
were good you should be rewarded with something out of the good child's box,
and accordingly I gave you a pretty book, because you had been good for some
days. I likewise told you if you were naughty, you should be punished, and I
now must keep my word. I am sorry to be obliged to unlock the naughty child's
box; but your behavior makes me do it: he then took the key out of his pocket,
and fetched in the medal which had the words upon it, Whoever wears this is a
cross child! and tied it with the yellow ribbon round his neck. He cried sadly
at having it put on; and to be sure that is not to be wondered at, as it looked
extremely ridiculous to see a yellow ribbon round a boy's neck: and a bow, and
long ends hanging upon his coat down his back, and a medal bobbing about under
his chin with such disgraceful words upon it: but, as he had been so cross to
his sister, it was proper he should be punished. All his brothers and sisters
looked very grave when they saw it put on: indeed, some of them could not help
shedding tears upon the occasion, as they were all very fond of each other, and
did not like to see one another in affliction: they asked their papa to take it
off, but, after again telling them how necessary it is to punish children when
they are naughty, and convincing them that he must not break his word, and
praising them for their affection to their brother, he insisted upon its being
worn all day.

Charles was quite ashamed of walking about, for every body who saw him took
hold of the medal, and read the inscription upon it. Some people said, there is
a cross boy! Do not go near him! Others said, that boy deserves to be whipped!
So that he found he was laughed at, and despised by every one who saw him, and
most heartily sorry he was that he had behaved so.



In the afternoon, some gentlemen and ladies drank tea with Mr. and Mrs.
Jennet, and Charles felt so exceedingly ashamed when he came into the room, he
did not know which way to look. As soon as he made his appearance, not knowing
at first what it was, they all enquired, why he chose to wear so much frightful
yellow ribbon round his neck? But when they were close enough to read the words
upon the medal, they begged he would not come near any of them, as they all
greatly disliked cross people. Charles was so mortified at the disgrace, that
he could not help crying all the time he was in the room; and very early
desired leave to go to bed; and upon his promising not to behave so any more,
and acknowledging he was sorry for his fault, his papa took off the medal, and
permitted him to retire.

When Saturday came, and they all had been very good, excepting Charles one
day, that he was naughty about lending his sister his book, Mr. and Mrs. Jennet
again opened the good child's box, and took out of it a bat and cricket-ball
for George; a very pretty flowered workbag for Maria; a doll for Charlotte; a
battledoor and shuttlecock for Harriot; a kite for Thomas; and as Charles had
been much better than usual, excepting that one day when he was punished, they
were so kind as to give him an orange; telling him at the same time, that they
were very sorry that he had by his behavior forfeited a more valualuable
reward; but as he had been good some days, he should not go quite unrewarded
from out of the good child's box; and they hoped by the next week he would gain
something better. After having seen the sad consequences of being naughty, not
only as it produced punishment, but likewise as it was the cause of going
without some pretty plaything at the end of the week, it never could have been
thought that any of the Miss or Master Jennets would again be silly, and
occasion the displeasure of their parents; but, I am sorry to say, some of them
stood in need of repeated chastisements. Miss Charlotte was apt to be very
silly, and one day, she, Harriot, and little Tom, had been to take a walk in
the field behind the house with the maid; and Miss Charlotte, instead of
walking in the path, ran all over the field in the very dirtiest parts she
could find out. The maid desired her not to do so; but instead of minding, she
only tried to persuade her brother and sister to do so too; but they, like very
good children, stopped the moment they were desired. Upon which Charlotte laughed
at them, and called them tender chickens and foolish gostins, to mind what the
maid said, and not only ridiculed their proper behavior, but likewise made
faces at Mrs. Deborah (the maid) and flung dirt at her. When they got home,
Mrs. Jennet asked Deborah how she happened to go out in so very dirty a gown
and cloak, as in general she looked very tidy, and clean? I did not go out so
dirty indeed, Madam, said Deborah; but Miss Charlotte did it. How did Charlotte
do it? enquired Mrs. Jennet. She then told the whole affair, and how sadly Miss
Charlotte had behaved, and wanted to make her brother and sister as bad as
herself; but they were very good, and did not mind her. If that is the case,
replied Mrs. Jennet, I think she behaves as if she had not common sense: the
fool's cap will therefore be the properest head dress she can wear. Charlotte
began to cry, and beg it might not be put on; but her mamma said, you know,
Charlotte, if you will be naughty, you must be punished, and if you did not
choose punishment, you would not be guilty of such things as deserve it. Indeed,
mamma, I do not choose it, said Charlotte, pray do not put it on! You cannot
expect, replied Mrs. Jennet, that I should break my promise, if I did, I should
be still naughtier than you; and you know very well that I have told you, if
you will be naughty, you shall be punished. She then unlocked the naughty
child's box, and took the fool's cap, and placed it upon Charlotte's head. The
cap was made something in the shape of a sugar loaf, and had two long ears,
like asses, hanging from the sides, and was painted red, blue, green, yellow,
scarlet, and black; with bits of all colored ribbons streaming from it, and in
the middle of the front was the picture of a naughty child crying; so that, you
may think, it looked extremely ugly and ridiculous. Miss Charlotte screamed so
loud when it was put on, that her mamma threatened to tie up her mouth, and
took out her handkerchief for that purpose; but Charlotte left off, so she put
it in her pocket again. When dinner was ready, Mr. Jennet was quite shocked to
see his daughter with so frightful a cap on her head; nor could her brothers
and sisters, or the servants, keep from looking at it, to see how strange and
ridiculous it looked. After dinner she again begged it might be taken off. Her
mamma told her it should, when she had been to Deborah, and asked her pardon,
and told her, she was sorry she had behaved so badly, and promised not to do so
any more. Charlotte did not like the thoughts of asking pardon; but when she
found her mamma would not take it off, unless she did, she went out of the
room, saying she would go and ask Deborah's pardon. Instead of which, she only
went up stairs into her own room for a few minutes, and then returned, and
asked her mamma to take the cap off. Have you, then, asked Deborah's pardon?
said Mrs. Jennet. Yes, Madam, I have, said she! Only think how extremely wicked
it was to say so, when she knew she had not. Mrs. Jennet likewise knew she was
telling a fib, for she had heard her go up stairs, and the maid was all the
time below. Mrs. Jennet then said, Charlotte, how dare you be so very wicked,
and naughty, as to tell such a fib. I thought you said you did not like
punishment; but you must now be punished with very great severity indeed. I am
quite ashamed of you, and do not know when I shall ever depend upon you again;
but though you tell lies, I shall not, I assure you* but shall punish you as I
always said I should, if you spoke any thing which was not true. She then again
opened the naughty child's box, and took out one of the three rods which was in
it, and the medal that had the words, The wearer of this has told a lie. Then
taking hold of Charlotte, tied the medal round her neck, and led her into
another room by herself where she whipped her as much as she deserved, for
being so wicked a girl; and that, you know, was a great deal, so that she was
most terribly punished indeed.

Mrs. Jennet then returned into the parlour, and found all the children crying
for their sister. I do not at all wonder, my dears, said she, to see you cry; I
can scarcely keep from it myself. I love all my children, and am extremely
sorry that any of them should suffer pain and uneasiness; you may, therefore,
well be concerned now, that she has undergone so great a degree; and another
cause sufficient to cry for, is, the thought of her having been guilty of so
wicked a thing as deceit, and lying; but I hope she will never be so naughty
again. Mrs. Jennet then fetched Charlotte into the room (for she had left her
by herself for a few minutes after she had corrected her) and she remained in
the parlour all the rest of the day, with the fool's cap upon her head, and the
medal round her neck; neither would her mamma suffer her to speak a word to any
of her brothers, or sisters, for fear she should teach them to be as naughty as
herself, saying, if she did not make the proper use of her tongue, which was
speaking the truth, she should not use it at all; so, you may be sure, she
spent a most miserable, unhappy afternoon. At last bed time came, and her mamma
was then so kind as to let her go to bed, though, indeed, children who tell
lies do not deserve a bed to sleep upon, or blankets to keep them warm* but
Mrs. Jennet was in hopes, as she appeared very sorry for her faults, that she
would never be guilty of the same again, and therefore permitted her to go to
bed. But the thoughts of her crime was so much in her head, that she could
sleep but very little all night; and the disgrace she was under, made her mind
exceedingly uneasy indeed, so that she only laid and cried, and sincerely
repented that she had been so very naughty.

CHAP. XIV.
AS soon as ever she was up in the morning, she went to Deborah, and asked her
to forgive her, for the rudeness she had been guilty of to her whilst she was
walking in the field. She then went into her mamma's room, and most earnestly
begged, that she and her papa would pardon her, promising never to commit the
same fault for the future. Mr. and Mrs. Jennet, seeing she was sensible of the
wickedness and folly of the crime she had committed, after talking a great
while to her, and convincing her of the bad consequences of deceit and
falsehood, telling her that nobody would ever depend upon her, or believe what
she said, and also that it was extremely wicked, and would certainly make her
very miserable; they at last kissed her, and let her go down to breakfast; but
still they behaved very gravely to her, for it was impossible to have as good
an opinion of her, as if she had not been so naughty. She was, herself, very
uneasy at the thoughts of her folly; and endeavored, all in her power, to make
amends by being very good, and doing every thing she was bid, which, to be
sure, was the only way to regain the love of her friends. But, still it was
impossible to untell the falsity she had spoken; nor could she be so much
depended upon afterward, as if she had not told it. When Saturday arrived, all
the young folks waited with great patience, though they thought the time rather
long, until the good child's box should be opened, and when it was unlocked,
Master George had another book, a History of Birds and Beasts given him: Miss
Maria a very handsome fan: Master Charles a set of nine-pins: Miss Harriot a
set of doll's tea things; and Master Thomas a bag of marbles; but Miss
Charlotte, who had, during the week, been so extremely naughty, had not any one
thing given her, not even so much as an orange or an apple. She was, you may be
sure, sadly mortified, to be obliged to go without, though she could not but
acknowledge she did not deserve any, and all the others were much delighted
with their presents.

The example of Charlotte's punishment, had so good an effect upon them, that
all excepting Charles, took care never to deserve the same: neither was Miss
Charlotte ever guilty of telling another lie. Little Thomas, at one time,
neglected his book for a few days; so that he was obliged to wear the medal
which was the badge of idleness and sloth, and, excepting that, Mr. and Mrs.
Jennet never had occasion to unlock the naughty child's box for any of their
children but Charles; who, notwithstanding all the pains that were taken with
him, and all the encouragement he met with when good, would frequently be very
naughty, and was so bad as to oblige his papa to use, not only all the
disgraceful medals and fools cap, but also the rods upon him. All his brothers
and sisters, when they grew up, were very worthy men and women, comfortable to
themselves, and beloved and admired by every body who knew them. Whereas,
Charles, from the badness of his disposition, and cross disobliging temper, was
despised, and shunned by all mankind; nobody liked to be in company with him,
and even his brothers and sisters went but seldom to see him; though they would
have gone with all their hearts, if he would but have been kind and civil to
them; but, instead of being so, he was so quarrel some, that they never knew
how to please him, or not give offense. In short, he was a most miserable,
unhappy man, and past all his time extremely uncomfortable, without being
beloved by any one person in the world. He lived by himself, for no one chose
to live with him; nor could he ever get servants to stay with him above a month
at a time; neither did any of his neighbors visit him, because they did not
choose to keep company with so bad tempered a person. His sad behavior gave the
greatest uneasiness to his parents, and they would certainly have died of
grief, had they not been comforted by the very different conduct of his
brothers and sisters, who, by their kind and dutiful behavior, gave them great
satisfaction and joy; and, by their constant attention to every thing their
father and mother liked, repayed that pains and care they had taken of their
education. It is much to be wished that all children, who read this history,
will learn to imitate the good Miss and Master Jennets, and, if ever they have
been naughty before, it is to be hoped, that like Miss Charlotte, they will
repent, and be sorry for their crimes, and take care never to be guilty of the
same again, for fear lest they should at last come to be as unhappy and
miserable as Master Charles; which, they may depend upon it, they will be, if,
like him, they neglect to mind what is said to them.

I hope therefore, the child who is now reading this pretty book, will remember
and always take pains to be good.

FINIS.

