AN ORATION: DELIVERED JULY 4, 1788, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF PROVIDENCE, IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE,
AND OF THE ACCESSION OF NINE STATES TO THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION.

By ENOS HITCHCOCK, A. M.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER.

ON the fourth of JULY inst. being the Anniversary of the Declaration of
INDEPENDENCE by the UNITED STATES, and appointed for the CELEBRATION of the
ADOPTION of the FEDERAL CONSTITUTION; the following ORATION, at the previous
Desire of the Inhabitants of the Town of PROVIDENCE, was delivered in
Commemoration of those Events, to a numerous Assembly at the Baptist
Meeting House; -- and at their Request, it now solicits the Candor of the
Public.

Providence, July 9, 1788.

AN ORATION.
TO felicitate Americans on the Anniversary of their Independence is a dictate
of philanthropy. -- To echo among my fellow-citizens, in grateful acclamations,
the accession of a free federal government is but the natural effusion of a
heart elate with joy. -- To sacrifice, at the shrine of liberty, "the fat of
fed beasts," and pour out the generous libation, if conducted with prudence,
may not be unsuitable expressions of the pleasure we this day experience.

BUT a nobler employment now awaits us -- we ascend from gratulations and
amusements to contemplate, in the temple of liberty, the various beauties of
the edifice, -- to recount the multifarious blessings she proffers our favored
land.

LONG had she erected her standard in our hearts before it was securely planted
on the walls of our citadel, or we safely rested under the shades of its
banner. -- Long did the doubtful events of war hold it in suspense and threaten
to wrest it from our hands.

IT is a dishonor to human nature that wherever liberty has been planted and
flourished, it has commonly required the blood of her sons to water and enrich
the soil -- Nor were we reluctant to pay the price. -- Too dearly had the fair
inheritance been purchased and too bravely defended by our ancestors, to be
tamely resigned by their sons. -- And when the encroaching spirit of ambition
threatened to wrest it from us we resisted unto blood.

THE genius of America greatly rose and inspired thirteen bodies with one soul
to oppose the usurpations of power, -- to secure and transmit the inestimable
patrimony to generations yet unborn. -- Here rises to view that band of
patriots who first united in common council for mutual defense and safety. --
While their productions astonish the political world, they secure its
attention, -- while the royal ear is shut against reiterated and dutiful
petitions of faithful subjects, the listening world only wait the favorable
moment to lend their aid.

VAIN are petitions, and all the pleadings of honest zeal, when the minions of
power and the calls of innumerable dependants plead against them. -- Insult is
added to iniquity -- invasion to insult -- We now approach the gloomy walks of
death! -- The awful images of war crowd around us! -- Hark! -- the distant
clashing of arms -- the hollow groans of the expiring salute our ears -- the
pale ghosts of our slaughtered countrymen hover over our heads and call on us
to avenge their wrongs, and defend our rights!

A SCENE now opens to view in which the best blood and treasure of America were
sacrificed to unjust claims, -- to the dictates of avarice, or the haggard
demon of revenge. -- To trace the steps which led to the unequal combat would
be to tread a hacknied path -- To relate the many achievements of the cabinet
and the field, through its varied progress, would be to give, not an Oration
but an history.

LET us then draw a veil over the melancholy scene which brings to sad
remembrance, the beloved brother -- the dutiful son -- the affectionate parent
-- the tender husband, whose lives were the only sacrifice that could appease
the violence of military force, and save a sinking country from ruin. -- And at
the same time we drop the tear of gratitude at the urn of our dear departed
heroes, let us never forget how much we are indebted to them, and that band of
brothers, who still live to participate in the blessings we this day enjoy. --
Nor should we pass in silence the generous efforts of a powerful Monarch, whose
seasonable alliance greatly aided to plant the vine his friendly hand still
continues to cherish.

UPON this day, which history will ever commemorate, America, compelled by
reiterated and atrocious acts of tyranny and oppression, declared her
independency, and determined, at all hazards to maintain it, -- Though nursed
in the lap of peace, and consequently unversed in the arts of war, -- though
assailed in a variety of points, and unprepared for defense in any, she began,
under every disadvantage, a contest, not for glory but for freedom and
independence, and divine providence has smiled upon efforts resulting from
motives so laudable.

IT has been often asked, what have we gained by our Independence? --

WE have gamed our freedom, Sirs! -- We have shaken off the yoke of foreign
legislation, with all the train of evils which would have followed our
subjugation to the unequivocal authority of transatlantic jurisdiction. -- We
are emancipated from all the horrors of vassalage and slavery; -- and "the man
who will meanly submit to wear a shackle, contemns the noblest gift of heaven,
and impiously affronts that God who made him free." -- We have gained peace and
empire with all the blessings of freedom. -- Forever welcome be the day that
raised us above the government of monarchy, and gave us rank among the citizens
of free republics!

A REVOLUTION can never be considered as complete till government is firmly
established -- and without this independency would be a curse instead of a
blessing -- These jointly were the great object of the American revolution --
and the sole reason why we have not enjoyed all the emoluments of the latter,
is because we have not availed ourselves of the former. -- We came into
national existence without national ideas, and therefore, could not have those
arrangements which more experience is suited to give.

THIS great and extensive people, pressed together by common danger, and loosly
holden by a confederacy suited only to their present exigency, united their
efforts for common safety. -- But when freed from the apprehensions of danger,
their government lost its energy -- their councils were divided -- the
refractory conduct of some States -- the clashing interests of others, and the
divided politics of the whole made it utterly impossible to draw forth national
resources, and to comply with the just demands of creditors, or even defray the
contingent expenditures of government. -- The tottering fabric of their union
shook from its foundation, and threatened the very existence of empire. -- Feuds
and animosities arose in every quarter; and formidable insurrections teemed
with all the horrors of civil war -- But the liberties of America are the
object of divine patronage -- a guardian God protects them -- This intervening
cloud, which spread darkness and distress over our land, was a prelude to a
brighter day.

INDEPENDENCE was but a part of the revolution -- and as we experienced many
difficulties in laying the foundation, it was but natural to look for some in
erecting the superstructure. -- The blessings of a free government, which many
nations have been unable to procure, even after ages of efforts and misery, are
granted by divine providence, to the confederating States after a few years
struggle.

THE boasted wisdom of Greece and Rome were not sufficient to prevent
convulsions in the State, nor to effect revolutions by reason or by rhetoric.

RIVERS of blood ran down the streets of Rome in defense of the republic, and
for the establishment of government -- and while her legions triumphed in
Italy, Gaul, Spain, Britain, and some parts of Germany, -- while the provinces
of Asia Minor, together with Armenia, Syria, Mosopotamia and Media, yielded to
her superior force -- while the most of the inhabitants of Africa obeyed the
voice of the Roman senate, there subsisted within her own walls civil wars of
the most threatening and sanguinary nature.

GREECE could boast of a Solon, a Lycurgus and other splendid genii, who did
honor to human nature, but they cannot boast of a revolution by reasoning,
began and completed in so short a period as that which distinguishes the
present Era.

IT was not till a struggle of more than forty years had distressed and
impoverished Holland that she gained her independence, and many more before she
attained to a firm government. -- England has been a great theater of civil
discord and contention for centuries -- In all their variations of the mode of
government recourse was had to the sword -- and almost the whole of that island
has been stained with the blood of contending nations and domestic factions; --
and they have found that when a sovereign or a system was agreed upon, their
reduction to order was far less rapid than ours.

THE road to empire has usually been slow and difficult. -- As order
progressively arose out of Chaos by the forming hand of the great Architect, so
must a well-ordered government be collected and formed from the scattered
materials and wild mixture of a chaotic people.

How to rescue these materials from the splendid ruins of government, and give
stability to the rising fabric with the greatest rapidity and least difficulty,
is a question which has nonplussed all the philosophers, lawgivers and
politicians of the world. -- The answer to this question has been reserved to
the American States. -- After ages of fruitless attempts in other countries,
this country afford the first instance of an entire revolution in policy and
government, the most important that ever marked the progress of human society,
without the effusion of human blood, without force, fraud or surprise.

HAVING had painful experience of the imbecility of the confederation and its
inadequacy to the purposes of government, the same patriotism which glowed in
the American breast at the commencement of the revolution, -- which animated
the patriot in the cabinet, and supported the brave soldier in the sufferings
and dangers of the field, is renewed in a Convention for devising a more
perfect scheme of government.

BEHOLD "the majesty of a free people, convened in awful simplicity, to consult
their safety and promote their happiness!" -- Here again rises to view, from
the placid shades of domestic life, the great AMERICAN CINCINNATUS, whose
virtues in the field can be equalled only by his wisdom in the senate! --
Illustrious Chief -- May remotest ages reap the fruit of thy toils, and the
happiness of a grateful people crown thy most ardent wishes!

THE business devolved on this august body is as difficult as it is new -- as
important as it is difficult. -- To balance the different interests of the
States, so that each might give up its proportion of local advantage for the
good of the whole, -- to frame a model of government that should so accord with
the genius of a large, extensive and free people, of different education,
manners and employments, that should meet the consenting voice of even of nine
among thirteen independent republics; -- to effect all this was a a task, to
which nothing was equal short of that assemblage of wisdom and philanthropy
which appeared in convention.

To the disappointment of our enemies and the joy of our friends, their wisdom
and candor accomplished the wondrous deed, and we now behold a system of
federal government acceded to with a degree of peace and unanimity, all
circumstances considered, which has no parallel. -- The abilities and political
knowledge, -- the patient deliberation and constant attention, -- the mutual
candor and condescension, which were exhibited by those who framed the Federal
Constitution -- and the similar spirit which actuated the most of those States
in which it has been received, do immortal honor to our country, and add
luster to the present age. -- Justly may it be said, "The present is an age of
philosophy, and America the empire of reason."

YES, my fellow-countrymen, this is an Era reserved for the commencement of
this western empire! The confederating States exhibit to the world the noble
image of a community, which, founded in equality and justice, secures to the
individuals every enjoyment which can be derived from human institutions. --
The fields and the fruits are their own, -- the regulations under which they
live are theirs -- they are the proprietors and lords of the soil, and jointly
constitute the sovereignty of their country. -- They are under a government of
laws and not of men.

HAPPY people! whose minds are not awed by the dread of a master, nor dazzled
with the peagantry of courts, nor enslaved by superstitious customs and
prejudices.

IT is not my province to point out the merits or defects of that federal
constitution which has employed the ablest pens -- I will only offer you the
sentiment of an ingenious writer on the subject -- "The Constitution defines
the powers of Congress; and every power not expressly delegated to that body,
remains in the several State legislatures. The sovereignty and the republican
form of government of each State is guaranteed by the constitution; and the
bounds of jurisdiction between the federal and State governments are marked
with precision. In theory, it has all the energy and freedom of the British and
Roman governments, without their defects," -- And I may venture to add, that
whatever defects appertain to this plan of government, it has this perfection,
it prescribes a remedy for them, and contains within itself the means of its
own cure -- a circumstance which ought to have its weight in the minds of all
opposers!

IF, from a vile assemblage of vagrants and rogues, the wisest and most
virtuous nation that ever existed, deduced its origin, under the wise
constitution and laws of Romulus -- what may not be expected from an
enlightened, virtuous and heroic people, who have the advantage of the wisdom
and experience, under a constitution formed by their free suffrages and
combined wisdom, of all those who have gone before them? -- Though much is
already effected -- though wonders are wrought, yet much still remains to be
done. -- Great wisdom and candor, both in public and private conduct, -- great
steadiness and perseverance will be necessary in order to reap all the
advantages which this happy event may produce.

WHAT blessings may they secure to themselves and posterity by a wise
improvement of the present occasion? What glorious prospects open to view when
we contemplate the scope given to the human mind for exertion, -- the extension
of commerce -- the progress of science, agriculture, manufactures, and all the
pleasing and useful arts of refined society, which naturally slow from
independence, and a government as just in its principles and firm in its
texture, as it is free in its formation? -- The vast tracts of uncultivated
lands, and their rapid population, present us with a most extensive theater for
human action, and the most magnificent empire on which the sun ever shone. --
Hither shall the oppressed of all nations flee for safety, and find a refuge
from the encroachments of restless ambition! -- The hand of industry shall
change the haunts of wild beasts into fruitful fields -- the wilderness shall
blossom as a rose -- the desert become vocal with the praises of God. The
friendly bosom of the earth shall nourish and unfold to her noble lord, the
industrious farmer, her inexhaustible sources of support and wealth -- and pour
forth her blessings, through the extended channels of trade and commerce, to
all quarters of the globe. -- While the East-Indian partakes of her dainties,
the hardy sons of Kamtschatka, in rude mirth, hail the American navigator, who
in exchange for the superabundance of our produce receives the wealth-giving
furrs and other effects of the frigid zone.

THESE improvements and advantages are not the doubtful prognostics of fancy,
nor the chimeras of enthusiasm. -- They are already realized in part -- nor is
this Town and State unacquainted with some of those advantages: -- Soon shall
your adventurous sons relate on India's scorching sands the enterprizing spirit
of our merchants -- soon shall her inhabitants regale themselves with the
generous fruits of your husbandry, and amply repay your labor with the
delicious products of her soil; -- and as this intercourse will lessen the
price of your imports it will increase the value of your produce.

WHETHER America will ever reap all the advantages, and realize all the
pleasing prospects which offer themselves to view, depends very much on the
wisdom, unanimity and firmness of her inhabitants in this critical and most
interesting period.

CERTAIN it is that a most extensive field is now opened before every friend of
his country, to display his utmost abilities in providing for its peace and
safety, and promoting its honor and prosperity in the sphere in which they
severally move. -- Society is composed of individuals -- they are parts of the
whole, -- and when each one moves in his own orb, and fills his own station,
the system will be complete, -- each will enjoy his proportion of good, and be
entitled to a just tribute of honor and applause from the whole. -- Every true
friend of society will consider the importance of good government, and
cheerfully submit to lawful authority, -- will encourage and support public
officers, in the execution of their office for the public good, -- will
cultivate in himself and others those benevolent dispositions so necessary to
amity and friendship; and those principles of integrity, honesty and justice
which lay the foundation of mutual confidence, and the preservation of peace
and harmony -- and, what is above all worthy of consideration, it will secure
the friendship and protection of that Almighty Being, whose providence rules
over all -- to whose control all second causes and subordinate agents are
subject.

THE privileges put within our reach are of such magnitude that they ought to
fire every breast with a fixed determination to adopt that line of conduct
which will effectually secure the proffered good. -- The consequences of our
present conduct will reach into future ages, and affect the unknown millions
who will come after us. -- What consideration of so much weight could arise in
the minds of parents to draw forth their exertions to secure the blessings
which the propitious hand of divine providence now offers, and transmit them to
posterity?

"WHERE property is secure, and men allowed to enjoy the fruits of their own
labor, they are capable of efforts unknown in those countries where despotism
renders every thing precarious, and where a tyrant reaps what slaves have
sown," -- said an European observer; and adds, -- "The chilling effects of
despotic oppression, or the benign influence of freedom and commerce, strikes
the eye of the most careless traveller."

BY our independency we are not only freed from the shackles of encroaching
monarchy, and are raised to a rank among the nations of the earth, but the way
is opened for the cultivation of the most useful knowledge and the practice of
the most exalted virtues; and the preservation of any republican form of
government depends infinitely more on a general diffusion of these than on the
form itself. -- What could give a more pleasing prospect of the future
stability of this empire than that spirit of enquiry which is gone forth so
generally through the land? -- The institution of colleges, academies, and
libterary societies have increased the means of knowledge -- Nor can you easily
estimate the advantage which this vicinity derives from yonder seat of the
Muses.

KNOWLEDGE has as favorable an aspect on religion as on civil society. -- The
religion of the ignorant is superstition -- Ignorance is the parent of blind
devotion, and such devotion generates the wildness of enthusiasm. -- Such will
not enquire, with candor and impartiality, after truth, nor practice the great
duties of benevolence.

A FREE intercourse with the world by an extensive commerce not only prepares
the way for the accession of wealth, but it unfetters and expands the human
mind, and prepares it for the reception of liberal science and the practice of
the most amiable virtues. -- It removes prejudices, and, by an acquaintance
with other nations, it softens the mind toward them, enlarges the benevolent
affections, and extends the empire of humanity to all the world.

THE happy effects of the American revolution are felt far beyond the bounds of
America. -- -- The oppressed Irelander has been exonerated of an insupportable
burden, and is permitted, in part to taste the sweets of independence with us.
-- The spirit of toleration, of which we so highly boast, is gone forth and
spread itself far through Europe. -- The bigotry of the Catholic, and the
resentment of the oppressed Protestant, have subsided -- the one no longer
esteems the temple polluted in which the unhallowed foot of the other has
trodden; but can succeed each other with their own modes in the same house,
sacred to the service of the same God.

MAY the spark of liberty, which has been kindled on the American altar, be
blown into one pure universal flame, and irradiate the whole world of
intelligent beings. -- No longer let the lovers of freedom impiously dare
trample under foot the natural rights of others -- nor wrest, by violence or
fraud, from their own domain, Africa's unoffending sons. -- May the happy time
be hastened when the reign of tyranny and oppression, of every description,
shall forever cease, -- when the majesty of laws shall be superior to that of
Kings, -- when the happy influences of a mild and benevolent religion shall be
universally felt, putting a final period to the baleful effects of bigotry,
superstition and persecution for conscience sake, -- when the nations of the
earth shall learn war no more!

IT cannot be necessary, after what has been said, to dwell on the importance
of attending to the regular education of children and youth -- it must be
evident, on the least reflection, that not only the growth and happiness, but
the very existence of republican government depends upon the culture of the
mind and morals of the rising generation. -- Let the history of fallen
republics admonish you of the danger of neglecting to nourish them by public
education, and to strengthen them by public virtue! -- Nor is education less
necessary to domestic peace and personal enjoyment, than to the well-being of
society.

THE great encouragement given to industry by the avenues of commerce which are
continually opening to us, is a reflection that cannot have escaped any one. --
By this means a market is found for your products, and their comparative value
is enhanced. -- Industry is the only sure road to wealth, -- and while it
increases the stock, it contributes to the health -- promotes the virtues, and,
of course, adds to the happiness of a people.

ALREADY have we experienced a material advantage from the recovery of this
source of every good to society. -- Nor are we a little indebted to the fair
part of the community for the vast increase of our manufactures. -- The profits
of their industry lay claim to this public tribute of applause. -- To them must
it be principally ascribed that in this town the manufactures of the last year,
on a loose calculation, exceed those of five or six years before by an hundred
thousand yards, the value of which cannot be computed at less than 30,000
dollars. -- Thus are we returning to the fruitful paths of industry more
rapidly than we declined from them.

WE have now little to fear from our enemies, but every thing to hope from the
situation, extent and resources of our country; and from the enterprizing
spirit of its inhabitants. -- Under the smiles of approving heaven, may they
proceed and prosper in every useful art -- increasing in knowledge and virtue,
until they become as conspicuous for the purity of their morals as for the
equality and perfection of their government!

MAY no one, this day, prove himself unworthy the freedom he enjoys, by a
conduct inconsistent with the purest pleasures, -- by any thing unbecoming him
as a man, as a christian! -- May temperance, sobriety and decorum preside over
all our joys, and be our constant attendants through the various walks of life.
-- Then may we look forward with hope and joy, through all the variations of
imperfect government, and the struggles of the contending passions of men, to a
state of more perfect society, -- to that grand community where "universal love
smiles on all around."


