A SERMON DELIVERED September 3, 1788. AT THE DUDLEIAN LECTURE IN THE CHAPEL OF
HARVARD COLLEGE, IN CAMBRIDGE.

BY TIMOTHY HILLIARD, A.M. PASTOR of the FIRST CHURCH in that TOWN.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDMUND FREEMAN OPPOSITE THE NORTH DOOR OF THE STATE-HOUSE.
M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

A SERMON.
EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS, I. 4. DECLARED TO BE THE SON OF GOD WITH POWER,
ACCORDING TO THE SPIRIT OF HOLINESS, BY THE RESURRECTION FROM THE DEAD.


THE pious and honorable founder of this Lecture having assigned revealed
religion as one of the subjects of investigation, the design of the present
discourse is to consider some of the principal evidences on which the truth of
revelation rests. It must be obvious to every one who is acquainted with the
subject, that a wide and extensive field opens to view, and that to traverse
the several parts, must vastly exceed the limits of a single discourse. --
Several able and worthy divines who have preceded me on this subject, have
confined themselves to some particular branch of it. One discourse was limited
to this single point, to prove that Jesus of Nazareth was the promised Messiah
By the Rev. Mr. Barnard of Marblehead.
. The sole object of another, was to consider that part of the evidence which
arises from miracles By the Rev. Mr. Barnard of Salem.
-- Others, who have also been eminent in their profession, have taken a brief
view of the several parts of this copious subject. I confess that the first of
these methods has struck me as best calculated to answer the design of the
institution. The internal evidence of christianity arising from the peculiar
excellency of its doctrines and precepts, deserves particular attention. The
exact accomplishment of a vast variety of prophecies in the successive periods
of the world, many of which respect important events which fall within our own
observation, affords a strong and undeniable argument of the truth of
revelation. The evidence arising from the miracles of Christ and his apostles,
however derided by some and misunderstood by others, will always have great
weight with every unprejudiced mind. -- Among the various incontestible proofs
of our Savior's mission, his resurrection from the dead, is the most
interesting and important. This is the grand basis of the system; the
cornerstone on which the whole building rests. For as St. Paul argues, if
Christ be not risen, our preaching is vain, and your faith is vain also 1 Cor.
15. 14.
. -- Infidels, aware of the importance of this fact to the christian faith,
have employed much art and address in attempting to overthrow it. Their
objections however have paved the way for the fullest investigation of the
subject, and the truth has been set in a clear view. However it may have
happened, this particular point has not been considered on this occasion; which
together with its magnitude and importance shall be my apology for paying some
attention to it.

That there was such a person as Jesus of Nazareth, who appeared on the stage
of human life more than seventeen hundred years ago, who delivered a system of
doctrines and laws, and performed a variety of wonderful works in support of
the truth of his mission, is a fact most clear and indisputable. -- In this
respect the friends and enemies of christianity are perfectly agreed. Celsus,
Porphyry, Heriocles and Julian the apostate with other inveterate enemies of
the christian cause, are compelled to acknowledge this truth -- Neither is
there any dispute with respect to the crucifixion of Jesus Christ at Jerusalem,
in the reign of Tiberius Caesar the Roman Emperor. The Jewish priests and
rulers, who most ardently wished to prevent the spread of christianity, with
subsequent historians bear the fullest testimony to this truth But the case is
far otherwise with respect to the resurrection of our Lord. From the time that
the Sanhedrim hired the Roman soldiers to declare that the disciples stole away
the body while they slept to the present day, various objections have been
urged to invalidate the truth of this important fact. Before we proceed to a
direct consideration of the subject, it is necessary to make some observations
on the nature of evidence in general, and that kind of evidence in particular,
which might reasonably be expected in attestation of a revelation from heaven.

"Evidence is the clear manifestation of truth to the mind, producing a ready
assent to it." Sometimes we discover truth by strict mathematical
demonstration. From certain axioms or self-evident principles we arrive by
various gradations at other truths; so that where the whole process is
understood, there is no possibility of doubt. In this case, the premises are of
such a nature as to render us infallibly certain of the conclusion. -- In other
instances, our assent is grounded upon the testimony of our senses. To this
evidence St. John refers when he says, that which we have heard, which we have
seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of
the word of life, declare we unto you 1 John 1. 1.
. This is a kind of evidence most full and satisfactory, to which an appeal is
always made, for the determination of the most interesting and important
affairs in life. To reject the testimony of our senses would imply a gross
reflection on the wisdom and goodness of our creator. This would be to suppose
that he has by the constitution of our nature subjected us to unavoidable
deception.

A third kind of evidence on which assent is grounded, is credible testimony,
or the concurrent declaration of faithful witnesses with respect to certain
facts which have fallen within their cognizance. With this proof men admit the
truth of all past transactions. All historical facts, from the beginning of the
world to the present day, depend upon it. The administration of justice and the
support of civil government in the world, rest upon this basis. Without this
kind of evidence a great part of the most useful knowledge must be given up.
Upon this idea, as one observes, no sort of discovery, no experiment or
observation which a man does not make himself, or see with his own eyes; nay
nor any demonstrable truth which he did not demonstrate himself is ever to be
admitted or made use of, either by way of argument in discourse, or as a
premise in any demonstration in order either to theory or practice. Every man
must stand upon the basis of his own proper knowledge without light or
information, without hints or suggestions from others Mr. Ditton.
. -- It has been alleged by de stical writers, that the external evidence of
christianity is diminished by time, and that the very nature of probability is
such, that were it left to time itself, even that would wear it quite out. This
representation is altogether inadmissible: For though the minds of men may be
much less affected with remote transactions than with those which are recent, a
fact which has once been sufficiently attested always claims our belief, unless
contrary evidence is adduced. For instance, it is now as firmly believed that
Julius Caesar was slain in the senate house, as that General Montgomery fell
before the walls of Quebec. If it was of the nature of credibility to be thus
destroyed, all true history must by degrees degenerate into mere fable and
faction. What is credible to day would perhaps be incredible to morrow. No real
distinction could be left on this supposition between truth and falsehood, but
we must be in a state of endless fluctuation and uncertainty. The truth is,
mankind have never been in doubt with regard to a multitude of past facts and
remote transactions. Modern infidels who urge this case the ravages of time,
have never presumed to doubt the surprising victories of Alexander the great,
that the ancient Romans subdued all the neighboring nations, or that they
destroyed and burnt the famous city of Carthage. In all cases where
christianity is not concerned, they admit these ancient facts without the least
hesitation. It discovers extreme unfairness to receive this kind of proof in
all other instances, and to reject it as applied to religion.

A being of infinite wisdom and goodness has been pleased to rest the truth of
revelation principally on this kind of evidence. Christianity makes no
pretensions to strict demonstration; neither are all men indulged the testimony
of their own senses; but those important facts on which the truth of it
depends, are attested by credible witnesses; who had neither ability nor
inclination to impose a falsehood upon the world, and whose whole character
bears the marks of the strictest integrity. On this evidence christians in all
ages, have admitted the truth of our Savior's resurrection, that most
important fact which lies at the foundation of the whole system. If agreeably
to the language of the text, God the father has declared Jesus Christ to be his
son, by raising him from the dead, no man can refuse to admit the truth of his
mission who believes the perfections of deity. It is impossible that any one
who owns the truth of natural religion should suppose, that a being of infinite
wisdom, goodness and veracity should ever set his seal to a lie, or give the
best credentials to an impostor.

The way being now in some measurs prepared, we proceed to consider the several
proofs of the reality of our Savior's resurrection. -- That HE to whom all
power belongs, can with the utmost ease raise one from the dead, is a point too
clear to be called in question. However impossible such an event may be to any
second cause, there is nothing in it which implies any absurdity or
contradiction. HE, whose creative hand gave existence to unnumbered worlds, and
to the various orders of creatures which inhabit them, and who established all
those laws by which the general system is governed, must infallibly have the
supreme direction and control -- As the resurrection of Christ was evidently a
subject of ancient prophecy, and as he had frequently declared that he must
suffer death and rise again the third day, the Jewish rulers took the most
effectual precautions to prevent any fraud. -- They said to Pilate, Sir we
remember that this deceiver said while he was yet alive, after three days I
will rise again; command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure till the
third day, lest his disciples come by night and steal him away, and say unto
the people, he is risen from the dead. So the last error shall be worse than
the first. Pilate said unto them, ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure
as you can; so they went and made the sepulcher sure sealing the stone and
setting a watch Matthew 27. 63, 64.
. As the prediction had fixed the third day for his resurrection, by having the
dead body in their custody till after that day, they imagined they should
abundantly defeat it, and know they had nothing to fear from it afterward.
Human policy could not have adopted a more effectual method to prevent all
fraud than that which was chosen by the Jewish rulers. The sepulcher was hewed
out of a solid rock, and delivered to a company of soldiers with orders from
their officer to guard it. But what are guards and sentinels against the power
of almighty God! An angel of the Lord opened the sepulcher, the guards saw him
and became as dead men. Terrified at the earthquake, and the radiant appearance
of this heavenly messenger, some of them presently repaired to the city, and
gave information to the chief priests and rulers, of those things which had
hapened. It seems highly probable from what followed, that the soldiers were
actual witnesses of the resurrection of Jeius. The deliberations of the
Sanhedrim on this subject, and the measures which they took to suppress the
story, plainly suppose that the guard assured them of the reality of his
resurrection. Our Lord is indeed said to have appeared first to Mary Magdalene.
This declaration is perfectly consistent with the idea that the soldiers law
him when he came out of the tomb. For that could not so properly be called an
appearance after the resurrection, as the resurrection itself.

However this might be, our Lord showed himself alive after his passion by many
infallible proofs, being seen of his disciples forty days Acts 1. 3.
. Deistical writers have fondly represented the accounts which the several
Evangelists have given of this important fact as being inconsistent with, and
contradictory to, each other and therefore, not worthy of credit. -- Though
there may be some disagreement, as to certain minute circumstances, yet their
testimony to the sect itself, is substantially the same. Their several
relations are of such a kind as to show that there was no collusion in the
matter, nor any preconcerted plan with respect to their narration. Each one
declared what he saw or heard in such order as seemed most natural, and in a
manner most simple and unadorned. Had the four Evangelists, says one, written
exactly in the same order, related only the same facts, reported only the same
discourses, and reported them in the same words, I doubt not but oar enemies
would have cried out plain juggle and imposture! How is it possible these
writers should have so exactly agreed in all these circumstances, had they not
concerted these matters together, and resolved each to support the others
account; or if each succeeding writer had not taken his account from the
former, whereby in stead of being four distinct witnesses, they are in reality
but one! And the objection from hence would have been stronger says he, than I
have seen it drawn from any other article Dr. Chandler.
. Several writers of distinguished abilities have considered, and completely
refuted the objections drawn from the seeming inconsistency of the witnesses.
The plan suggested by Mr. West is perhaps on the whole, most unexceptionable.
It is needless to recite particularly the mode which he has adopted. To save
time, I must refer you to the work itself, and proceed to consider the number
of witnesses attesting this fact, their character their steadfast adherence to
their declaration amidst danger and death, etc. Let us attend for a moment to
the number of the witnesses -- Our Lord appeared to men and women, to the
eleven Apostles at sundry times; he ascended in the presence of an hundred and
twenty, and St. Paul assures us that he was seen of more than five hundred
brethren at once, the greater part of whom were alive when he wrote to the
Corinthians, and who of course would have contradicted his account if it had
not been true 1 Corinthians 15. 6.
. -- Now though it is scarcely possible that a single person should be deceived
with respect to a fact which was an object of sense, it is altogether
incredible that so large a number should have been imposed upon. Can any person
be so skeptical as to suppose that not one of the Apostles, not one of the
hundred and twenty, or of the five hundred could tell what he saw, and heard
and felt? It is not to be admitted that so many persons would unite in
reporting a falsehood, without the least prospect of any advantage If the
apostles had designed to impose a falsehood upon the world, they would never
have communicated the affair to so large a number, lest amidst such a variety
of dispositions, some should have discovered the cheat. They must have
recollected that of the small number of twelve, one had proved a traitor, and
that among so many as five or six hundred, it was hardly possible that all
should prove true to their trust. Had they been impostors, this very
circumstance would infallibly have ruined their cause. No rational account can
be given of the number of witnesses but upon the idea that they were conscious
of their integrity, and knew the truth of the fact to which they bore testimony.

As these witnesses were abundantly sufficient in number, to ascertain the
truth of any fact which fell within their cognizance, so their character was
such as to render their testimony highly credible.

They were persons of a fair, unblemished character, and therefore could not
wish to deceive mankind in their most important interests. Their writings
plainly discover their piety toward God, as well as their benevolence to men.
Conscious of their integrity, they appeal to the omniscient God for the truth
of what they delivered to the world. We do not find any charge of immorality or
wickedness brought against them by their most inveterate enemies. If they had
been persons of abandoned characters, the Jewish rulers would not have failed
to have brought them to justice; but when they cited them before their
tribunal, they accused them of nothing but preaching Jesus and the
resurrection. So that malice itself can hardly indulge a suspicion that they
were liable to any impeachment. It cannot therefore be admitted, that they
would ever have wished to persuade the world that Christ was raised, unless
they knew the truth of the fact. -- Further, they appear in the whole of their
conduct to have been persons of great plainness and simplicity. They were
altogether unqualified to impose a falsehood upon the world, had they been
wicked enough to have attempted it. "They had neither gifts of nature, nor
advantages of education to lead a multitude, and to manage the passions of
men." There is no appearance of art or address in their testimony, but they
declare in the most simple, unaffected manner those things which they had seen
and heard. They do not even attempt to conceal their own faults, but mention
with the utmost frankness their dullness of apprehension, their incredulity,
their doubts and fears. They relate without the least reserve, the perfidy of
Judas, the denial of Peter, and their total dereliction of their master in the
hour of distress. These are certain marks of fairness and impartiality, and
serve to recommend their testimony to the belief of all men. However, though
they had a large share of simplicity, yet they were not such weak and deluded
mortals as some have represented, so as not to be certain of what they saw and
heard. There is no appearance of wild enthusiasm, or an overheated imagination.
There was nothing in their conduct which looked like fond credulity. They were
extremely slow in admitting the truth of a fact, of which they had not the
least expectation. They enquired with care and attention as to the reality of
it, and never published it to the world till they had the fullest ocular
demonstration. The incredulity of Thomas was carried to the greatest excess,
and was at length removed by the most invincible evidence.

Though they were illiterate men, yet they were as capable as others, of
judging of a plain matter of fact. By their former intimacy with Jesus they
could distinguish him from any other person. -- When they saw him eat and drink
before them, when they handled his body, and freely conversed with him for
forty days, they must have been infallibly certain with respect to the identity
of his person -- So that on the whole, they could not have been imposed upon
themselves, neither had they ability or disposition to impole upon others.

We are further to consider their steadfast adherence to their declaration
amidst danger and death. Soon after our Lord's ascension, his apostles
published his religion in the city of Jerusalem. They ceased not to declare the
innocence of their master, and b^ldly charged his death upon the priests and
rulers as a most inhuman murder, No threateings were sufficient to intimidate
them. James one of the twelve, and Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the
holy Ghost, soon fell sacrifices to the rage of persecution. Peter, one of the
chief of the apostles, was committed to prison and the time fixed for his
execution. The rest, nevertheless persevered in their declaration, and ceased
not to preach Jesus and the resurrection. While they were exposed to every kind
of indignity and contempt, from an unbelieving world, and death itself in the
most tremendous forms, they never hesitated with respect to their testimony. We
cannot, say they, but speak the things which we have seen and heard. We are his
witnesses of these things, and so also is the holy Ghost, which God has given
to them that obey him Acts 4, 20. 5, 32.
. Now though the sufferings of the apostles do not immediately prove the truth
of Christ's resurrection, yet they are a good evidence of the sincerity of
their declaration. There have indeed been instances where persons have suffered
cather than relinquish false and erroneous opinions. But the case is widely
different where men die for the truth of a matter of fact which they had seen
themselves. "In doctrines, as Bishop Sherlock observes, men are always liable
to mistake, and it is no reason for me to embrace another man's opinion because
I think him sincere in it. But when a man reports to me an uncommon matter of
fact, which is in its own nature an object of sense, if I believe him not, it
is not because I doubt the testimony of his senses, but merely because I
question his truth and sincerity. Since voluntary suffering for the truth is a
good proof of sincerity, the suffering of the apostles for the truth of
Christ's resurrection, is a powerful argument in support of the reality of it.
The apostles gave up their lives in bearing testimony to the resurrection of
their master. It was always in their power to quit their evidence and save
their lives. Even their bitterest enemies required them only to be silent.
Others have denied or asserted facts in hopes of saving their lives: but these
men attest a fact at the expense of their lives which they might have saved by
denying the truth. So that between criminals denying plain facts, and the
apostles dying for their testimony there is this material difference. Criminals
deny the truth in hopes of saving their lives, the apostles willingly parted
with their lives rather than deny it."

Once more, the gifts of the holy Ghost which were imparted to the apostles and
others, are a substantial proof of our Lord's resurrection. He assured them
that they should receive power to execute the work assigned them, that the holy
Ghost should come upon them, and that they should be his witnesses both in
Jerusalem and in all Judea, and to the uttermost parts of the earth Acts 1. 8.
. The sacred historian assures us that this promise was fulfilled on the
memorable day of Pentecost, when they received the gift of tongues and other
miraculous powers necessary to support the truth of their mission. These powers
began to be exercised at a public festival in Jerusalem, in the presence of a
vast multitude collected from all quarters. So that if these had not been real
miracles, there was every possible advantage for detection. Now as God himself
bore them witness with diverse signs and miracles and gifts of the holy Ghost,
their declaration was entitled to the fullest credit. The apostle in our text
refers to these miraculous gifts when he says that Christ was declared to be
the son of God with power according to the spirit of holiness, or the holy
spirit. For though these miraculous powers did not directly prove the
resurrection of Jesus, yet as they were agreeable to his own prediction, and
bestowed at the very time which he had prescribed, as they were visible
manifestations of the power of God, it follows that the apostles either
declared the truth, or else that God Almighty gave the highest possible
attestation to a falsehood. -- It has indeed often been suggested that evil
spirits have a power of working miracles. But as the laws of nature are the
established rules of the divine government, and essential to the order and
happiness of the world, it cannot be rationally supposed that God ever
delegates to his creatures a power of controuling those laws at their own
pleasure. It is altogether inadmissible that opposite beings should in turn
suspend the laws of nature, in order to support different systems. "This would
entirely destroy the credit of miracles as criterions of truth, and credentials
of a divine mission. A God of truth can never bear an immediate testimony to
one as a divine messenger whom he has not sent, or who publishes his own
inventions as the oracles of heaven." He cannot consistently with his wisdom
and benevolence, ever suffer any inferior beings by miraculous works to deceive
his creatures. It must be added, that the rapid spread and propagation of the
gospel in the world, against the strongest prejudices and the most violent
opposition, serve to confirm the truth of Christ's resurrection. The doctrines
and precepts of christianity were totally opposite to the principles and views
of Jews and Gentiles. All parties were confederated against it, though upon
different motives; and yet it spread and triumphed. Within twenty five years
after the death of Christ many myriads of Jews believed in him; and in a few
years after, the gospel was propagated through all parts of the Roman empire;
and thus agreeably to our Lord's prediction, being lifted up, he drew all men
after him John 12. 32.
. Now that a few men destitute of all the advantages of birth and education,
bred up amidst the numerous prejudices and superstitions of their own nation,
and engaged in the lowest occupations of life, should in a few years, propagate
the christian religion in the world against the strongest prejudices, and the
most violent opposition, is an event most astonishing, which never can be
accounted for, but upon the idea that God was with them of a truth.

It must indeed be acknowledged, that false religions have been propagated with
success. The Mohammedan imposture had a rapid progress, and still exists in the
world. But how was this system propagated? Was it by its own internal
excellence, and by such proofs as are adapted to afford rational conviction to
the minds of men? Was not this prophet arrayed in armor and blood, riding in
triumph over thousands and ten thousands who fell by his victorious sword? How
many cities did he consume! What an extent of country did he ravage and
destroy! What wretchedness did he bring on the inhabitants of the earth! Were
any such unhallowed means adopted by Christ and his apostles! What a striking
contrast is there between this fierce invader of the sacred rights of mankind,
and the benevolent, meek and humble Jesus, who came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them; who went about doing good to the souls and bodies of men,
dis^using happiness in the family of God! Besides, did not this artful imposter
adapt his religion as far as possible, to the lusts and passions of men? Did he
not by his precepts and example justify those practices to which mankind are
extremely addicted? Did he not promise his votaries a paradise which should
give full scope to their unbridled appetites and inclinations? -- The religion
and example of Jesus were totally opposite to this system. Christianity is
levelled against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. It inculcates
every virtue which can adorn human nature, and assimilate it to the pattern of
perfection. The example of Christ was pure and spotless, calculated in every
view to recommend and enforce that excellent religion which he taught. A
comparison of the nature of the christian and mohammedan systems and the mode of
their propagation, must convince us that the argument drawn from the spread and
actual existence of the former, remains in full force. These are some of the
principal proofs on which the truth of our Savior's resurrection rests.
Several things have been alleged by the enemies of christianity in one age and
another to invalidate this evidence, which may deserve notice.

The Jewish rulers alarmed at the idea of his resurrection and the probable
consequences of it, immediately took measures to prevent the belief of this
important fact. They hired the soldiers to declare that the body was stolen
away by the disciples while they slept. This report, however improbable, has
been believed by the Jews in all ages of the christian Church No story was ever
fabricated more absurd in itself. For men can never say what is done while they
are asleep. If the disciples had attempted to take away the body, and the guard
knew it, they might with the utmost ease, have prevented it. If the body was
taken away while they were asleep, it was impossible for them to say by whom it
was done. Supposing they had been so regardless of their duty as to have fallen
asleep, any attempt to rob the sepulcher must instantly have awaked them. The
body was so deposited that its removal could not be effected without
considerable noise. Besides, the Evangelist assures us, that the burying
clothes were left in such order that there was no appearance of hurry and
confusion, but all the marks of leisure and composure of mind. -- It is
extremely improbable that the disciples of our Lord should have attemped any
thing of this kind. It does not appear that they had any expectation of his
rising again. When he was laid in the tomb, all their hopes of his being the
promised Messiah, were buried with him. It is therefore inconceivable that they
should have contrived any account with respect to his resurrection. By stealing
the body, they would have been guilty of a high offense, and liable to a heavy
punishment, without the least expectation of support either from God or men in
asserting the resurrection, which on this supposition, they knew to be false.
Besides, if the Jewish rulers had believed this story themselves, and knew that
there had been any collusion with respect to the removal of the body, why was
there no attempt to confront and destroy the testimony of the apostles? This
would certainly have been an act of justice to themselves, and what they owed
to their nation and to mankind.

Is it possible that men in these circumstances should never have attempted any
investigation of the matter? Is not their silence a strong presumptive proof
that they knew the reality of Christ's resurrection?

It has also been suggested by way of objection, that according to the account
of the Evangelists, Christ was raised before the time fixed in the prediction.
It must be observed that the words meta treis emeras, after three days do not
signify either in the nature of the thing, or in constant acceptance, the
completion of three times twenty four hours. It is evident that the Scribes and
Pharisees understood by the third day only the commencement of that day. They
demanded that a watch should be set till the third day, which plainly shows
that had Christ risen on any part of that day to their conviction, they must
have owned the accomplishment of the prophecy. Our Lord was crucified and laid
in the tomb on Friday; he continued there all Saturday, and early in the
morning on what is now called the first day of the week, he arose; which
according to Jewish phraseology, was three days and three nights. We have a
similar instance of computation in 1 Kings 12. 5. where Rehoboam says to the
people, depart yet for three days and then come again, and yet all the people
came to him the third day. In like manner, when the parents of Jesus missed him
on their return from Jerusalem, it is said that they went back, and after three
days, found him in the temple, i. e. the third day. For they missed him after
the first day's journey, returned the second day to the city, and on the third
day they found him in the temple. Josephus, the Jewish historian, has a similar
expression with respect to Isaac, on eutheus met ogdocen emeran peritemnousi,
i. e. the eighth day. So that the expression in the prophecy exactly agrees
with the event, when taken according to the use of language at that time.

The last objection which I shall notice, is that which is derived from our
Lord's not appearing to the body of the Jewish nation. Infidels say, that he
promised such an appearance, when he declared that no sign should be given, but
the sign of the prophet Jonas; and that as Jonas was a sign to the Ninevites,
so should the son of man be to that generation Luke 11. 29, 30.
. In reply to this it must be observed, that the prophecy never intimated that
he should rise in the presence of the people or show himself to the body of
them, but only that sufficient and proper evidence should be exhibited of the
truth of his resurrection. Jonas was a sign to the Ninevites, because they had
proper evidence of his miraculous deliverance, though none of them perhaps saw
him when he was thrown out of the fish. The prophecy of Christ was also
literally and exactly fulfilled when the truth of his resurrection was attested
by credible witnesses The body of the Jewish nation had no reason to expect
that Christ would appear to them; for his particular commission to that people
terminated at his death, and he assured them that they should see him no more
till they were better disposed to receive him Luke 13. 35.
. As the whole world was concerned in the truth of Christ's resurrection, it
was necessary that such proof should be exhibited as was adapted to the
satisfaction of all men. Who could be so well qualified to be the witnesses of
this important fact, as those who had been intimately conversant with him, who
knew his form and air, his voice and manner: If our Lord had appeared publicly
to the Jews, it is probable that some of them would have been convinced; others
would no doubt have persisted in their infidelity; so that future generations
must after all, have depended upon the evidence of those very persons who were
appointed to be the witnesses of his resurrection. Instead of gaining any thing
by his public appearance, we must have trusted to the evidence of the
disciples, and this clogged with one encumbrance, viz. that some who saw him
were not convinced. If the body of the Jewish nation had been convinced by such
a public appearance, this would not have been sufficient to satisfy modern
infidels. They could have no other evidence of the fact than testimony, and
therefore according to their own system, must continue in doubt. Persons of
this character are not the more ready to admit the reality of the miracles of
Moses in Egypt and at the Red sea, because they were wrought before all the
people. If the testimony of several hundreds of credible persons who had the
best possible opportunity for knowing the truth, and who were ready to seal
their declaration with their blood, is not admitted, there is no probability
that an augmentation of their number to any amount whatsoever, would afford
conviction. "If they hear not Moses and the Prophets," Christ and his apostles,
there is no probability that they would be persuaded, "though one rose from the
dead" and appeared personally to every individual. -- The time will not admit
of enlarging any further, I will relieve your patience by concluding with some
remarks on the doctrine which has been considered.

If Christ has been declared to be the son of God with power by his
resurrection from the dead, then we may rest assured that the christian
religion is of divine original. It is evident that "we have not followed
cunningly -- devised fables, and that our faith stands not in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God." For surely the almighty and benevolent Father of
all, would never have thus honored an impostor and have given credit to his
impious undertaking. This is the highest possible attestation which could ever
be given to any messenger from heaven. So that he who doubts the divine mission
of Jesus Christ must either believe that it is within the reach of human power
to raise the dead, or else that a being of all perfection has adopted the most
effectual method to lead mankind into error and delusion. The resurrection of
Jesus is at once a striking instance of two of the best kinds of evidence in
support of revelation; I mean miracles and prophecies. This was itself an
illustrious miracle, far exceeding the limits of created power. It was also an
exact fulfillment of express predictions delivered by preceding prophets and by
Christ himself. If therefore the proof of this fact is satisfactory to our
minds, we cannot for a moment doubt the truth of the gospel revelation; and if
we admit this, the writings of Moses and the Prophets cannot be discredited,
because they all refer ultimately to Christ, and were completely accomplished
in him. The old and new Testaments are closely and inseperably connected, and
must stand or fall together. -- Again, it follows, that while infidels are
constantly charging Christians with fond credulity, they themselves have an
uncommon share of it. For since the Christian religion has been propagated and
still exists in the world, upon their principles they must admit, that a few
poor illiterate fishermen were able to contend with the prejudices of all the
world, the superstition of the people, the interests of the priests, the pride
of the philosophers, the malice of the Jews, the learning of Greece and the
power of Rome. They must believe also, that a number of the vilest impostors
that ever appeared in this world, have published the most excellent system of
morality which mankind was ever favored with. They will be compelled to own,
that these men submitted to the most grievous sufferings, and to death itself,
in vindication of what they knew to be false, without the most distant prospect
of any reward whatsoever. These and sundry other things which might be
mentioned, which undeniably follow from their principles, are totally opposite
to the established order of nature, and are facts as miraculous as any recorded
in the New Testament. Further, it follows that the prevalence of infidelity is
not owing to the want of evidence of the truth of our holy religion, but to
some other causes. Under the continuance and progress of christianity, its
evidence has been growing and gathering strength. The more thoroughly this
system has been canvassed, with the brighter luster does its evidence appear.
'The continual accession of strength from the exact accomplishment of
prophecies, of which in many instances, we have ocular demonstration, is an
overbalance for any supposed diminution, with respect to the proof arising from
miracles. The want of the testimony of our senses which the apostles and
primitive christians had, is supplied by an increase of evidence of another
kind, in the same manner (if the similitude may be admitted,) that the loss of
luminous matter from the sun is supplied by a communication of light from the
fixed stars; or as other suppose, by absorbing comets into it. The wisdom and
contrivance of divine providence being no less admirable in the moral, than the
natural world; no less in the light which God gives us from and concerning the
sun of righteness, than in the supply of that of the sun in the firmament.'

Deism oftentimes results from the pride of the human heart. Men who have a
high sense of their own abilities and philosophical knowledge, are not willing
to admit the truth of revelation, because there are some things in it above
human investigation. They forget that natural religion is liable to the same
objection; and that philosophy itsef, so far as it relates to the abstract
natures of things, is a science full of arcana, which the utmost stretch of
genius has hitherto been unable to disclose. If these persons are resolved to
believe nothing which they connot fully comprehend, the being of God and his
providence, together with their own existence must be called in question and
all the phenomenon of nature whose causes have not been investigated, must be
peremptorily denied.

It is very possible, that an affectation of courage may in some instances,
have betrayed men into infidelity. Some flatter themselves that it is a sure
indication of courage to call in question that which the world holds sacred. A
late author Bishop Hurd.
remarks, that when the philosopher of Malmsbury in the last century, resolved
all morality and religion into the will of the magistrate, the bold singularity
of the paradox was, no doubt, that which chiefly recommended it to himself, as
well as surprised the world into an opinion of his bravery; though we know from
his story that he had no more of this virtue, than might have consisted with
faith and the fear of God. But vain man, says he, often affects to make a show of
that which he does not possess, and thus his defect in true courage, may be the
reason why he pretends to so much of it.

It will hardly be thought a breach of charity to suppose, that many have
rejected revelation on account of its opposition to their favorite vices: or in
the language of our Savior, "that they love darkness rather than light because
their deeds are evil."

Immersed in worldly pursuits and sensual pleasures, men cannot endure the holy
precepts of the New Testament. They secretly wish that there was not sufficient
evidence to support this system. When they come enqtire, small objections through
the force of prejudice, appear to them insuperable, and they are easily
prevailed on to reject the gospel. If they would with honest, impartial minds
consider the nature and design of the christian institution, and the evidence
of the facts recorded in the New Testament, they would presently be satisfied
of its truth. If they were seriously disposed to practice the duties of natural
religion, the gospel would appear to them "worthy of all acceptance."

This literary society, founded by the wisdom of our ancestors, has under the
smiles of heaven been happily instumental of promoting the knowledge and belief
of christianity in our land. Many of its sons have risen to distinguished
eminence and usefulness in church and state, and their names will be
transmitted with honor to the latest generations. May a noble emulation be
excited in the breasts of the students in this university to exceed all who
have gone before them in intellectual and moral seize. The distinguishing
advantages which you now enjoy, the expectations of your friends and your
country, as well as your present peace and future happiness, all urge you to
vigorous pursuit and unremitting application. While you advance in the
delightful paths of science, and survey the wonders which modern philosophy
opens to your view, ever carry your thought up to the first cause, the original
source of existence. Sensible of the weakness and imperfections of the human
mind, and of the doubt and uncertainty of the best heathen philosophers with
respect to religious truths, receive the gospel revelation with gratitude and
joy. Examire its evidence with candor and impartiality. Be not shaken in mind
either by the sophistical reasonings or the profane banter of men of depraved
hearts. Never indulge an idea that it is an argument of weakness or fond
credulity to admit the truth of revelation. Many of the most distinguished
philosophers which the world ever produced, have been firm believers in the
christian system, and have done themselves immortal honor by their writings in
support of it, and their dying testimony to it. Let all your searches after
truth be accompanied with a temper and practice conformable to the eternal and
immutable rules of reason and religion. May you be trained up for eminent
service among the multitude of your brethren, and finally be qualified for that
state where every thing whith is mysterious and unintelligible shall be cleared
up, and the whole intellectual world be open to your view.

Finally, with what unfeigned gratitude should we all "bless the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his resurrection from the dead, has begotten
us to the lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away. Since "Christ is risen as the first fruits of them that
slept," we cannot doubt the truth and certainty of our own resurrection. This
is a noble discovery of revelation. May we be raised in our desires and
pursuits above all the vanities of this transitory life, and be "looking for
the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ."

AMEN.

