OBSERVATIONS UPON THE PROPOSED PLAN OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. WITH AN ATTEMPT TO
ANSWER SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL OBJECTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN MADE TO IT.

BY A NATIVE OF VIRGINIA.

PETERSBURG: PRINTED BY HUNTER AND PRENTIS. M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
IT was discovered soon after the peace, that the Confederation, in its present
form, was wholly inadequate to the end ^f its creation; that of making America
one State, for great ^ational purposes. As soon as peace took place, confusion
in very department of Congress, ruin of public and private ^redit, decay of
trade, and loss of importance abroad, were ^he immediate consequences of the
radical defects in the Confe^eration. During the war, the fear of a powerful
enemy ^nswered all the purposes of the most energetic government, ^ut as soon
as that fear was removed, the thirteen United ^tates began to draw different
ways. Some refused to ratify ^he treaty of peace; others neglected to pay their
respective ^uotas to the public Treasury; and others absolutely rejected ^he
most salutary propositions of Congress; propositions to which the greater
number of States readily assented. In vain ^ave Congress called upon the
different States to pay up their ^uotas in order to support the falling credit
of America: In ^ain have they pointed out to them the necessity of establishing
their public faith as a nation, by complying with their treaties: ^n vain have
they recommended to them to forego their own ^mmediate interests, and consider
the interests of the Union. ^ongress might advise, or recommend measures: might
ap^ove the conduct of some States, and condemn that of others; ^^ht preach up
public faith, honor, and justice: But was this sufficient to preserve a union
of thirteen States, or support a national government? It had no authority, its
powers expired at the peace, became a dead letter, for the fear of common
danger was gone. Peace, which to other nations produces, and which under other
circumstances would have produced to us, the greatest blessings, was pregnant
with the greatest evil; disunion, the certain parent of internal quarrels,
disorder, and bloodshed. In this situation of America, some of the best and
wisest of her citizens, lamenting that the term of her glory was so short, and
dreading the fatal consequences which would necessarily follow from disunion,
proposed that a Convention of the States should be called for the purposes of
amending the Confederation. The wisdom of the measure was instantly seen: It
was approved by Congress, recommended to, and adopted by the States.

IT is on all hands agreed, that an abler or more upright Assembly never met in
America, than the late Convention held at Philadelphia. The original design of
their meeting was to amend the present Articles of Confederation: But upon
consulting together; upon accurately investigating the Confederation, and
informing each other of the real situation of their respective States, they saw
so many radical defects in the one, and so many alarming appearances in the
other, as induced them readily and unanimously to modify the Federal
Constitution: And after four months spent in painful inquiries, and diligent
labor, produced the frame of government now offered to the consideration of
the citizens of America. A form of government, which the President of the
Convention, with the modesty peculiar to him, acknowledges to be in some
respects defective; but which he likewise tells us, was the result of a spirit
of amity, and of that mutual deference and concession which the peculiarity of
our political situation rendered in dispensible.

WHEN we take a view of the respectable names who met upon this occasion, and
composed this plan of government, we ought to approach it with deference and
respect. Though not in such a manner as to deprive us of the power of
discovering its faults; yet with such liberality as will lead us to consider it
as the result of the deliberations of good and able men, actuated by just
motives, and governed by pure principles. Men not swayed by selfish prospects,
but urged to action by general philanthropy, and the desire of handing to
posterity the best form of Federal Government, that America is capable of
receiving, or perhaps that was ever offered to the consideration of mankind.

IF we read the proposed plan under these ideas, and think we discover
imperfections, and faults; ought we not rather to distrust our own perceptions,
than the understandings of its makers? Because it is much more probable, that a
single reader, even of great capacity, should be mistaken, than that so
respectable a body as the Convention, with minds equally enlightened, and more
unbiased, should, after the freest and fullest investigation of this important
subject, be wrong.

I confess I am not one of those who would adopt without consideration, or
blindly pursue a plan produced by any body of men, however eminent their
characters for wisdom and virtue. "Not to pin my faith upon the sleeve of any
man," was one of my earliest lessons. However, I am persuaded that the work
before us, requires no blind followers: but standing upon the basis of its
intrinsic merit, possesses strength sufficient to withstand the shocks of its
most powerful enemies. Often have I read this work; and sometimes discovered,
as I thought, important defects; yet upon doubting my own judgment, and reading
it again, have generally found the fault in myself, not in the Constitution.
Yet I will not pretend to say that it is perfect. Did perfection ever come from
the hands of man? If (...) were perfect, it would be illy suited to our
imperfect capacities. Government in itself is not a positive good; but
something introduced by societies to prevent positive evil. The best frame of
government is that which is most likely to prevent the greatest sum of evil.
Such I apprehend is the government now under consideration. Had the design of
the Convention been to frame a Constitution for any individual State, they
might perhaps have produced one, in the abstract, still nearer perfection. But
far different was the purpose of their meeting! and I feel myself happy in
concurring with that august body in thinking, that it is the best government
which could be obtained for the thirteen States of America. Under this
impression I shall attempt to explain those parts of it which are, or have been
supposed to be difficult; and to answer some of the principal objections which
have been made to it.

BEFORE we enter into a discussion of the different articles which compose the
Constitution, it may not be improper to take into consideration the question
respecting a Bill of Rights; which many, from habit and prejudices, rather than
from reason, and truth, have thought necessary; and upon the want of it have
founded one of their principal objections.

FEW people know the origin of the term; still fewer have considered, without
prejudice, the necessity of the thing. What is a Bill of Rights? A declaration
insisted on by a free people, and recognized by their rulers, that certain
principles shall be the invariable rules of their administration; because the
preservation of these principles are necessary for the preservation of liberty.
If this distinction be just; can there be a difference, whether these
principles are established in a separate declaration, or are interwoven and
made a part of the Constitution itself? Is an infringement of a Bill of Rights
by the Governing powers, of more serious consequence, than an infringement of
the frame of government? The question carries the answer along with it. That
there is no distinction between them is a truth, an attempt to prove which
would be an offense against common sense.

OF all the European governments a Bill of Rights is known I believe, to that
of England alone. The cause of this is obvious. The liberty of that country has
been procured and established by gradual encroachments upon the regal powers
seized by, if not yielded to, the first Prince of the Norman family. The first
declaration of this sort found in the history of that government, is the
Charter of Hen. the 1st, obtained in consequence of that Monarch's feeble title
to the Throne. The frequent infractions of that Charter by Henry himself, a^
well as by subsequent Monarchs, produced the famous Magna Charta of John, which
is generally considered as the foundation of English freedom. But in those ages
of darkness, when scarcely a rule of descent was fixed, much less principles in
politics established, Charters, or Declarations of Rights, were soon lost sight
of, whenever interest induced, and circumstances offered opportunities to the
English Princes, to infringe them.

These violations gave rise to the Charter of Hen. 3d, which was of much more
importance than any of the preceding; and the discontents and confusions which
led to it, in the end gave birth to the House of Commons. From this period some
ideas of liberty began to prevail in the nation, but which for a long course of
years were obscured by turbulent Barons, long and destructive civil wars, and
the arbitrary government of an able line of Princes. The art of printing, the
reformation, and the restoration of letters, at length enlightened the minds of
men: Just ideas of liberty now prevailed, and the Commons saw, that if the
powers exercised by the Tudors were to continue in their new Sovereigns, all
hope of liberty was at an end. Their restless spirit frequently showed itself
during the reign of Elizabeth; but that prudent Princess had the address to
allay their fears, and the vigor to repress their spirit. A new and foreign
race of Princes now ascend the Throne. The opportunity was not to be lost:
Political positions were laid down in, and established by the House of Commons,
which were considered by many as extraordinary, as they were true.

JAMES, without the tallents, affected to reign with as high an hand as the
Tudors. Charles unfortunately for himself, had been educated in the prejudices
of his father. His ill-advised and arbitrary measures, involved him in
difficulties which produced the Petition of Right in 1628. In this was set
forth the unalienable rights of Englishmen. New infractions produced new
quarrels; which terminated in a total change of government. At the restoration
all was joy and festivity. The tide of royalty ran too high, to think of Bills
of Rights, or privileges of Englishmen. The conduct of James the 2d, the last
King of that ill-fated family, involved the nation in fresh discontents: The
Prince of Orange is called to its assistance: The King quits the Kingdom: The
Throne is declared vacant; and William afcended it upon terms stipulated in a
Bill of Rights. It may be asked, why did the English consider a Bill of Rights
necessary for the security of their liberty? The answer is, because they had no
written Constitution, or form of (...) the English Constitution is no more than
an assemblage of certain powers in certain persons, sancti^ied by usage and
defined by the authority of the Sovereignty; not by the people in any compact
entered into between them and their rulers.

If at the revolution the English had fully marked out the government under
which they chose in future to live, without contenting themselves with
^stablishing certain principles, (...) Bill of Rights, can there be a doubt,
but that such frame of government would have supplied the place of, and
rendered unnecessary, a Bill of Rights?

FORMER Princes had pretended to a divine right of governing: William
acknowledged his to flow from the people, and previously to his ascending the
Throne, entered into a contract with them, which recognized that just and
salutary principle. Had the English at this time limited the regal power in
definite terms, instead of satisfying themselves with a Bill of Rights, there
would have been an end of prerogative: but they from habit were contented with
a Bill of Rights, leaving the prerogative still inaccurately defined, to claim
by implification, the exercise of all the powers not denied it by tha^
declaration.

WHEN the United Netherlands threw off their dependence on the Crown of Spain
and passed their act of Union, the^ thought not of any Bill of Rights; because
they well knew tha^ the States General could have no right nor pretext to pass
the bounds prescribed by that celebrated act: So in the instanc^ before us,
Congress have no right, and can have no pretext to pass the bounds prescribed
them by this Federal Constitution and the powers conceded to the Federal
Government by the respective States, under this government, are as accurately
defined, as they possibly could have been in a Declaration o^ Rights.

WHEN Independence was declared by the Americans, the had no government to
control them: Were free to chus^ the form most agreeable to themselves. Six of
these State have no Bill of Rights; wisely judging, that such declaration rend
to abridge, rather than preserve their liberties. The considered their
Constitutions as the evidence of the social compact between the governors and
the governed, and the only proof of the rights yielded to the former. In all
disputes respecting the exercise of power, the Constitution or frame of
government decides. If the right is given up by the Constitution, the governors
exercise it; if not, the people retain it. Each of the remaining seven States
has a Declaration of Rights, adopted rather from habit arising from the use in
the English government, than from its being necessary to the preservation of
their liberties.

PLAN OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION.
WE, the People of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union,
establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquillity, provide for the Common
Defense, promote the General Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to
Ourselves and our Posterity, do Ordain and Establish this CONSTITUTION for the
UNITED STATES of AMERICA.

THE introduction, like a preamble to a law, is the key of the Constitution.
Whenever federal power is exercised, ^^ntrary to the spirit breathed by this
introduction, it will be inconstitutionally exercised, and ought to be resisted
by the people.

ARTICLE I.
Section 1. All legislative powers herein granted, shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States, which shall consist of ^ Senate and House of
Representatives.

IT is necessary to observe that, Congress consists only of^ Senate, and House
of Representatives. The President make no part of it; for his negative only
amounts to a reconsideration of the public measures; as notwithstanding his
disapprobation, a bill becomes a law, if two thirds of each House agre^ to it.

Sect. 2. The House of Representatives shall be composed ^ members chosen every
second year by the people of the sever^ States, and the electors in each State
shall have the qualification requisite for electors of the most numerous branch
of the Sta^ Legislature.

It will be asked by some, -- Why should the Representative to Congress be
elected for two years, when in Virginia and the other States, the State
Delegates are annually chosen? I answer to this question a variety of reasons
occur; such as tha^ they will have a great distance to go: That the purposes ^
their Legislation being purely federal, it will take them some time to become
acquainted with the situation and interests ^ the respective States, as well as
the relative situation and interest of the whole Union: That it would be
difficult to g^ men of abilities to serve in an office, the re-election to
which would be so frequent. If the election had been once in thr^ years, it
would perhaps have been an improvement. The u^stable councils, the feeble laws,
the relaxation of governme^^ which afflict this, and almost every State in the
Union, man justly be attributed to the frequent changes which take pla^^ among
the rulers in all the American governments.

Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among a several States
which may be included within this Union, ac^^^ing to their respective numbers,
which shall be determined, (...) adding to the whole number of free persons,
including those ^^nd to service for a term of years, and excluding Indians not
^^xed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration shall be made
within three years after the first meeting of the ^ongress of the United
States, and within every subsequent term ^f ten years, in such manner as they
shall by law direct. The ^^mber of Representatives shall not exceed one for
every thirty ^housand, but each State shall have at least one Representative:
And until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be
entitled to choose three; Massachusetts, eight; Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations, one; Connecticut, (...), New York, six; New Jersey, four;
Pennsylvania, eight; Delaware, one; Maryland, six; Virginia, ten;
North-Caro^^na, five; South Carolina, five; and Georgia, three.

EVERY free person counts one, every five slaves ^ount three. ^y this
regulation our consequence in the Union is increased, (...) an increase of
numbers in the Congress. But some objectors ^gue that this arrangement is
unjust; and that it bears hard ^on the southern States, who have been
accustomed to con^^der their slaves merely as property; as a subject for, not
as ^ents to taxation; and therefore by adding three fifths of our ^ves to the
free persons, our numbers are increased; and con^^quently by how much is that
increase, by so much is the in^^^ase of our federal burden. It is true, that
slaves are pro^^rty, -- but are they not persons too? Does not their labor
^^^oduce wealth? And is it not by the produce of labor, that (...) taxes must
be paid? The Convention justly considered (...) in the light of persons, rather
than property: But at the (...) time conceiving their natural forces inferior
to those of (...) whites: knowing that they require freemen to overlook them,
and that they enfeeble the State which possesses them, they equitably
considered five slaves only of equal consequence with three free persons. What
rule of federal taxation so equal, and at the same time so little unfavourable
to the southern States, could the Convention have established, as that of
numbers so arranged? Suppose the value of the lands in the respective States
had been adopted as the measure: Let us see what then would have been the
consequence. The northern States are comparatively small to the southern, and
are very populous; whilst to the southward, the inhabitants are scattered over
a great extent of territory. Any given number of men in the latter States
possess much greater quantities of land, than the like number in the former. It
is true the lands to the northward sell for a greater price than those to the
southward, but the difference in price is by no means adequate to the
difference in quantity; consequently an equal number of men to the southward
would have to pay a much greater federal tax than the like number to the
northward.

BY the 8th article of Confederation, the value of lands is made the measure of
the federal quotas. Virginia in consequence is rated something above
Massachusetts, whose number of white inhabitants is nearly double.

AFTER all, this point is perhaps of no great consequence The Congress probably
will rarely, if ever, meddle with direct taxation, as the impost duties will in
all likelihood answer al^ the purposes of government, or at any rate the
post office which is daily increasing, and a tax upon instruments of writing,
will supply any deficiency.

INDIANS are mentioned in this clause because there are nations of Indians
within the limits of several of the States.

When vacancies happen in the Representation from any State, the Executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

THE Convention attentive to the preservation of the consequence of each State,
have entrusted to the Executives thereof, the power of issuing writs of
elections when vacancies happen. An additional security to the independance of
the individual States.

The House of Representatives shall choose their Speaker and there officers; and
shall have the sole power of impeachment.

THE Representatives in Congress possess the sole power of ^mpeachment: But
here it may be observed, that they cannot ^mpeach one of their own body; but
have the power of expul^on, when two-thirds of their body shall agree.

Sect. 3. The Senate of the United States shall be composed of ^o Senators from
each State, chosen by the Legislature thereof, (...) six years; and each
Senator shall have one vote.

THE inequality of the representation of the Senate, has ^^en made a great
ground of objection.

WE should never forget that this is a government proposed ^^r thirteen
independent States, unequal in population, and ^^tent of territory, and
differing in a variety of other circum^^nces. It will not be denied that the
small, have an equal ^^ght to preserve their independence with the large
States; ^^^d this was their only means of preserving it. The justice of ^is is
acknowledged by most of the objectors and amenders of (...) plan.

WE should here also recollect, that under the Confederation ^^ich at present
exists, the small States have a vote in all respects equal to the large, even
to Virginia; and it certainly was a great point gained by the large ones, to
get their consequence increased in the House of Representatives in proportion
to their numbers. In the United Provinces each of the seven States has but one
vote in their Congress, and in that Confederation the disproportion between the
States is much greater, than in ours; for the Province of Holland pays rather
more than one half of the whole federal quota. Yet so great are the evils which
would arise from a disunion, that this wealthy Province readily submits to so
unequal a representation.

Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be, into three classes. The
seats of the Senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year; of the second class, at the expiration of the fourth year; and
of the third class, at the expiration of the sixth year; so that one third may
be chosen every second year: And if vacancies happen by resignation, o^
otherwise, during the recess of the Legislature of any State, the Executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
Legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty
years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not,
when elected, be an inhabitant of that State for which he shall be chosen.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Senators are to be chosen by the Legislatures of the
respective States, who surely are competent judges of those who are most
capable of filling this important office: Notwithstanding one third of them are
re-chosen every two years: Yet the enemies to the Constitution affect to call
this an aristocratic body: And endeavor to excite visionary fears in the minds
of men, that they will form a distinct order in the State, and become
formidable to the libert^ of America. I am not gifted with the spirit of
prophecy, and therefore cannot say what will happen; but this I will boldly
assert, that if power cannot be trusted in the hands of men so appointed, it
can be trusted no where. The different States will be well acquainted with the
characters of those whom they elect to the Senate; their time of duration when
elected is too short to enable them to form dangerous intrigues, or bring about
important revolutions. It is a well established principle in rhetoric, that it
is not fair to argue against a thing, from the abuse of it. Would you say there
should be no Physicians because there are unskilful administers of medicine: No
Lawyers because some are dishonest: No Courts because Judges are sometimes
ignorant; nor government because power may be abused? In short, it is
impossible to guard entirely against the abuse of power. Annual elections will
not do it. The Delegates of Virginia are annually elected, yet it is a fact,
that there has not been an Assembly since the government was framed, wherein
the Bill of Rights and the Constitution have not been infringed. The instances
have been of no great importance and therefore notwithstanding the danger of
the principle, they have been overlooked.

The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but
shall have no vote, unless they be equally divided.

The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro
tempore, in the absence of the Vice President, or when ^^e shall exercise the
office of President of the United States.

THE Vice President has been introduced from the State Government of New York.
This useful, though surely inoffensive officer, has been made by some objectors
the bugbear of the Con^titution. It is a strong proof of want of argument in
the enemies to it, when they hold up this officer as dangerous. He is ^lected
by the same persons as the President, and in the same manner. He presides in
the Senate, but has no vote except when they are divided. This is the only
power incident to his office whilst he continues Vice President; and he is
obviously introduced into the government to prevent the ill-consequences which
might otherwise happen from the death or removal of the President. This is the
purpose for which a similar officer has been introduced into the Constitution
of New York.

The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting for
that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the
United States is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from
office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or
profit, under the United States but the party convicted shall nevertheless be
liable and subject t^ indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to
law.

I CONCEIVE that the Senators are not impeachable, an^ therefore Governor
Randolph's objection falls to the ground I am surprised that a man of that
gentleman's abilities should have fallen into this mistake. The Senators having
a power over their own members, have the right of expulsion. Wh^ then should
they be impeachable? For upon impeachment the punishment is only removal from,
and incapacity to hol^ offices. Expulsion amounts to the same thing. Besides,
the Senators are elected by the people, though mediately, as we as the House of
Representatives, and therefore have not the same degree of responsibility
annexed to their characters, the officers of government; and for this obvious
reason, -- t^^ former are ^^pointed by the people themselves to stand their
places, and they are the best judges of those who are mo^^ fit to serve them;
but the latter are appointed by the servan^ of the people. It is a generally
received maxim among writers on government, that the Judiciary and Legislative
departments should be kept distinct. The position is true to a certain extent;
but this like most other general rules, is liable to exceptions. In the English
government, which is certainly the freest in Europe, the House of Lords not
only try impeachments, but is the highest civil court in the kingdom. In that
Constitution the House of Commons are the impeachers, the House of Lords the
triers: But no members either of the House of Commons or House of Lords, was
ever impeached as such: But whenever members of either House have been
impeached, it was as great officers of State. Under the federal government this
is impossible, because the members of neither House can hold any office of
State.

IF this reasoning be not conclusive, the fourth section of the second article
puts it out of doubt, viz. "The President, Vice President, and all civil
officers of the United States, shall be removed from office on impeachment,
etc." The Senators are representatives of the people; and by no construction
can be considered as civil officers of the State. If this be the case, in whose
hands can this power be lodged with greater propriety, or with greater safety,
than in those of the Senate? Or how ^an a better court be appointed? To impeach
either the members of Senate or House of Representatives, would be to impeach
the representatives of the people, that is the people themselves, which is an
absurdity.

Sect. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for Senators and
Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature thereof;
but the Congress may at any ^ime, by law, make or alter such regulations,
except as to the ^laces of choosing Senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a
different day.

Sect. 5. Each House shall be the judge of the elections, returns, and
qualifications, of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitute a
quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and
may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner,
and under such penalties as each House may provide.

Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for
disorderly behavior, and with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member.

Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time
publish the same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either House on any question,
shall, at the desire of one-fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

Neither House, during the cession of Congress, shall, without the consent of
the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that
in which the two Houses shall be sitting.

EXPERIENCE and a change of circumstances may render it necessary that the
Congress should have the power of regulating the elections: But as the Senate
is elected by the State Legislatures, the place of such election must be the
place where they meet. Besides which, this power was necessary lest some of the
States from obstinacy, or selfish views, should alter the time and place of
holding the elections in such a manner, as might impede the operation of the
federal government.

Sect. 6. The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for
their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the
United States. They shall in all cases, except treason, felony and breach of
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of
their respective houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for
any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected,
be appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been
increased during such time; and no person holding any office under the United
States, shall be a member of either House during his continuance in office.

SAY the objectors, -- Why are not the salaries of the members of Congress
ascertained by the Constitution? I will answer them by another question, -- Why
are not the salaries of every officer of the United States ascetained by it? Or
rather, why should the Convention have descended into such minutia? Can it be
supposed, for a moment, that in the present situation of America, when there
are still left many men of talents and virtue, from amongst whom the Congress
will doubtless be chosen, that they will pass a law to give themselves
immoderate sallaries? But even should they, what would be the mighty evil to
this extensive continent, from eighty or ninety persons having salaries larger
than perhaps their services might merit?

IT is proper that Congress should have the regulation of this matter for
another reason. It is a fact well known in the commercial world, that, from one
certain cause, the quantity of specie is insensibly increasing: This of
consequence lessens its value: Therefore a salary which now would be sufficient
forty years hence, would be wholly inadequate.

IN the latter part of this section there is an admirable check upon the
members of both Houses; as nothing can tend in a greater degree, to prescribe
their independence of conduct, and prevent intriguing, than that no member
shall be eligible to any office which has been created, or whose emoluments
have been increased, since the time of his election, and during the time for
which he has been elected.

Sect. 7. All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of
Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on
other bills.

IN this the Constitution is an improvement upon that o^ England: There all
money bills must not only originate bu^ must be perfected in the House of
Commons: Here though^ the Senate cannot originate such bills, yet they have the
power of amending them, and by that means have an opportunity o^ communicating
their ideas to the House of Representatives upon the important subject of
taxation.

Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the
Senate, shall, before it become a law, be presente^ to the President of the
United States; if he approve he shall fig^ it, but if not, he shall return it
with his objections, to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall
enter the the objection at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider
it. If after such reconsideration two-thirds of that House shall agree (...)
pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to t^^ other
House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and approved by two-thirds
of that House, it shall become a law. B^ in all such cases the votes of both
Houses shall be determined (...) yeas and nays, and the names of the persons
voting for a^ against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each Hou^^
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the Preside^^ within ten
days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been pr^sented to him, the same
shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by
their adjournment prevent (...) return, in which case it shall not be a law.

THIS power in the President is derived from the State government of
Massachusetts and New York, though in the latter the Chancellor and Chief
Judges are added to the Governor. This power goes only to a reconsideration of
the public measures; and the President's disapprobation, or negative, is
nugatory, when two-thirds of each House concur in any measure after it has
undergone his inspection. The Convention wisely judged that the President would
in all probability be a man of great experience, and abilities, and as far as
his powers extend, ought to be considered as representing the Union; and
consequently would be well acquainted with the interests of the whole. Great
utility is therefore likely to arise to Congress from his knowledge, and his
reasoning upon their acts of Legislation. Farther, the experience of all ages
prove that all popular assemblies are frequently governed by prejudices,
passions, and partial views of the subject; nay sometimes by ^ndecent heats and
animosities. The ten days therefore given ^o the President for his opinion of
their measures, is wisely in^erposed to prevent the mischiefs which might ensue
from those common faults of such assemblies.

Every order, resolution or vote, to which the concurrence of ^he Senate and
House of Representatives may be necessary (except ^n a question of adjournment)
shall be presented to the President ^f the United States; and before the same
shall take effect, shall (...) approved by him, or, being disapproved by him,
shall be re^^ssed by two-thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives,
^^cording to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of bill.

THE reasoning upon the last clause applies also to this.

Sect. 8. The Congress shall have power

To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to pay the debts and
provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States; but
all duties, imposts, and excises, shall be uniform throughout the United
States;

IT is here to be observed, that all taxes, imposts, etc. are to be applied
only for the common defense and general welfare, of the United States. By no
possibility will the words admit of any other construction. Yet several popular
See in particular the address and reasons, etc. of the Pennsylvania Minority.
declaimers have attempted to sound the alarm by their illeberal and
ill-founded suggestions of peculation, bribery, and corruption, and of the
probability of the public Treasury being converted to the use of the President
and Congress. But how will this be possible? They will have all fixed salaries,
and perquisites. The public accounts of receipts and expenditures will be
regularly kept and regularly published, for the public inspection: Besides
which, the public offices will always be open for the search and inquiries of
every individual. I doubt if human wisdom could devise any better mode of
securing a just application of the public money.

AS scarcely any article of the proposed plan has escaped censure, there are
objections made to the grant of the imposts to Congress. But when we consider
that the purposes for which the imposts are to be applied are merely national,
and falls directly within the design of the Union, that of making all America
one State for great political purposes, the objection falls; for in this view
America composes but one great republic, all the subjects of which stand
precisely upon the same ground, and pay only in proportion to their consumption
of foreign articles. To this we may add, that those States which export the
chief of the produce of their labor, and in consequenec of that circumstance,
import more than those which manufacture, receive a compensation for the
increased import, by the exported produce being free from duties. And besides,
we may fairly conclude, that the consumption of foreign articles throughout
America, is nearly in proportion to the enumeration, which is the measure of
the respective quotas.

To borrow money on the credit of the United States;

THIS power is lodged with the present Congress.

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States, and
with the Indian tribes;

THE power of regulating commerce gives great alarm to the enemies of the
Constitution. In this, as in most other instances, they forget that this is a
government for thirteen (...); and think only of the immediate interests of
Virginia; as if she had a right to dictate to the other twelve, and as if her
interests alone were to be consulted. Be not deceived my countrymen. However
important we may be in the scale of Union, there are other States which are
equally so. The consequence of this power, say they, will be, that the eastern
and northern States will combine together, and not only oblige the southern to
export their produce in their bottoms, by prohibiting foreign bottoms; but will
also lay such duties upon foreign manufactures as will amount to a prohibition,
in order to supply us themselves.

UPON accurately investigating this point, we shall find the reasoning to be as
false, as the supposition is illiberal. It is true the eastern States can build
and equip ships, upon better terms than the southern: Nay, I believe I may go
farther, and say, that they can upon better terms than any nation in Europe.
This arises from their having all the materials for ship-building within
themselves, except canvas and cordage, whilst most of the maritime powers of
Europe, depend upon foreign countries, not only for these articles, but also
for timber and masts. A great extent of sea coast, a cold climate, a barren
soil, and above all, the fisheries, furnish an infinite number of seamen, who
from necessity are willing to navigate for very moderate wages. If this be the
case, is their any reason to suppose that the eastern States will not carry our
produce upon as reasonable terms as any of the European powers? I believe it is
a fact, that before the war, they were the principal carriers to the British
West Indies; so low were the terms upon which their vessels could be chartered.
And the same causes still exists, why they should take freight upon terms
equally moderate. But this is not all. The eastern States are not ignorant that
the southern possess even better materials for ship-building, than they do; and
therefore will take care not to excite their jealousy, nor stimulate them to
build ships and become their own carries, by exacting unreasonable freightage.
But admitting that the eastern Delegates should be so dishonest as well as
unwise, to combine against those of the south -- I will venture to assert, that
not a man in America, who is acquainted with the middle States, can suppose
that they would join in such a combination. New York is rather a country of
farmers than of sailors: It possesses large tracts of fertile soil, but no
fisheries, and before the war, for one ship built in that State, either for
freightage or sale, there were thirty in New England. All that she will aim at,
therefore, will be ships of her own, sufficient to carry her own produce. Her
interests, therefore will not induce her to enter into this formidable
combination.

JERSEY, from her local situation, and a variety of peculiar circumstances, has
fewer ships and seamen than even any of ^he southern States. Her interests,
therefore, will lead her ^o adhere to them.

THE same reasoning applies to Pennsylvania that does to New York; and still
more emphatically; because this State is still more employed in husbandry. And
as to the State of Delaware, it does not own six ships.

LET us then see how this question will stand in point of numbers. The four
eastern States will have seventeen voices, which will be opposed by the
nineteen voices of the middle States and the twenty-nine of the southern.

I WILL not endeavor to answer the other objection. -- The fear of a northern
combination to furnish the southern States with manufactures. This I conceive,
has arisen either from ^gnorance of the subject, or an absolute enmity to all
confederation. The only manufactures which the northern States possess and with
which they can furnish others, are shoes, cotton cards, nails, hats, carriages,
and perhaps paper and refined ^ugars may be added; and should the whale-fishery
be ever revived, train oil and spermacaeti candels. The two first articles may
be in a great measure confined to Massachusetts. Their shoes are as good and as
cheap as those imported from Great Britain, at least as the sale shoes. And as
to the second article, the exportation of them from thence is prohibited by act
of Parliament. Both New York and Pennsylvania manufacture leather in all its
branches, and hats; but not more than sufficient for their own consumption.
Connecticut has no manufactures to export; nor has New York, unless perhaps
some refined sugar. Jersey has only domestic manufactures. Pennsylvania
manufactures nails, refined sugar, cotton cards, carriages, and, of late, paper
for exportation. The Delaware State has only domestic manufactures.

IF Massachusetts can furnish us with shoes, cards, train oil and spermacaeti
candles; Pennsylvania with nails, white sugar carriages, and paper, as cheap as
we can procure them from beyond the Atlantic, why should not such European
article be probibited? There is no probability that either the northern or
southern States, will in many years become extensive manufacturers. The price
of labor and cheapness of land will prevent it; and the daily migrations from
all the States to the western parts of America, will keep up the one, and keep
down the other. I have been informed, and I believe rightly informed, that the
amount of the imports from Europe, is a great or greater in the eastern or
middle States, as in the southern, in proportion to their numbers. It is a
generally received opinion in this country, that the exports of the eastern and
middle States are very inconsiderable but this is a great mistake; for when we
take into consideration their wheat, flour, lumber, flax-seed, pot-ash, fish
oil, iro^ and rum, there can be no doubt but these articles produce gre^^ sums.
I am informed that the European goods annually shipp^ to Massachusetts, are to
a greater amount than those shipped (...) Virginia. These goods can only be
paid for by the produce (...) their exports.
This, to many, may appear doubtful; but I believe it, because I have good
reason to think, that the domestic manufactures of the southern States
particularly of Virginia, are of greater value than the dome^tic manufactures
of the northern and middle States, in the sam^ proportion. This has arisen from
the cultivation of cotton which will not come to perfection to the northward;
and tha^ article is manufactured with much less trouble than either flax or
hemp.

IF this account be just, what have the southern States (...) fear? But
admitting some of the eastern and middle State should enter into this
illiberal, unjust, and impolitic combination: Let us see how the numbers would
stand. New Hampshire, Massachusetts, New York, and Pennsylvania, the only
manufacturing States, may combine: Their numbers will amount to twenty-five in
one House, to be opposed by forty; and in the other the numbers will be eight,
to be opposed by sixteen.

AFTER all, suppose these objections are founded in fact: Had we not better
submit to the slight inconveniences which might arise from this combination;
than the serious evils that must necessarily follow from disunion?

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform ^aws on the
subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign ^oin, and fix the
standard of weights and measures;

To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States;

To establish post-offices and post roads;

To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing ^r limited
times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right their respective writings
and discoveries;

To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;

To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the ^^gh seas, and
offenses against the law of nations;

To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and ^ake rules
concerning captures on land and water;

MOST of these powers, the present Congress possess, and ^ne of them have been
objected to, except what relates to Courts, which will be taken notice of
hereafter.

To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall
be for a longer term than two years;

BY this regulation every House of Representatives will have a share in the
appropriations; and no mischief can ensue from appropriations of two years,
since the proceedings of each House of Congress are to be published from time
to time, as well as regular statements and accounts of the receipts and
expenditures of all public money.

To provide and maintain a navy;

To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;

THE present Congress possess the powers given by these clauses.

To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union,
suppress insurrections and repel invasions;

To provide for organizing, arming and disciplining the militia, and for
governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United
States; reserving to the States respectively, the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress.

BY these clauses, the appointment of the militia officers, and training the
militia, are reserved to the respective States; except that Congress have a
right to direct in what manner they are to be disciplined, and the time when
they are to be ordered out.

THESE clauses have been extremely misunderstood, or purposely misconstrued, by
the enemies to the Constitution. Some have said, the absolute unqualified
command that Congress have over the militia may be made instrumental to the
destruction of all liberty, both public and private, whether of a personal,
civil, or religious nature. Minority address, p. 22 23.


IS this the result of reason, or is it the dictate of resentment? How can the
command of Congress over the militia be either absolute or unqualified, when
its officers are appointed by the States, and consequently can by no
possibility become its creatures?

THEY will generally be men of property and probity: And can any one for a
moment suppose that such men will ever be so lost to a sense of liberty, the
rights of their country, and their own dignity, as to become the instruments of
arbitrary measures? Whenever that shall be the case, we may in vain contend for
forms of government; the spirit of liberty will have taken its flight from
America, and nothing but an arbitrary government will be fit for such a people,
however accurately defined the powers of her Constitution may be. But so long
as there shall be a militia so officered, or the majority of the people
landholders, America will have little to fear for liberty. Congress have the
power of organizing the militia; and can it be put into better hands? They can
have no interest in destroying the personal liberty of any man, or raising his
fortune in the mode of organization: They can make no law upon this, or any
other subject, which will not affect themselves, their children, or their
connexions.

CAN any one seriously suppose, that Congress will ever think of drawing the
militia of one State out, in order to destroy the liberties of another? Of
Virginia, for instance, to destroy the liberties of Pennsylvania? Or should
they be so wicked, that an American militia, officered by the States, would
obey so odious a mandate? Minority address. That hasty and passionate
performance is full of absurdities upon this head.
The supposition is monstrous.

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such district
(not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular States, and
the acceptance of Congress, become the seat of the government of the United
States, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent
of the Legislature of the State in which the same shall be, for the erection of
forts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other needful buildings.

So great is the jealousy of some of our citizens, that even this clause has
excited their fears. This little spot is to be the center to which is to be
attracted all the wealth and power of this extensive continent: The focus which
will absorb the last remains of American liberty. Such are the visionary
phantoms of the antifederalists.

THE Congress is to govern, as they shall see fit, a district not more than ten
miles square. And what possible mischief can arise to the United States from
hence? This district must either be purchased by Congress, or yielded to them
by the inhabitants of that particular spot, which they may conceive most
convenient for them to assemble at, and for which the consent of the State is
necessary. If the first, there will be few or no inhabitants; they will
therefore induce people to settle it, by establishing a mild government. If the
second, the inhabitants of any particular district certainly have a right to
submit to whatever form of government they may think agreeable, provided the
State within which the district lies, consents; without giving offense to
Virginia, or any other of the States. We are told that the wise Franklin has
recommended to (...) Philadelphians to offer their city and its environs as the
seat of Congress. Can it be supposed that he would recommend this measure to
his favorite city were he not well assured that the government of Congress will
be a good one? I have no doubt but this district will flourish; that it will
increase in populaton and wealth: Because I have no doubt but most people would
think it a happiness to live under the government of such men as will compose
the Congress; or under such a government as such men will frame for that
district.

And -- To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
executiont the foregoing powers, and other powers vested by this Constitution
in the government of the United States, or in any departmen or officer thereof.

BY this clause, Congress have no farther legislative authority than shall be
deemed necessary to carry into execution the powers vested by this
Constitution. This regulation is necessary; as without it the different States
might counteract all the laws of Congress, and render the Federal Government
nugatory.

Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such persons as any of the States now
existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may
be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

THIS clause is a proof of deference in the members of the Convention, to each
other, and of concession of the northern to the southern States. There is no
doubt but far the greater part of that Convention hold domestic slavery in
abhorrence. But the members from South Carolina and Georgia, thinking slaves
absolutely necessary for the cultivation and melioration of their States,
insisted upon this clause. But it affects not the law of Virginia which
prohibits the importation of slaves.

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when
in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.

BY this clause the Congress have the right of suspending the habeas corpus in
the two cases of insurrection and rebellion -- a power which follows from the
necessity of the thing.

No bill of attainder or^ex post facto law shall be passed.

IT is extraordinary that Mr. Mason should have made a part of this clause a
ground of objection. 'Till that gentleman denied it, I had supposed it an
universally received opinion that ex post facto laws were dangerous in their
principle, and oppressive in their execution. And with respect to bills o^
attainder, a very slight acquaintance with the history of tha^ country in which
alone they are used, is sufficient to discove^ that they have been generally
made the means of oppression.

No capitation, or other direct tax, shall be laid, unless in proportion to the
census or enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

THIS clause is a confirmation of the third clause of the second section of the
first article.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any State. No
preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue, to the
ports of one State, over those of another Nor shall vessels bound to, or from,
one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

ALL writers upon finance hold taxes upon exports to be impolitic. Yet there
are doubtless some articles which will with propriety bear an export duty; such
as tobacco and perhaps indigo. But then these articles are of the growth of
only five of the States; and it would be a manifest injustice that the produce
of some States should be taxed for the benefit of others. The latter part of
the clause provides that all Naval Officers fees and port charges shall be the
same throughout the United States; and that a vessel bound to one State from
another, and calling at any intermediate State, shall not be obliged to enter,
clear, or pay duty, in such State. This tends to facilitate the intercourse
among the States, and may produce many commercial conveniences.

No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money, shall be published from time to time.

AS all appropriations of money are to be made by law, and regular statements
thereof published, no money can be applied but to the use of the United States.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: -- And no person
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
Congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.

THE first part of this clause proves the Convention had no aristocratical
views, nor any idea of establishing an order in the State, with rights
independent of the people. The latter part of it is introduced to prevent the
officers of the Federal Government being warped from their duty.

Sect. 10. No State shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation;
grant letters of marque and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make
any thing but gold and silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill
of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts;
or grant any title of nobility.

THE States, in their individual capacities, should be restrained from the
exercise of the powers enumerated in this clause, for a variety of reasons. If
any State should have a right of making treaties, granting letters of marque,
and the like, America might be perpetually involved in foreign wars. By
exercising the right of coinage and of emitting bills of credit, a State might,
by the former, debase the currency of the United States, by mixing great
quantities of alloy, and by that means defraud the Federal Treasury; and by the
latter it might defraud not only its own citizens, but the citizens of other
States. But this is not all. An exercise of these rights would materially
interfere with the exercise of the like by the Congress; and therefore the
particular, should give way to the general interest. The making any thing but
gold and silver a tender in payment of debts, and the impairing the obligation
of contracts, is so great a political injustice, that the Constitution here
requires of the States, that they will forever relinquish the exercise of a
power so odious. This part of the clause would probably never have been
introduced, had not some of the States afforded too frequent instances of
unjust laws upon these subjects.

No State shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties
on imports and exports, except what may be obsolutely necessary for executing
its inspection laws; and the nett produce of all duties and imposts, laid by
any State on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the Treasury of the
United States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and control
of the Congress. No State shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty
of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war in time of peace, enter into any
agreement or compact with another State, or with a foreign power, or engage in
war; unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger, as will not admit of
delay.

IF the individual States might lay duties upon the imports, it would be
counteracting the same right in Congress, and ruin the great fund out of which
the present federal debts are to be paid, as well as the future federal
expenses defrayed. And with regard to exports, it was highly reasonable that
one State should be prohibited from laying an export duty on the articles of a
sister State, which may be shipped through that State.

THE exigencies of the Union may however require direct taxes. By this clause,
a door is open to the States, to raise their respective quotas, in lieu of
direct taxes; by laying a duty upon exports; or even duties upon imports. But
as the amount of these duties are to be paid into the public Treasury, no
inconvenience can, on the one hand, arise to the general welfare from them;
and, on the other, the power of revision in the Congress will be the means of
securing a due attention to the interests of all the States, in the mode of
laying the duty, as well as in the application of it. The latter part of the
clause is no more than a confirmation of principles antecedently established,
and of powers before vested in the Congress; but such as are absolutely
necessary for the good order, dignity, and harmony of the whole; and are such
as the States have already yielded to the present Congress. See Article the 6th
of the Confederation.


ARTICLE II.
Sect. 1. The Executive power shall be vested in a President of the United
States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and
together with the Vice President, chosen for the same term, be elected as
follows:

Each State shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature thereof may
direct, a number of Electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and
Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: But no
Senator or Representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under
the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.

The Electors shall meet in their respective States, and vote, by ballot, for
two persons, of whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same State
with themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for, and
of the number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify, and
transmit, sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed
to the President of the Senate. The President of the Senate shall, in the
presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open a^ the certificates,
and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the greatest number of
votes shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole number
of Electors appointed and if there be more than one who have such majority, and
have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representative shall
immediately choose, by ballot, one of them for President and if no person have a
majority, then from the five highest o^ the list the said House shall in like
manner choose the Presiden^ But in choosing the President, the votes shall be
taken by State the Representation from each State having one vote; a quoru^ for
this purpose shall consist of a member or members from tw^ thirds of the
States, and a majority of all the States shall be n^cessary to a choice, In
every case, after the choice of the Pres^dent, the person having the greatest
number of votes of the Electors, shall be the Vice President. But if there
should remain two ^or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose from
them, ^^y ballot, the Vice President.

IT has been urged by many, that the President should be continued in office,
only a given number of years, and then ^e rendered ineligible. To this it may
be answered, were that to be the case, a good officer might be displaced, and a
^ad one succeed. Knowing that he could not be continued, ^e might be more
attentive to enrich himself, should opportunities offer, than to the execution
of his office. But as his con^inuance in office, will depend upon his
discharging the duties ^f it with ability, and integrity, his eligibility will
most pro^ably be the best security for his conduct. The longer a man ^f
abilities and virtue, fills an office, the better, and easier ^ill the duties
of it be discharged: The whole system of administration becomes well arranged;
and every department in ^e government well filled. An election to this office
once in ^very four years, is a sufficient curb upon the President: The ^lectors
hold the reins. If he has misconducted himself, he ^ill not be re-elected; if
has governed with prudence, and ^bility, he ought to be continued.

THE Vice President will probably be a candidate to succeed ^e President. The
former will therefore be a perpetual cennel over the latter; will be a stimulus
to keep him up to his ^^ty, and afford an additional security for his upright
conduct.

NOTWITHSTANDING these reasons, and the powerful ^ecks opposed to the powers of
the President, the enemies of ^e Constitution has sounded the alarm with great
violence, ^on the ground of his eligibility for life. Some tell us that will be
the means of his becoming the hereditary sovereign of ^e United States; whilst
others hold up to our view the dan^^rs of an elective monarchy.

IT is pretty certain that the President can never become the sovereign of
America, but with the voluntary consent of the people: He is re-elected by
them; not by any body of men over whom he may have gained an undue influence.
No citizen of America has a fortune sufficiently large, to enable him to raise
and support a single regiment. The President's salary will be greatly
inadequate either to the purpose of gaining adherents, or of supporting a
military force: He will possess no princely revenues, and his personal
influence will be confined to his native State. Besides, the Constitution has
provided, that no person shall be eligible to the office, who is not
thirty-five years old; and in the course of nature very few fathers leave a son
who has arrived to that age. The powers of the President are not kingly, any
more than the ensigns of his office. He has no guards, no regalia, none of
those royal trappings which would set him apart from the rest of his fellow
citizens. Suppose the first President should be continued for life: What
expectations can any man in the Union have to succeed him, except such as are
grounded upon the popularity of his character?

NONE of its citizens possess distinct principalities, from whence money may be
drawn to purchase, or armies raised to intimidate the votes. Fortunately for
America, she has no neighboring Princess to interfere in her elections, or her
councils: No Empress of Russia to place the Crown upon the head of her favorite
Powniotowsky. The present King of Poland was Stanislaus Leginski, Count
Powniotowsky.


IT has also been objected, that a Council of State ought to have been assigned
the President. The want of it, is, in my apprehension, a perfection rather than
a blemish. What purpose would such a Council answer, but that of diminishing,
or annihilating the responsibility annexed to the character of the President.
From the superiority of his talents, or the superior dignity of his place, he
would probably acquire an undue influence over, and might induce a majority of
them to advise measures injurious to the welfare of the States, at the same
time that he would have the means of sheltering himself from impeachment, under
that majority. I will here once for all observe, that descended as we are from
the English, conversant as we are in the political history of that country, it
is impossible not to derive both political opinions, and prejudices, from that
source. The objectors probably considered, that as in the English government,
the first Magistrate has a Council of State; there should be one also in the
American. But they should at the same time have recollected, that the King of
England is not personnally responsible for his conduct; but that her
Constitution looks up to his Ministers, that is, to his Council, to answer for
the measures of the Sovereign. But in the American Constitution, the first
Magistrate is the efficient Minister of the people, and as such, ought to be
alone responsible for his conduct. Let him act pursuant to the dictates of his
own judgment; let him advise with his friends; let him ^onsult those of whom he
has the highest opinion for wisdom; but let not his responsibility be
diminished by giving him a Council.

The Congress may determine the time of choosing the Electors, and the day on
which they shall give their votes; which day shall (...) the same throughout
the United States.

No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States,
at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the
office of President; neither shall any per^^^ be eligible to that office who
shall not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen
years a resident within (...) United States.

In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President; and the Congress may by
law provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of
the President and Vice President, declaring what officer shall then ^ct word^
President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.

The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a
compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period
for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that
period any other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

Before he enters on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation: I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully
execute the office of Presiden of the United States, and will, to the best of
my ability, preserve, protect, and defend, the Constitution of the United
States.

THE first of these clauses is intended to prevent intrigue and tumult in
choosing the Electors: And the reasons already offered, why Congress should have
the right of altering "the times and manner of holding the elections for
Senators," apply why they should have the power of determining the time of
choosing Electors. The fifth is an additional check upon the President.

Sect. 2. The President shall be Commander in Chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several States, when called into the
actual service of the United States: He may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officer in each of the Executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

THE powers vested in the President by this and the subsequent clause, belong,
from the nature of them, to the Executive branch of government; and could be
placed in no other hands with propriety.

SO long as laws can not provide for every case that may happen: So long as
punishments shall continue disproportionate to crimes, the power of pardoning
should some where exist. With whom could this power, so precious to humanity,
be better entrusted, than with the President? An officer who, from his age and
experience, will seldom be misled in the exercise of it; and who less liable to
the influence of prejudice and passion than a popular assembly, will most
probably be guided by discretion in the use of it.

WHY Governor Randolph should wish to take from him this power, at least in
cases of treason; and why he should have made a distinction between the power
of pardoning before, and after conviction; I am at a loss to conceive; and
shall therefore attempt no further answer to an objection which appears to me,
unsupported by reason. See Governor Randolph's letter. He has enforced none of
his objections with reasons.


He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two-thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint
Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the Supreme Court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may, by law, vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

THE Constitution has here lessened the authority of the President, by making
the assent of two-thirds of the Senate necessary in the important cases of
making treaties, in appointing Ambassadors, the Judges of the Supreme Court,
and the great officers of State.

WRITERS upon government have established it as a maxim, that the Executive and
Legislative authority should be kept separate. But the position should be taken
with considerable latitude. The Executive authority here given to a branch of
the Legislature, is no novelty, in free governments. In England, the Executive,
or Cabinet Council, is taken indifferently from either House of Parliament. In
the States of New York and Jersey, the Senate not only act as an Executive
Council, but also form a part of the Court of Appeals. It is to be observed,
that this is the only instance where the Senate have the shadow of Executive
power.


THE following reasons suggest themselves in support of the propriety of
vesting the President and Senate with the power of making treaties.

THE President is the Representative of the Union: The Senate the
Representatives of the respective States. The objects of treaties must always
be either of great national import, or such as concern the States in their
individual capacities; but never can concern the individual members of the
State. Secrecy and dispatch are necessary in making them: For without secrecy
and dispatch, they are seldom made to purpose. Hence arises the impropriety of
consulting either the Representatives of the people, or the different States.
If the former were consulted, the interests of the small States might be
sacrificed; if the latter, almost insurmountable obstacles would be thrown in
the way of every negotiation.

IN the Dutch Republic the States General are obliged to consult their
constituents, upon this, as upon every important occasion, however urgent may
be the necessity. This vice in their Federal Constitution has more than once
brought them to the brink of ruin.

The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during
the recess of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end
of their next session.

THIS inoffensive clause is made a ground of objection by Governor Randolph! I
wish he had informed us wherefore.

Sect. 3. He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the
state of the Union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he
shall judge necessary and expedient: He may on extraordinary occasions, convene
both Houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between them, with
respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time as he
shall think proper: He shall receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers: He
shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed; and shall commission all
the officers of the United States.

THE powers given by this section are such as in all governments, have always
been, and must necessarily be, vested in the first magistrate.

Sect. 4. The President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United
States, shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of,
treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

THE persons subject to impeachment, are the President Vice President, and all
civil officers of the United States, and no others.

ARTICLE III.
Sect. 1. The judicial power of the United States shall b^ vested in one
Supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to
time ordain and establish. The Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts,
shall hold their offices during good behavior, and shall, at stated times,
receiv^ for their services, a compensation, which shall not be deminishe^
during their continuance in office.

Sect. 2. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in la^ and equity,
arising under this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties
made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting
Ambassadors, other publi^ Ministers and Consuls; to all cases of admiralty and
maritime jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United States shall be a
party; to controversies between two or more States, between a State and
citizens of another State, between citizens of different States, between
citizens of the same State claiming lands under grants of different States, and
between a State or the citizens thereof, and foreign States, citizens or
subjects.

In all cases affecting Ambassadors, other public Ministers, and Consuls, and
those in which a State shall be a party, the Supreme Court shall have original
jurisdiction. In all the other case before mentioned, the Supreme Court shall
have appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact with such exceptions, and
under such regulations as the Congress shall make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and
such trial shall be held in the State where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any State, the trial shall be at such
place or places, as the Congress may by law have directed.

NO part of the Constitution seems to have been so little understood, or so
purposely misconstrued, as this article. Its enemies have mustered all their
forces against the Federal Court; and have loudly sounded the trumpet, for the
benevolent purpose of alarming the good people of Virginia, with the fears of
visionary danger and imaginary oppression. They have told them the Federal
Court, like Aron's rod, would swallow up all the judiciary authority of the
respective States. That a citizen of Virginia may be forced to Philadelphia for
a debt of 5 l. although it was contracted with a fellow citizen: And, above
all, that the trial by jury is not preserved. In a word, it is the Federal
Court that is to be made the great instrument of tyranny.

THESE indeed would be serious objections were they well founded.

IT is on all hands admitted, that a Federal Court is necessary, for a variety
of purposes, and under a variety of circumstances.

THE only question then is, whether the enumeration of the cases assigned to
the Federal Court, by this article, is likely to produce oppression? Or if
there be any ground to apprehend that Congress will not, by law provide a
remedy for all probable hardships, and render the federal jurisdiction
convenient to every part of the United States?

THERE has been no objection raised to the Federal Court having original
jurisdiction, in all cases respecting public Ministers, and where a State may
be a party; and these are the only cases wherein it has original jurisdiction.
In these cases, in controversies between two or more States, and between a
State and citizens of another State, and between citizens of the ^ame claiming
lands under grants of different States, the present Congress have the right of
determining. 9 Article of the Confederation.
Here the judiciary is blended in an eminent degree with the Legislative
authority; a strong reason, among many others, for new modeling that unskilful
organized body. Under the present Confederation, every department of
government, is lodged in the same body; which alone is a sufficient ^eason for
adopting a new federal system.


THE Convention sensible of this defect, has wisely assigned the cognizance of
these and other controversies to a proper tribunal, a Court of Law.

AMONG these controversies, there is but one possible case where a dispute
between two citizens of the same State can be carried, even by appeal, to the
Federal Court; and that is, when they claim the same land under grants from
different States. As their title is derived through States, this case is
precisely within the reason which applies to controversies wherein two States
are parties.

NOTWITHSTANDING this, we are told that in the most ordinary cases, a citizen
of Virginia may be dragged within the appellate jurisdiction of the Federal
Court, although the transaction which gave rise to the controversy originated
between fellow citizens. This, it is said, may be effected, by assigning a
bond, for instance, given by one fellow citizen to another, either to a
foreigner or a citizen of another State. To this I answer, that such assignment
would not be attended with any such consequence; because it is a principle in
law, that the assignee stands in the place of the assignor; and is neither in a
better nor a worse condition. It is likewise asserted, that if two citizens of
the same State claim lands lying in a different State, that their suit may be
carried to the Federal Court for final de^ermination. This assertion is equally
groundless. For this being a local action, it must be determined in the State
where^n the lands lie.

AND I repeat it again, because it cannot be too often repeated, that but one
possible case exists, where a controversy between citizens of the same State
can be carried into the Federal Court. How then is it possible that the Federal
Court can ^ver swallow up the State jurisdictions, or be converted to the
purposes of oppression.

SEVERAL reasons occur why the Federal Court should possess an appellate
jurisdiction in controversies between foreigners and citizens, and between the
citizens of different States. A foreigner should have the privilege of carrying
his suit to the Federal Court, as well for the sake of justice, as from
political motives. Were he confined to seek redress in the tribunal of that
State, wherein he received the injury, he might not obtain it, from the
influence of his adversary; and by giving him this additional and certain means
of obtaining justice, foreigners will be encouraged to trade with us, to give
us credit, and to employ their capitals in our country. Then controversies must
for the most part arise from commercial transactions, by which the bulk of the
people can be seldom effected. The first part of this reasoning equally applies
to controversies between citizens of different States. Besides, were the
jurisdiction of the Federal Court not coextensive with the government itself,
as far as foreigners are concerned, a controversy between individuals might
produce a national quarrel, which commencing in reprisals, would probably
terminate in war. Suppose a subject of France or Great Britain should complain
to the Minister residing at the seat of Congress, that (...) was impossible to
obtain justice in a Court of Law, in Virginia, for instance. The Minister
represents the matter to hi^ Court. That Court will apply to the Congress, not
to the individual State, for redress. Congress replies, we lamen^ that it is
not in our power to remedy the evil; but we have no authority over the
jurisprudence of the State. Is it probable that such an answer will be
satisfactory to powerful nations? Will they not say we must take that redress
by forc^ which your feeble government denies us? We are under the necessity of
seizing American property wherever we ca^ lay our hands upon it, till the just
demands of our subject are satisfied.

THOSE objectors who are so much alarmed for the trial by jury, seem little
acquainted either with the origin or use o^ that celebrated mode of trial.

I WILL take leave to inform them, that by our laws a variety of important
causes are daily determined without the intervention of a jury, not only in the
Court of Chancery, but in those of common law; and that by several of our acts
of Assembly, the General Court has a power of assessing fines as high as 500 l.
for inconsiderable delinquencies, without the intervention of a^^ry, even to
find the fact.

AS I have before observed, these causes will be from the nature of things,
generally mercantile disputes; must be matters of account, which will be
referred to commissioners, as is the practice of all common law Courts in
similar cases. Whenever it may be necessary that the facts should be stated, no
doubt they will be found by a jury of the State, from whence the cause is
carried; and will be made a part of the record.

IN criminal cases, the trial by jury is most important. In criminal cases the
Constitution has established it unequivocal^y. But in having only recognized
this trial in criminal, it by no means follows that it takes it away in civil
cases: And ^e may fairly presume, that by the law which the Congress will make
to complete the system of the Federal Court, it will ^e introduced, as far as
it shall be found practicable, and applicable to such controversies as from
their nature are subjects proper to be determined in that Court.

ALL civilized societies have found it necessary to punish a ^ariety of
offenses, with the loss of life. The life of man is a ^erious forfeiture: Our
law has therefore humanely and just^y said, that it shall not be affected, but
by the unanimous opinion of twelve men. In a political view, this mode of
tri^l, in State prosecutions, is of still greater importance. The ^hief
Magistrate, or the Legislature itself, of a republic, is as ^^able to personal
prejudice, and to passion, as any King in Europe; and might prosecute a bold
writer, or any other person, who had become obnoxious to their resentment, with
as ^uch violence and rigor. What so admirable a barrier to ^efend the
innocent, and protect the weak from the attacks (...) power, as the
interposition of a jury? In this respect, the ^rial by jury may well be called
the palladium of liberty.

THE framers of the Constitution viewing it in this light, ^lthough it was
impossible to enter minutely into the subject of the Federal Court, and arrange
it fully, took care to de^lare that, in criminal cases, the trial by jury
should be pre^^rved, lest we should have had some ground of uneasiness upon
that important point.

I MUST farther observe, that the Federal Court has no ju^sdiction over any
offenses except such as are against the (...): And the criminal is to be tried
in the State where be fact is committed.

IT is asked, why has not the Constitution more accurately defined the
jurisdiction of the Federal Court, more clearly ascertained its limits, and
more fully pointed out the modes o^ trial?

TO this it may be answered, that the out-lines of the piece are traced with
sufficient accuracy: That to have entered minutely into this subject, to have
filled it with all its parts would have employed almost as much time as framing
the Constitution itself, and would have spun out the work to a tedious length.
In that case the Convention must have ascertained the number of inferior Courts
necessary, the number o^ Judges, and other officers, with their salaries, the
times of holding the Federal Courts, the duration of their terms; in what cases
the trial shall be by jury, in what not, with an infinite variety of
circumstances, the introduction of which in a system of government, would have
made a strange appearance. They therefore properly left to the Congress the
power of organizing by law the Federal Court: Well knowing that at least eight
of the States must, from their local situation, concur in rendering it
convenient to the whole. The four eastern States, and the four southern, being
at a great distance from the center, will necessarily concur in making the
Federal Court as convenient as possible: And therefore appeals to the Supreme
Court will be allowed only in cases of great consequence.


Sect. 3. Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same over^ act, or on confession in open Court.

The Congress shall have full power to declare the punishment ^f treason, but
no attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person at^ained.

THIS section is equally humane and just.

ARTICLE IV.
Sect. 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each State ^o the public
acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every ^ther State. And the Congress
may by general laws prescribe ^he manner in which such acts, records, and
proceedings shall ^e proved, and the effect thereof.

Sect. 2. The citizens of each State shall be entitled to all ^rivileges and
immunities of citizens in the several States.

A person charged in any State with treason, felony, or other ^rime, who shall
flee from justice, and be found in another State, shall, on demand of the
Executive authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be
removed to the State having ^urisdiction of the crime.

No person held to service or labor in one State, under the ^aws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, in consequence of any ^aw or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or ^abour, but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom ^uch service or labor may be due.

THE convenience, justice, and utility, of these sections, are ^bvious.

AT present, slaves absconding and going into some of the ^orthern States, may
thereby effect their freedom: But un^er the Federal Constitution they will be
delivered up to the ^awful proprietor.

Sect. 3. New States may be admitted by the Congress into this Union; but no
new State shall be formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other
State; nor any State be formed by the junction of two or more States, or parts
of States, without the consent of the Legislatures of the States concerned, as
well as of the Congress.

The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States; and nothing in this Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular State.

UPON this section I shall only observe, that illiberal and groundless
prejudices against the northern States too generally prevail in this country.
Hence the unwarranted jealousy of the politics of those States. But were they
well founded, the powers given under this section will manifestly tend to allay
our fears of a northern combination. For as the greater portion of those
immense tracts of fertile land which remain uninhabited, or but thinly settled,
and which are yet to be divided into new governments, lie on the south-western
boundary; the southern interest will be strengthened by the Representatives of
the new States. Would we could forget our provincial prejudices, and consider
ourselves as citizens of America! The vulgar in Massachusetts believe, that the
practice of gouging in Virginia is so common, that half of its inhabitants have
but one eye. This opinion is on a level with a declaration of a gentlemen high
in office, in this country, who declared him self against the Federal
Government, because the eastern people were all rogues.


Sect. 4. The United States shall guarantee to every State in the Union a
republican form of government, and shall protect ^ach of them against invasion;
and on application of the Legisla^ure, or of the Executive (when the
Legislature cannot be con^^ned) against domestic violence.

THIS is an additional proof of the caution of the framers of be Constitution,
and how distant their views must have been from the design of introducing and
establishing an arbitrary ^overnment.

ARTICLE V.
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem necessary, shall
propose amendments to this Constitution; or, ^^ the application of the
Legislatures of two-thirds of the several ^tates, shall call a Convention for
proposing amendments, which (...) either case, shall be valid to all intents
and purposes, as part (...) this Constitution, when ratified by the
Legislatures of three ^^^rths of the several States, or by Conventions in
three-fourths ^^^reof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be
pro^^sed by the Congress. Provided, that no amendment which ^ay be made prior
to the year one thousand eight hundred and (...), shall in any manner effect
the first and fourth clauses in (...) section of the first article; and that no
State, without consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

ALL human productions must partake of imperfection. The ^embers of the
Convention did not pretend to infallibility: ^hey considered that experience
might bring to light inconve^iences which human wisdom could not foresee -- And
this ar^cle wisely provides for amendments, the necessity of which (...) may
discover.

THERE is not an article of the Constitution that deserves ^cater praise than
this. The Convention sensible that they ^^uld not foresee every contingency,
and guard against every ^^ssible inconvenience: Sensible that new circumstances
might arise, which would render alterations in the government necessary; have
declard that whenever two-thirds of both Houses of Congress, or two-thirds of
the State Legislatures, shall concur in deeming amendments necessary, a general
Convention shall be appointed, the result of which, when ratified by three
fourths of the Legislatures, shall become a part of the Federal Government.

I CONFESS myself at a loss to conceive what better mode could have been
adopted. If the system be reduced to practice, and experience shall discover
important defects, there can be no doubt but that two-thirds of Congress will
be sensible to them, and will point them out to the different Legislatures. On
the other hand, it is equally certain, that if the defects be flagrant, they
will be readily seen by two thirds of the Legislatures, and a Convention will
necessarily be the consequence: Nor is there any cause to apprehend, that the
result of such Convention, will be rejected by one-fourth of the States: Since
all the States must feel the inconvenience of important defects.

BUT, say the friends to previous amendments, friends, as many of them pretend
even to an energetic Federal Government, See Mr. Gerry's, Mr. Mason's, and
Governor Randolph's, objections.
why not amend the Constitution before it is adopted? To this it may be
answered, that they should first demonstrate their objections to be well
founded; and that their proposed amendments, if they can be said to have
offered any, would make it better. I am inclined to think, that neither Mr.
Gerry's, Mr. Mason's, nor Governor Randolph's, would. Upon this occasion I hope
I shall be excused for recommending to those gentlemen, as well as to other
objectors, Dr. Franklin's last speech in the Convention, which is replete with
good sense, as well as a marked deference for the opinions of others. If the
objections of these gentlemen be groundless, the Constitution needs no
amendment; if they be not, it cannot be amended in the manner they propose. Mr.
Mason, Mr. Randolph, the State of Virginia, raise objections: Mr. Gerry, and
the State of Massachusetts, do the same: Every other citizen, every other
State, has an equal right. A new Convention is formed, the proposed plan is
amended, or a new one produced. It is again presented to the public eye. New
blemishes appear new amendments are thought necessary. That which Mr. Mason may
think a perfection, another may think a fault: What would be agreeable to
Massachusetts, might displease Virginia. In a word, there would be no end to
objections, amendments, and Conventions. All federal government falls to the
ground. Anarchy ensues, and produces convulsions, which inevitably end in
despotism.

ARTICLE VI.
All debts contracted and engagements entered into before the adoption of this
Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this
Constitution, as under the Confederation.

This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the
Judges in every State shall be bound thereby; any thing in the Constitution or
laws of any State, to the contrary notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
several State Legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of
the United States and of the several States, shall be bound by oath or
affirmation, to support this Constitution; but no religious test shall ever be
required as a qualification to any office or public trust under the United
States.

THAT treaties should be the supreme law of the land is warmly opposed by the
enemies of the Constitution. This power, say they, may be converted to the most
arbitrary and destructive purposes.

TREATIES ought of right to be considered in the light, tha^ the Convention has
here viewed them. For why should they be made, if due obedience is not to be
paid them? The negative can only be supported by those who feel it their
interest that they should be disregarded.

THE objects of government are protection and security Many national
circumstances may arise wherein these object cannot be effected, without the
observance of treaties.

WHEN we consider who it is that has the power of making treaties, the manner
of his election, the checks that the Constitution has interposed to guard
against his possible abuse o^ power, among which his liability to impeachment
is no^ the least: When we consider the subject matter of treatie^ are always of
national import, and can not affect the interest of individuals, we have no
reason to fear that they will b^ made improvidently, or converted into
instruments of oppresion: They may be unwise, but can never be intentionall
wicked.

THIS, like every other article of the Constitution, was the subject of long
and serious deliberation; and it was ultimatel^ and rightly determined, that as
the power of making treatie^ was necessary, it could no where so properly, or
so safely b^ placed for the interests of the Union as in the hands of the
President: And if when made they were not to have the e^fect of law, the power
of making them would be nugatory The following passage from Blackstone's
Commentaries, will and to illustrate this subject, "It is also," says that
elegant ^ommentator, "the King's prerogative to make treaties, leagues, and
alliances, with foreign States and Princes. For it is by the law of nations
essential to the goodness of a league, that it be made by the sovereign power,
and that it is binding upon the whole community: And in England the sovereign
power, quod hoc, is vested in the person of the King. Whatever contracts
therefore he engages in, no other person in the kingdom can legally delay,
resist, or annul. And yet lest this plenitude of authority should be abused, to
the detriment of the public, the Constitution (as was hinted before) has here
interposed a check by means of Parliamentary impeachment, for the punishment of
such Ministers, as from criminal motives advise or conclude any treaty, which
shall afterward be judged to derogate from the honor and interest of the
nation." 1 Bl. p. 257. I might ^e all the political writers in support of the
general doctrine (...) laid down. The Convention considered it just. They ^w
the necessity of entrusting the power to the President; but ^oy also knew that
in this, as in every other exercise of power, is the Minister of the people;
and that whenever in making ^reaty he shall be governed by corrupt motives, he
will be ^le to impeachment.

HAVING thus gone through the different articles of the Con^^ution. I will now
endeavor to answer two other objections (...) have been made to it. The first
is, "that the liberty of (...) press is not secured." The second, "that it will
annihilate (...) dependence of the different States."

ON the first objection I shall only observe, that as the Con^^^ can claim the
exercise of no right which is not expressly (...) them by this Constitution;
they will have no power to restrain the press in any of the States; and
therefore it would have been improper to have taken any notice of it. The
article respecting the habeas corpus act corroborates this doctrine. The
Convention were sensible that a federal government would no more have the right
of suspending that useful law, without the consent of the States, than that of
restraining the liberty of the press: But at the same time they knew that
circumstances might arise to render necessary the suspension of the habeas
corpus act, and therefore they require of the States, that they will vest them
with that power, whenever those circumstances shall exist. But they also knew,
that no circumstances could make it necessary that the liberty of the press
should be entrusted to them, and therefore they judged it impertinent to
introduce the subject. But still there are fears for the district which may
become the seat of Congress, and which may be ten miles square.

CAN it be for a moment supposed, that Congress will not preserve the liberty
of the press in the government of that district? Or that there exist American
citizens so lost to a sense of liberty, as to reside under a govenment where it
shall be taken away? It is to be observed, that the consent of the State where
this district shall (...), must be obtained by the Congress: And the State may
stipulate the terms of the cession.


AS to the other objection, I will admit, that by this Constitution, the
several States will be abridged of some of their powers; but of no more than
are necessary to make a strong federal government. Sufficient still remains
with the State Legislatures to preserve the quiet, liberty, and welfare, of
their citizens. To them is left the whole domestic government of the States;
they may still regulate the rules of property, the rights of persons, every
thing that relates to their internal police, and whatever effects neither
foreign affairs nor the rights of the other States. Powers weighty enough to be
entrusted to most men; and which good and modest men would think sufficient to
be entrusted to them. Besides we should remember that every State has its
proportionate share in the national government; and that the Constitution has
not only guaranteed to them a republican form, but has made their independence
necessary to its own existence.

THE adoption of this government will not only preserve our Union, and thereby
secure our internal happiness; but will restore that consequence and
respectability abroad, which have been lost since the days of Saratoga and
York. The firm confederation of thirteen States, inhabiting a fertile soil, and
growing rapidly in population and strength, will give them an importance in the
world, which they never can acquire when disunited: And we are assured from the
best authority, that the link of the present Union is but a thread. An
energetic government will give a spring to every thing: New life will be
^nfused throughout the American system. Our credit will be ^estored; because
the proposed Constitution at the same time that it will give us vigor, will
inspire foreign nations with a confidence in us. The restoration of credit,
will be the revival of commerce. The sound of the hammer will be again heard in
our ports. The ocean will once more be covered with our ships, and the flag of
the United States be respected by the nations.

BUT once disunited, these bright prospects immediately va^ish^ Our western
hemisphere is clouded over; and destructive storms arise. Our inactivity and
torpor produced by the relaxation of our laws will become inveterate, unless
our internal quarrels shall rouse us into action; the seeds of which have been
long sown, and disunion will make the harve plentiful. Massachusetts and
New Hampshire have more tha^ a pretext of quarrel in their pretensions to the
province ^ Main; and their mutual interference in the fisheries will s^^^ to
increase the dispute. Connecticut and New York may ^^vive their old quarrel
respecting boundaries. Pennsylvan^^ will not forget that the territory of
Delaware was once unit^ to her; and will probably cast thither a longing eye.
Man land and Virginia may dispute the right to the Shores of P^^ towmack, and
the latter may readily revive with Pennsyl^^nia, the old dispute respecting the
northern boundings: (...) dispute which terminated unfavourably to Virginia,
and wh^ from the peculiarity of it, was difficult to settle. When such causes
of dissension, we add the commercial regulatio^ of the individual States, the
ambitious views of their leads and the ill-grounded, though rooted, prejudices
of the wh^ have we not abundant reason to fear the most serious calam^ties from
a disunion? Then will open a new scene in A^^rica; the sword is then drawn not
against foreign foes, (...) against each other: The sword is then drawn never
to sheathed, till some State more powerful or more fortun^ than the rest, shall
subjugate the whole.

EXAMINE then, my countrymen, dispassionately the p^^posed plan of federal
government, and you will find that far from being full of defects, it is a
system well calculated preserve the liberty, and ensure the happiness of Ame^
and that it reflects additional honor on the names of a D^ck^ ^n, a Franklin,
and a Washington. I might have mentioned the names of a Madison, a Blair,
Hamilton, a Johnson, a King, a Rutledge. I acknowledge abilities of Mr. Mason
and Governor Randolph; but let it be forgotten, that at the close of the
Convention, there were three dissenting voices.
You can not for a mo^ent suppose that such men would deceive you! If human
nature were capable of falling at once from the height of vir^e to the depth of
depravity; even then you were safe -- for ^^ey could construct no government
which would oppress you, ^^at would not equally oppress themselves, and their
posterity.

NOTE --
INTENDED to have subjoined some observations upon Mr Lee's letter to Governor
Randolph; but finding that ^s manner of treating the subject has carried me
farther than ^xpected, and that answers to most of that gentleman's ob^tions
have arisen naturally out of the different articles of ^^e Constitution, I have
declined it, for fear lest the length of ^^e performance might become
fatiguing. For however im^^rtant such a subject may be to mankind; few have the
art (...) treating political disquisitions in such a manner as to inter^ the
majority of readers. I will h^^ever, in this place, ob^^^ve, that Mr. Lee, to
whose mellifluous tongue, I have of^^^ listened with pleasure, and who may be
said to have grown (...) in politics, must have written that letter in the heat
of his ^l, before he had well considered the proposed system of ^eral
government; or he never could have talked of the ^s and threads of
representation, or laid himself so open to ^ck in every quarter. Mr. Lee, like
most other enemies of (...) Constitution, objects without pointing out the
alterations that would improve it; asserts rather than argues (...) ^^^llible
mark of a bad cause. Mr. Gerry's and Mr. Mason's objections take up but a small
compass: But neither of these gentlemen has deigned to give us any thing like
argument in support of his objections. Mr. Randolph has said much to point out
the necessity of an energetic federal government; but nothing to prove that his
proposed amendments are founded in reason. And Mr. Lee would have the
government wholly new modelled to please himself. I suspect some of these
gentlemen have upon this occasion too much resembled Dr. Franklin's French
lady. I would ask Mr. Lee what advantage would result from a numerous
representation in a federal Congress? If the numbers in America are not greatly
exagerated, one member for every 30,000 will make the House of Representatives
to consist of an 100; which number will be increased every ten years. Has not
Mr. Lee's experience in public affairs taught him that even that is a number
too large to transact business with facility? But let the number of that House
be relatively great or small, it can in no sense be a rag or part of a
representation. That House stands, as to federal purposes, in the place of the
citizens of the thirteen States, and possesses all the powers conceded to it by
the citizens of those States, consequently ten persons would be as much a
representation as an hundred. Had Mr. Lee considered this government as
intended for thirteen different States; had he considered that the powers
vested in the Congress are merely national, that is such as respect America in
its relative situation with foreign nations, or such as respect the relative
situation of the States in their individual capacities; and that the States
still retain the most important part of their rights, in as much as the right
of Legislation in domestic cases, is of much greater consequence than in
foreign, I think he never would have made the observation.

I CONFESS that for some time I viewed some parts of the Constitution in the
light Mr. Lee and some others have done. ^ at first conceived that the Senators
where liable to impeachment; and that some mischief might arise from treaties
of peace being made the law of the land. But after mature deliberation, I was
convinced that I was mistaken in the former, and that the Constitution is right
in the latter.

THE foregoing little piece was intended to counteract the misrepresentations
of the proposed Federal Government, which the antifederalists have most
industriously disseminated in the southern counties. The writer had no idea of
publishing any thing upon the subject of the Constitution, till a visit he made
to one of those counties, where at the desire of his friend, he was induced to
write in haste the pamphlet now offered to the public. It was to have been
published time enough to be dispersed before the elections, but the Printer
found it impossible to deliver it in time. The primary intention being thus
defeated, it would not have been published at all, had it not been put into the
press at the time stipulated. The writer had neither Mr. Mason's, Mr. Gerry's,
nor Mr. Lee's objections by him: This it is hoped will be a sufficient apology
for its inaccuracies, as far as their objections have been taken notice of. He
takes this opportunity of observing, that perhaps he, and not Governor
Randolph, is mistaken as to the impeachability of the Senate: He acknowledges
that he has never conversed with any member of the late Convention upon the
subject, though he still thinks that the arguments be has used are sufficiently
strong to prove that the Senators neither are nor ought to be impeachable. He
does not pretend to have gone fully into the objections which have been raised
to the government: His design was to obviate only the most popular, and in a
manner as popular as he was able.

ERRATA.
Page 4, Line 22, dele the --, 24, for modify read new-model 6, 28, for
distinction read definition 9, 7, for contract read compact 15, 2, dele ones
21, 3, for prescribe read preserve 22, 17, for prove read proves 23, 16, add
before perquisites, no --, the last, for subjects read citizens 25, 10, for
their read there --, 14, for to read for 26, 13, for not read now 27, 20, for
trouble read labor 30, 22, for raising read ruining 47, 4, for unskilful read
unskilfully 48, 21, for then read these 51, 7, for with read in 61, 13, for
boundings read boundaries

