Mr. MARSH's Christmas-Sermon. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

To The EPISCOPAL SOCIETY (...) BARKHEMSTEAD.
GENTLEMEN,
THE following Discourse, being delivered in your presence and penned on your
request, is here presented to you, with a sincere desire to your instruction
and benefit; and what ever reception it may meet with from others (whose
candor I crave) with you I am persuaded it will be perused with some degree of
satisfaction, being composed with an hearty concern for your good; it is
therefore recommended to you with a sincere* desire for your final and eternal
happiness, through the merits of the Savior, even Christ the Lord -- and this
attoned with my hearty prayer to the God of all grace, who has the hearts of
all men in his hands, that he will animate and influence you all to such a
religious conduct, as shall best serve for the promotion of his glory, and your
best advantage, and that he will be pleased to own and bless these my
endeavors to promote these most important purposes.

I am your sincere friend, and well wisher, JONATHAN MARSH.
New-Hartford, April 10, 1788.
A SERMON, Delivered in BARKHEMSTEAD on Christmas Day, December 25, 1787,
before the EPISCOPAL SOCIETY and others convened on that Solemn Occasion.

BY JONATHAN MARSH, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in New-Hartford.

For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall
be upon his Shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Prophet Isaiah. She
shall bring forth a Son and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save
his People from their sins. St. Matt. Published at the request of his Hearers.

HARTFORD: Printed by NATHANIEL PATTEN. M,DCC,LXXX,VIII.

LUKE, ii. II. For unto you is born this Day, in the City of David, a Savior
who is Christ the Lord.
MY text points out to us one of the most interesting and important events in
Divine Providence that ever took place in this lower world, designed for the
glory of God and the eternal advantage of sinful men; for here we are informed
of the birth of the blessed Savior, who was made man for our sakes. Assuming
the human nature, that he might redeem and save millions of sining mortals from
ruin and misery, restore them to the favor of God and make them happy with
himself in glory in the heavenly world; and here you may observe how this
astonishing event was discovered to men, this was by the agency of an angel of
heaven -- for behold the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the
Lord shone round about them, to the astonishment of those to whom they
appeared. And well might they be afraid, when surrounded with such a blaze of
heavenly glory as was now exhibited to their view; for being conscious of
guilt, they had reason to fear a messenger of wrath instead of mercy and grace.
But happy for them it was quite the reverse -- for the angel said unto them,
fear not, for behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who
is Christ the Lord -- Even this divine Savior the Lord Jesus Christ -- The
long expected Messiah who had been spoken of by the holy prophets of the Lord
for hundred of years before -- now, now that happy time is come when that child
should be born -- when that Son was to be given whose name is called Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; for he
was to procure peace between God and man, so between man and man, uniting Jews
and Gentiles into one church, of whom Jesus is the head, even the Lord our
righteousness, and who is the savior of all that believe in his name, be they
of any nation or kingdom whatever who dwell on the face of the earth. But where
should they find this lovely babe, this darling of heaven, why wrapped in
swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger: for so it pleased God, that the son of
his infinite love should be distinguished to the admiration of angels and men,
by his amazing condescension and humiliation. But further observe -- How
suddenly there was joined a choir of blessed angels to celebrate the praises of
God on this most joyful occasion; and what did they proclaim to the world, why,
glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will to men. How happy if
we were able now with the most elevated affections to join with the heavenly
host as well as with the saints on the earth, ascribing glory to our God, for
this his surprising mysterious love in the gift of the Savior to a guilty
world -- that hereby divine wisdom has contrived and divine grace executed the
most important glorious plan for man's redemption: God manifest in the flesh,
who was seen and adored by the angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on
in the world and received up into glory, even this Savior who was born in the
city of David, the Savior who is Christ the Lord.

MY text may well serve to lead your thoughts to a serious contemplation of the
infinite goodness and grace of God in the gift of Christ Jesus our blessed
Savior, whom he has sent into the world for man's redemption and salvation.
And here I may observe, --

1. THAT in the gift of Christ the blessed Son of God to be our Savior, the
Lord has given the greatest and the most valuable which he had to bestow on us,
though sure it is that he had the whole world to command at his pleasure: for
as for this Savior, Christ the Lord, he was the blessed Son of God -- the
darling of heaven, in whom God was ever well pleased; and how perfectly fitted
for his most important work as our Redeemer and Savior was the blessed Jesus,
in that he was the great Immanuel -- God with us -- God manifest in the flesh,
by which mysterious union to the human nature, he was infinitely well fitted
for every part of his sacred office, to become the Savior of sinful men.
Should the highest angel in the heavenly world have attempted our redemption
and salvation, all would have been wholly ineffectual to this important design;
but the gift of Christ was far greater in value than would have been the whole
world of angels above. Amazing goodness this was indeed -- this was that
unspeakable gift, which was admired by all the blessed angels in the heavenly
world, and thus was the gift of the Savior, the very greatest, and the dearest
gift God had to bestow on a guilty miserable world, for which let the Lord have
all the glory and praise.

2. GOD not only sent his Son into this world for our sakes, but he designed
him to be a sacrifice for our sins -- to suffer, to bleed and die, that he
might satisfy the divine justice for our sins against God: for that end, how
wonderfully was he fitted for that important work, for which he was appointed
by his assuming the human nature for our sakes -- a nature suited to the
blessed design of man's redemption and salvation. And by that very remarkable
providence was that ancient prophecy fulfiled, where it is said, that the Lord
has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man, as in the
prophecy of Jeremiah; and so being made man for our sakes, he was by his own
consent made under the law, and freely subjected himself to the severe penalty
of it, to satisfy for our sins and bring in an everlasting righteousness. And
thus by his bearing our sins in his own body on the cross, and by his suffering
the most exquisitely tormenting, distressing, and ignominious death that ever
was endured, a full atonement was made for the sins of guilty men, and hereby
the way was laid open for our recovery to the favor, the image and the happy
enjoyment of God in the heavenly world, and all this grand plan of our
redemption was accomplished in a method perfectly consonant with the moral
perfections of the Lord God, and suited to his righteous government. And never,
never was there so lively a display of God's infinite hatred of sin, no not in
the most tremendous calamities that ever have been brought on this sinful,
guilty world, as there was in the painful, distressing sufferings of the adored
Savior for our salvation; but so it must be when the Lord of glory became a
surety for the rebellious sons of men, then when that awful time came, even the
time of his dreadful sufferings, then God spared not his own son, but delivered
him up to become a sacrifice for sins -- witness his amazing sufferings in the
garden under the heartfelt sense of his father's wrath, and that awful scene
of sufferings which the Lord of glory underwent in his passage to mount
Calvary, where he groaned forth his most bitter and very affecting cries, my
God, my God why have thou forsaken me. O what a dreadful evil sin is, which
really cost the Savior so many distressing pains and agonies to satisfy for it.

3. So was the infinite and amasing goodness of God manifested in and by the
blessed Mediator, in that this sacrifice of Christ Jesus, was for the
redemption and salvation of innumerable guilty sinners, who were enemies to God.

So we are told that Christ died for the ungodly: Now for God to pity and
spare, to redeem and to save his guilty creatures, guilty of aggravated
wickedness, of the most inexcusable enmity to their Maker, of the most horrid
rebellion against Deity itself, to appoint any way, or ordain any method for
man's recovery and happy restoration to the favor and love of God, and to
effect this so glorious a favor, in so very wonderful and expensive a manner
as this was, by the most painful sufferings, and the ignominious death of the
blessed Son of God, in whom he was always well pleased; even by him who was
perfectly holy in his nature, and in all his life, and only guilty by the
imputation of the guilt of sinful men to himself; that this blessed Son of God
should suffer and die for the rebellious, who had forfeited all claim to his
favor and love. Sure this was a miracle of mercy indeed, when on the contrary,
what might have been expected from a God of infinite holiness and justice; that
in consequence of man's rebellion against the Deity, he would have armed
himself with the most dreadful vengeance against these his enemies, and have
crushed them to pieces with his rod of iron, or have eternally banished them
from all hopes of the divine mercy forever, well then at the view of this
divine grace might the angels of heaven join in their doxology to God, and
congratulations of men upon that most solemn occasion, even a multitude of the
heavenly hosts: -- Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace and good will
toward men; for sure the Lord ought to have all the glory of our redemption
and salvation, for his own infinite wisdom first laid the plan in so glorious a
manner, as that all the different perfections of God perfectly harmonise, and
are effectually seen and glorified, and will be so to the endless ages of
eternity in the heavenly word.

4. So was the infinite wisdom and goodness of God manifested in this way, of
our redemption through Jesus Christ, in that by this so grand an overture in
the Divine Providence; the nature of man is greatly advanced in dignity and
honor by its being united to the Savior. So we read that Christ took not on
him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. We are told by St. Luke the
evangelist, that Adam our first parent was by creation the Son of God; but then
by Christ's assuming the human nature, and becoming the Mediator betwixt God
and man; the sons of Adam become nearly allied to the Son of God, and by the
most astonishing goodness of the Deity, our natures are united to Christ
himself, who is God as well as man; therefore, every true believer in Christ
Jesus is the child of God, not only by creation as are all the rest of mankind,
but they are the Children of God in a more exalted sense, as they are nearly
united to the Savior, who is not ashamed to call them brethren; and thus our
natures which are infinitely distant from, and infinitely below the Deity, are
bro't near to God himself by the divine Mediator; and so by that means, though
in creation our natures are exalted above all others here on the earth; yet by
the assumption of the human nature, in the person of the blessed Mediator, this
exalted far above that of the blessed angels themselves: And indeed this same
Jesus our adored Savior, who condescended to become man for our sakes, and in
that nature suffered and was crucified and slain, he is raised out of the
grave, he is ascended into heaven, and is set on the right hand of God, far
above all principalities and powers, might and dominion, and every name that is
named: O that we had so feeling a sense of the dignity of our natures as might
be a continued restraint against all kinds of iniquity, by which the hu^^^
nature is awfully degraded, and man become like to the beasts which perish.

5. AND lastly, so was the infinite and amazing goodness of God discovered in
this way of our redemption by Christ Jesus, in that hereby there is a sure
foundation laid for the eternal salvation of Innumerable precious souls in the
various ages of the world: How wonderful, how surprising have been the
conquests made by the blessed gospel of Christ Jesus, attended by the
influences of the holy spirit of God, in the happy conversion of millions of
fining mortals, who have been justified and saved through the merits of
Christ's death; by which that remarkable prophecy has been happily verified;
that a little one has become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation, as in
the prophecy of Isaiah; this doubtless refers to the days of the gospel, and
shows the vast increase of the church of Christ, and if as when very great
multitudes should be made christians indeed, and the kingdom of the Savior be
greatly advanced on the ruins of idol worship, when thousands should be new
born in a day, and churches planted by a few apostles in a direct opposition to
all the implacable enemies to the christian religion: How remarkably is this
grand overture in the divine providence set forth in the book of Psalms; thy
people shall be made willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness, from the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth, which
prophecy points out in a very lively manner the large increase of the flock of
Christ Jesus, and especially in the first days of the gospel, when by the
preaching of the word of God an innumerable multitude should become real
christians, and fill the earth; when millions and millions of true believers
shall be brought into the family of the adored Savior, and replenish the
christian church so as to become like the stars of heaven for multitude, or as
the sands on the sea shore innumerable.

THUS have I considered in a few instances how the infinite goodness and grace
of God has been manifested in the gift of Christ Jesus, to be our Savior and
Redeemer. -- A few inferences will conclude this discourse, -- and

1st. From hence we infer, how vile a contempt is offered to the blessed Son of
God, when he is slighted and rejected by sinful men. To slight or undervalue
the common gifts of the divine providence is odious and offensive to the God of
all mercy, but to do this amidst so rich a discovery of divine grace, as was
this of the gift of Christ Jesus, to suffer, to bleed and die for rebellious
sinners, how vile an instance of the blackest ingratitude must this be indeed.
-- What aggravated guilt, -- guilt of the deepest dye is this, when men do as
it were trample underfoot the precious blood of the blessed Son of God, and put
him to an open shame by their sins: Sure it is that the guilt of those nations
who have not been favored with the light of the gospel, is but small if
compared to that of these who have been favored with the word and ordinances
of God all their days, and favored with the charming voice of the blessed Son
of God, inviting them to mercy, -- to grace and salvation, and yet slight,
contemn and wilfully refuse it as if beneath their regards; but sure it is that
these who now undervalue and contemn these inestimable blessings will sadly
lament this their own folly, when death and judgment will awaken them to
effect; then will they most heartily lament their own sin and folly, when all
will be to no purpose to obtain the favor of God; but know this sinners, that
though thousands under the gospel will wilfully reject the Savior, and refuse
to have him to rule over them. Yet this is the will of God, that there will be
numberless immortal souls saved by virtue of his perfect merits and
righteousness: -- Behold then ye unbelieving souls, who may live and die in
your sins, though you may reject the Savior; yet thousands of others will
joyfully receive him as their Redeemer and their God, and the Savior will
assuredly have a glorious retinue to become his dear friends and followers: For
millions will be purchased by his precious blood, and he shall see the travel
of his soul, and be satisfied. Sure this is the plain determination of heavenly
wisdom, that the many mansions of heavenly glory shall be filled with true
believers, for the saints shall come from the east and from the west, from the
north and from the south, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the kingdom of God, and from an immense body of glorified saints above, where
they shall surround the throne of God, and praise and serve him evermore.

2. INFER what a peculiar value we ought to have for the gospel of the Savior
which has been the happy means of the conversion and salvation of many souls.
-- When we consider how great the opposition has been to the pure and holy
gospel of Christ Jesus, and especially on its first entrance into this wicked
world, in that the divine precepts taught hereby were directly calculated to
control and restrain all kinds of vice and immorality, both in the hearts and
lives on sinful men. When this heavenly religion of the Savior was in direct
opposition to the prevailing idolatries of the Gentile nation, and when the
grand and the most important doctrines taught by the gospel were to bring men
to believe in and to obey -- a God incarnal -- a once crucified Savior, whom
the apostles affirmed was risen from the dead, and gone into the heavenly
world. And once more, when all the followers of Jesus might expect to be
contemned, vilified and persecuted by a sinful world, and many exposed to the
loss of their lives for their becoming christians -- To what can the sudden
progress of this holy religion be ascribed? Why to no other but to the
powerful, the all-powerful agency of the Lord God, and proves at once in the
most convincing manner, that the christian religion is of God -- that God was
really the divine author of it. -- Let us all then highly value it, love it,
and live daily in conformity to these sacred rules herein contained; whilst we
are pitying and praying for all these who are living under the light of the
gospel, and yet are making a scoff and mock at some of its doctrines and divine
precepts; who instead of embracing the Savior and believing in him: -- Alas,
they represent him as a mere impostor -- a grand deceiver, and by their
abandoned wicked lives they declare, that Christ shall not rule over them. O
may a compassionate Savior open their eyes effectually, and give to them all a
true and sincere repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, that they may
be recovered out of the snare of the devil who are now led captive by him at
his will.

3. MY next use may be by way of Address to those of the episcopal church and
society of christians, who are here convened for the public worship of God. --
My friends, brethren and fellow christians: You are convened here this day in
commemoration of the very greatest favor and blessing that ever this sinful
world has been favored with -- abusing the good effects of which not only
extends to all the various ages in time, but they will reach to an eternal
duration in the future state, -- for unto you is born in the city of David, the
Savior who is Christ the Lord. -- O may you all seriously consider, not only
on this happy day, but frequently in your lives: Let these things sink deep in
your hearts -- how precious in the view of the Lord God is the eternal
salvation of immortal souls, and how very important for the advancement of
God's glory, both in time and to eternal ages in the future state; for these
ends was laid this glorious plan for our redemption and salvation before the
world began, and when the time came, that happy and ever memorable time, when
infinite wisdom saw sit to send the son of his infinite love into this world
for our salvation, then appeared the Lord of life and glory, and how did he
appear, why not in pomp and grandeur as was expected by the Jews; no far from
this, for he was born in a stable, then wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in
a manger. Adore then the wisdom, the goodness and the grace of God in this so
astonishing a method for our redemption and salvation, -- that rather than the
race of men should perish, the Savior should be made man and made a curse for
their deliverance from ruin and misery, and that through him they might have
life eternal: Well if God has had so great a value for your souls, O be very
careful of their best welfare yourselves, and never -- never expose them to
ruin and misery by any sensual and worldly enjoyments, and be this fixed deeply
on your minds, that all the attempts you may make to keep this most remarkable
event in divine providence in your memories, all these will nothing avail for
your eternal salvation, unless you are the careful followers of Christ Jesus as
his dear children, unless the temper of your hearts and the conduct of your
lives are habitually conformed to the holy laws; the doctrines and the divine
precepts of your ascended Savior. -- The doctrines of your Church which you
profess to believe are agreeable to the holy word of God, as to these which are
essential to true christianity: -- So you profess to believe that the sacred
scriptures contain all these holy laws and precepts which are necessary to be
observed by all christians, and that whatsoever is not r^^d in the scriptures,
or may be proved hereby, is not to be required of any man to be believed or
practiced as necessary to salvation; well then having such sacred doctrines to
regulate your beliefs, and such plain full and express laws for the good
regulation of your hearts and lives: Always be careful by the divine grace that
your minds be deeply affected, and your lives regulated by these glorious
gospel truths which you often hear of and may read at your leisure; and this
you may firmly believe, this you may depend on as a real important and most
interesting truth, -- that the revelation of christianity was designed by
infinite wisdom to be reduced to practice, and that it is heard, professed and
believed will all be in vain to any immortal souls, unless this be dutifully
obeyed; this then demands your immediate and your continued care and concern,
obey the truth -- obey the gospel as ever you expect an interest in that
salvation which is pointed out and promised to all the true disciples of Christ
Jesus: -- and remember, ponder this often in your minds, that a supreme love to
God, and a sincere and hearty love to your fellow men, constitute the true real
and esential character of all true christians. -- Let these divine graces then
be in a continued exercise in your souls, day after day, and remember and
realize this as a very important truth, that unless you love God supremely, you
don't love him as you ought to do, and this you may believe and depend on, that
the surest and the most substantial evidence of a true love to God, it is this,
a dutiful hearty and a persevering obedience to all his commands, and the
stronger your love is to the Lord God, the more uniform, steady and pleasant
will this your obedience be, and where this supreme love to God prevails in
your hearts, there will surely follow an hearty love to your fellow men; and
may I remind you of this, that this will not merely appear in a tender love and
regard to those who may be of your community, or persuasion on religious
accounts, but you will love christians of all denominations with all sincerity,
and be ready to express your love to them by all proper acts of kindness,
compassion and benevolence; this so excellent a grace, is an imitation of God
who is your divine pattern herein, and how very sensible and illustrious are
the displays of it toward you every day -- every hour, and every moment of
your lives. So may I call your attention to consider that divine pattern set
before you in the holy life of your dear Redeemer, whose goodness, love and
grace you are seriously to commemorate this day -- this divine love of the
Savor brought him down from heaven for a time to take our natures upon him --
to be born of a woman to be made under the law, and to become obedient unto
death, even the shameful, painful, and the accursed death on the cross. Walk
therefore in love as Christ has loved and has given himself for us: To your
honor and credit be it spoken that whilst many societies of our denomination
are thrown into great disorders and divisions by following Itinerants, who
pretend to an immediate call and remarkable assistance from heaven, who are
mere babes in knowledge, and novices in spiritual things; and yet are vain
enough to believe themselves fit to be the teachers of others, and able to
speak in a public manner to those who are willing to hear them. Your societies
appear to discountenance such as these while you are willing to encourage a
learned, regular and a pious ministry: -- Would to God that you might persevere
in this so laudable a practice to the glory of God and your own comfort and
edification.

FINALLY be careful to bear this often upon your minds, that the same Jesus who
became man for our sakes, but was despised and rejected of men; who was
vilified -- reproached -- condemned and suffered on the cross, even this same
Jesus, God, man, mediator, he shall desend from heaven at the last day with a
shout, with the trump of God, attended by myriads of his angels, to judge the
world in righteousness; then will you, and then shall we all appear before his
dread tribunal, when every one of us shall give an account of himself to God:
Then, then my friends, the grand enquiry will not be, of what denomination of
christians we have been here in life, but what has been the prevailing temper
of our hearts, and the habitual conduct of our lives; whether we have been the
true followers of Jesus -- whether we have believed in him and submitted to his
laws as our Lord and our God.

WELL then, seeing that all earthly enjoyments will soon fail and come to a
speedy end, and there remains a rest for all the saints in the heavenly world.
O let us all be in earnest to prepare for that happy state. Let the Lord, let
the Savior, let his holy religion be much upon your minds; be these the sacred
and powerful objects to influence our hearts -- to attract our affections, and
to regulate our various actions. Then may we hope to share a part of these
transcendent glories, and that exalted happiness in the heavenly world, where
is fullness of joys and pleasures evermore, and where Christ will be all ^^d in
all; as therefore we firmly believe that the last tremendous day will come,
when we all, with our eyes shall behold the Savior who is Christ the Lord,
when we shall behold him coming in the clouds with power and great glory, even
in that terrible day of the Lord, when the heavens shall be rent asunder and
wrapped up as a scroll; when the Almighty arm of the great Jehovah shall darken
the sun, and deprive the moon of its light* when his divine power shall dash to
pieces the structure of this lower world, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat and when all the dead small and great shall stand before God, and
the fates of all mankind shall finally be determined, either to happiness or
misery by an irrevocable decision. O let us all be careful to prepare for this
so important a scene, by a believing acceptance of the Savior the Lord Jesus
Christ, and being savingly interested in his perfect righteousness, and (...)
sufficient merits, we might be owned by him at the last, and being covered with
the wings of his redeeming love, we might be all safely conveyed to heavenly
glory. There the blessed saints of all denominations of christians shall
happily unite together, all in perfect love to God and to each other, and so
will they accompany the blessed angels of heaven, even all these numerous
inhabitants of the upper world, where surrounding the throne of God, will they
celebrate the praises of redeeming love, and give glory to the lamb, who was
slain, and who has redeemed us to God by his own blood out of every kindred and
tongue, and people and nation, when the number of them will be ten thousand
times ten thousand and thousands, of thousands, and when all will proclaim with
a loud voice, saying, blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that
fitteth on the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever: O may our souls
rejoice at the views of these heavenly joys, and be more and more prepared for
this so glorious a state, being fitted to enter into that heavenly world, and
permitted to behold our ascended Savior, face to face, and be transported with
the brightest discoveries of his divine perfections, and with the views of the
divine attributes of the Godhead.

AMEN.

