CASES and OBSERVATIONS; BY THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF NEW HAVEN COUNTY, IN THE
STATE OF CONNECTICUT.

Instituted in the Year 1784.

PLUS ULTRA



New Haven: Printed by J. Meigs, 1788.

PREFACE.
A number of Physicians in the city and county of New Haven, stimulated by the
importance of the object, and the laudable example of the faculty in the
various nations of Europe, and in some parts of America, formed a society in
the year 1784, for the purpose of improving themselves in Medical knowledge.

The cases and observations, which have been exhibited to the society, are
given to the public, in the following sheets, who it is hoped will regard with
a favorable eye, the first essay of this infant institution. All attempts to
improve a science which is subservient to the dearest interests of humanity,
must meet the approbation of every benevolent mind. Attempts of this nature are
particularly necessary, and must be peculiarly useful, in an infant empire,
where the seeds of science, though widely disseminated, are but just beginning
to germinate. Their future growth and increase depend on the care and attention
with which they are nurtured. To excite others to this laudable and salutary
work, is one principal object of this publication. It has not we presume
proceeded from incapacity, or a criminal inattention to the interests of
humanity that the faculty in this country have hitherto contributed so little
to the general stock of Medical knowledge. In a widely extended country, at a
distance from each other, it has not been in their power to unite their efforts
in this noble pursuit. The late war brought many ingenious and learned
Physicians together from all parts of the continent, and the army formed them
into a temporary society, whose unreserved communications have contributed to
the improvement of medical knowledge, and the establishment of a new and
important era in the healing art. By this mean the faculty have become more
sensible of the importance of uniting their endeavors, and several Medical
societies have been formed in different parts of the United States. Should
similar institutions become general, and permanent, there is reason to hope
that Medical literature will soon be in as flourishing a state in this country
as in any part of Europe. A spirit of emulation will take place, sloth and
ignorance decline, and the art appear with dignity and luster. Should this
effort of the society contribute in the smallest degree to effect those
desirable ends, it will afford them ample satisfaction for their labor.

This society was formed on the most liberal and generous principles, and was
designed first to lay a foundation for that unanimity and friendship which is
essential to the dignity and usefulness of the profession; to accomplish which,
they resolved secondly, to meet once in three months: thirdly, that in all
cases where counsel is requisite they will assist each other without reserve:
fourthly, That all reputable practitioners in the county, who have been in the
practice for one year or more, may be admitted members: fifthly, that they will
communicate their observations on the air, seasons and climate, with such
discoveries as they may make in physic, surgery, botany or chemistry, and
deliver faithful histories of the various diseases incident to the inhabitants
of this country, with the mode of treatment and event in singular cases:
sixthly, to open a correspondence with the Medical Societies in the
neighboring states and in Europe, for which purpose they have a standing
committee of correspondence: seventhly, to appoint a committee for the purpose
of examining candidates for the profession, and to give certificates to the
deserving.

In pursuance of these resolutions, the Society have punctually attended their
meetings, examined and approved a number of candidates, many of whom bid fair
to be ornaments to the profession: and of late they have made some advances
toward the establishment of a fund, which promises permanency to the
institution.

Any communications which may tend to the advancement of the science, from
gentlemen of the faculty in other parts of this and in the neighboring states
or elsewhere, will be thankfully received, and such as may be deemed worthy of
publication preserved for a future volume. -- Such communications may be sent
to the Secretary Dr. SAMUEL DARLING.
, or any other member of the Society, by whom they will be exhibited to the
Society, and lodged on their files for future use.

New Haven, June 14th, 1788.
CONTENTS.
ARTICLE I. CASE of a Singultus from an Adhesion of the Liver to the Diaphragm,
proving fatal. Communicated by Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. F. M. S. ARTICLE II. Case of
a Puerperal Fever successfully treated. Communicated by Dr. Elnathan Beach, F.
M. S. ARTICLE III. Two cases of difficult Deglutition from extraneous bodies
lodged in the Gula. By Dr. Abraham Tomlinson, F. M. S. ARTICLE IV. Case of a
fractured cranium successfully treated. By John Spalding, Surgeon, F. M.S.
ARTICLE V. Case of a Gangrene of the Scrotum. By Dr. Leverett Hubbard, F. M. S.
ARTICLE VI. Case of the Locked Jaw successfully treated by Electricity. By Dr.
Eneas Munson, F. M. S. ARTICLE VII. Case of an Hamatemesis, successfully
treated. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt, F. M. S. ARTICLE VIII. Case of an Enteritis.
Communicated by Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley. F. M. S. ARTICLE IX. Case of a deformed
Foetus, with a cut, communicated by Dr. Leverett Hubbard, F. M. S. ARTICLE X.
Case of the fatal effects of the corrosive sublimate of Mercury. By Dr. Levi
Ives, F. M. S. ARTICLE XI. Case of the fatal effects of drinking cold water
when heated. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt, F. M. S. ARTICLE XII. Case of an Asthma
from an extraordinary cause. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt, F. M. S. ARTICLE XIII. Case
of an Hydrocephalus Internus, By Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley, F. M. S. ARTICLE XIV.
Case of a Schirrous Tumor in the Pylorus. By Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley, F. M. S.
ARTICLE XV. Case of a singular wound in the Eye. By John Spalding, Surgeon, F.
M. S. ARTICLE XVI. Case of a Peripneumony. By Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley. F. M. S.
ARTICLE XVII. Case of an amputation of the leg in consequence of a divided
artery. By John Spalding, Surgeon, F. M. S. ARTICLE XVIII. A letter from Dr.
Benjamin Gale, C. M. S. on the bite of a mad dog, communicated by Dr. Leverett
Hubbard. F. M. S. ARTICLE XIX. Case showing the good effects of the
antiphlogistic regimen in the eruptive variolous fever. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt,
F. M. S. ARTICLE XX. History of a dysentery, occasioned by stagnant air. By Dr.
Ebenezer Beardsley. F. M. S. ARTICLE XXI. Case of a division of the tendo
Achillis. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt, F. M. S. ARTICLE XXII. Case of a wound in the
Trachea Arteria and Aesohpagus. By John Spalding, Surgeon, F. M. S. ARTICLE
XXIII. Case of an enlarged Gall bladder. By Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley, F. M. S.
ARTICLE XXIV. Case of Dysenteric Symptoms from worms. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt, F.
M. S. ARTICLE XXV. Case of a schirrous in the pylorus of an infant. By Dr.
Hezekiah Beardsley, F. M. S. ARTICLE XXVI. Case of Calculi in the Lungs. By Dr.
Eneas Munson, F. M S.
CASES and OBSERVATIONS.
A Singultus (from an adhesion of the Liver to the Diaphragm) proving fatal. By
Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read to the Society, 3d May, 1784.
ON the 4th of October, 1783, I was called in council with Dr. Eneas Munson, to
visit Polydore, a Negro servent of Capt. Trowbridge of this city, aged 26; his
symptoms were, a fixed pain under the Cartilago Ensiformis, a sense of fullness
at the pit of the stomach, with dyspnaea, and very frequent hiccup that was
violent, and affected greatly his pulse, so as to produce the true faultering,
or interrupted pulse, he had no cardialgia, nor disposition to vomit, only an
eructation, arising from the spasms of the diaphragm; he had been attacked
twice with the same disease, in the course of the last twelve months, previous
to the present. In the former attacks, Absorbents, Correctors, and
Antispasmodics, had been tried to little purpose, the disease spent itself
gradually, and the Singultus wore off, in proportion as the patient grew weak.
Perhaps the tension and inflammation, gave way to relaxation and resolution;
but I make no doubt, left an adhesion of the Liver to the diaphragm, from the
first attack; which might gain ground as the disease recurred, and I think it
may be warranted from this circumstance of the patient's being uneasy in the
intervals of the recited affections, with that sense of fullness, at his
stomach, and disturbed respiration.

From the history of the disease, previous to the 4th of October, and the
Symptoms now subsisting, Dr. Munson and myself were of opinion, that an
inflammatory affection of the diaphragm and liver was deducible, and that the
stomach and other viscera were not affected. We adopted the antiphlogistic
treatment, blood drawn and repeated, was sizey and cohesive, the serum strongly
impregnated with bile, correctors and antispasmodies were given to temporize,
epispastics over the part affected were applied, and after a course of three
weeks attendance (the symptoms gradually abating) the disease gave way, so as
to leave the patient apparently well, except that sense of fullness at his
stomach.

On the 27th of March last, the patient called on me, complained of a
headache, and of being much pressed at his stomach, his pulse moderate, and no
return of hiccups. I prescribed a cathartic, and heard no more of him, until
the 29th of that month. When I visited him, he complained of headache, an
uneasy breathing, with a small frequent cough, the old sense of fullness, but no
pain or hiccups. I let blood which was florid, but not sizey nor uncommonly
cohesive. I prescribed an emetic which operated gently, but excited no spasms
nor additional uneasiness. The 30th the head ache was increased and some degree
of fever. I prescribed a bolus of five gr. merc. dulc. to be worked off with
salts and manna.

On the 31st he seemed relieved, headache and symptoms abated. April 1st.
found him no worse, only prescribed the dulcif. sp. of Nitre, and diluents. The
2d of April, he complained more of his head, and that the room was dark, his
fever gone, and pulse rather small and interrupted; but as the day was stormy,
and the room he was then in was a dark room, I did not apprehend a failure of
vision. The 3d his complaints the same, and evident that vision was affected,
attended with a degree of stupor. I applied a large epispastic to the nape of
his neck. And on the 4th repeated the purge with the calomel, which not
operating kindly an enema was given. On the 5th I found him totally blind, and
so insensible as to afford no satisfactory answer to any of my questions, his
pulse feeble and oppressed, accompanied with a subsultus tendinum. I gave him
four portions of the factit. cinnabar, a scruple in each dose, once in six
hours. On the 6th I found his sight a little restored, and more sensible, though
still incoherent in his answers and observations. I was favored with Dr. Eneas
Munson in council this evening; we agreed to prescribe an infusion of the
valerian, and to repeat the next morning, the mercurial purge; it did not
operate. On the 7th we met in council, ordered the repetition of enemas, the
purge not having operated; On this day the hiccups came on gradually at first,
and with a constant eructation of a frothy mucus from the lungs and stomach. An
anodyne was given this evening. On the 8th I found him much distressed with an
increase of the hiccups, and a continuation of all the other symptoms; In the
evening I prescribed two anodynes, one to be given h. s. alter in four hours if
the hiccups were violent. On the 9th his symptoms much the same, with the
addition of a strangury and retention of urine, through the whole of the night
and day; I prescribed an emollient fotus to the pubis, and a decoction of the
cooling seeds and roots, proposing to use the catheter in the morning if he was
not relieved. On the 10th found he had passed urine freely in the night, the
strangury in some measure abated, the hiccups violent and almost incessant. I
prescribed antispasmodic bolusses of camphor, opium, and gum assasaetida, to be
washed down with infus. valerian; the hiccups were incessant, and the
eructation so violent that he spouted up every part of drink or medicine, as
soon as he attempted to swallow, although he manifested no aversion to anything
offered him. On the 11th, he was evidently growing worse, although the hiccups
were not so violent, yet were they as incessant, with delirium, subsultus
tendinum, and a trembling pulse. On the 12th having passed a very restless
night, the eructations and hiccups continuing, but less delirium; he complained
of a burning heat in his belly, from which a mortification of the viscera was
apprehended. On the 13th in the morning he died, nor did the hiccups entirely
leave him, until he breathed his last. On opening the body, in presence of Drs.
Hubbard, Munson, Darling etc. it appeared as follows; the omentum adhered
strongly to the pe^itoneum and intestines, so as not to be separated without
great difficulty, the fat of the omentum was entirely wasted, so as to be a
mere parchment, except small vesicles of fat, interspersed over it, and
gangrenous. The intestines only appeared to view, occupying the place of the
stomach and liver, and strongly drawn up to the diaphragm; the intestines were
interspersed with mortified spots, and adhered to each other by their external
coats. The vesica urinaria was high in the pelvis, and distended with urine.
The stomach appeared sound, but drawn out of its place by the spasms, lying
under the arch of the diaphragm, and pressed down under the advanced
intestines. The liver adhered strongly to the diaphragm, so as not to be
separated without tearing, and pressed out of view under the arch of the
retracted diaphragm. The anterior and unequal part of the liver adhered to the
diaphragm, so as to be almost inverted, and also adhered strongly to the
peritoneum below. The vesica fellis was small, shrunk, with a small quantity of
bile, and adhered strongly to that part of the duodenum to which it lay
contiguous, and not to be separated without laceration. On opening the thorax,
the heart and its pericardium, was found lying (or rather pressed by the
contraction of the diaphragm) across the thorax, with its apex to the left, and
its top or auricles to the right; there was no fluid contained in the
pericardium, the heart was about double the usual size, and the vena cava and
aorta greatly distended. The left lobe of the lungs was not to be seen until
the heart was drawn aside, being pressed down to the left side of the
vertebrae, adhering strongly to the pleura; neither lobe appeared otherwise
diseased. May I not, gentlemen, from the history of the case, and the
appearances after death, be authorized to say, that a primary inflammation of
the liver and diaphragm, was the proximate cause of the whole train of
symptoms, and preternatural appearance of the abdominal and thoracic viscera,
that the Singultus originated from the heat of an inflamed liver, and its
adhesion to the diaphragm, that the dyspnaea and cough, were occasioned by the
great spasmodic contraction of the diaphragm, disturbing respiration; the
heart's position and size, also, would naturally produce dyspnaea, a tickling
cough, etc. May we not very readily deduce the head ache, and loss of vision,
delirium etc. from the position and pressure of the heart, as thereby the
entrance of the blood by the vena cava, was greatly obstructed, and its exit
through the pulmonic arteries and aorta, by the praeternatural curve of those
vessels greatly interrutped, from whence might arise and subsist, those
affections of the brain so manifest in the last accession of the disease.

The great and preternatural enlargement of the vena cava and aorta, prove the
increased resistance the blood met with, both on its return to and from the
heart. How necessary then gentlemen is it, rightly to distinguish or develope,
the true source of a singultus, as it may arise from various causes; I mean not
that singultus, which is an attendant on death, and is irremediable from the
nature of the case. An acrimony in the stomach, irritating the nervous parts,
will produce a hiccup, originating from the same cause as the cardialgia, and
removable on the same principle, by absorbents, etc. But a singultus attended
with pain at the pit of the stomach, or accompanied with pleuritic symptoms,
denote an inflammation of the diaphragm, and may be strictly accounted a
pathognomic symptom of it. Here it is apparent, that absorbents and correctors
will remove the one, while the lancet and antiphlogistic regimen only is
capable of effecting the other.

Case of a Puerperal Fever, successfully treated with the Bark. By Dr. Elnathan
Beach. Read October 13, 1785.
A Woman aged twenty-one, of a sanguine habit, on the 19th of March, 1784,
became mother of a living child; her labor was easy, natural, and every
circumstance favorable. On the evening of the 23d, I was called -- found
little or no fever attending; but great pain in the abdomen, accompanied with a
violent diarrhaea, which had been of some days continuance; the lochial
discharge irregular, the skin dry. I gave an opiate, to abate the severity of
the pain, and to correct the diarrhaea accompanied it with Rhubarb. This had
the desired effect, and she rested well the succeeding night. The next morning
I found her in a free, gentle perspiration, and without pain, except what was
occasioned by the operation of the purge. Upon these symptoms of amendment, I
left her, and did not see her until the 26th; when I found she had been
attacked with rigors, which were succeeded by heat, thirst, and fever, together
with excruciating pains in the abdomen, -- extending to the uterus, with a
reddish streak on the surface, spreading itself to the umbilical region, with
other symptoms of an inflammation of that viscus. I prescribed the common
antiphlogistic remedies, as evacuants, cooling febrifuges and aperients,
together with epithems, cataplasms, and injections; which course was persisted
in until the 30th, when I found the streak before mentioned was extended over
the whole abdomen, and changed from a redish to a cineritious hue, the pulse
small, the countenance pale and wan; -- the part affected almost insensible to
the touch. I directed to the use of the bark in decoction, acidulated with
elixir vitriol. The next morning, the 31st, found the disorder greatly
increased, every symptom pregnant with danger -- the abdomen almost covered
with livid vesicles, the interstices of a negro black, with a total
insensibility of the part, copious discharges, sanious and fetid, from the
uterus. The countenance dejected and ghastly, the voice indistinct, pulse weak
and intermitting. The case being thus alarming, Dr. Andrews was consulted, we
agreed to make a thorough trial of the bark, and directed it to be taken in
substance and decoction, accompanied with some alexipharmics. She took 1 ounces
a day, besides the application of a strong tincture externally, together with
injections; and in a few days a desquamation of the cuticle took place, the
lividity disappeared; her strength gradually returned, and by the beginning of
May, she acquired her former health.

Two Cases of difficult deglutition, from extraneous bodies lodged in the Gula.
By Dr. Abraham Tomlinson. Read October, 1784.
MR. Joseph Smith, of Milford, aged 70 years, eating pieces of hard salted
flesh, without sufficient mastication, (his teeth being gone) a piece lodged in
the gullet. Sundry methods were tried, by a gentleman of the medical
profession, to remove it, but they proved ineffectual. Nine hours after the
accident I was called, and found him exercised with pain, and a tumor in his
throat. I first prescribed 2 or 3 spoonfulls of warm olive oil, to lubricate
the parts; then I ordered him to drink some warm water, with a view to excite a
nausea and vomiting; this had the desired effect, the flesh being ejected by
vomit in about 32 minutes.

CASE II.
JONATHAN NORTHRUP, of Milford, aged about 26 years, eating some beef and
cabbage, swallowed a scale of beef bone in the cabbage, of a triangular figure,
of more than one inch in length, from the base to the point: the point of which
as well as the sides, were thin and sharp. This bone lodged in the gula,
between the upper end of the sternum and pomum Adami. The situation might be
discerned by feeling with the fingers, on each side of the trachea. This case
was attended with tumor and extreme pain.

In this distressed state, Mr. Northrup made application to sundry gentlemen of
the faculty, who tried various methods to relieve him, among the rest a pair of
long, slender, curved, crane bills, were introduced, with a view to extract the
bone; but all to no purpose. Twenty-four hours after this accident Mr. Northrup
applied to me. I made use of the method prescribed in the case of Mr. Smith;
but it had no effect.

I then made a solution of four grains of tartar emetic, in warm water, which
he drank, and in about fifteen minutes he brought up the bone by vomit, and was
effectually relieved.

As it is one of the known laws of hydraulics, that fluids when pressed, press
undequaque, the application appeared plain to me in the recited cases; for I
considered the gula to be a flexible, cylindrical tube, which by means of its
muscular fibers, may be contracted or dilated. I also considered the great
force of the muscles employed in the action of vomiting; whereby the fluid
contents of the stomach are forced through the upper orifice, into the
aesophagus, in a full stream; there meeting with resistance from the offending
body, will expand the gula, and being urged on by the impetus of the fluid,
will overcome the resistance and bear away the offending matter in the torrent
of water by the mouth. -- This, in fact, was the issue of the two cases above.

I am persuaded that the same method may be used with success, in almost every
case where the patient can be prevailed with, to drink a sufficient quantity of
water, or other liquid.

I could add more similar cases in confirmation of the practice, but perhaps
the foregoing will be sufficient.

Case of a fractured cranium, successfully treated. By Dr. John Spalding. Read
before the Society October 13th, 1784.
ON Saturday the 21st of August, 1784, I was called to visit a son of Mr.
Erastus Bradley, of this Town; aged seven years; who fell from a tree upon a
stone wall, and fractured the right os parietalia. I arrived about half an hour
after the accident, found a large wound through the external integuments and a
considerable hemorhage from the wound; upon introducing my finger found the
fractured bone depressed and compressing the dura matter; the child being
delirious and much convulsed. Finding no prospect of relief but from the
trepan, I proceeded immediately to the operation: having denuded the cranium
sufficiently to admit the trephine, a hemorrhage ensued, rendering a delay
necessary until the arteries were secured by ligature; then began a persoration
on the sound part of the os bregmatis, near the os frontis, a little to the
right of the sutura coronalis, then introduced the elevator, with which I
raised some small pieces of the depressed bones, and took them out: but could
not raise the largest, so as to disengage it from the under part of the sound
skull; finding it necessary to make a second perforation, I applied the
trephine on the os bregmatis, back of the former, and introduced the elevator,
with which I disengaged the fractured piece, and took it out with my forceps,
laying the dura matter bare the extent of the fracture. Then proceeded to dress
the wound, after which I percieved the child had fainted, by reason of the
^^diousness of the operation and through the loss of blood; I ordered a little
spirits of lavender to be put into his mouth, fresh air to be admitted, and his
extremeties rubbed, we soon perceived life in him, and he began to breath and
stir his limbs.

In the evening I found his pulse a little quickened, ordered him an enema, he
appeared to be very restless but a little more sensible. In the morning he came
to his reason so as to speak and take such nourishment as was prescribed.

In the evening of the 22d found his fever had increased, prescribed a gentle
cathartic, and in case it did not operate by morning, to assist it by an enema.
He being drowsy all day, could hardly be persuaded to take any thing.

The 23d found his drowsiness and fever had increased; gave him some febrifuges
and ordered his dressings to be kept wet with spirits, in order to facilitate
the removal of the dressings next day.

Visited him the 24th in company with Dr. Munson -- found his fever and stupor
abated; dressed the wound: every thing appearing as favorable as could be
expected.

Visited him the 25th in company with Dr. Beardsley; dressed his wound, there
being very little discharge, we prescribed a gentle cathartic; and after its
operation the Bark in decoction.

On the 26th with Dr. Munson; the wound had come to suppuration, as the denuded
part of the bones, now changed to a dark hue. We ordered a more copious use of
the bark, and the wound to be continually wet with spirits; he was now
perfectly sensible.

On the 27th dressed the wound, found a laudable discharge, and his fever
moderate; ordered a cathartic, and the bark to be suspended during its
operation.

On the 28th with Dr. Munson, dressed his wound, the dura matter began to
slough, with a proper discharge from the wound; some small pieces of bone being
loose.

On the 29th, found he had past a very good night; sat up to have his head
dressed; the wound discharged plentifully, and every symptom was in his favor.

On the 30th removed two small pieces of bone, the wound discharged freely.

On the 31st dressed his wound; no apparent alteration, only a little more
active and cheerful.

September 1st the wound beginning to incarn, since which he has daily mended,
and is now perfectly recovered.

Case of a Gangrene of the Scrotum, Read January, 1785.
MR. S -- H --, aged forty years, a temperate man, and of a good constitution,
by prosession a shoemaker and tanner, was seized with an intense pain in the
glands of the left groin, on September the 19th, 1784, for which a plaster was
applied, formed of the oily dirt which swine leave on fences after rubbing.

September 20th. I was sent for, and the messenger told me that the pain was
intolerable; but I was engaged another way, and concluding that the disorder
would subside with an anodyne, I sent him one.

September 21st. I visited the patient, and found him in a high fever; the
scrotum and penis greatly tumified, and of a livid color; I immediately opened
a vein,, and took away seventeen ounces of blood, which was as buffy as is
usual in a violent pleurify, with very little serum; I ordered a fomentation of
bitter herbs boiled in water, to which was added rum. After using the
fomentation, I applied a cataplasm of white-bread, milk, and white rose leaves,
and I ordered him to take a few doses of camphorated nitre.

September 22d. I found him still under an high fever, and took twelve ounces
more of blood, which was less buffy than before; the parts affected now
appeared to be in a state of mortification, black, and insensible to the touch;
I scarified the penis and the scrotum in several places, without giving pain to
the patient, and then applied strong spirits and the cataplasms as before; gave
him a table-spoonful of the cortex peruv. and ordered him to take a like dose
every two hours, to be washed down with a strong decoction of the same, with
the addition of red rose leaves.

September 23d. The tumor and inflammation were much abated; he complained of
a pain in two of the fingers of his right hand, on which I observed tumors
much inflamed, of a ripe cherry color.

September 24th. The carpus of the same hand tumified and inflamed, and of a
livid hue: I continued the same prescriptions, with the addition of an
emollient clyster.

September 25th. I found his pulse low, with great faintness and dejection of
mind, apprehending that death would soon close the scene. I ordered him some
wine, which raised his spirits and abated his gloomy apprehensions; and
continued the dressings as usual. I opened a tumor on his wrist, which
discharged purulent matter.

September 26th. I requested the assistance of my friend Dr. Nesbitt. We found
the patient under a high fever, and bled him the third time, though we
considered the case almost desperate; we continued the bark, with the elixir
vitriol, which was given with the utmost freedom, without any regard to the
fever, as we judged it essential to the patient's recovery. In three days came
on a digestion and separation of the mortified parts, which by degrees were
removed by the knife; we dressed the ulcer with dry lint, sometimes making use
of the spirits and the common digestive, till the whole of the scrotum was
taken off, leaving the testicles uncovered with the prosta^ae glans; after the
scrotum was sloughed off, the state of the juices was so acrid as to destroy
two other coats, the cremaster and the tunica vaginalis, which digested, and
also sloughed off, leaving the tunica albuginea in a sound state: he had
violent pain in the testicles, and there was reason to suspect suppuration;
when pressed with the finger the parts were very elastic, which induced us to
think that there was matter contained within: accordingly, we made a small
puncture through the tunica albuginea, but the discharge was only a bloody
scrum; we continued the same treatment; the testicles suffered the same very
painful sensation for several days, and we concluded that matter was formed in
them, and opened one of them to its center to ascertain it, but found only a
discharge of bloody serum; the wounded testicle was dressed with a digestive,
and healed in a few days, at which time the surface of the testiticles next the
perinaeum began to granulate and heal very fast, and caused an adhesion, or
union of the testicles, from each extremity, which now resembled a twin peach
or apple; the spermatic chords suffered a great contraction, and the tescles
adhered closely to the perinaeum, and cicatrized favorably.

The preputium was entirely taken off the penis, the muscles were diseased, and
partly destroyed, the urethra was left without a covering, but the bulb or
glans was not affected; a covering however, gradually formed over the body of
the penis, but less smooth than before. Soon after the discharge from the
mortified parts abated, he complained of a pain in the left side of the
abdomen, which extended up as far as the short ribs, it was here tumified and
inflamed; whereupon we ordered that part to be fomented four or five times a
day with warm spirits, and the inflammation and swelling soon disappeared: two
or three days afterward a pain came on in the right side, extending as it had
done on the left; we applied the spirits as before, but without effect; we then
ordered the application of a cataplasm, which soon brought on a suppuration; we
perforated the ulcer, and it discharged a large quantity of pus, which
continued more or less for ten days; the patient remaining feeble and greatly
emaciated with fever; we ordered a decoction of barley with figs, sago, salop,
and panada, (gruel had been his usual diet, with a little wine) and he
continued recovering for the space of ten days, when he was suddenly seized
with a pain in his bowels, succeeded by a fetid diarhoea: in twenty-four hours
he was greatly reduced, frequently discharging two or three ounces of purulent
matter, attended, with a bloody mucus; we gave him lenient purges, such as
senna, manna, and a solution of gum arabic, in barley-water; clysters prepared
with a decoction of the bark and red rose leaves were frequently administered;
these in a few days gave relief, and the matter of the internal ulcer being
discharged through the return, the patient recruited every day, and on December
the 5th, 1784, was able to attend his former business.

In forty-nine days he took fifty-eight ounces of that sovereign medicine, the
bark, which seemed to contribute in a great measure to his perfect recovery.

Case of a locked jaw successfully treated by electricity. By Dr. Eneas Munson.
Read to the Society, April 6th, 1785.
JANE HARRISON, a servant maid, aged fourteen years, of a strong and good
bodily habit, on the 17th of February last, voluntarily threw herself out of a
garret window, feet foremost, which gave her such a violent shock as to deprive
her of her senses. She was immediately taken up, and many attempts made to
bleed her, but it was with great difficulty that about twelve ounces of blood
was obtained. She remained in a state of insensibility during the day and the
night following; but on Friday morning a little recovered, so as to speak and
talk with an air of cheerfulness until evening; when there appeared a rigidity
of her limbs, together with a deprivation of sense for some time, and then a
return of sensation, with some appearance of reason. On the evening of the
18th, I visited her for the first time, and prescribed for her a nervine
antispasmodic decoction for the night. On Saturday morning found her no better,
but senseless, with her jaws locked, which I was told had been the case during
the night; so that she was unable to receive any food or medicine; and by
reason of the projection of the upper jaw, the upper teeth, which were very
even and closely set, shut over the under teeth, quite down to the gums of the
lower jaw, so that nothing could be introduced into her mouth but what was
drained through a double row of thick set teeth. The muscles in her neck,
especially the posterior, were very straight, with a rigidity of the whole
spine; the countenance was very florid, the pulse quick, but rather small* she
was ordered the liniment. saponac. with opium and ol. succin. to embrocate the
spine and part^ contracted; a camphorated antispasmodic fomentation was ordered
to be applied to the stomach, and enemas with fetid gums injected, and after
the foregoing prescriptions, at night she was put into the warm bath, which
produced a relaxation of a^^ her spasms. On Sunday morning she appeared
rational and cheerful, and sat up, but not without great complaint of pain
across her reins, extending under the sternum, with universal soreness. She
continued the foregoing prescriptions, with the addition of valerian and
faetida by the mouth. As she was now able to swallow, she remained calm during
the day and better part of the night, but toward morning was seized with the
contraction of the jaw again, together with violent struggles and convulsions:
in this situation she continued during the day: at night with what laudanum was
forced into the stomach, and injected with an enema, she slept some time; but
on Tuesday morning no relaxation of spasm, but stupid and senseless, with a
great degree of opisthotonos, and as I had, in several instances heretofore,
proved unsuccessful in the use of the grand specific, viz. opium, I had
determined, in my own mind, if ever I should have a case of the kind under my
direction, to depend upon opium no longer than I found it soporific; and if a
quantity sufficient to bring on and produce a manifest soporosis did not remove
the spasm, I would seek a remedy from some other means. I therefore now
endeavored, at more lucid intervals, to get down some small doses of calomel,
and tried the warm bath again, which, so far from yielding the relief as before
we experienced, that it produced immediate convulsions, so violent as to render
the continuation impracticable, she was accordingly put to bed, and was, during
Tuesday night, attended with all the symptoms of opisthotonos, locked jaw, and
emprosthotonos alternately; but as the spasms of opisthotonos and
emprosthotonos counteract each other, they were productive of a tetanus, with a
considerable elevation of the sternum, attended with great pain and anxiety,
with a total inability of swallowing. She remained in this situation, with
convulsions, during Wednesday night, when an epispastic was applied to the nape
of her neck, and the calomel continued in small doses though the quantity got
into the stomach was altogether uncertain; she continued much in the same state
on Thursday. She growing weaker and more distressed, and her case more
desperate, until Friday noon, I determined to try what effects electricity
would produce. Accordingly a moderate sized receiver was filled, which was
discharged on her leg, and passed through the body to the head. This
immediately produced a tremulous motion in her lips, before stiff and
contracted, and a grating of the teeth, a symptom never before observed in the
course of her complaints, on which I thought her going into a convulsion fit;
but to my surprise her jaws were opened, and her tongue extended far out of her
mouth, and she rubbing it with her fingers. I asked her if she could speak --
she gave me to understand she could not. I then discharged a second receiver in
the same direction with the first, and her tongue was immediately at liberty,
so that she was able to speak plainly: But observing her thumbs contracted, as
they had been for twenty four hours, into the palms of her hands, there was a
third shock passed through her arms, which loosed them instantly. On Friday
night she rested quietly, and got up on Saturday morning; but on her return to
bed she was seized with fits, very similar to hysteric fits, but the locking of
the jaws did not return; the common nervine, antihysteric medicines were used,
but to little purpose, till Monday, when recourse was again had to electricity,
which was found effectual for these fits, and was applied repeatedly on their
return, until Wednesday fortnight from the time of her fall, when the fits left
her, and she is now in a comfortable state of health.

Thus I have given an exact and plain narrative of facts only, in the case; and
though, as doctor Sylvester observes, one instance is scarce of consequence
enough to deserve attention, yet as it is a disorder so rare to this climate,
but so often fatal when it happens, it will not, I trust, be thought useless to
communicate a method, though but once successful. How far the early use of
mercury may be depended on in this disease, I am not able, from my own
experience, to say, though it has been recommended as a specific in the
disorder. Yet in the case above recited, there appeared no amendment until the
use of electricity, which most instantaneously relaxed the spasms, to the
astonishment of every bystander. Indeed there was no room to doubt of its being
the immediate and sole cause of relief to the poor girl. Should this
communication be an inducement to farther experiments of the kind in like
disorders, and prove it successful, it will yield the most ample recompense and
the highest satisfaction for this communication.

Case of an Haematemesis successfully treated. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read
April 6th, 1785.
ON the 13th of November, 1773. about 9'clock A. M. I was called, to visit
Capt. Noble Hinman, aged 40, of a very plethoric habit, who was seized suddenly
with a violent and copious discharge of blood from the stomach. The symptoms
preceding, were, a sense of fullness in the stomach, or rather an increasing
distention thereof, which was soon followed with a nausea, and a discharge of
blood from the stomach by vomit, to the quantity of above two quarts, as the
bystanders judged. In this stage of the complaint, I received the call, and
found the patient languid, and sensibly affected with the loss of blood; his
vomiting had ceased before I arrived. Notwithstanding, I immediately bled him
to the quantity of sixteen ounces, gave him an opiate pill, prescribed an
astringent infusion, and the decoctum corticis, with elixir vitriol. I directed
all his drinks to be strongly acidulated, to be given cold, and in small
quantities.

I remained with my patient two hours, and in consequence of a return of the
sickness, and vomiting of blood (to the quantity of about two pounds by
estimation) I again let blood, to the amount of twelve ounces. -- I visited my
patient at one P. M. found him more sensibly affected by the loss of blood, and
although no return of the vomiting, yet there had been a discharge of blood by
stool, procured by an enema previously administered. His countenance from being
remarkably florid, was now become very pale, yet the evident continuance of the
hoemorrhage and a tension of the pulse, exceeding the then apparent standard of
safety, emboldened me to let blood again, to the amount of fourteen ounces; his
medicines were continued, and the anodyne pill directed to be repeated
occasionally, if the vomiting returned: I then informed my patient and his
friends, that I could promise no relief in the present case, unless I could
reduce my patient to that state of weakness, by the lancet, which might to them
appear alarming, and preserve, or rather suspend him in that state, until the
ruptured blood vessels collapsed, and the astringent medicines might have time
to effect the constriction of the bleeding orifice. My patient and his friends
acquiesced; of course no cordial of the vinous or stimulating kind, was, in
this stage of the disease, administered; except what cordial was received by
the decoctum corticis. At five, P. M. visited my patient; he complained, while
I was present, of a return of the sense of fullness, which was soon succeeded by
a very copious vomiting of blood. I held a large wash-hand basin, capable of
containing three pints, to receive the contents of the stomach, which vessel he
filled, and, continuing to vomit, it ran over, at least a pint, on the floor. I
then judged, that at least one half the quantity discharged was blood. It was
observable, in this and the two preceding turns of vomiting, that the nausea,
and consequent vomiting was excited by the previous accumulation of blood in
his stomach. I immediately gave an anodyne pill, continued in small quantities
the decoct. corticis, and astringent infusion, with the cold drinks sparingly
administered, and let blood again, to the amount of 12 oz. for the fourth time
between nine in the morning and seven in the evening of the same day.
Notwithstanding all these evacuations, by haemorrhage and the lancet, no
syncope ensued, only a desirable languor. I again visited my patient at late
bed time, found no return of the vomiting, nor symptoms that indicated a fresh
haemorrhage; the same regimen was directed through the night, with his drink
strongly acidulated, and with this caution, to be given in small quantities,
and frequently.

On the 14th, early in the morning, I visited him; found his pulse a little
fuller, and exceeding the standard of safety I had proposed. I again let blood,
to the amount of fourteen ounces, which evacuation he endured without syncope;
the former regimen and medicine was persisted in, except the pills. At 10 A. M.
I repeated my visit, my patient had a discharge by stool, principally
coagulated blood; as he had no returns of vomiting as yet, and had retained the
decoct. corticis, etc. I still found his pulse not so languid as I wished, I
therefore let blood to the amount of twelve ounces: and complaining of some
griping uneasiness in his bowels, I directed an emollient enema, and an opiate
pill by the mouth, with a continuation of the former medicines, etc. I visited
him in the evening, no return of the vomiting, but found by the operation of
the enema, directed in the forenoon, that a quantity of coagulated blood was
discharged. I again let blood to the amount of twelve ounces, and gave an
anodyne pill, he bore this last bleeding as formerly, without fainting, and
continued the other medicines with the same precaution as before.

On the 15th I visited him, found no return of the hoemorrhage by any evident
symptom, therefore continued the decoct. corticis, etc. without the anodyne.

On the 16th, visited him, beginning to recruit a little, having had no return
of the haemorrhage, I thought it advisable to suspend the astringent
medicines, and interpose a lenient purge of manna only, which operated gently,
and produced a discharge of some coagulated blood, which, apparently from its
color, was not produced by a recent haemorrhage.

On the 18th, finding no return of the haemorrhage, and judging that the
ruptured vessel, or vessels, were sufficiently coalesced, I indulged my patient
in a little more nutritious regimen, and ordered a continuance of the decoct.
cort. as a restorative. The treatment, by God's blessing, had the desired
effect, and the patient, within three weeks from the first attack, was able to
return to his ordinary business, and enjoyed his usual state of health.

I must acknowledge, gentlemen, that in the case now recited, although the plan
adopted appeared to me rational, yet it was not put in execution without much
concern, least my patient should miscarry, and of course my bold practice be
severely censured; however, this with many other instances I have met with, to
prove the power of the lancet in similar cases, has strongly impressed on me
the importance of blood letting. The indiscriminate use of astringents in
haemorrhages, and the good effects of blood letting, afford sufficient matter
for animadversion, but at present I will take up no more of your time: another
opportunity, perhaps, may produce some observations on these subjects from me,
or some abler pen. At present my design is answered by a bare recital of a
matter of fact.

It is worthy of remark, that the patient lost, in about thirty-six hours,
ninety-two ounces of blood by the lancet; and I am confident, by the most
moderate calculation, double that quantity by haemorrhage. The blood drawn by
lancet I weighed accurately.

Case of an Enteritis. By Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley. Read before the Society,
April 5, 1786.
THAT article in our constitution, which obliges every member of the society,
to exhibit a history of all the remarkable cases which occur in his practice,
must, if duly observed, conduce in the highest degree to promote the design and
end of our institution. If we are faithful, accurate and persevering in our
observations, we shall soon be furnished with a number of facts and histories,
which at some future period may be very interesting and beneficial to the
public, and do honor to the society. It is much to be regretted that hitherto,
the faculty, in this country, have contributed so little to the general stock
of medical knowledge. Our predecessors would have rendered an important piece
of service to us, and to future generations, if they had made and transmitted
down, faithful histories of the diseases which prevailed in their times.

The dysentery, ulcerous sore throat, and most of the other diseases which have
been epidemical in this country, have been attended with pretty long intervals,
during which the diseases have not appeared at all, or in but a few instances:
consequently, on a general return of any of them, most of the practitioners who
had been conversant with them being dead, and having left no observations on
record for the assistance and instruction of succeeding practitioners, those
diseases have been almost as new and strange, and the proper mode of treating
them as uncertain as though they had never occurred before. It cannot be
doubted, under such circumstances, that many valuable lives have been lost,
before the nature of the disease has been understood, and a proper mode of
treatment ascertained. From whence it is probable the common and well known
observation arose, that a new disease is more fatal on its first accession,
than in its advanced progress and later stages. For a number of years part, we
have been so happy as not to be visited with any epidemic disease: but I well
remember, when the ulcerous sore throat made its appearance about fifteen years
ago, that there was not among my acquaintance, but one or two physicians, who
had ever seen it before; which was also the case with respect to the dysentery.
We ought to esteem it a peculiar happiness, that we have now an opportunity,
and have already made a hopeful beginning in the establishment of a new era in
the healing art. With proper attention, should our country have the misfortune
to be visited again with any kind of epidemic disease, it will be in our power
to mark its origin, progress, effects, and termination, and to hand down to
succeeding generations, a faithful history of the mode of treatment, success,
and every other circumstance of importance.

With a view to contribute by example, as well as precept, to this important
design, I now lay before you a case, which, from the violence of its accession,
rapid progre^ sudden and fatal termination, appeared to deserve attention.

JOHN CHAPEL, a healthy, sprightly boy, five years of age, on his return from
school, at noon, on Friday the 24th of June, 1785, was seized with sickness at
his stomach, and vomiting, which was soon after succeeded with thirst, heat,
and restlessness. These symptoms continued through the afternoon and night,
during which time he ejected every thing he took into his stomach, and in the
course of the night and next morning, brought up ten large worms of the round
kind. On Saturday morning I first visited him, at which time his pulse was
extremely quick, small, and unequal; his countenance pale and sunk, his
respiration quick and laborious, and he was so restless that it was with
difficulty that his attendants kept him on the bed; his thirst was great, but
he almost instantly threw up whatever was given to him. Nothing had passed his
bowels since he was first taken ill, but his abdomen was not at all tumefied
but rather contracted. He had his senses perfectly, but did not complain of
pain in his bowels, or elsewhere. I prescribed magnes. alb. the neutral
mixtures, and other antiemetics, with emollient fomentations, enemas, and small
doses of calomel through the day, but without any good effect. At evening the
symptoms were much increased, at which time, Dr. Nesbitt, at my desire, was
called in to consult his case. We both judged it to be a worm case, joined with
inflammation from their irritation. The fomentations, enemas, calomel, etc.
were continued, and epispastics were applied to his extremities. In the night
his vomiting abated, so that he retained the medicines and drinks which were
administered to him until his stomach seemed to be overloaded, when they were
ejected to appearance from that cause. On Sunday morning we visited him again,
but though the vomiting was not so frequent, his dejected countenance,
difficulty of respiration, weak, quick, unequal pulse, and cold extremities,
indicated his approaching dissolution. He died at eleven o'clock this morning.
No evacuation was obtained from the bowels, during the course of the disease,
by the many injections which were used, aided by the calomel, etc. On the
afternoon of the same day, I obtained permission from the parents, to open the
body, in company with Dr. Nesbitt and my brother. We found but one worm in the
whole intestinal canal. The abdominal viscera were all sound and well
conditioned, except about two inches of the lower part of the duodenum, or
upper part of the jejunum, which was inflamed and sphacelated, which appeared
clearly to be the cause of his death. From the dissection it appears, that the
disease was originally a true enteritis, or inflammation of the bowels, and it
is highly probable that the worms were not at all concerned in the production
of it; but being disturbed by the increased heat and disagreeableness of their
situation, quitted it in search of a better. It also appears from this history
and dissection, that we ought not implicitly to trust those authors and others,
who are too apt to consider all diseases of the intestines in children, as
arising from worms. Such a pre-conceived opinion will be likely to blind us,
with respect to the real cause, if it should be of a different nature, and
mislead us perhaps fatally in our prescriptions. Allen, in his Synopsis,
advises the practitioner in treating the diseases of children, if he meets with
any symptoms he cannot readily account for, to place it to the account of
worms. But this advice was certainly unbecoming a philosopher and physician. It
is much more safe and honorable to imitate the example of the great Boerhaave,
who assures us that he made it an invariable rule, never to quit the bedside
of his patient, until he had fully ascertained the state and condition of all
the important viscera. All the common symptoms of worms in the intestines, such
as loss of appetite, acidity, pains in the abdomen, alternate bound and loose
body, slimy and fetid stools, grinding the teeth, erratic fever, etc. may arise
from an increased quantity of mucus in the intestines, obstructions in the
mesenteric glands, and dentition. Symptoms of a similar kind, are also observed
in other diseases remote from this organ, particularly in the hydrocephalus
internus. How absurd then, and dangerous must it be, to treat diseases in the
same method, that are so dissimilar in their causes and seat, merely because
there happens to be a similarity in some of the symptoms! Notwithstanding the
great similarity in the symptoms of some diseases, there cannot be a doubt but
what every disease has its own pathognomonic or distinguishing signs, by which
it may be discriminated, by the attentive and skillful physician.

Amongst the other symptoms which are common to worms, and the hydrocephalus,
the slow pulse, and dilated pupil of the eyes, are striking marks by which the
latter disease may be readily known.

Dr. Home of Edinburgh, in his clinical experiments affirms, that he discovered
sixteen years before he published those experiments, a certain diagnostic
symptom of worms, which in all that time had never failed him; which is, an
oedematous swelling of the alae narium, upper lip, and often of the contiguous
parts of the cheeks; the apertures of the nostrils are also diminished at least
the half of their natural size. Since I read his observations, I have seen a
few worm patients, which I apprehended were swelled in the manner he describes,
but I could not satisfy myself fully; the subject deserves farther attention. I
shall conclude these remarks, with this practical caution, that in all cases
that are attended with heat, thirst and a fever, though we may have ocular
proof that the patient is troubled with worms, we ought to be circumspect in
the administration of hot, (...), stimulating substances, however much they may
be celebrated for their anthelmintic virtues.

Case of a deformed Foetus. By Dr. Leverett Hubbard. Read before the Society,
April 5th, 1786.
IN the year 1786, I was called to a gentlewoman in the sixth month of
gestation. I found her attended with a strong pain in her breast, and left side
of the abdomen: flooding largely. I examined the state of the os uteri, found
it not dilated in the least, but tumefied and very hard; no pressure from her
pains. I immediately let blood, which abated the flooding, but not the pain. I
prescribed her an anodyne, which gave no relief: in two hours I gave her
another dose, which moderated the pain a little. I tarried all night, and in
the morning I found the whole of the abdomen swelled to a prodigious size, with
high fever and inflammation. I ordered a fomentation of bitter herbs, which
abated the tumor and inflammation in some measure; after which came on a
nausea, and vomiting of a green bilious fluid, in quantity about three quarts.
I gave her large doses of the fell. vip. which abated the vomiting; soon after
came on an universal languor and faintness; she remained in that state the
greater part of the day. After the faintness abated, she complained of a
coldness of the abdomen, which on examination I found to be extreme: this
alarmed me, the pulse at the same time being very low. I gave her a little wine
whey repeatedly, which accelerated the motion of the blood, raised the pulse,
and caused an increase of heat through the whole body, except the abdomen. Her
pain left her; I repeated the fomentation with the addition of a little
spirits, and the wine whey to be given now and then, and left her. In about
twelve hours I was called again, her pain returning; I examined the state of
the os uteri, I found it a little dilated. Soon after a violent flooding came
on: I judged that her present circumstances required a speedy delivery. By
repeated trials I gently dilated the os uteri, so as to introduce two of my
fingers, with which I could feel the foetus. Its position was preternatural;
the abdomen first presented, as I judged, but was mistaken. By further
examination, I found it could not be the abdomen, neither could it be the head,
for it was not hard enough; my first intention was to change its position, so
as to obtain the head, but could not by reason of a contraction attending every
pain: after a little time obtained one of the feet, and soon after the other,
which gave me great encouragement of a speedy delivery; I brought forward the
feet and legs, but to my great surprise the body stopped. Then with my left hand
extended the thighs of the foetus as far asunder as I could, and slipped the two
fore fingers of my right hand, in order to obtain the extremity of the
intestinum rectum. But to my astonishment, I found there was no intestinum
rectum, but the same feeling below the thighs as there was in the first touch,
as I mentioned before, which proved to be the pendulous body which presented to
the birth, as delineated in the plate.



Finding I could do nothing that way, I then returned the legs into their
former position, and by repeated trials, turned the child so as to feel one of
the hands, after that the shoulder, and then the head which I caused to
present, and soon after that obtained a delivery in the natural way.

I should not have troubled you with this case, if the formation of the foetus
had not been very singular. The best description I can give you is this; as I
observed before, it was in the sixth month of gestation, the foetus as large as
usual. The child, from the sutura coronalis down to the lowest or last true
ribs was natural, except that the cranium was uncovered; upon the left, from
the sutura coronalis, down to the sutura squamosa and sutura transversalis,
except a pericranium. I shall next proceed to the thighs; the end of the os
femoris was rather flat than round, no os innominatum but a ligament formed,
fastened to the vertebrae immediately below the last true ribs, the ligament
being about an inch long, gave liberty for the thighs and legs to move exactly
as a swingle is moved by the motion of its staff. A little below the joining of
the thighs to the vertebrae, there was a neck formed a little larger than that
on the shoulders, to which was formed a head as large as that of the natural,
consisting of cerebrum and cerebellum, not contained in a cranium but a
cartilaginous case, with a dura matter; which was separate from the
cartilaginous case, and covered with a skin, or scalp, as usual, but no hair.
Upon the right side of this false head (if I may so call it) appeared three
small perforations or inlets, placed in a triangular form, and were about an
inch and an half from each other; two of which were about as large as a rye
straw, the other of an oval, about one fourth of an inch long, which was lower
than the other. I introduced a probe into the small perforations first, and
found they did not extend more than half an inch; the other which I founded
extended two or three inches in an ascending direction, which with my knife, I
laid open, and found it to be a small tube or canal, a little resembling the
oesophagus by its wicker like structure; it extended no farther an entire tube,
but was divided into a number of fine tubes or fibers, which were lost in that
which I called the cerebellum, or medullary substance. The left leg was flat,
having two tibias and two fibulas articulated about half way from the patella
to the ancle.

I should have proceeded further in my dissection and enquiry, but was suddenly
called off.

What great reason have we to praise the great former of our bodies, that our
children are not oftener deformed than they are.

On the fatal Effects of the Corrosive Sublimate of Mercury. Communicated by
Doctor Levi Ives. Read February 7th, 1787.
ON Friday, Dec. 29th, 1785, Mr. I. S. nineteen years of age, through an
unhappy mistake of his own, swallowed four grains of the corrosive sublimate of
mercury, dissolved in a small quantity of water, which very soon excited a
violent vomiting and purging, with intense pains and griping. It was about
thirty hours after he took the fatal dose, when I first visited him. I found
him attended with a constant nausea, and purging of a sanguineous mucus, with a
quick, low pulse, great thirst, a most intolerable cardialgia, and griping. I
directed a cooling purge, and to dilute plentifully with an infusion of
violets, together with an infusion of gum arabic, which was taken freely, but
without any mitigation of his complaints. Sunday morning found him as above
described, and no alteration for the better. On Monday finding him sinking
under his complaints, directed to the use of ol. ric. with barley water and
nitre, which gave some relief to his griping. Tuesday, January 1st, his purging
and gripings much abated, yet attended with a very quick, low pulse,
cardialgia, and great thirst. The prescriptions of Monday were continued, and
as his pains became erratic and more universal, I directed an anodyne for the
night, though with little advantage. Wednesday his distress became still more
universal, the same medicines were continued, with an anodyne at evening, which
procured some rest. Thursday the 3d, found him distressed with the
forementioned symptoms, and nature evidently sinking. Friday the 4th, came on a
small haemorrhage from the nose, with a singultus and a great acerbation of all
the symptoms. Saturday and Sunday following no material alteration, except a
manifest decay of strength. On Monday came on a profuse haemorrhage from the
nose, which continued until death closed the scene, which was on the eleventh
day from receiving the fatal dose.

The fatal effects of drinking cold water, when heated. Communicated by Doctor
Samuel Nesbitt. Read April 4th, 1787.
ON the 11th of August, 1774, I was called to visit Joseph Kent, a laboring
man, aged 45, of a robust habit. The account he gave of himself was, that a few
days before, when warm with work, he had drank about a quart of cold water,
after a hearty dinner of fish, the immediate effects of which were great
distress at the pit of his stomach, a trembling and difficulty of breathing,
with faintness; the trembling and faintness went off soon, but the difficulty
of breathing and pain, increased, extending over the whole hypocondriac region,
so as to give him the idea of cholic, which idea he retained through the whole
disease, notwithstanding every persuasion on my part, and the plainest
indications to the contrary, as every enema and aperient in the course of of
the disease operated readily. A physician was called immediately who had
prescribed a lenient purge and sedatives; but without relief. I do not
recollect whether venaesection was premised; but I think it most probably was
before my visit, which was on the 4th or 5th day of the attack. I found him
with every symptom of an extended and high inflammation, great distress and
difficulty of respiration, accompanied with a severe singultus, and extreme
pain in the region of the liver. I immediately let blood from the arm
copiously, which was repeated often and occasionally, without any permanent
relief. For several days the most rigid antiphlogistic course was pursued,
epispastics were applied and renewed to the costae, sternum, and parts
adjacent, gentle cathartics and enemas were administered, with the desired
effect as evacuants. Fotuses of emollient herbs were repeatedly used, with now
and then a gentle anodyne as a placebo. But the whole that was obtained from a
bold antiphlogistic course, was a prevention of gangrene in the inflamed
viscera, and of course a less speedy termination of the disease. The issue was
a suppuration of the inflamed parts, probably about the 15th day of the
disease. When symptoms of the hectic kind came on, and a formation of pus, the
pains grew more tolerable, and an apparent distension began in the right
hypochondrium, which in the sequel, about two days before his death, became
prominent a little below and to the right of the cartilago ensiformis, with a
fluctuation about the time of his death, evident to the touch. Death was so
evidently near at hand, that I expected no relief to the patient nor credit to
myself would arise from a puncture of the abscess, and therefore deferred it
until dissection. On the cessation of the inflammatory symptoms, and the
commencement of the hectic, the antiphlogistic course was exchanged for a
regimen of the nutritious and restorative kind, with a light preparation of the
bark. The patient finding no prospect of relief from any remedies I had
applied, and still retaining the idea of cholic, as before recited, dispatched
a messenger for a famous cholic doctor residing in a neighboring town, without
my knowledge. I was informed, however, before the doctor's arrival, and desired
the nurse to let me know that I might attend and state the case to him previous
to his attempting any thing for the patient. The doctor arrived about ten, in
the night of the 4th of September, and immeditely pronounced the disease to be
the cholic. I in vain endeavored to remove every idea of the kind from his
mind; contrary to my remonstrances, he was put under a course of strong aloetic
purges, combined with aromatics, commonly called Hull's bitter powders. The
operation was violent, and he died on the 6th, about thirty days from the first
attack.

The appearance of the body, on dissection, was as follows. On puncturing the
abscess extending from the liver, a stream of pus issued to a distance from the
body; when the viscera were exposed to view, the liver was found to have been
greatly distended with pus, from whence the aforementioned tumor was formed,
by a distension of the peritoneum and intervening teguments; it was a mass of
corruption, and its substance discharged by that and several smaller abscesses:
the lower surface of the diaphragm was overspread with numbers of small
tumors, of the size of nutmegs and hazel nuts containing pus; the mediastinum
and the pericardium in a similar state, but the tumors smaller. In the place
of lymph, in the cavity of the pericardium, there was found a purulent matter
to a considerable number of ounces: The heart's surface was covered or
encrusted like the distinct smallpox in a state of complete maturation, or a
day or two past that period: the external surface of each lobe of the lungs was
affected by previous inflammation, and matter was contained in the right cavity
of the thorax, which communicated by an opening through the diaphragm with an
abscess in the liver.

An extraordinary cause of an Asthma, in the case of a Lady of this city,
proving fatal. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read before the Society, April 4th, 1787.
IN the morning of the 24th of June, 1774, I was called to visit Mrs. R --,
aged thirty-eight years, in consultation with Dr. Bontecou. We found the
patient sitting up, leaning her elbows on a pillow, supported by a stand, and
in that posture laboring for breath, with an emaciated countenance, feeble
pulse, and every symptom of great debility, unable to lay in a supine posture,
having thus passed her days and nights for some time, except now and then on a
bed bolsered up: the patient was then pregnant, and about the sixth or seventh
month of gestation. The disease had been gradually increasing for about two
years, with this addition, that in the period of gestation the symptoms were
much aggravated by her increase of bulk; it appeared to us impossible she could
endure through the remaining period of gestation, if the symptoms increased with
the bulk, even if her strength would have admitted; but as the case then was,
the situation of our patient was truly deplorable; however, we had not much
time to deliberate on the case, for on the evening of the same day, premature
labor came on; Dr. Hubbard was joined in the council, and delivered her in a
few hours: we then hoped for an abatement of the symptoms, but none were
obtained; every effort was made for her relief and recovery, but she died on
the evening of the 30th.

We viewed the case as an empyema, and requested liberty of the relatives to
open the body, but with great reluctance on their part, obtained leave to
puncture the thorax. I punctured the right cavity of the thorax, but no fluid
issued, I did not proceed to puncture the left, lest I should fail in finding a
fluid contained, which was the apology made to the relatives; but loath to stop
our enquiries, I enlarged the puncture a little with a scalpel, so as to
introduce my finger, and found it obstructed in its course by a hard body; we
enlarged the opening in the course of the rib and distinctly felt a hard fleshy
substance, in form and shape like a pine apple, crouding up along the right
cavity of the thorax, and pressing strongly the right lobe of the lungs
upwards, and against the mediastinum. The tumor was a schirrhous enlargement
of the liver, in form and about the size of a moderate pineapple, with its
apex projecting into the cavity of the thorax, and carrying by distension that
portion of the diaphragm opposed to its superior point, and reaching at least
to midway of the cavity: we were anxious to push our enquiries further, and to
have examined more minutely into the state of the affected viscus and other of
the viscera, but the relatives would not admit of any further defacing of the
corpse, as they called it.

From these circumstances, Gentlemen, thus discovered as it were by accident,
the investigation of the cause of our deceased patient's complaint and its
gradual accession, was apparent; the aggravated symptoms from gestation by the
increase of the uterus, and its consequent pressure on the superior and
affected viscus, were likewise easy to be accounted for, and that no
substantial relief was derived from delivery, we were at no loss to determine,
all being deducible from the grand and proximate cause, the unnatural
distension and elevation of the diaphragm; the interruption of the same
muscular partition, so necessary in both acts of respiration; and the occupying
by the tumor the greater part of that cavity prepared for the free action of
the right lobe of the lungs.

From the history of this singular and unfortunate case, there appears no era
at which we could promise any successful mode of treatment; at the time I saw
the patient, the case was irremediable, and I am led to conclude that at no
period of the disease when the complaint of the asthma became apparent, was
their much, if any chance for relief, as undoubtedly the schirrhous had
obtained some considerable size before the difficulty of breathing was much
noticed, and its cause being concealed, destroys the first principles of
practice viz.

Investigatio causae, saepe morbum solvit. CELSUS. Case of a Hydrocephalus
Internus. By Dr. Ebenezer 17, Beardsley. Read before the Society, October, 1787.
FRIDAY, January 13, 1787, Polly Edwards, daughter of Pierpont Edwards, Esquire. of
this city, aged five years and three months, was seized with thirst, and
restlessness; the next day she was something feverish, and dull, but played
abroad. At night her complaints returned, and she was feverish and restless
through the night. Sunday, Monday and Tuesday, she complained of a soreness in
her head, which was so great as to be much affected from a slight touch; she
was also attended with a constant headache, and for the most part was dull and
sleepy, but had turns of anxiety and restlessness: her thirst continued, and
her countenance was very florid. On Wednesday, her disorder was so increased
that she became confined to her bed. Thursday night she was very restless, her
sleep was much disturbed and she frequently cried out that some body pulled her
hair. Her weakness increased so that she became unable to bear her own weight,
her eyes appeared bright, shining, and inflamed; she picked her nose, and often
put her hands up to her face and head. She had no appetite for food from the
beginning; she voided three worms in consequence of a purge of mercurius
dulcis. Friday and Saturday, her anxiety and restlessness increased, and she
frequently threw her hands round the back side of her head. Sunday her pulse,
which, from the beginning, had been quick, full and strong, became remarkably
weak and small; and she totally lost her speech, which returned no more.

This evening I saw her for the first time, in company with the Doctors Prime
and Munson, the former of whom, had attended her from the first accession of
the disorder. Her face was very florid, and a little bloated, her eyes
inflamed, weeping, and the pupils dilated, the pulse was very small and weak,
so as hardly to be perceived, but not remarkably quick, her extremities were
cold, but her head, especially the hinder parts of it, were very hot; she had
little or no thirst; she had frequent turns of the greatest anxiety and
distress imaginable, during which, she writhed her body, threw off the bed
clothes, grated her teeth, started up on end in the bed, and clenched her hands
round the backside of her head. In the intervals between these paroxisms, she
lay quite easy and composed, looked about, and took notice of the people and
things around her. Her reason did not appear to be at all impaired; she
appeared to know every person of her acquaintance who came into the room, put
out her tongue readily when desired, for the inspection of her physicians, etc.
which continued till near the closing scene. In her intervals of ease, she lay
upon her back, with her feet drawn up. In her paroxisms of distress, her eyes
were convulsed. Through the whole of this week her anguish and distress
continued to increase, her extremities became as cold as a corpse, her pulse
was quick, weak, and so small as scarcely to be perceptible; yet her head
remained hot, and her cheeks highly colored to the last. On Sunday morning she
expired without a struggle or a groan. Purges of merc. dulc. with senna,
rheubarb, and the Carolina pink root, had been the principal medicines. These
were succeeded by fomentations, semicupium, blisters, wine and other cordials.

Dr. P. who attended the patient from the first accession of the disorder, had
considered it as a worm case, and notwithstanding the dissent of the other
physicians who were consulted, he maintained his opinion with confidence to the
last. To remove all doubts upon the subject, and to investigate the nature of
the disease, the body was inspected in the afternoon of the same day. The
intestines, which had been supposed to be the seat of the disease, were
entirely sound, without a single worm or any other morbid appearance; which was
also the case with the other viscera of the abdomen, and the thorax. Finding no
morbid appearance in the thorax or abdomen, we proceeded to inspect the brain.
After the external integuments were removed, the cranium was sawed off a little
above the ears, and carefully removed without injuring the dura matter, when
with a scalpel, the upper part of the brain, with the surrounding integuments
down to the first ventricle, were removed. The first and second ventricles,
being laid open, exhibited no morbid appearance, but upon cutting into the
third and fourth, five or six ounces of clear transparent lymph flowed out, and
ran into a vessel which was placed to receive it. The dissection was performed
in the presence of a number of the faculty and others, who were fully satisfied
that this was the seat of the disease, and that the patient's death was
occasioned by a compression of the brain, especially the cerebelluum, from
whence the remarkable failure and weakness of the vis vitae, loss of speech
etc. which took place many days before death, though the animal functions
remained found to the last: the reason of which is obvious from anatomy and
physiology.

Case of a Schirrous tumor in the Pylorus, Mesentery, and Intestines,
communicated by Dr. Ebenezer Beardsley, Oct. 17th, 1787.
MRS. Sarah Tuttle, aged 64, had for several years been afflicted with
indigestion, nausea, acidity, and heart-burn, with diarrhaea, and costiveness
alternately. Lime water, soap, gum pills, bitters, and absorbents, which her
physicians had occasionally prescribed for her, afforded her a temporary
relief, but the complaints often recurred, and increased, so as to render the
last six or eight years of her life very uncomfortable. About the beginning of
last July she was taken down with a fever of the low depressed kind, attended
with headache, vertigo, sleeplessness, frequent slight rigors, and the usual
complaints in her first passages. August the 10th, my advice was asked. She was
much emaciated, had a low feeble pulse, constant nausea, cardialgia, and
sickness at her stomach, with frequent ejections of an acid, slimy fluid, the
thrush, and a troublesome and wasting diarrhaea.

She was wholly destitute of appetite, and had little or no quiet sleep. I
prescribed watery infusions of rheubarb, flowers of camomile, snake-root, and
other stomachics, with the bark, and anodynes, which gave her great relief for
several weeks. But the nausea and sickness at stomach returning, and finding no
relief from stomachics, antacids, or any other medicines, at her request, on
the second of September, I gave her about one scruple of ipecacuanha, which
operated mildly five or six times. But the next day the sickness, etc.
returned, and she was, in all respects, worse than before. After this I
directed her to the use of porter, which abated the nausea and sickness, but
produced an intolerable burning and uneasiness in the stomach, upon which it
was laid aside. She continued slowly declining, without any remarkable
alteration in her symptoms, till Saturday the 12th instant, when she died, at
about ten in the morning. The dissection was performed by Dr. Spalding, in the
presence of Dr. Darling, my brother, and myself, the next morning. The thoracic
viscera, liver, spleen, omentum, and large intestines were in a sound state.
The stomach was considerably distended, and filled with a fluid which resembled
chyle. At its lower orifice, there was an oblong schirrous tumor, of the size
of a pullet's egg, and about two inches and an half in length, extending
downwards into the duodenum. The schirrhus invested the pylorus on all sides,
and was nearly three quarters of an inch thick. The orifice was contracted to
the size of a goose-quill, and upon cutt^ng into the tumor, there was found a
quantity of pus-like matter, of an ash color, and of the consistence of thick
cream. The substance of the tumor consisted of a number of round, hollow
bodies, of a hard compact texture, which bore a strong resemblance to the round
belly worm, but they adhered closely, at each end, to the surrounding parts.
The mesentery, and a considerable proportion of the small intestines were also
in a schirrhous state. The uterus, vesica urinaria, etc. were not diseased, nor
was there any sphacelation in any part. It would be a curious and interesting
enquiry, if we were able to give a history of the origin, and progress of this
disease. It is highly probable that it had been of many years standing. The
only practical deduction which I shall make from this case is, that, where a
patient has been troubled for many years with similar complaints in the primae
viae, we ought to suspect the existence of a schirrhous or cancerous tumor,
and to be on our guard against exhibiting to such unhappy persons strong
emetics, or any other acrid, stimulating medicines, all of which must increase
the malady, and precipitate the sufferer to the grave.

Case of a singular Wound in the Eye, from the bursting of a Gun. By Dr. John
Spalding. Read before the Society, April 2d, 1788
MR. Ezra Curtis, aged twenty years, on the 18th of September, 1785, received a
wound by the bursting of a musket, the breech-pin of which, entering his right
eye, drove the eye, with the whole of its bony orbit before it, until it was
impeded in its progress by the vertebrae of the neck, and os maxilla inferior,
or lower jaw. The spine of the pin passing through the coracohyoidaeus and part
of the mastoides muscles, to the adipose membrane, without perforating the
skin. The body of it was firmly wedged between the processes of the vertebrae
of the neck and the upper and outer angle of the lower jaw. The destruction of
such a number of large blood vessels producing a violent haemorrhage from the
wound, nostrils and mouth, which was succeeded ed by a great degree of
inflammation, and tumefaction of the face and neck, no suspicion was
entertained by the surgeons who attended him, or any other person, that the pin
had entered the eye, till six months after, when a suppuration took place, and
the tumor being opened, the pin was discovered, to the great surprise and
astonishment of the surgeons and spectators. After the inflammation and tumor
subsided, the end of the pin projected itself about three eighths of an inch
beyond the skin, where it remained immoveably fixed, without admitting any
change in its position from the strongest efforts that could be made, until May
31st, when it was happily extracted.

Upon his first application to me, which was the first of May, I dilated the
wound as much as the nature of the parts would admit; and then with a pair of
strong forceps, attempted to turn the pin so as to disengage it; but after my
utmost exertions I was obliged to relinquish the attempt, the case being of so
singular a kind, and from the proximity of such a large number of blood
vessels, attended with the utmost danger. On the 5th, I procured a consultation
of the faculty belonging to the city, in which it was agreed to denude a part
of the jaw bone, and with a small trephine cut out a piece opposite to the pin,
in the shape of a crescent; this operation I performed on the 8th, in presence
of the gentlemen of the faculty before mentioned, and took out a small portion
of the jaw, about half the breadth of the screw, by which it was loosened a
little, so as to admit of more motion than before, but all our efforts to
extract it proving ineffectual, and fearing that the jaw would be rendered
wholly useless if the painful operation of cutting it any further should be
repeated; I determined, as the dernier resort, to attempt to saw off the spine
of the screw as near to the body of it as possible, hoping by that means to
give it more liberty to turn within the narrow circumference to which it was
confined. On the 15th, having fixed a small hand vise to the end of the spine
which projected out, and fixed that vice into a larger one which was fastened
to a bench; I then began the difficult, painful and laborious operation, which
I continued till his strength and patience were exhausted. On the 16th, I
reassumed the operation, and repeated from time to time as his strengh would
admit, until the 29th, when the separation was completed, and the spine of the
screw was extracted without difficulty, the body of it still remaining b^hind.
In attempting to extract it I unfortunately broke my forceps; but having
provided myself with a stronger pair, on the 31st I happily extracted it, to
the inexpressible joy of the patient; who had exhibited an uncommon degree of
fortitude and resolution through the whole of his severe sufferings and
distress. The jaw, which had been immoveably fixed from the beginning, so that
it was with great difficulty he got down a sufficient quantity of food for his
support, gradually recovered its former motion, the wound healed well, and
except the loss of the eye, he is now perfectly recovered.

Case of a fatal Peripneumony. Communicated by Doctor Ebenezer Beardsley. Read
January 2, 1788.
JULIA MEIGS, daughter to Mr. Josiah Meigs, of this city, a lovely and
beautiful child, aged seven months, was taken about eight days ago, with a
cold, attended with a cough and feverishness, especially at night. But the
symptoms were so slight, that her parents were not alarmed about her until
Tuesday morning, the 23d of October, 1787, when, by the advice of a physician,
she took a dose of emetic tartar. On the evening of the same day I visited her,
at which time her pulse was quick, hard and strong; her respiration quick,
laborious, and accompanied with a rattling noise: her skin was dry and she was
very thirsty. Her countenance was pale and full, with a kind of shining,
leucophlegmatic appearance, which extended over the whole body. The emetic
which she took in the morning operated several times, both upward and downward,
but without affording any relief. I prescribed small doses of emetic tartar, as
a febrifuge, with pediluvium, and diluting drinks. Wednesday morning there was
no abatement of the symptoms, the pulse continued quick and hard, the
respiration laborious, attended with a noise not unlike the boiling of a pot,
her thirst was great, and her skin, notwithstanding the pediluvium, etc.
remained dry.

It now appeared that the disease was a true peripneumony, and from its rapid
progress there was reason to apprehend a speedy and fatal termination,

I attempted to bleed her in several places in her arms and feet, but the veins
were so imperceptible, that all my attempts were unsuccessful. I then had
recourse to deep scarification and cupping, which I repeated in several
places.; but with all my endeavors I could not extract more than two or three
ounces of blood, which was very thick, without scarce any appearance of serum.
Nitre, can phor, etc. with diluting drinks, were freely exhibited, blisters
were applied to the sternum and sides, and emollient cataplasms to the lower
extremities. The steam of a warm decoction of emollient herbs was received into
the lungs, and emollient nitrated enemas were frequently injected. But all
these remedies proved ineffectual: -- she made an easy exit on Friday morning.

As there had been some difference in the fentiments of the physicians who saw
her during her illness, some of them having suspected that the disorder was the
croup, or that suffocating disease vulgarly called the rattle^, the body was
opened in the afternoon of the same day.

The dissection was performed by Dr. Nesbitt, in the presence of several
gentlemen of the faculty. Both lobes of the lungs were deeply and extensively
inflamed, and in several places entirely sphacelated. No other morbid
appearance was found in any of the viscera, only the liver appeared to be of an
unusual size and hardness, but there were no signs of inflammation upon it.

The history and dissection of this subject afford some very important
practical hints, with respect to the diseases of infants and children. Diseases
of the lungs are more frequent, violent and fatal in infancy than in adult age.
A large proportion of children who die under two years of age are carried off
by diseases in this organ; and, to the best of my recollection, many of those
which have fallen under my observation, have been attended with the same
symptoms which occurred in the present case. But I must heartily own, that I
have not been wont to consider and treat such cases as strictly inflammatory,
and of course have neglected venaesection, or used it very sparingly, and the
proper antiphlogistic regimen and medicines, for emetics, pectoral detergents,
etc. Other practitioners, as far as I am acquainted, have pursued the same
course. But for the future, whenever I find an infant attended with a dry
cough, difficulty of respiration, a hard, quick pulse, thirst, etc. I am
resolved to be more upon my guard against an inflammatory affection of the
lungs; and, where it is possible, to bleed such subjects as readily as I would
adult persons attended with the same symptoms.

I beg leave to propose it as a question to you, my learned brethren, whether,
in such a case as the foregoing, where no vein can be found from whence a
proper quantity of blood can be obtained, it would not be warrantable to open
an artery? and whether a puncture in the temporal artery, which is perhaps the
most eligible, would not be admissible?

Case of an amputation of the leg, in consequence of a divided artery. By John
Spalding, Surgeon. Read to the Society, 2d January, 1778.
MR. James Robinson, Jun. of Durham, aged tenty-two years, on the 27th of
March, 1787, cut his leg with a straight edged axe, which divided the postica
arteria, near the junction of the fibula to the tibia transversely, about one
and three-fourths of an inch from where it goes off from the tibialis anticus,
from which proceeded a violent hoemorrhage, which was restrained for the
present by a common bandage; it remained secure to all appearance, until April
4th, when it began to digest and the hoemorrhage returned with as great force
as before, and was again suppressed by compress and bandage. On the 5th the
hoemorhage returned a second time, when the Doctors Cole and Gaylord, were
called in, who made a ligature round the divided artery, by which the bleeding
was restrained until the 6th; in the morning the hoemorrhage returning, I was
called to the assistance of those gentlemen; we agreed to make a ligature on
the upper part of the divided artery, which restrained the bleeding until the
11th; but the ligature not investing the wounded artery, but the muscles only,
immediately below it, which we discovered to be the case after amputation, the
upper end of the artery having receded from the wound so far as to be out of
the reach of the needle, and the upper branch of the postica dilated, so as to
form a sort of aneurism; we then, not knowing the impossibility of securing the
artery, agreed to fix on Pettit's tournequet, and clear the wound of the
grumous blood, and cut away the muscles on each side the wound, so as to admit
the needle to pass so deep, if possible, as to encircle the artery; which
operation proved unsuccessful as the former. We ordered the tourniquet to
remain, that in case of its bleeding it might be restrained, but to be so loose
as not to obstruct the circulation in the least, unless upon a return of the
hoemorrhage. He remained free from hoemorrhage until the 14th, when they were
again alarmed by the blood flowing from the wound; they sent a messenger after
me and the gentlemen beforementioned; we met in the evening, and from the loss
of blood, which he had sustained at different times, and the improbability of
saying the limb by any further efforts, made known our sentiments to him and
his friends, desiring them to call in such further counsel as they should think
proper, which they accordingly did. We met on the 15th, and after maturely
examining his case, gave it as our opinion, that amputation was the only means
of saving his life; observing, at the same time, that his recovery was
doubtful, from his extreme weakness: however, as there appeared no alternative,
we proceeded, and amputated the limb in the modern method, by the double
incision, etc. The wound digested Well, had very little of the symptomatic
fever, owing, perhaps, to the previous loss of blood. He recovered sooner than
usual, has a fine coat of flesh, which covers the stump, and he now enjoys a
good state of health.

Case of the Bite of a Mad Dag. Communicated to the Society by Dr. Benjamin
Gale. C.M.S.
THE saliva of a mad dog, when mixed with the refluent blood, is known to be a
slow, but deleterious poison, and unless relieved by art, brings on a train of
grievous symptoms, which terminate in death.

The inhabitants of these northern States, have not been exposed to the bite of
mad dogs, until within the compass of a few years, and for that reason I
conclude physicians have not paid proper attention to search after a rational
and radical cure.

If you judge the following history worthy to be communicated to the public,
you have my liberty to do it, in that way, and by those methods, you may think
will render it most useful to those who may have the misfortune to be bit by a
mad dog. The truth of the facts may be relied upon, and is well known in this
vicinity.

A mad dog, on the 4th of October, 1786, came from the north part of this town,
about sixteen miles from the sea. In his course down he passed through the east
part of the town of Guilford, and again entered and passed through this town on
the post-road, as far as the west parish of Saybrook, where he was pursued,
overtaken, and killed. He attacked and bit a child in East-Guilford, in the
vertebrae of the neck, the wound much lacerated. In this town he bit a girl
about eight or ten years of age, through her clothes in her hip, one tooh
perforated the skin and drew blood. In his whole course, in the whole of
cattle, hogs, dogs, including the children, he wounded the same day, to the
number of fifteen or sixteen; all the dogs bitten, were killed soon after being
bit, except one, which was permitted to run at large until it manifestly showed
symptoms of madness, and then was killed: all the other animals bitten run mad
and died, except one sow, which suckled a number of pigs, six or eight weeks
old; she was bit in the tip of one ear, which was perforated by one tooh only
-- The sow nor her litter of pigs were in any perceptible manner affected;
which, I conceive, was owing to the poison passing into the blood, being
immediately drawn off by the lacteals, and disseminated among the whole litter
of her pigs, before it had contaminated the mass of blood, it might not affect
either sow or pigs; as it is well known the mostdeleterious poison may be taken
in so small a dose, as not to injure the animal machine.

I had certain advice the same day the child was bit at East-Guilford, by one
who both saw the dog and the child, soon after it was bit; and again saw the
dog as he was passing through this town, and informed me it was mad, which was
the occasion of its being pursued and killed. -- Never expecting to have such a
case, I had spent but little thoughts on the subject; but had taken so much
notice of of practical writers on the subject, in the course of my reading, as
to think their prescriptions trifling and insignificant. Being anxious for the
safety of the children bitten, recollecting I had an abridgement of all the
medical cases that had been read before the royal society, and finding one
among others, which I looked upon rational, and which had been successful so
late as the year 1731, which was put in practice by Mr. Floyer, in consequence
of the recommendation of Dr. James, who never had made trial of the medicine
himself, which was turpeth. min. several times repeated. The trial was made
first on dogs that were mad; giving for the first dose twelve, the second
twenty-four, the third forty-eight grains, and the method succeeded: it was
afterward tried on three of the human kind, and was successful in all three.
-- Concluding the child bitten would fall under the care of Dr. Todd, a young
gentleman who had studied under my care, I immediately wrote him my advice, as
follows, founded on that intimation given in the philosophical transactions,
No. 441, page 241. (which see) I advised him to dress the wound with equal
parts of s. nit. and s. marin, finely pulverized, to scarrify the wound as much
as the part would admit, if necessary, and to fill the wound with it, and
likewise to incorporate with it the digestive.

Common salt I had experienced of great efficacy in wounds from the bite of
dogs not mad, and the addition of s. nit. I took as a hint from the worthy
president of your society, and then immediately to give an emet. of turpeth
miner. proportioned to the age of the child, so as to puke it three or four
times. And to repeat it for four or five times, at the distance of four, five
or six days, taking in the intermediate days a portion of calomel in theriac.
audrom. sufficient to purge it two or three times the next day. The calomel to
be taken at night going to bed, and a draught of canker weed, boiled in milk
and water, every night. By canker weed, I mean an herb brought into our
assembly by a member some years past, famous for its usefulness in the
malignant species of the apthae, accompanied with a putrid fever, in order to
spread its utility through the government. Mr. B. Batram, the famous botanist, of
Philadelphia, once showed me the same plant, and told me it was sovereign in
the bite of the rattlesnake, and termed it prenanthes, a name however I never
could find in any botanic writer. By this method, carefully attended, the child
got well, and remains so to the present time.

The girl bitten the same day in this town, I visited the next day from
principles of philanthropy, concluding they had sent for a physician who at
present resides among us. I asked the mother of the child whether her daughter
had been bitten by the mad dog the preceding day? who told me with a smiling
countenance she had, and seemed wholly unconcerned. I then asked her whether
she had consulted a physician? she told me she had not. I then endeavored to
convince her of the great danger her child was in; but it made no impression on
her. I asked leave to see the wound, which was on her hip. I carefully examined
the wound, and found one tooth had perforated the skin and drew blood. A little
below where the tooth had perforated the skin there appeared a streak, which
looked like blood settled under the skin from being bruised, but rather of a
darker hue. As the woman was so unconcerned, I did not think proper to urge a
scarification, but advised her to make a poultice of wheat bread and milk, and
incorporate as much of the s. marin. as could well be mixed after it was
reduced to the consistence of a poultice, and to wear it steadily. The contused
part appeared to be about one third of an inch in length, and the width of the
narrowest tape. I told her if she would permit me to give her child medicines,
I would do it gratis, which she at last consented to. I put her upon the same
course of medicine I had advised in the case of the other child. The poultice
separated a large slough from the wound, but not deeper than the cutis, about
an inch long and half an inch wide, and afterward soon healed. I should have
thught the tooth passing through all the clothes the child had on, it might have
wiped off all the saliva, in which I conceive the poison is contained, had it
not cast off so large a slough. The child continuing the course of medicine
prescribed, had no symptoms of the rabies.

Case showing the good effects of the antiphlogistic regimen in the eruptive
variolous fever. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read to the Society at their annual
meeting, January 2, 1788.
JOSIAH TUTTLE, of East-Haven, aged twenty-one years, of a large frame and
rigid fibers, was seized on his passage from New York, on Saturday, the 9th of
June, with the eruptive variolous fever; the symptoms ran very high, but at
that time, he supposed he had only caught cold by sleeping on the deck, and did
not suspect he had received the infection. On his arrival that evening, or the
next morning, Dr. Hotchkiss was consulted, who bled him, and prescribed
febrifuges. On the 10th, about ten at night, I saw the patient for the first
time, found him very restless, with great delirium, a strong throbbing pulse,
skin hot and dry, his countenance very florid, his eyes inflamed, and a great
determination to the head, with a constant nausea and eructation of bilious
phlegm. I immediately let blood to the amount of twenty ounces, then gave him a
strong solution of emetic tartar. During its operation he ejected great
quantities of bile: after the operation of the emetic, I gave him a cooling
purge, which had its desired effect, thoroughly cleansing the intestinal canal,
the vomit having failed in that part of the operation. I remained with the
patient until about four o'clock in the morning, and had an opportunity of
remarking that he obtained relief from all and every part of the treatment; the
delirium almost gone, the restlessness, etc. so that he could lie composed,
which, before these evacuations, required the family to detain him in bed. I
enquired on my first seeing him, whether he had not been exposed to the
smallpox, as at that time no satisfactory information could be received from
him; I strongly suspected the small pox, and was determined in this instance,
to try the effects of the antiphlogistic regimen: he was allowed only a sheet
to cover him when in bed, the doors and windows of the room open constantly,
and in the day enjoined to be led out; his drinks were beverage impregnated
with nitre, etc.

On the afternoon of the 11th, I visited him, the eruption was then evident, he
was much better, but still too much fever for his safety, and had now and then
intervals of wildness and delirium: I let blood again, to the amount of about
sixteen ounces, gave him frequent doses of the nitre, his drinks and regimen
continued.

On the 13th, I was called to visit him, chiefly to determine whether the
eruption was the smallpox; their doubts arose from his being so well, and so
free from any complaint, and the eruption so distinct and favorable, that the
family and others said it was impossible to be the smallpox, and therefore
pronounced it was the chicken pox. On inspection I was convinced otherwise; I
continued to affirm it was the smallpox, that he was past all danger, and felt
very happy to see the good effect of a bold antiphlogistic course. Dr. Hubbard
agreed to inoculate the family who had been exposed, I therefore, as a matter
of convenience, and a saving to the family, resigned my patient to the care of
the Doctor, perfectly satisfied with the issue of my experiment: the Doctor
carried him through with ease and safety, he making no complaint, except from a
few pustules on the soles of his feet.

This case, Gentlemen, and many other observations I have had opportunity to
make in the disease, leads me to draw this conclusion, that the good or bad
management of the eruptive fever, in most habits, stamps the extent and future
progress of the disease, perhaps I may venture to say, the very nature of the
pock; and that in this stage chiefly, if not principally, is the skill of a
physician manifested and called for.

History of a Dysentery, in the 22d regiment of the late Continental Army,
occasioned by the Barracks' being over crowded, and not properly ventilated.
Communicated by Doctor Ebenezer Beardsley. Read Jan. 2, 1788.
ABOUT the first of April, 1776, the American army under the command of his
Excellency Genesis Washington, marched from Boston to New York, at which place
they arrived about the middle of the month. The sick and invalids having been
left behind in the hospitals, the whole army was in perfect health.

The troops were quartered in barracks, and in the houses of the citizens, till
about the 10th of May, when they went into tents, except the 22d regiment,
under the command of Col. Samuel Wyllys, who for want of tents, continued in
their quarters in Smith Street.

The regiment were very healthy till about the middle of the month, when more
than one hundred men were taken down with the dysentery in the space of one
week. Such a sudden invasion of this formidable disease alarmed me very much,
and I was greatly surprised, upon enquiry to find, that there was not a single
dysenteric patient in the whole army, except those which belonged to our
regiment. From this circumstance I concluded, that the disease was occasioned
by some cause peculiar to the city; but after a particular enquiry, I could not
find that there was a single inhabitant sick with this disease in the city:
those who lived in the same street with us, and many of them in the same
houses, were free from that or any other acute disease. For several days I was
much perplexed and entirely at a loss to determine what had given rise to the
disease. At length I observed, that not only the inhabitants who lived with us
were free from the distemper, but several whole companies of the same regiment
had nothing of it. This led me to consider more minutely the circumstances and
situation of the sick, the whole of which were quartered either in low,
underground rooms, or in chambers or garrets, which were so situated at not to
admit a free circulation of air. The rooms were also considerably less than
usual in proportion to the number of men. Having made these discoveries and
observations, I concluded at once that the disease originated from the confined
and putrid atmosphere, which these unfortunate men lived in. I immediately
communicated my observations to the Colonel, and requested that the men, both
sick and well, might be removed out of those rooms into such as were more airy
and capacious. This measure was attended with the most salutary consequences:
Those who sick recovered in a short time, except two, who died; and no more
being seized with the distemper, in a few weeks the regiment became quite
healthy. This striking instance of the pernicious effects of putrid, stagnant
air, was of great service to me in the course of the campaign. In the months of
July, August and September, the dysentery, bilious and other fevers of the
putrid kind, became very rife in the army. I took great pains to procure for
our men who were down with those disorders, large rooms; and to have them well
ventilated, and cleansed once or twice a week. Yet under these circumstances I
frequently found, caeteris paribus, that the sick who lay in and near the
corners of the rooms, were handled much more severely than those who lay in and
near the middle of them. I do not remember to have met with this observation
before, but I think it is of no small importance in the treatment of
dysenteries, and other putrid fevers.

From the foregoing history the following practical deductions may be made.
First, that caeteris paribus, people who live in airy, capacious houses, are
less liable to be seized with dysenteries and other putrid fevers, than those
who live in smaller houses and breathe a more confined air. Secondly, that
patients laboring under these diseases instead of being confined in small,
tight rooms, (the common and fatal practice of the country in general) ought
either not to be confined to the house at all, or to be placed in the most
spacious and airy rooms. Thirdly, that it is highly probable that smothering
feather beds, warm, close rooms, and over careful nursing, are among the
principal causes of the fatality which too often attends this class of
diseases. Fourthly, that persons in the latter stages of a pulmonary
consumption, when they usually spit large quantities of purulent matter, and
their perspiration and other excreta are of a putrid disposition, ought to be
treated in this respect, as though they were sick with a dysentery or other
putrid fever; which will not only conduce to their preservation and comfort,
but is the only means of safety to their attendants and friends.

Case of a division of the Tendo Achillis. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read to the
Society, January 2d, 1788.
WILLIAM HOTCHKISS, aged ten years, son of Captain Stephen Hotchkiss, of this
city, on the 3d of October, 1783, was wounded a little above the heel of his
left leg, by the stroke of a drawing knife. I happened to be present at the
time of the accident, and on examining the wound, found a complete division of
the tendon of the gastrocnemei muscle, commonly called the tendon of Achilles,
about three quarters of an inch above its insertion into the os calcis; having
no convenient dressing on the spot, I dressed it superficially, so as to
preserve it from the action of the air; the accident happening abroad, he was
carefully conveyed home, with his leg and foot placed in the most favorable
posture to prevent the receding of the tendon.

In consequence of a call, I visited the patient, and in the presence of Dr.
Eneas Munson, examined the wound. A complete division of the tendon was clearly
ascertained, and that part of the tendon adjoining the muscle was found receded
about an inch and a half from the lower part, and hid under the common
integuments of the parts. We concluded to bring the divided ends of the tendon
into contact, by suture; and in order thereto, found it necessary to make a
longitudinal incision, about two inches, through the integuments previous to a
suture of the tendon, thereby exposing the receded point of the tendon about
half an inch; I then passed an armed needle through each extremity of the
tendon, about half an inch from the divided extreme, previously placing the
limb in a state of flexion, with the heel strongly bent back, and, by means of
straps, etc. continually through the cure, retained in that position. The wound
was then dressed up with small pledgets of dry lint, and a pledget of the
linim. arcoei. over the whole. Rest was enjoined the patient, a strict
antiphlogistic regimen prescribed, and an anodyne for the night. On the 4th we
visited our patient: found him much easier than we expected: ordered an
emollient cataplasm over the dressings: an enema to be administered, and an
anodyne for the night.

On the 5th we visited our patient: the tension and inflammation moderate: he
had rested well: therefore found no occasion to alter the above method; but
directed as before.

On the 6th we removed the dressings, the wound beginning to digest, and the
divided part remaining in complete contact, gave a favorable aspect to the
case: dressed with warm pledgets of liniment* arcoei. pursued the
antiphlogistic treatment, rest, and anodyne, h. s. with the strictest attention
to the flexure of the limb and foot. On the 7th we continued the same
treatment; fever and other symptoms moderate, the aspect of the wound
favorable; repeat an enema, and the anodyne, h. s.

On the 8th dressed the wound as usual, tension and inflammation of the parts
moderate, a laudable discharge of pus, and the future beginning to loosen, so
as to call our attention more particularly to the assistance of bandages and
the strap, lest the parts, by inattention or a sudden motion, might be torn
asunder. Continued the regimen and the anodyne h. s.

On the 9th the discharge and appearance of the wound continued favorable, the
thread was removed, and the parts remaining yet in complete contact, a small
slough beginning to cast off from that part of the tendon that was compressed
by the thread. Treatment as usual, only with the omission of the anodyne, and
the addition of an oily embrocation to the knee, ancle, etc.

On the 10th the sloughs cast off, a fine appearance of a granulation, or
increase of that part of the tendon cast off, and the symptoms in every respect
mild and favorable.

The 11th granulations increase, and appear to extend themselves along the
whole surface of the denuded tendon, the parts in complete contact, with a
laudable discharge from the wound.

The 12th, granulations increasing a little too fast, praecip. merc. r. was
added to the former dressings,

The 13th, and for some days, the fungus rather luxuriant rendered the
continuance of the precipitate necessary; however, the granulations, gradually
subdued and restrained, changed their appearance and texture, from a soft
fungus, to that of a tendon; so that at the end of the month a complete cure
took place, without any accident or bad symptom, except a trifling one of a
fall, which the patient had in attempting to walk after the wound was
completely cicatrized, by which, on examination, there appeared to be a
laceration, or separation of the integuments in contact with the exterior
surface of the tendon, and a small diffusion of blood marking the extent of the
transverse and longitudinal incision. As soon as the patient was fit to go
abroad, a shoe was contrived with a high heel, and the limb guarded by a strap,
to prevent a sudden extension of the limb or muscle, and this regulation
complied with for some months, gradually lowering the heel to the standard of
the other foot, so that by degrees, a free and perfect use of the limb was
restored, and at the present no difficulty remains, but is as active as any lad
of his age and constitution.

The apparatus made use of to restrain the limb in a state of flexure, and its
muscles from any unfavourable action, were a strong piece of pasteboard,
accommodated to the upper part of the foot or instep and ancle, and confined by
bandage, which by its pressure against the anterior and inferior part of the
leg, prevented the elevation of the foot; the leg was preserved in a state of
flexure, and the gastrocnemei muscle in a state of constant relaxation, by a
strap affixed to the heel of a slipper, that went over all the bandages on the
foot, and led to a bandage above the knee, with a buckle to lengthen or shorten
it at pleasure. The few instances that occur, or are recorded of similar cases,
induced me to lay this before you, Gentlemen, more especially, as there have
been many objections offered against sutures in the case of such wounds,: it is
true, the patient referred to in this case, was young and of a spare, delicate
habit, and of course less disposed to inflammation, and a numerous train of bad
symptoms, common to such wounds in the plethoric and adult habit, yet, in my
opinion, it does not argue against the safety of the practice, provided the
antiphlogistic method is carried to the extent such plethoric habits require,
as the degree of symtomatic fever alone, in such, and perhaps all wounds, (not
in themselves mortal) must determine the proportion of danger or difficulty.

Case of a Wound in the Trachea Arteria and Oesophagus. By John Spalding,
Surgeon. F. M. S. Read to the Society April, 2, 1788.
ON January the 22d, 1781, I was called to visit Mrs. Potter, aged 58 years,
who had been afflicted with a large scrophulous tumor on the sore part of her
neck, and much subject to melancholy, and under temptations to put a period to
her life, for a number of years. On the 22d day of January, she, with a pair of
shears (which she had secreted for that purpose) attempted her own life, by
thrusting one blade of them into her throat; cutting the trachea about two
thirds off; and wounding the oesophagus. I arrived about half an hour after,
and found a deep and frightful wound in her throat; the fore part of the
trachea open, and extended about an inch. Dr. Ives being in the neighborhood,
was called in to assist me. I made two ligatures on the trachea, one on the
right and the other on the left side of it; directed her to swallow nothing but
liquids, until I saw her again; and to keep her head in a prone situation. On
the 23d, found she had slept very little, her pulse calm, the wound discharging
a gleety matter copiously: dressed it with lint dipped in bals. traumaticum;
directed her to take 20 drops of the balsam, in a tea of baum. On the 24th
found her pulse a little accelerated, and her rest disturbed in consequence of
a cough: prescribed a tea of flaxseed and honey, with a dose of the elixir
asth. to be taken at night, and chicken broth sparingly, on account of the
difficulty of deglutition, which never failed to excite the cough. The wound
discharged a viscid gleet; ordered a saline draught, and a cooling enema: her
cough abated, and she rested better. On the 25th found a full pulse, a dyspnea,
with an inflammation on the scrophulous tumor threatening a gangrene. I let
blood, and gave her a solution of sal nit. ordered her feet to be bathed in
warm water, and to take her broth sparingly, part of which escaped through the
wound.

On the 26th, I found her pulse very full, with great difficulty in
respiration, and the scrophulous tumor much inflamed; ordered her feet to be
bathed in warm water, and took from her about twelve ounces of blood, which
gave her immediate relief: continued the nitrous solution, and she rested much
better that night than the preceding; the wound continuing to discharge a gleet
with a little purulent matter. On the 27th, perceived an abscess had formed in
the body of the tumor, which had emptied its contents into the wound, part of
which was discharged by the mouth; the inflammation abated, the gleet less, a
discharge of pus, and the fever abating. On the 28th, I found, by a fit of
coughing the night before, the ligatures had given way, her breath and liquids
which she took came out at the wound; I then passed an armed needle through the
divided muscles and trachea, making three sutures on the gaping wound, drawing
the edges into close contact; then dilated the scrophulous tumor, at its
depending sinus, in order to give vent to the matter, advising her not to take
any thing into her mouth for several hours; she rested better than she had done
at any time before. On the 29th, found the inflammation much abated, owing to
the free discharge at the depending orifice; her respiration relieved, yet on
her taking drink some of it escaped through the wound; the matter discharged
was of a better kind. I directed her head to be kept still and in a prone
situation. On the 30th, found she had rested very well, her mind a little more
composed, the tumor lessening daily, she could swallow much better, especially
when she took but a little at a time; her fever subsiding, and the appearance
of the wound favorable. On the 31st, she had a craving appetite for food that
was more nourishing; gave her an egg beat up with wine and sugar; she swallowed
it without much difficulty; and appeared mending in every respect. Feb. 1st,
found her craving solid food; I informed her it was not admissible under her
present circumstances, and must content herself with her liquid diet, until the
wound cicatrized. On the 2d, found she had rested very well, swallowed with
ease, very little of it escaping at the wound. From this time she mended daily,
and the wound incarned and cicatrized, and she now enjoys her usual health.

Case of an enlarged Gall Bladder. By Ebenezer Beardsley. Read April 2d 1788.
MRS. Scott, a healthy temperate industrious woman aged 44, was seized with a
violent paroxysm of the bilious colic, attended with the usual symptoms of
nausea, vomiting, severe pain in the abdomen and costiveness. She obtained
relief from purges and other remedies commonly used in that disorder; and in
about a week was quite free from pain and disease, except a slight jaundice,
which disappeared within a few weeks, in the use of saponaceous and other
medicines. She continued healthy for about three months, when she was again
attacked with a more severe fit of the cholic, which lasted longer and was more
difficult to cure than the former: this paroxysm, like the first, was succeeded
by a jaundice, which was more obstinate than before; but at the end of six or
eight weeks it disappeared, and left her to appearance in a state of health.
She continued apparently healthy for about four months, when she was attacked
with a third paroxysm of cholic, which was much more severe than either of the
former. Aloetic purges, fomentations, enemas, etc. removed the constipation of
the bowels and pain in about a week. But from this period she began to complain
of an incessant cardialgia, which preyed upon her without intermission: an
obtuse, deep seated pain in the pit of her stomach and right hydochondrium, a
yellowness in her eyes and skin, obstinate costiveness, with other symptoms of
an inveterate jaundice. For these complaints she took mercurials, soap,
limewater, gum pills, absorbents, bitters, etc. But notwithstanding her
complaints daily increased, her appetite forsook her, the heat and uneasiness
about her stomach became intolerable, and in about four months she died, quite
emaciated. Soon after her death I examined the body in presence of my brother
and another physician. Upon making a transverse incision through the
integuments, a little below the diphragm, we were surprised at the sudden and
violent protrusion of a hard elastic body through the aperture we had made,
which upon farther examination we found to be the gall bladder, distended to
the enormous length of ten inches, and proportionably large in its diameter.

The coats of the bladder, notwithstanding the amazing distension, were thick,
hard, and elastic, we separated it from the liver, and opened it by a
longitudinal incision from the neck to the fundus, and found that the
distension and enlargement, were occasioned by a preternatural fleshy
substance, which appeared to have sprouted out from all that part of the
bladder which is connected with the liver, and had gradually increased to such
a monstrous size. The fungus, or fleshy substance, consisted of coarse parallel
fibers, not unlike the muscular parts of lean beef, and from the middle of it
we extracted near an ounce of a soft, gray colored calculus. The end of the
fungous substance, next to the fundus of the bladder, was in a state of
suppuration, and there was a spoonful of very thick cream colored pus about
it. It did not adhere to the bladder any where but at its insertion into the
liver. There was no appearance of bile in the gallbladder, the communication
with the liver being wholly cut off by the fungous body.

What could have given rise to this formidable disease? Must there not have
been a previous wound, laceration, or inflammation in the part whence the
fungus issued?

Permit me again so repeat the practical caution, which I gave at the close of
the history of the schirrous pylorus, at our last meeting, against the use of
strong emetics in long continued biliary obstructions. In a case like the
preceding, their effects must be terrible to the unhappy sufferer.

Case of Dysenteric Symptoms from worms. By Dr. Samuel Nesbitt. Read before the
Society April 2, 1788.
IN the winter of 1784, I was called to visit a child of the Rev. Bela Hubbard,
Aged two years. The child was seized on the night preceding with a violent
fever, great restlessness, a constant nausea, and vomiting, attended with
alarming dysenteric symptoms, viz. a frequent discharge of an acrid mucus,
resembling in color beef brine, a distressing tenesmus, with a tumefaction and
tension of the abdomen. Under these circumstances I found my little patient on
the morning succeeding the attack. The dysenenteric symptoms were so strongly
marked, that, overlooking the circumstance of worms, I bent my whole attention
to deterge the acrid offending matter; and accordingly prescribed two gr. of
emetic tartar, to be dissolved in four table spoonfulls of warm water, and one
spoonful to be given every half hour, until the child had taken the whole, or
a sufficiency to clear well the stomach. The first spoonful suppressed every
appearance of sickness at the stomach, the second was given, and the whole
according to the directions above, without any apparent disposition to vomit.
Its operation was cathartic, and procured, within three hours from the first
dose of the tartar, a discharge of thirty two large worm of the round kind.
Some of them measured 8 and 9 inches in length, none, that I remember, (...)
short of four inches. The first discharge contained twenty, which were forced
into the anus in such a body, that the assistants found it necessary to relieve
the child by the hand. Two discharges more completed the number, they were all
alive and squirming on the receiver. From the expulsion of such a number of
disagreeable tenants, every dysenteric symptom vanished, the tension of the
abdomen and fever subsided, and from that period a perfect recovery took place,
without any further assistance from medicine.

Thus, gentlemen, without assuming any credit to myself, a happy and speedy
issue was, by accident, obtained in the present alarming case, and by a
medicine, which, in its operation, proved the most active and powerful
anthelmintic I had, or ever have met with in my practice; curing, as Celsus
says, Tuto, cito and jucundo.

I most sincerely wish we could always be so fortunate in our prescriptions,
when we are right in our conjectures of the proximate cause of diseases. But it
is not to be expected that a mistaken theory will always terminate so
favorably.

Case of a schirrhus in the Pylorus of an infant. Communicated by Doctor
Hezekiah Beardsley. Read April 2, 1788
A CHILD of Mr. Joel Grannis, a respectable farmer in the town of Southington,
in the first week of its infancy, was attacked with a puking, or ejection of
the milk, and of every other substance it received into its stomach almost
instantaneously, and very little changed. The foeces were in small quantity and
of an ash color, which continued with little variation till its death. For
these complaints a physician was consulted, who treated it as a common case
arising from acidity in the prima via; the testaceous powders and other
absorbents and correctors of acid acrimony, were used for a long time without
any apparent benefit. The child, notwithstanding it continued to eject whatever
was received into the stomach, yet seemed otherwise pretty well, and increased
in stature nearly in the same proportion as is common to that state of infancy,
but more lean, with a pale countenance and a loose and wrinkled skin like that
of old people. This, as nearly as I can recollect at this distance of time, was
his appearance and situation when I was first called to attend him; he was now
about two years old. I was at first inclined to attribute the disorder to a
deficiency of the bile and gastric juices, so necessary to digestion and
chylification, joined with a morbid relaxation of the stomach, the action of
which seemed wholly owing to the weight and pressure of its contents, as
aliment taken in small quantities would often remain on it, till by the
addition of fresh quantities, the whole, or nearly all was ejected; but his
thirst, or some other cause, most commonly occasioned his swallowing such large
draughts as to cause an immediate ejection, and oftentimes before the cup was
taken from his mouth. It did not appear that he was attended with nausea or
sickness at his stomach, but he often complained that he was choked, and of
his own accord would introduce his finger or the probang, so as to excite the
heaving of the stomach and an ejection of its contents; the use of this
instrument was generally necessary if the stomach did not of itself, in a few
moments, discharge its contents, the choking would in that short space of time
become almost intolerable, which by this discharge was entirely removed. In
this situation, with very little variation of symptoms he continued till death
closed the painful and melancholy scene, when he was about five years of age.
He was uncommonly cheerful and active considering his situation. A number of
the most respectable medical characters were consulted and a variety of
medicines were used to little or no effect. His death, though long expected,
was sudden, which I did not learn till the second day after it took place. This
late period, the almost intolerable stench, and the impatience of the people
who had collected for the funeral prevented so thorough an examination of the
body, as might otherwise have been made. On opening the thorax, the oesophagus
was found greatly distended beyond its usual dimensions in such young subjects;
from one end to the other of this tube, between the circular fibers which
compose the middle coat, were small vesicles, some of which contained a table
spoonful of a thin fluid like water, and seemed capable of holding much more. I
next examined the stomach, which was unusually large, the coats were about the
thickness of a hog's bladder when fresh and distended with air, it contained
about a wine pint of a fluid exactly resembling that found in the vesicles
beforementioned, and which I suppose to have been received just before his
death. The pylorus was invested with a hard compact substance, or schirrosity,
which so completely obstructed the passage into the duodenum, as to admit with
the greatest difficulty the finest fluid; whether this was the original
disorder, or only a consequence, may perhaps be a question. In justice to
myself I ought to mention, that I had pronounced a schirrosity in that part for
months before the child^s death. On removing the integuments of the abdomen, I
was struck with the appearance of the vesica fellis, which was nearly five
inches in length and more than one in diameter, it lay transversly across the
abdomen, and was bedded into the small intestines, which were sphacelated
wherever they came in contact with it; its contents were rather solid than
fluid, and resembled flesh in a highly putrid state; its color was that of a
very dark green, like the juice of the nightshade berry, and a fluid of the
same color exuded through its sphacelated coats. The necessity there was of
interring the body that evening, put a scop to any further examination.

I should have been happy, Gentlemen if I had been able to have given you a
more particular and accurate description of this very singular case, but the
abovementioned circumstances forbad.

Case of Calculi in the Lungs. Communicated by Dr. En^^s Munson. Read April 2,
1788.
MR. CALEB HOTCHKISS, aged 45 years, of a chole^ic disposition, died of a (...)
of the lungs, in the month of December, 1784. His disease by his own account of
(...), comm^^^^ about 15 years before his death. (...) in the year 17^9, he was
(...) with extreme pain in his (...), at different periods, which ended in a
nephritis; and at length in an haemoptosis, when, by coughing, a calculus was
thrown out from his lungs, after which he passed about 12 years of tolerable
health; he lived a sedentary life, and was able to pursue a moderate course of
study, and preached occasionally, until July 1784, when I was consulted in his
case. He complained of a general lassitude and weakness, attended with a slow
fever and cough, with a quick, hectical pulse; though without any pain in or
about the chest. His cough was neither hard nor frequent: he had been riding
short journies, for the purpose of recruiting his health, and had found so much
advantage thereby, that he was determined to take a more lengthy one of some
hundred miles. But his weakness and Hippocratic countenance, together with a
small hemoptoe which attended his cough, made me diffident in recommending so
lengthy a journey as was proposed, and the more so on account of a number of
small calculi, which at different times he had coughed up, tho with less
irritation than might have been expected, they being of very even, smooth
surfaces, but of different figures, and about the size of a large orange seed.
But seeing the great confidence he had of the advantages he should derive from
the proposed journey, I consented, rather than advised to it, with all the
precautions I thought necessary for one under his infirmity. He returned in
about six weeks, and appeared rather recruited, and continued so until the
month of September, when his cough increased, and on the 9th he raised about a
pint of blood from his lungs; which came so fast and suddenly upon him, as to
threaten an immediate suffocation. I was called in the night, but before I
arrived his haemoptoe ceased. But just on my entrance into the room he
expectorated a large mouthfull, which appeared by candle light to resemble a
mixture of blood and pus. This I directed to be thrown into a small vessel of
water, and after maceration, found it to consist of a portion of the internal
membrane of the lungs, about one inch and a quarter in length, and half the
breadth, and about a quarter of an inch thick. About this time he expectorated
another calculus, after which he continued gradually to decay, until the latter
end of December following, when welcome death closed the scene.

As this is but the second case of the kind that has fallen under my
observation, in the course of thirty years practice, I narrate it as something
singular, with this remark only, by way of quaere. As, in the present case,
many severe pectoral complaints were terminated with a fit of the gravel,
whether very considerable relief may not be expected in like cases, from those
means which have proved so specific in resolving and bringing off calculous
matter from the kidneys and ureters? Which is humbly submitted to those more
skilful and experienced to determine.


