OBSERVATIONS ON THE PROPOSED CONSTITUTION FOR THE United States of America,
Clearly showing it to be a complete SYSTEM OF ARISTOCRACY AND TYRANNY, AND
DESTRUCTIVE OF THE RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES OF THE PEOPLE

PRINTED in the STATE OF NEW YORK, M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

OBSERVATIONS, etc.
[Although the following pieces were addressed to the inhabitants of
Pennsylvania, etc. they are (in almost every respect) as applicable to this
state, and to every other state in the union.]
The ADDRESS and REASONS of DISSENT of the MINORITY of the CONVENTION of the
state of Pennsylvania to their Constituents.
IT was not until after the termination of the late glorious contest, which
made the people of the United States an indedendent nation, that any defect was
discovered in the present confederation. It was formed by some of the ablest
patriots in America. It carried us successfully through the war; and the virtue
and patriotism of the people, with their disposition to promote the common
cause, supplied the want of power in Congress.

The requisition of Congress for the five per cent. impost was made before the
peace, so early as the first of February, 1781, but was prevented taking effect
by the refusal of one state; yet it is probable every state in the union would
have agreed to this measure, at that period, had it not been for the
extravagant terms in which it was demanded. The requisition was new molded in
the year 1783, and accompanied with an additional demand of certain
supplementary funds for twenty-five years. Peace had now taken place, and the
United States found themselves laboring under a considerable foreign and
domestic debt, incurred during the war. The requisition of 1783, was
commensurate with the interest of the debt, as it was then calculated; but it
has been more accurately ascertaine (...) that time. The domestic debt has been
fou^^ to fall se^^ ^^^lio^ (...) of the calculation, and it has lately (...)
considerably diminished by large sales of the western lands. The states have
been called on by Congress annually for supplies, until the general system of
finance, proposed in 1783, should take place.

It was at this time that the want of an efficient federal government was first
complained of, and that the powers vested in Congress were found to be
inadequate to the procuring of the benefits that should result from the union.
The impost was granted by most of the states, but many refused the
supplementary funds; the annual requisitions were set at naught by some of the
states, while others complied with them by legislative acts, but were tardy in
their payments, and Congress found themselves incapable of complying with their
engagements, and supporting the federal government. It was found, that our
national character was sinking in the opinion of foreign nations. The Congress
could make treaties of commerce, but could not enforce the observance of them.
We were suffering from the restrictions of foreign nations, who had shackled
our commerce, while we were unable to retaliate: and all now agreed that it
would be advantageous to the union to enlarge the powers of Congress; that they
should be enabled in the amplest manner to regulate commerce, and to lay and
collect duties on the imports throughout tho United States. With this view a
convention was first proposed by Virginia, and finally recommended by Congress
for the different states to appoint deputies to meet in convention, "for the
purpose of revising and amending the present articles of confederation, so as
to make them adequate to the exigencies of the union." This recommendation the
legislatures of twelve states complied with so hastily as not to consult their
constituents on the subject; and though the different legislatures had no
authority from their constituents for the purpose, they probably apprehended
the necessity would justify the measure; and none of them extended their ideas,
at that time, further than "revising and amending the present articles of
confederation." Pennsylvania, by (...) appointing deputies, expressly confined
their powers to this (...) though it is probable that some of the members of
the (...) of (...) state, had at that time in contemplation to annihilate the
present confederation, as well as the constitution of Pennsylvania, yet the
plan was not sufficiently matured to communicate it to the public.

The majority of the legislature of this commonwealth were at that time under
the influence of the members from the city of Philadelphia. They agreed, that
the deputies sent by them to convention, should have no compensation for their
services, which determination was calculated to prevent the election of any
member who resided at a distance from the city. It was in vain for the minority
to attempt electing delegates to the convention, who understood the
circumstances and the feelings of the people, and had a common interest with
them. They found a disposition in the leaders of the majority of the house to
choose themselves and some of their depend^nts. The minority attempted to
prevent this by agreeing to vote for some of the leading members, who they knew
had influence enough to be appointed at any rate, in hopes of carring with them
some respectable citizens of Philadelphia, in whose principles and integrity
they could have more confidence; but even in this they were disappointed,
except in one member: the eighth member was added at a subsequent session of
the assembly.

The continental convention met in the city of Philadelphia at the time
appointed. It was composed of some men of excellent characters; of others, who
were more remarkable for their ambition and cunning, than their patriotism; and
of some who had been opponents to the constitution of this commonwealth. The
convention sat upwards of four months. The doors were kept shut, and the
members brought under the most solemn engagements of secrecy. The journals of
the conclave are still cancealed.
Some of those who opposed their going so far beyond their powers, retired,
hopeless, from the convention; others had the firmness to refuse signing the
plan altogether; and many who did sign it, did it not as a system they wholly
approved, but as the best that could be the^ obtained, and notwithstanding the
time spent on this subject, it is agreed on all hands to be a (...) of haste
and accom^.

Whilst the gilded chains were forging in the secret conclave, the meaner
instruments of despotism without, were busily employed in alarming the fears of
the people with dangers which did not exist, and exciting their hopes of
greater advantages from the expected plan than even the best government on
earth can produce.

The proposed plan had not many hours issued forth, from the womb of suspicious
secrecy, until such as were prepared for the purpose, were carrying about
petitions for people to sign, signifying their approbation of the system, and
requesting the legislature to call a convention. While every measure was taken
to intimidate the people against opposing it, the public papers teemed with the
most violent threats against those who should dare to think for themselves, and
tar and feathers were liberally promised to all those who would not immediately
join in supporting the proposed government, be it what it would. Under such
circumstances, petitions in favor of calling a convention, were signed by
great numbers in and about the city, before they had leisure to read and
examine the system, many of whom, now they are better acquainted with it, and
have had time to investigate its principles, are heartily opposed to it. The
petitions were speedily handed in to the legislature.

Affairs were in this situation, when on the 28th of September last, a
resolution was proposed to the assembly by a member of the house who had been
also a member of the federal convention, for calling a state convention, to be
elected within ten days, for the purpose of examining and adopting the proposed
constitution of the united states, though at this time the house had not
received it from Congress. This attempt was opposed by a minority, who, after
offering every argument in their power to prevent the precipitate measure,
without effect, absented themselves from the house, as the only alternative
left them, to prevent the measures ^^king pl^^^ previous to their constituents
being acquainted with the bus^^^ That violence and outrage which had been often
threatened, was now p^^^^^sed; some of the members were seized the next day by
a mob, collected for the purpose, and forcibly dragged to the house, and there
detained by force, while the quorum of the legislature so formed, completed
their resolution. We shall dwell no longer on this subject, the people of
Pennsylvania have been already acquainted therewith. We would only further
observe, that every member of the legislature, previously to taking his seat,
by solemn oath or affirmation, declares, "that they will not do or consent to
any act or thing whatever that shall have a tendency to lessen or abridge their
rights and privileges, as declared in the constitution of this state." And that
constitution which they are so solemnly sworn to support, cannot legally be
altered but by a recommendation of the council of censors, who alone are
authorized to propose alterations and amendments, and even these must be
published at least six months, for the consideration of the people. The
proposed system of government for the United States, if adopted, will alter,
and may annihilate the constitution of Pennsylvania; and therefore the
legislature had no authority whatever to recommend the calling a convention for
that purpose. This proceeding could not be considered as binding on the people
of this commonwealth. The house was formed by violence, some of the members
composing it were detained by force, which alone would have vitiated any
proceedings, to which they were otherwise competent; but had the legislature
been legally formed, this business was absolutely without their power.

In this situation of affairs were the subscribers elected members of the
convention of Pennsylvania. A convention called by a legislature in direct
violation of their duty, and composed in part of members, who were compelled to
attend for that purpose, to consider of a constitution proposed by a convention
of the United States, who were not appointed for the porpose of framing a new
form of government, but whose powers were expressly confined to altering and
amending the present articles of confederation. Therefore the members of the
The continental convention, in direct violation of the 13th article of
confederation, have declared, "that the ratification of nine states shall be
sufficient for the establishment of this constitution, between the states so
ratifying the same." Thus has the plighted faith of the states been sported
with! they had solemnly engaged that the confederation now subsisting should be
inviolably preserved by each of them, and the union thereby formed should be
perpetual, unless the same should be altered by mutual consent.
continental convention, in proposing the plan, acted as individuals, and not
as deputies from Pennsylvania -- the assembly who called the state convention
acted as individuals, and not as the legislature of Pennsylvania; nor could
they, or the convention chosen on their recommendation, have authority to do
any act or thing, that can alter or annihilate the constitution of Pennsylvania
(both of which will be done by the new constitution) nor are their proceedings,
in our opinion, at all binding upon the people.

The election for members of the convention was held at so early a period, and
the want of information was so great, that some of us did not know of it until
after it was over, and we have reason to believe, that great numbers of the
people of Pennsylvania have not yet had an opportunity of sufficiently
examining the proposed constitution. We apprehend that no change can take place
that will affect the internal government or constitution of this commonwealth,
unless a majority of the people should evidence a wish for such a change; but
on examining the number of votes given for members of the present state
convention, we find, that of upwards of seventy thousand freemen who are
entitled to vote in Pennsylvania, the whole convention has been elected by
about thirteen thousand voters, and though two-thirds of the members of the
convention have thought proper to ratify the proposed constitution, yet those
two-thirds were elected by the votes of only six thousand and eight hundred
freemen.

In the city of Philadelphia, and some of the eastern counties, the junto that
took the lead in the business agreed to vote for none but such as would
solemnly promise to adopt the system in toto, without exercising their
judgment. In ^^ny of the counties the people did not attend the elections,
(...) ^hey had not an opportunity of judging of the plan. Others did not
consider themselves bound by the call of a set of men who assembled at the
state-house in Philadelphia, and assumed the name of the legislature of
Pennsylvania; and some were prevented from voting by the violence of the party
who were determined at all events to force down the measure. To such lengths
did the tools of despotism carry their outrage, that in the night of the
election for members of convention in the city of Philadelphia, several of the
subscribers (being then in the city to transact your business) were grossly
abused and insulted, while they were quiet in their lodgings; though they did
not interfere, nor had any thing to do with said election; ^ut, as they
apprehend, because they were supposed to be adverse to the proposed
constitution, and would not camely surren^^r those sacred rights which you have
committed to their charge.

The convention met, and the same disposition was soon manifested in
considering the proposed constitution, that had been exhibited in every other
stage of the business. We were prohibited by an express vote of the convention,
from taking any question on the separate articles of the plan, and reduced to
the necessity of adopting or rejecting in toto. It is true the majority
permitted us to debate on each article, but restrained us from proposing
amendments. They also determined not to permit us to enter on the minutes our
reasons of dissent against the whole. Thus situated we entered on the
examination of the proposed system of government, and found it to be such as we
could not adopt, without, as we conceived, surrendering up your dearest rights.
We offered our objections to the convention, and opposed those parts of the
plan, which, in our opinion, would be injurious to you, in the best manner we
were able; and closed our arguments by offering the following propositions to
the convention:

First. The rights of cons^^ence shall be held inviolable; and ^^ither the
legislative, executive, nor judicial powers of the united states, shall have
authority to alter, abrogate, or infringe any part of the constitution of the
several states, which provide for the preservation of liberty in matters of
religion.

Second. That in controversies respecting property, and in suits between man
and man, trial by jury shall remain as heretofore, as well in the federal
courts, as in those of the several states.

Third. That in all capital and criminal prosecutions, a man has a right to
demand the cause and nature of his accusation, as well in the federal courts as
in those of the several states; to be heard by himself and counsel; to be
confronted with the accusers and witnesses; to call for evidence in his favor,
and a speedy trial by an impartial jury of his vicinage, without whose
unanimous consent, he cannot be found guilty, nor can he be compelled to give
evidence against himself; and that no man be deprived of his liberty, except by
the law of the land, or the judgment of his peers.

Fourth. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines
impo^ed, nor cruel nor unusual punishments inflicted.

Fifth. That warrants, unsupported by evidence, whereby any officer or
messenger may be commanded or required to search suspected places, or to seize
any person or persons, his or their property, not particularly described, are
grievous and oppressive, and shall not be granted either by the magistrates of
the federal government or others.

Sixth. That the people have a right to the freedom of speech, of writing and
publishing their sentiments; therefore, the freedom of the press shall not be
restrained by any law of the united states.

Seventh. The people have a right to bear arms for the defense of themselves
and their own state or the United States, or for the purpose of killing game;
and no law shall be passed for disarming the people of any of them, unless for
crimes committed, or real danger of public injury from individuals; and as
standing armies in the time of peace are dangerous to liberty, they ought not
to be ^^t ^^; and that the military shall be kept under strict subordination
(...) and governed by the civil powers.

Eighth. The inhabitants of the several states shall have liberty to fowl and
hunt in seasonable times, on the lands they hold, and on all other lands in the
United States not enclosed, and in like manner to fish in all navigable waters
and others not private property, without being restrained therein by any laws
to be passed by the legislature of the United States.

Ninth. That no law shall be passed to restrain the legislatures of the several
states from enacting laws for imposing taxes, except imposts and duties on
goods imported or exported, and that no taxes, except imposts and duties on
goods imported and exported, and postage on letters, shall be levied by the
authority of Congress.

Tenth. That the house of representatives be properly increased in number; that
elections shall remain free; that the several states shall have power to
regulate the elections for senators and representatives, without being
controuled either directly or indirectly by any interference on the part of
Congress; and that elections of representatives be annual.

Eleventh. That the power of organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia
(the manner of disciplining the militia to be prescribed by Congress) remain
with the individual states, and that Congress shall not have authority to call
or march any of the militia out of their own state, without the consent of such
state, and for such length of time only as such state shall agree.

That the sovereignty, freedom, and independency of the several states shall be
retained, and every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this
constitution expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.

Twelfth. That the legislative, executive, and judicial powers be kept
separate; and to this end, that a constitutional council be appointed, to
advise and assist the president, who shall be responsible for the advice they
give; hereby the senators would be relieved from almost constant attendance;
and also that the judges be made completely independent.

Thirteenth. That no treaty which shall be directly opposed to the existing
laws of the United States in Congress assembled, shall be valid until such laws
shall be repealed or made conformable to such treaty; neither shall any
treaties be valid which are in contradiction to the constitution of the United
States, or the constitutions of the several states.

Fourteenth. That the judiciary power of the United States shall be confined to
cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, or consuls; to cases of
admiralty and maritime jurisdiction; to controversies to which the United
States shall be a party; to controversies between two or more states; between a
state and citizens of different states, between citizens claiming lands under
grants of different states, and between a state or the citizens thereof and
foreign states; and in criminal c^ses, to such only a^ are expressly enumerated
in the constitution; and that the United States in Congress ass^mbled, shall
not have power to enact laws, which shall alter the laws of descents and
distribution of the effects of deceased persons, the titles of land or goods,
or the regulation of contracts in the individual states.

After reading these propositions, we declared our willingness to agree to the
plan, provided it was so amended as to meet those propositions, or something
similar to them: and finally moved the convention do adjourn, to give the
people of Pennsylvania time ^o consider the subject, and determine for
themselves; but these were all rej^cted, and the final vote was taken, when our
duty to you induced us to vote against the proposed plan, and to decline
signing the ratification of the same.

During the discussion, we met with many insults, and some personal abuse; we
were not even treated with decency, during the sitting of the convention, by
the persons in the gallery of the house* however, we flatter our^elves, that in
contending for the preservation of those invaluable rights you have thought
^roper to commit to our charge, we acted with a spirit becoming freemen, and
being desirous tha^ you might know the principles which actuated our conduct,
and being prohibited from infering our reasons of dissent on the minutes of the
convention, we have subjoined them for your consideration, as to you alone we
are accountable. It remains with you, whether you will think those inestimable
privileges, which you have so ably contended for, should be sacrificed at the
shrine of despotism, or whether you mean to contend for them with the same
spirit that has so often baffled the attempts of an aristocratic faction, to
rivet the shackles of slavery on you, and you unborn posterity.

Our objections are comprised under three general heads of dissent, viz.

WE DISSENT, First, Because it is the opinion of the most celebrated writers on
government, and confirmed by uniform experience, tha^ a very extensive
territory cannot be governed on the principles of freedom otherwise than by a
confederation of republics, possessing all the powers of internal governments;
but united in the management of their general and foreign concerns.

If any doubt could have been entertained of the truth of the foregoing
principle, it has been fully removed by the concession of Mr. Wilson, one of
the majority on this question, and who was one of the deputies in the late
general convention. In justice to him we will give his own words; they are as
follows, viz. "The extent of country for which the new constitution was
required, produced another difficulty in the business of the federal
convention. It is the opinion of some celebrated writers, that to a small
territory, the democratical; to a middling territory (as Montesquieu has termed
it) the monarchial; and to an extensive territory, the despotic form of
government, is best adapted. Regarding, then, the wide and almost unbounded
jurisdiction of the United States, at first view, the hand of despotism seemed
necessary to control, connect, and protect it; and hence the chief
embarrassment rose. For we knew, that, although our constituents would
cheerfully submit to the legislative restraints of a free government, they
would s^urn at every a^tempt to sh^cle them with despotic power." And again, in
another part of his speech, he continues, "Is it probable that the dissolution
of the state governments, and the establishment of one consolidated empire,
would be eligible in its nature, and satisfactory to the people in its
administration? I think not, as I have given reasons to show, that so extensive
a territory could not be governed, connected, and preserved, but by the
supremacy of despotic power. All the exertions of the most potent emperors of
Rome were not capable of keeping that empire together, which in extent was far
inferior to the dominion of America."

We dissent, secondly, because the powers vested in Congress by this
constitution, must necessarily annihilate and absorb the legislative,
executive, and judicial powers of the several states, and produce from their
ruins one consolidated government, which, from the nature of things, will be an
iron-handed despotism, as nothing short of the supremacy of despotic sway could
connect and govern these United States under one government.

As the truth of this position is of such decisive importance, it ought to be
fully investigated, and if it is founded, to be clearly ascertained; for,
should it be demonstrated, that the powers vested by this constitution in
Congress, will have such an effect, as necessarily to produce one consolidated
government, the question then will be reduced to this short issue, viz. whether
satiated with the blessings of liberty; whether repenting of the folly of so
recently asserting their unalienable rights, against foreign despots, at the
expense of so much blood and treasure, and such painful and arduous struggles,
the people of America are now willing to resign every privilege of freemen, and
submit to the domination of an absolute government, that will embrace all
America in one chain of despotism; or whether they will, with virtuous
indignation, spurn at the shackles prepared for them, and confirm their
liberties by a conduct becoming freemen?

That the new government will not be a confederacy of states, as it ought, but
one consolidated government, founded upon the destruction of the several
governments of the states, we shall now show.

The powers of Congress, under the new constitution, are complete and unlimited
over the purse and the sword, and are perfectly independent of, and supreme
over, the state governments, whose intervention in these great points is
entirely destroyed. By virtue of their power of taxation, Congress may command
the whole, or any part of the property of the people. They may impose what
imposts upon commerce; they may impose what land-taxes, poll-taxes, excises,
duties on all written instruments, and duties on every other article that they
may judge proper; in short, every species of taxation, whether of an external
or internal nature, is comprised in section the 8th, of article the 1st, viz.
"The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and
excises, to pay the debts, and provide for the common defense and general
welfare of the United States."

As there is no one article of taxation reserved to the state governments, the
Congress may monopolite every source of revenue, and thus indirectly demolish
the state governments, for without funds they could not exist; the taxes,
duties, and excises imposed by Congress may be so high as to render it
impracticable to levy any further sums on the same articles; but whether this
should be the case or not, if the state governments should presume to impose
taxes, duties, or excises, on the same articles with Congress, the latter may
abrogate and repeal the laws whereby they are imposed, upon the allegation that
they interfere with the due collection of their taxes, duties, or excises, by
virtue of the following clause, part of section 8th, article 1st, viz. "To make
all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the
government of the United States, or in any department or officer thereof."

The Congress might gloss over this conduct by construing every purpose for
which the state legislatures now lay taxes to be for the "general welfare," and
therefore of their jurisdiction.

And the supremacy of the laws of the United States, is established by article
6th, viz. "That this constitution and the laws of the United States, which
shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be
made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the
land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the
constitution or (...) of any state to the contrary notwithstanding." It has
been alleged, that the words "pursuant to the constitution," are a restriction
upon the authority of Congress; but when it is considered, that by other
sections they are invested with every efficient power of government, and which
may be exercised to the absolute destruction of the state governments, without
any violation of even the forms of the constitution, this seeming restriction,
as well as every other restriction in it appears to us to be nugatory and
delusive, and only introduced as a blind upon the real nature of the
government. In our opinion, "pursuant to the constitution." will be
co-extensive with the will and pleasure of Congress, which, indeed, will be the
only limitation of their powers.

We apprehend, that two coordinate sovereignties would be a solecism in
politics. That therefore, as there is no line of distinction drawn between the
general, and state governments; as the sphere of their jurisdiction is
undefined, it would be contrary to the nature of things, that both should exist
together, one or the other would necessarily triumph in the fullness of
dominion. However, the contest could not be of long continuance, as the state
governments are divested of every me (...) of defense, and will be obliged, by
"the supreme law of the land," to yield at discretion.

It has been objected to this total destruction of the state governments, that
the existence of their legislatures is made essential to the organization of
Congress; that they must assemble for the appointment of the senators and
president general of the United States. True, the state legislatures may be
continued for some years, as bo^^ds of appointment, merely, after they are
divested of every other function; but the fo^mer^ of the constitution,
foreseeing that the people will soon, be disgusted with this solemn mockery of
a government without power and usefulness have made a provision for relieving
them from the imposition, in section 4th, of article 1st, viz. "The times
places and manner of holding elections for senators and representatives, shall
be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at
any time, by law, make or alter such regulations, except as to the place of
choosing senators.

As Congress have the control over the time of the appointment of the president
general, of the senators and of the representatives of the United States, they
may prolong their existence in office, for life, by postponing the time of
their election and appointment, from period to per^^d, under various p^^^^nces,
such as, an apprehension of invasion, the factions disposition of the people,
or any other plausible pretense that the occasion may suggest: and having thus
obtained life estates in the government, they may fill up the vacancies
themselves, by their control over the mode of appointment -- with this
exception in regard to the senators, that as the place of appointment for them,
must, by the constitution, be in the particular state, they may depute somebody
in the respective states, to fill up the vacancies in the senate, occasioned by
death, unti^ they can venture to assume it themselves. In this manner, may the
only restriction in this clause be ^^ded. By virtue of the foregoing section,
when the spirit of the people shall be gradually broken -- when the general
government shall be firmly established -- and when a numerous standing army
shall render opposition vain -- the Congress may (...) the system of despotism,
in renouncing all dependant on the people, by continuing themselves and
children in the government.

The celebrated Montesquien, in his Spirit of Laws, vol. I. p. 12, says, "that
in a democracy, there can be no exercise of sovereignty, but by the suffrages
of the people, which are their will: now the sovereign's will is the sovereign
himself: the laws, therefore, which establish the right of suffrage, are
fundamental to this government. In f^^st, it is as important to regulate, in a
republic, in what manner, by whom, and concerning what, suffrages are to be
given, as it is in a monarchy to know who is the prince, and after what manner
he ought to govern." The time, mode, and place of the election of
representatives, (...), and president general of the United States, ought not
to be under the control of Congress, but fundamentally ascertained and
established.

The new constitution, consistently with the plan of (...), contains no
reservation of the rights and privileges of the state governments, which was
made in the (...) of the year 1^^^, (...) article the (...) its sovereignty,
(...) and every power, jurisdiction and (...), which is (...) by this
confederation expressly delegated to this United States in Congress assembled."

The legislative power, vested in Congress by the foregoing recited sections,
is so unlimited in its nature, may be so comprehensive and boundless in its
exercise, that this alone would be amply sufficient to annihilate the state
governments, and swallow them up in the grand vortex of general empire.

The judicial powers, vested in Congress, are also so various and extensive,
that by legal ingenuity they may be extended to every case, and thus absorb the
state judiciaries: and when we consider the decisive influence that a general
judiciary would have over the civil polity of the several states, we do not
hesitate to pronounce, that this power, unaided by the legislative, would
effect a consolidation of the states under one government.

The powers of a court of equity, vested by this constitution in the tribunals
of Congress -- powers which do not exist in the state of Pennsylvania, unless
so far as they can be incorporated with jury trial -- would, in this state,
greatly contribute to this event. The rich and wealthy suitor would eagerly lay
hold of the infinite mazes, perplexities, and delays, which a court of
chancery, with the appellate powers of the supreme court, in fact, as well as
law, would furnish him with, and thus the poor man, being plunged in the
bottomless pit of legal discussion, would drop his demand in despair.

In short, consolidation pervades the whole constitution. It begins with an
annunciation that such was the intention. The main pillars of the fabric
correspond with it: and the concluding paragraph is a confirmation of it. The
preamble begins with the words, "We the people of the United States," which is
the style of a compact between individuals entering into a state of society,
and not that of a confederation of states. The other features of consolidation,
we have before noticed.

Thus we have fully established the position, that the powers vested by this
constitution in Congress, will effect a consolidation of the states under one
government, which even the advocates of this constitution admit, could not be
done without the sacrifice of all liberty.

We dissent, thirdly, because, if it were practicable to govern so extensive a
territory as these United States include, on the plan of a consolidated
government, consistent with the principles of liberty and the happiness of the
people, yet the construction of this constitution is not calculated to attain
the object; for, independent of the nature of the case, it would of itself,
necessarily produce a despotism, and that not by the usual gradations, but with
the celerity that has hitherto only attended revolutions effected by the sword.

To establish the truth of this position, a cursory investigation of the
principles and form of this constitution will suffice.

The first consideration that this review suggests, is the omission of a bill
of rights, ascertaining and fundamentally establishing those inalienable and
personal rights of men, without the full, free, and secure enjoyment of which,
there can be no liberty, and over which it is not necessary for a good
government to have the control. The principal of which are, the rights of
conscience, personal liberty, by the clear and unequivocal establishment of the
writ of habeas corpus, jury trial in criminal and civil cases, by an impartial
jury of the vicinage or county, with the common law proceedings, for the safety
of the accused in criminal prosecutions, and the liberty of the press, that
scourge of tyrants, and the grand bulwark of every other liberty and privilege.
The stipulations heretofore made in favor of them, in the state constitutions,
are entirely superseded by this constitution.

The legislature of a free country should be so formed as to have a competent
knowledge of its constituents, and enjoy their confidence. To produce these
essential requisites, the representation ought to be fair, equal, and
sufficiently numerous to possess the same interests, feelings, opinions, and
views, which the people themselves would possess, were they all assembled; and
so numerous as to prevent bribery and undue influence; and so responsible to
the people by frequent and fair elections, as to prevent their neglecting or
sacrificing the views and interests of their constituents, to their own
pursuits.

We will now bring the legislature, under this constitution, to the test of the
foregoing principles, which will demonstrate, that it is deficient in every
essential quality of a just and safe representation.

The house of representatives is to consist of sixty-fi^e members; that is, one
for about every fifty thousand inhabitants, to be chosen every two years.
Thirty-three members will form a quorum for doing business, and seventeen of
these, being the majority, determine the sense of the house.

The senate, the other constituent branch of the legislature, consists of
twenty-six members, being two from each state, appointed by their legislatures
every six years; fourteen senators make a quorum; the majority of whom, eight,
determines the sense of that body: except in judging on impeachments, or in
making treaties, or in expelling a member, when two thirds of the senators
pre^ent, must concur.

The president is to have the control over the enacting of laws, so far as to
make the concurrence of two thirds of the representatives and senators present
necessary, if he should object to the laws.

Thus it appears, that the liberties, happiness, interests, and great concerns
of the whole United States, may be dependent upon the integrity, virtue,
wisdom, and knowledge of twenty-five or twenty-six men. How inadequate and
unsafe a representation! inadequate, because the sense and views of three or
four millions of people, diffused over so extensive a territory, comprising
such various climates, products, habits, interests, and opinions, cannot be
collected in so small a body; and besides, it is not a fair and equal
representation of the people, even in proportion to its number: for the
smallest state has as much weight in the senate as the largest; and from the
smallness of the number to be chosen for both branches of the legislature; and
from the mode of election and appointment, which is under the control of
Congress; and from the nature of the thing, men of the most elevated rank in
life, will alone be chosen. The other orders in society, such as farmers,
traders, and mechanics, who all ought to have a competent number of their best
informed then in the legislature, will be totally unrepresented.

The representation is unsafe, because in the exercise of such great powers and
trusts, it is so exposed to corruption and undue influence, by the gift of the
numerous places of honor and emolument, at the disposal of the executive; by
the arts and address of the great and designing, and by direct bribery.

The representation is moreover inadequate and unsafe, because of the long
terms for which it is appointed, and the mode of its appointment, by which
Congress may not only control the choice of the people, but may so manage as
to divest the people of this fundamental right, and become self-elected.

The number of members in the house of representatives may be increased to one
for every thirty thousand inhabitants. But when we consider, that this cannot
be done without the consent of the senate, who, from their share in the
legislative, in the executive, and judicial departments, and permanency of
appointment, will be the great efficient body in this government, and whose
weight and predominancy would be abridged by an increase of the
representatives, we are persuaded that this is a circumstance that cannot be
expected. On the contrary, the number of representatives will probably be
continued at sixty-five, although the population of the country may swell to
treble what it now is; unless a revolution should effect a change.

We have before noticed the judicial power, as it would effect a consolidation
of the states into one government. We will now examine it, as it would affect
the liberties and welfare of the people, supposing such a government were
practicable and proper.

The judicial power, under the proposed constitution, is founded on the well
known principles of the civil law, by which the judge determines both on law
and fact, and appeals are allowed from the inferior tribunals to the superior,
upon the whole question; so that facts, as well as law, would be re-examined,
and even new facts brought forward in the court of appeals; and to use the
words of a very eminent civilian, "The cause is many times another thing before
the court of appeals, than what it was at the time of the first sentence."

That this mode of proceeding is the one which must be adopted under this
constitution, is evident from the following circumstances: First, that the
trial by jury, which is the grand characteristic of the common law, is secured
by the constitution, only in criminal cases, Secondly, that the appeal both
from law and fact is expressly established, which is utterly inconsistent with
the principles of the common law, and trials by jury. The only mode in which an
appeal from law and fact can be established, is, by adopting the principles and
practice of the civil law; unless the United States should be drawn into the
absurdity of calling and swearing juries, merely for the purpose of
contradicting their verdicts, which would render juries contemptible, and worse
than useless. Thirdly, that the courts to be established, would decide on all
cases of law and equity, which is a well known characteristic of the civil law,
and these courts would have conusance not only of the laws of the United
States, and of treaties, and of cases affecting ambassadors, but of all cases
of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, which last are matters belonging
exclusively to the civil law, in every nation in Christendom.

Not to enlarge upon the loss of the invaluable right of trial by an unbiassed
jury, so dear to every friend of liberty, the monstrous expense and
inconveniences of the mode of proceed^^g to be adopted, are such, as will
prove intolerable to the people of this country. The lengthy proceedings of the
civil law courts in the chancery of England, and in the courts of Scotland and
France, are such, that few men of moderate fortunes can endure the expense of:
the poor man must, therefore, submit to the wealthy. Length of purse will too
often prevail against right and justice. For instance, we are told by the
learned judge Blackstone, that a question only on the property of an ox, of the
value of three guineas, originating under the civil law proceedings in
Scotland, after many interlocutory orders and sentences below, was carried at
length from the court of sessions, the highest court in that part of
Great Britain, by way of appeal, to the house of lords, where the question of
law and fact was finally determined. He adds, that no pique or spirit could, in
the court of king's bench, or common pleas, at Westminster, have given
countenance to such a cause for a tenth part of the time, nor cost a twentieth
part of the expense. Yet the costs, in the courts of king's bench, and common
pleas, in England, are infinitely greater than those which the people of this
country have ever experienced.

We abhor the idea of losing the transcendent privilege of trial by jury, with
the loss of which, it is remarked by the some learned author, that in Sweden
the liberties of the commons were extinguished by an aristocratic senate: and
that trial by jury, and the liberty of the people, went out together. At the
same time, we regret the intolerable delay, the enormous expenses, and infinite
vexation, to which the people of this country will be exposed, from the
voluminous proceedings of the courts of civil law, and especially from the
appellate jurisdiction, by means of which, a man may be drawn from the utmost
boundaries of this extensive country, to the seat of the supreme court of the
nation, to contend, perhaps, with a wealthy and powerful adversary. The
consequence of this establishment will be, an absolute confirmation of the
power of aristocratical influence in the courts of justice: for the common
people will not be able to contend or struggle against it.

Trial by jury, in criminal cases, may also be excluded, by declaring that the
libeller, for instance, shall be liable to an action of debt for a specified
sum, thus evading the common law prosecution by indictment and t^ial by jury.
And the common course of proceeding against a ship for breach of revenue laws,
by information (which will be classed among civil causes,) will, at the civil
law, be classed within the resort of a court where no jury intervenes. Besides,
the benefit of jury trial in cases of a criminal nature, which cannot be
evaded, will be rendered of little value, by calling the accused to answer far
from home, there being no provision that the trial be by a jury of the
neighborhood or country. Thus, an inhabitant of Pittsburgh, on a charge of a
crime committed on the banks of the Ohio, may be obliged to defend himself at
the side of the Delaware, and so vice versa.

To conclude this head: we observe, that the judges of the courts of Congress
would not be independent, as they are not debarred from holding other offices,
during the pleasure of the president and senate, and as they may derive their
support, in part, from fees, alterable by the legislature.

The next consideration that the constitution presents, is the undue and
dangerous mixture of the powers of government: the same body possessing
legislative, executive, and judicial powers. The senate is a constituent branch
of the legislature; it has judicial power in judging on impeachments, and in
this case unites in some measure the characters of judge and party, as all the
principal officers are appointed by the president-general, with the concurrence
of the senate, and therefore they derive their offices in part from the senate.
This may bins the judgments of the senators, and tend to screen great
delinquents f^^ punishment. And the senate has, moreover, various (...) great
executive powers, viz. in concurrence with the p^^sident-general, they form
treaties with foreign nations, that they may control and abrogate the
constitutions and laws of the several states. Indeed, there is no power,
privilege, or liberty of the state-governments, or of the people, but what may
be affected by virtue of this power: for all treaties made by them, are to be
the "supreme law of the land, any thing in the constitution or laws of any
state notwithstanding."

And this great power may be exercised by the president and ten senators, being
two thirds of fourteen, which is a quorum of that body. What an inducement
would this offer to the ministers of foreign powers to compass, by bribery,
such concessions as could not otherwise be obtained? It is the unvaried usage
of all free states, whenever treaties interfere with the positive laws of the
land, to make the intervention of the legislature necessary to give them
operation. This became necessary, and was afforded by the parliament of
Great Britain, in consequence o^ the late commercial treaty between that
kingdom and France. As the senate judges on impeachments, who is to try the
members of the senate, for the abuse of this power? And none of the great
appointments to office can be made without the consent of the senate.

Such various, extensive, and important powers, combined in one body of men,
are inconsistent with all freedom. The celebrated Montesquien tells us, that
"when the legislative and executive powers are united in the same person, or in
the same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty, because apprehensions
^ay arise, lest the same monarch or senate should enact tyrannical laws, or
execute them in a tyrannical manner."

Again, "there is no liberty, if the powers of judging be not separated from
the legislative and executive powers. Were it joined with the legislative, the
life and liberty of the subject would be exposed to arbitrary control: for the
judge would then be legislator. Were it joined to the executive power, the
judge might behave with all the violence of an oppressor. There would be an end
of every thing, were the same man, or the same body of the nobles, or of the
people, to exercise those three powers; that of enacting laws; that of
executing the public resolutions; and that of judging the crimes or differences
of individuals."

The president-general is dangerously connected with the senate. His
coincidence with the views of the ruling junto in that body, is made essential
to his weight and importance in the government, which will destroy all
independency and purity in the executive department; and having the power of
pardoning, without the concurrence of a council, he may screen from punishment
the most treasonable attempts that may be made on the liberties of the people,
when instigated by his coadjutors in the senate. Instead of this dangerous and
improper mixture of the executive with the legislative and judicial, the
supreme executive powers ought to have been placed in the president, with a
small independent council, made personally responsible for every appointment to
office, or other act, by having their opinions recorded; and that without the
concurrence of the majority of the quorum of this council, the president should
not be capable of taking any step.

We have before considered internal taxation, as it would affect the
destruction of the state governments, and produce one consolidated government.
We will now consider that subject as it affects the personal concerns of the
people.

The power of direct taxation applies to every individual: as Congress, under
this new government, is expressly vested with the authority of laying a
capitation or poll-tax upon every person, to any amount. This is a tax, that,
however oppressive in its nature, and unequal in its operation, is certain as
to its produce, and simple in its collection. It cannot be evaded, like the
objects of impost or excise; and will be paid, because all that a man has,
will he give for his head. This tax is so congenial to the nature of despotism,
that it has ever been a favorite under such governments. Some of those who
were in the late general convention, from this state, have long labored to
introduce a polltax among us.

The power of direct taxation will further apply to every individual: as
Congress may tax land, cattle, trades, occupations, etc. to any amount; and
every object of internal taxation is of that nature, that, however oppressive,
the people will have but this alternative, either to pay the tax, or let their
property be taken, for all resistance will be vain. The standing army and
select militia would enforce the collection.

For the moderate exercise of this power, there is no control left in the
state-governments, whole intervention is destroyed. No relief or redress of
grievances can be extended, as heretofore, by them. There is not even a
declaration of rights, to which the people may appeal for the vindication of
their wrongs, in the courts of justice. They must, therefore, implicitly obey
the most arbitrary laws: as the worst of them will be pursuant to the
principles and form of the constitution: and that strongest of all checks upon
the conduct of administration, responsibility to the people, will not exist in
this government. The permanency of the appointments of senators and
representatives, and the control the Congress have over their election, will
place them independent of the sentiments and resentment of the people: and the
administration having a greater interest in the government, than in the
community, there will be no consideration to restrain them from oppression and
tyranny. In the government of this state, under the old confederation, the
members of the legislature are taken from among the people: and their interests
and welfare are so inseparably connected with those of their constituents, that
they can derive no advantage from oppressive laws and taxes: for they would
suffer in common with their fellow citizens; would participate in the burdens
they impose on the community, as they must return to the common level after a
short period; and, notwithstanding every exertion of influence, every means of
corruption, a necessary rotation excludes them from permanency in the
legislature.

This large state is to have but ten members in that Congress, which is to have
the liberty, propert^, and dearest concerns of every individual in this vast
country, at absolute command: and even these ten persons, who are to be our
only guardians -- who are to supersede the legislature of Pennsylvania -- will
not be of the choice of the people, nor amenable to them. From the mode of
their election and appointment, they will consist of the lordly and high minded
-- of men who will have no congenial feelings with the people, but a perfect
indifference for, and contempt of them. They will consist of those harpies of
power, that prey upon the very vitals -- that riot on the miseries of the
community. But we will suppose, although in all pr^bability it may never be
realized in fact, that our deputies in Congress have the welfare of their
constituents at heart, and will exert themselves in their behalf, what security
could even this aff^rd? what relief could they extend to their oppressed
constituen^s? To attain this, the majority of the deputies of the twelve other
states in Congress must be alike well disposed -- must alike forego the sweets
of power -- and relinquish the pursuits of ambition, which, from the nature of
things, is not to be expected. If the people part with a responsible
repre^entation in the legislature, founded upon fair, certain, and frequent
elections, they have nothing left they can call their own. Miserable is the lot
of that people whose every concern depends on the will and pleasure of their
rulers. Our soldiers will become j^nissaries, and our officers of government
^ashaws; in short, the system of despotism will soon be completed.

From the foregoing inve^^igation, it appears, that the Congress, under this
constitution, will not possess the confidence of the people, which is an
essential requisite in a good government: for unless the laws command the
confidence and respect of the great body of the people, ^o as to induce them to
support them, when called on by the civil magistrate, they must be executed by
the and of a numerous standing army, which would be inconsistent wi^h every
idea of liberty: for the same force that may be employed to compel obedience to
(...) laws, might, and probably would, be used to wrest f^^m the people their
constitutional liberties. The f^^mers of this constitution appear to have been
aware of this great deficiency; to have been sensible that no dep^n^^nce could
be placed on the people for their support; but, on the contrary, that the
government must be e^^^uted by force. They have, therefore, made a provision
for this purpose, in a permanent standing army, and a militia that may be
subjected to as strict disciple and government.

A standing army, in the hands of a government placed so independent of the
people, may be made a fatal instrument to overturn the public liberties. It may
be employed to enforce the collection of the most oppressive taxes, and to
carry into execution the most arbitrary measures. An ambitious man, who may
have the army at his devotion, may step up to the throne, and seize upon
absolute power.

The absolute unqualified command that Congress have over the militia, may be
made instrumental to the destruction of all liberty, both public and private,
whether of a personal, civil, or religious nature.

Fir^^ the personal liberty of every man, probably from (...) to sixty years of
age, may be destroyed by the power Congress have in organizing and governing
the (...). As militia, they may be subjected to fines (...) ^^mount, levied in
a military manner; they may be (...) to corporal punishments of the most
disgra^^^^^ and humi^^^ing ^ind, and to death itself, by the (...) of a (...)
martial. To this our young m^n (...) be more im^^^iately subjected: as a select
militia composed of them, will best answer the purposes of government.

(...): the rights of conscience may be violated: (...) exemption of those
persons, who are con^^^ (...) bearing arms. There com^^^^ (...) of the
community in the (...) remarkable, because, even when the distresses of the
late war, and the evident disaff^ction of many citizens of that description,
inflamed our passions -- and when every person, who was obliged to risque his
own life must have been exasperated against such as on any account kept back
from the common danger -- yet even then when outrage and violence might have
been expected, the rights of conscience were h^ld sacred.

At this momentous crisis, the framers of our state constitution, made the most
express and decided declaration and stipulation in favor of the rights of
conscience: but now, when no necessity exists, those dearest rights of men are
left insecure.

Thirdly: the absolute command of Congress over the militia, may be destructive
of public liberty: for under the guidance of an arbitrary government, they may
be made the unwilling instruments of tyranny. The militia of Penns^lvani^ may
be marched to New England, or Virginia, to quell an insurrection occasioned by
the most galling oppression: and, aided by the standing army, they will, no
doubt, be successful in subduing their liberty and independency: but in so
doing, although the magna^imity of their minds will be extinguished, yet the
manner p^ssions of resentment and revenge will be increased and these, in turn
will be the ready and obedient instruments of despotism, to enslave the others;
and that with an irritated vengeance. Thus may the militia be made the
instruments of crushing the last efforts of expiring liberty, of riv^ting the
chains of despotism on their fellow citizens, and on one another. This power
can be exercised not only without violating the constitution, but in strict
conformity with it. It is calculated for this express purpose, and will
doubtless be executed accordingly.

As this government will not enjoy the confidence of the people, but be
executed by force, it will be a very expensive and burdensome government. The
standing army must be numerous, and, as a further support, it will be (...) of
this government to multiply officer^ in every department; judges, c^llectors,
tax-ga^h^r^rs, (...), and ^^e whole (...) of revenue officers, wi^^ ^^^arm over
the (...) devouring the hard earnings of the industrious; like the locusts of
old, impoverishing and desolating all before them.

We have not noticed the smaller, nor many of the considerable blemish^s, but
have confined our objections to the great and ess^ntial defects -- the main
pillars of the constitution: which we have shown to be i^consistent with the
liberty and happiness of the people, as its establishment will annihilate the
state governments, and produce one consolidated government, that will
eventually and speedily issue in the supremacy of despotism.

In this investigation, we have not confined our views to the interests or
welfare of this state, in preference to the others. We have overlooked all
local circumstances; we have considered this subject on the broad scale of the
general good; we have asserted the cause of the present and future ages; the
cause of liberty and mankind.

Nathaniel Breeding, John Smilie, Richard Baird, Adam Orth, John A. Hanna, John
Whitehill, John Har^^^, Robert Whitehill, John Reynolds, Jonathan Hoge,
Nicholas Lutz. John Ludwig, Abraham Lincoln, John Bishop, Joseph Heister,
Joseph Powell, James Martin, William Findley, John Baird, James Edgar, William
Todd,

Philadelphia, December 12, 1787.
A LETTER of his Excellency EDMUND RANDOLPH, Esquire on the FEDERAL CONSTITUTION.
Addressed -- To the Honorable the Speaker of the House of Delegates, Virginia.
Richmond, October 10, 1787. SIR,
THE constitution, which I enclosed to the general assembly in a late official
letter, appears without my signature. This circumstance, although trivial in
its own nature, has been re^dered rather important to myself at least, by being
misunderstood by some, and misrepresented by others. -- As I disdain to conceal
the rea^ons for witholding my subscription, I have always been, still am, and
ever shall be, ready to proclaim them to the world. To the legislature,
therefore, by whom I was deputed to the federal convention, I beg leave now to
address them: aff^cting no indifference to public opinion, but resolved not to
court it by an unmanly sacrifice of my own judgment.

As this explanation with involve a summary, but general review of our federal
situation, you will p^rdon me, I trust, although I should transgress the usual
bounds of a letter.

Before my departure for the convention, I believed, that the confederation was
not so emin^ntly defective, as it had been supposed. But after I had entered
into a free communication with those who were best informed of the condition
and interest of each state; after I had compared the intelligence derived from
them, with the properties which ought to characterise the government of our
union, I became persuaded, that the confederation was distitute of every
energy, which a constitution of the United States ought to possess.

For the objects proposed by its institution were, that it should be a shield
against foreign host^lity, and a firm resort against domestic commotion; that
it should cherish trade, and promote the prosperity of the states under its
care.

But these are not among the attributes of our present union. Severe experience
under the pressure of war -- a ruinous weakness manifested since the return of
peace; and the contemplation of those dangers, which darken the future
prospect, have condemned the hope of grandeur and of safety under the auspices
of the confederation.

In the exigencies of war, indeed, the history of its effects is but short; the
final ratification having been delayed until the beginning of the year 1781.
But however short, this period is distinguished by melancholy testimonies of
its inability to maintain in harmony, the social intercourse of the states, to
defend Congress against encroachments on their rights, and to obtain, by
requisitions, supplies to the federal treasury, or recruits to the federal
armies. I shall not attempt an enumeration of the particular instances; but
leave to your own remembrance and the records of Congress, the support of the
assertions.

In the season of peace too, not many years have elapsed; and yet each of them
has produced fatal examples of delinquency, and sometimes of pointed opposition
to federal duties. To the various remonstrances of Congress, I appeal, for a
gloomy, but unexaggerated narrative of the injuries which our faith, honor, and
happiness, have sustained by the failure of the states.

But these evils are past; and some may be led by an honest zeal to conclude
that they cannot be repeated. Yes sir, they will be repeated as long as the
confederation exists, and will bring with them other mischiefs, springing from
the same source, which cannot be yet foreseen in their full array of terror.

If we examine the constitution and laws of the several states, it is
immediately discovered that the law of nations is unprovided with sanctions in
many cases, which deeply affect public dignity and public justice. The letter
however of the confederation does not permit Congress to remedy these defects,
and such an authority, although evidently deducible from its spirit, cannot,
without violation of the second article, be assumed. Is it not a political
phoenomenon, that the head of the confederacy should be doomed to be plunged
into war, from its wretched impotency to check offenses against this law; and
sentenced to witness in unavaling anguish the infraction of their engagements
to foreign sovereigns?

And yet this is not the only grievous point of weakness. After a war shall be
inevitable, the requisitions of Congress for quotas of men or money, will again
prove unproductive, and fallacious. Two causes will always conspire to this
baneful consequence.

1. No* government can be stable, which hangs on human inclination alone,
unbiassed by the coercion; and 2, from the very connection between states bound
to proportionate contributions, jealousies and suspicions naturally arise,
which at least chill the ardour, if they do not excite the murmurs of the
whole. I do not forget indeed, that by one sudden impulse our part of the
American continent has been thrown into a military posture, and that in the
earlier annals of the war, our armies marched to the field on the mere
recommendations of Congress. But ought we to argue from a contest, thus
signalized by the magnitude of its stake, that as often as a flame shall be
hereafter kindled, the same enthusiasm will fill our legions, or renew them, as
they may be filled by losses?

If not, where shall we find protection? Impressions, like those, which prevent
a compliance with requisitions of regular forces, will deprive the American
republic of the services of militia. But let us suppose, that they are
attainable, and acknowledge, as I always shall, that they are the natural
support of a free government. When it is remembered, that in their absence
agriculture must languish; that they are not habituated to military exposures
and the rigor of military discipline, and that the necessity of holding in
readiness successive detachments, carries the expense far beyond that of
enlistments -- this resource ought to be adopted with caution.

As strongly too am I persuaded, that the requisitions for money will not be
more cordially received. For besides the distrust, which would prevail with
respect to them also; besides the opinion, entertained by each state of its own
liberality and unsatisfied demands against the United States, there is another
consideration, not less worthy of attention. The first rule for determining
each quota the value of all lands granted or surveyed, and of the buildings and
improvements thereon. It is no longer doubted, that an equitable, uniform mode
of estimating that value, is impracticable; and therefore twelve states have
substituted the number of inhabitants under certain limitations, as the
standard acc^^ding to which money is to be furnished. But under the subsisting
articles of the union, the assent of the thirteenth state is necessary, and has
not yet been given. This does of itself lessen the hope of procuring a reven^e
for federal uses; and the miscarriage of the impost almost rivets our
despondency.

Amidst these disappointments, it would afford some consolation, if when
rebellion shall threaten any state, an ultimate asylum could be found under the
wing of Congress. But it is at least equivocal whether they can intrude forces
into a state, rent asunder by civil discord, even with the purest solicitude
for our federal welfare, and on the most urgent entreaties of the state itself.
Nay the very allowance of this power would be pageantry alone, from the want of
money and of men.

To these defects of congressional power, the history of man has subjoined
others, not less alarming. I earnestly pray, that the recollection of common
sufferings, which terminated in common glory, may check the sallies of
violence, and perpetuate mutual friendship between the states. But I cannot
presume, that we are superior to those unsocial passions, which under like
circumstances have infested more ancient nations. I cannot presume, that
through all time, in the daily mixture of American citizens with each other, in
the conflicts for commercial advantages, in the discontents which the
neighborhood of territory has been seen to engender in other quarters of the
globe, and in the efforts of faction and intrigue -- thirteen distinct
communities under no effective superintending control (as the United States
confessedly now are, notwithstanding the bold terms of the confederation) will
avoid a hatred to each other deep and deadly.

In the prosecution of this enquiry, we shall find the general prosperity to
decline under a system thus unnerved. No sooner is the merchant prepared for
foreign ports, with the treasures which this new world kindly offers to his
acceptance, than it is announced to him, that they are shut against American
shipping, or opened under oppressive regulations. He urges Congress to a
counter-policy, and is answered only by a condolance on the general misfortune.
He is immediately struck with the conviction, that until exclusion shall be
opposed to exclusion, and restriction to restriction, the American flag will be
disgraced. For who can conceive, that thirteen legislatures, viewing commerce
under different regulations, and fancying themselves discharged from every
obligation to concede the smallest of their commercial advantages for the
benefit of the whole, will be wrought into a concert of action and defiance of
every prejudice? Nor is this all: Let the great improvements be recounted,
which have enriched and illustrated Europe: Let it be noted, how few those are,
which will be absolutely denied to the United States, comprehending within
their boundaries the choicest blessings of climate, soil, and navigable waters;
then let the most sanguine patriot banish if he can, the mortifying belief,
that all these must sleep, until they shall be roused by the vigor of a
national government.

I have not exemplified the preceding remarks by minute details; because they
are evidently fortified by truth, and the consciousness of the United States of
America. I shall, therefore, no longer deplore the unfitness of the
confederation to secure our peace; but procced, with a truly unaffected
distrust of my own opinions, to examine what order of powers the government of
the United States ought to enjoy? How they ought to be defended against
encroachments? Whether they can be interwoven in the confederation, without an
alteration of its very essence, or must be lodged in new hands? Showing at the
same time the convulsions, which seem to await us, from a dissolution of the
union or partial confederacies.

To mark the kind and degree of authority, which ought to be confided to the
government of the United States, is no more than to reverse the description
which I have already given, of the defects of the confederation.

From thence it will follow, that the operations of peace and war will be
clogged without regular advances of money, and ^^^t these will be slow indeed,
if dependent on supplication alone. For what better name do requisitions
deserve, which may be evaded or opposed without the fear of coercion? But
although coercion is an indispensable ingredient, it ought not to be directed
against a state, as a state; it being impossible to attempt it except by
blockading the trade of the delinquent, or carrying war into its bowels. Even
if these violent schemes were eligible, in other respects, both of them might
perhaps be defeated by the scantiness of the public chest; would be tardy in
their complete effect, as the expense of the land and naval equipments must be
first reimbursed; and might drive the proscribed state into the desperate
resolve of inviting foreign alliances. Against each of them lie separate
unconquerable objections. A blockade is not equally applicable to all the
states, they being differently circumstanced in commerce and in ports; nay, an
excommunication form the privilege of the union would be vain, because every
regulation or prohibition may be easily eluded under the rights of American
citizenship, or of foreign nations. But how shall we speak of the intrusion of
troops? Shall we arm citizens against citizens, and habituate them to shed
kindred blood? Shall we risque the inflicting of wounds which will generate a
rancour never to be subdued? Would there be no room to fear, that an army
accustomed to fight, for the establishment of authority, would salute an
Emperor of their own? Let us not bring these things into jeopardy. Let us
rather substitute the same process by which individuals are compelled to
contribute to the government of their own states. Instead of making
requisitions to the legislatures it would appear more proper, that taxes should
be imposed by the federal head, under due modifications and guards; that the
collectors should demand from the citizens their respective quotas, and be
supported as in the collection of ordinary taxes.

It follows too, that, as the general government will be responsible to foreign
nations, it ought to be able to annul any offensive measure, or enforce any
public right. Perhaps among the topics on which they may be aggrieved or
complain, the commercial intercourse, and the manner in which contracts are
discharged, may constitute the principal articles of clamor.

It follows too, that the general government ought to be the supreme arbiter,
for adjusting every contention among the states. In all their connections,
therefore, with each other, and particularly in commerce, which will probably
create the greatest discord, it ought to hold the reins.

It follows too, that the general government ought to protect each state
against domestic as well as external violence.

And lastly, it follows, that through the general government alone, can we ever
assume the rank to which we are entitled by our resources and situation.

Should the people of America surrender these powers, they can be paramount to
the constitutions and ordinary acts of legislation, only by being delegated by
them. I do not pretend to affirm, but I venture to believe, that if the
confederation had been solemnly questioned in opposition to our constitution,
or even to one of our laws, posterior to it, it must have given way. For never
did it obtain a higher ratification, than a resolution of assembly in the daily
form.

This will be one security against encroachment. But another not less effectual
is, to exclude the individual states from any agency in the national
government, as far as it may be safe, and their interposition may not be
absolutely necessary.

But now, Sir, permit me to declare, that in my humble judgment, the powers by
which alone the blessings of a general government can be accomplished, cannot
be interwoven in the confederation, without a change in its very essence, or,
in other words, that the confederation must be thrown aside. This is almost
demonstrable, from the inefficacy of requisitions, and from the necessity of
converting them into acts of authority. My suffrage, as a citizen, is also for
additional powers. But to whom shall we commit these acts of authority, these
additional powers? To Congress? When I formerly lamented the defects in the
jurisdiction of Congress, I had no view to indicate any other opinion, than
that the federal head ought not to be so circumscribed. For free as I am at all
times to profess my reverence for that body, and the individuals who compose
it, I am yet equally free to make known my aversion to repose such a trust in a
tribunal so constituted. My objections are not the visions of theory, but the
result of my own observations in America, and of the experience of others
abroad. 1. The legislative and executive are concentred in the same persons.
This, where real power exists, must eventuate in tyranny. 2. The representation
of the states bears no proportion to their importance. This is an unreasonable
subjection of the will of the majority to that of the minority. 3. The mode of
election, and the liability ^f being recalled, may too often render the
delegates rather partisans of their own states than representatives of the
Union. 4. Cabal and intrigue must consequently gain an ascendency in a course
of years. 5. A single house of legislation, will sometimes be precipitate,
perhaps passionate. 6. As long as seven states are required for the smallest,
and nine for the greatest votes, may not so ^eign influence at some future day
insinuate itself, so as to interrupt every active exertion? 7. To crown the
whole, it is scarce within the verge of possibility, that so numerous an
assembly should acquire that secrecy, dispatch, and vigor, which ar^ the test
of excellence in the executive department.

My inference from these facts and principles, is, that the new powers must be
deposited in a new body, growing out of a consolidation of the union, as far as
the circumstances of the states will allow. Perhaps, however, some may mediate
its dissolution, and others, partial confederacies.

The first is an idea awful indeed, and irreconcilable with a very early, and
hitherto uniform conviction, that without union, we must be undone. For, before
the voice of war was heard, the pulse of the then colonies was tried, and sound
to beat in unison. The unremitted labor of our enemies was to divide, and the
policy of every Congress, to bind us together. But in no example was this truth
more clearly displayed, than in the prudence with which independence was
unfolded to the sight, and in the forbearance to declare it, until America
almost unanimously called for it. After we had thus launched into troubles,
never before explored, and in the hour of heavy distress, the remembrance of
our social strength, not only forbade despair, but drew from Congress the most
illustrious repetition of their settled purpose to despise all terms, short of
independence.

Behold, then, how successful and glorious we have been, while we acted in
fraternal concord. But let us discard the illusion, that by this success, and
this glory, the crest of danger has irrecoverably fallen. Our governments are
yet too youthful to have acquired stability from habit. Our very quiet depends
upon the duration of the union. Among the upright and intelligent, few can read
without emotion the future ^ate of the states, if severed from each other. Then
shall we learn the full weight of foreign intrigue. Then shall we hear of
partitions of our country. If a prince, inflamed by the lust of conquest,
should use one state as the instrument of enslaving others -- if every state is
to be wearied by perpetual alarms, and compelled to maintain large military
establishments -- if all questions are to be decided by an appeal to arms,
where a difference of opinion cannot be removed by negotiation -- in a word, if
all the direful misfortunes which haunt the peace of rival nations, are to
triumph over the land, for what have we to contend? why have we exhausted our
wealth? why have we ^^^ely betrayed the heroic martyrs of the federal cause?

But dreadful as the total dissolution of the union is to my mind, I entertain
no less horror at the thought of partial confederacies. I have not the least
ground for supposing, that an overture of this kind would be listened to by a
single state, and the presumption is, that the politics of the greater part of
the states, flow from the warmest attachment to an union of the whole. If,
however, a lesser confederacy could be obtained by Virginia, let me conjure my
countrymen, well to weigh the probable consequences, before they attempt to
form it.

On such an event, the strength of the union would be divided in two, or
perhaps three parts. Has it so increased since the war as to be divisible --
and yet remain sufficient for our happiness?

The utmost limit of any partial confederacy, which Virginia could expect to
form, would comprehend the three southern states, and her nearnest (...)
neighbor. But they, like ourselves, are dimin^^^^ in their real force, by the
mixture of an unhappy species of population.

Again may I ask, whether the oppul^nce of the United States has been augmented
since the wa^? This is answered in the negative, by a load of debt, and the
declension of trade.

At all times must a southern confederacy support ships of war, and soldiery?
As soon would a navy move from the forest, and an army spring from the earth,
as such a confederacy, indebted, impoverished, in its commerce, and destitute
of men, could, for some years at least, provide an ample defense for itself.

Let it not be forgotten, that nations, which can enforce their rights, have
large claims against the United States, and that the creditor may insist on
payment from any of them. Which of them would probably be the victim? The most
productive, and the most exposed. When vexest by reprisals or war, the southern
states will sue for alliance on this continent or beyond sea. If for the
former, the necessity of an union of the whole is decided; if for the latter,
America will, I fear, re-act the scenes of confusion and bloodshed, exhibited
among most of those nations, which have, too late, repented the folly of
relying on auxiliaries.

Two or more confederacies cannot but be competitors for power. The ancient
friendship between the citizens of America, being thus cut off, bitterness and
hostility will succeed in its place; in order to prepare against surrounding
danger, we shall be compelled to vest some where or other power approaching
near to military government.

The annals of the world have abounded so much with instances of a divided
people being a prey to foreign influence, that I shall not restrain my
apprehensions of it, should our union be torn asunder. The opportunity of
insinuating it, will be multiplied in proportion to the parts into which we may
be broken.

In short, Sir, I am fatigued with summoning up to my imagination the miseries
which will harrass the United States, if torn from each other, and which will
not end until they are superseded by fresh mischiefs under the yoke of a
tyrant.

I come, therefore, to the last, and perhaps only refuge in our difficulties, a
consolidation of the union, as far as circumstances will permit. To fulfill this
desirable object, the constitution was framed by the federal convention. A
quorum of eleven states, and the only member from a twelfth have subscribed it;
Mr Mason of Virginia, Mr. Gerry of Massachusetts, and myself having refused to
subscribe.

Why I refused, will, I hope, be solved to the satisfaction of those who know
me, by saying, that a sense of duty commanded me thus to act. It commanded me,
Sir for believe me, that no event of my life ever occupied more of my
reflection. To subscribe, seemed to offer no inconsiderable gratification,
since it would have presented me to the world as a fellow laborer with the
learned and zealous statesmen of America.

But it was far more interesting to my feelings, that I was about to differ
from three of my colleagues, one of whom is to the honor of the country which
he has saved, embossomed in their affections, and can receive no praise from
the highest desire of language; the other two of whom have been long e^^o^led
among the wisest and best lovers of the commonwealth; and the unshaken and
intimate friendship of all of whom I have ever prized, and still do prize, ^s
among the happiest of all acquisitions. I was no str^nger to the reigning
partiality for the members who composed the convention, and had not the
smallest doubt, that from this cause, and from the ardor for a reform of
government, the first applauses at least would be loud and profuse. I
suspected, too, that there was something in the human breast which for a time
would be apt to construe a temper^teress in politics, into an enmity to the
union. Nay, I (...) foresaw, that in the dissentions of parti^s a middle line
would probably be interpreted into a want of ent^rpri^^ and decision. But these
considerations, how seducing s^^ver, were feeble opponents to the suggestions
of my conscience. I was sent to exercise my judgment, and to exercise it was my
fixed determination; being instructed by even an imperfect acquaintance with
mankind, that self-approbation is the only true reward which a political career
can bestow, and that popularity would have been but another name for perfidy,
if to secure it, I had given up the freedom of thinking for myself.

It would have been a peculiar pleasure to me to have ascertained before I left
Virginia, the temper and genius of my fellow citizens, considered relatively to
a government, so substantially differing from the confederation as that which
is now submitted. But this was, for many obvious reasons, impossible; and I was
thereby deprived of what I thought the necessary guides.

I saw, however, that the confederation was tottering from its own weakness,
and that the sitting of the convention was a signal of its total insufficiency.
I was therefore ready to assent to a scheme of government, which was proposed,
and which went beyond the limits of the confederation, believing, that without
being too extensive it would h^ve preserved our tranquillity, until that temper
and that genius should be collected.

But when the plan which is now before the general assembly, was on its passage
through the convention, I moved, that the state conventions should be at
liberty to amend, and that a second general convention should be holden, to
discuss the amendments, which should be suggested by them. This motion was in
some measure justified by the manner in which the confederation was forwarded
originally, by congress to the state legislatures, in many of which amendments
were proposed, and those amendments were afterward examined in Congress. Such
a motion was doubly expedient here as the delegation of so much more power was
sought for. But it was negatived. I then expressed my unwillingness to sign. My
reasons were the following:

1. It is said in the resolutions which accompany the constitution, that it is
to be submitted to a convention of delegates chosen in each state by the people
thereof, for their assent and ratification. The meaning of these terms is
allowed universally to be, that the convention must either adopt the
constitution in the whole, or reject it in the whole, and is positively
forbidden to amend. If therefore, I had signed, I should have felt myself bound
to be silent as to amendments, and to endeavor to support the constitution
without the correction of a letter. With this consequence before my eyes, and
with a determination to attempt an amendment, I was taught, by a regard for
consistency, not to sign.

2. My opinion always was, and still is, that every citizen of America, let the
crisis be what it may, ought to have a full opportunity to propose, through his
representatives, any amendment which, in his apprehension, tends to the public
welfare. By signing, I should have contradicted this sentiment.

3. A constitution ought to have the hearts of the people on its side. But if
at a future day it should be burdensome after having been adopted in the
whole, and they should insinuate that it was in some measure forced upon them,
by being confined to the single alternative of taking or rejecting it
altogether, under my impressions, and with my opinions, I should not be able to
justify myself had I signed.

4. I was always satisfied, as I have now experienced, that this great subject
would be placed in new lights and attitudes by the criticism of the world, and
that no man can assure himself how a constitution will work for a course of
years, until at least he shall have heard the observations of the people at
large. I also fear more from inaccuracies in a co^stitution, than from gross
errors in any other composition; because our dearest interests are to be
regulated by it; and power, if loosely given, especially where it will be
interpreted with great latitude, may bring sorrow in its execution. Had I
signed with these ideas, I should have virtually shut my ears against the
information which I ardently desired.

5. I was afraid, that if the constitution was to be submitted to the people,
to be wholly adopted or wholly rejected by them, they would not only reject it,
but bid a lasting farwell to the union. This formidable event I wished to avert,
by keeping myself free to propose amendmen^s, and thus, if possible, to remove
the obstacles to an effectual government. But it will be asked, whether all
these arguments were not well weighed in convention. They were, Sir, with great
candor. Nay, when I called to mind the respectability of those, with whom I was
associated, I almost lost confidence in these principles. On other occasions, I
should cheerfully have yielded to a majority; on this, the sat of thousands,
yet unborn, enjoined me not to yield until I was convinced.

Again, may I be asked, why the mode pointed out in the constitution for its
amendment, may not be a sufficient security against its imperfections, without
now arresting it in its progress? My answers are, 1. That it is better to
amend, while we have the constitution in our power, while the passions of
designing men are not yet enlifted, and while a bare majority of the states may
amend, than to wait for the uncertain assent of three fourths of the states. 2.
That a bad feature in government, becomes more and more fixed every day. 3.
That frequent changes ^f a constitution, even if practicable, ought not to be
wished, but avoided as much as possible. And 4 That in the present case, it may
be questionable, whether, after the particular advantages of its operation
shall be discerned, three fourths of the states can be induced to amend.

I confess, that it is no easy task, to devise a scheme which shall be suitable
to the views of all. Many expedients have occured to me, but none of them
appear less exceptionable than this; that if our convention should choose to
amend, another federal convention be recommended: that in that federal
convention the amendments proposed by this or any other state be discussed; and
it incorporated in the constitution or rejected, or if a proper number of the
other states should be unwilling to accede to a second convention, the
constitution be again laid before the same state conventions, which shall again
assemble on the summons of the executives, and it shall be either wholly
adopted, or wholly rejected, without a further power of amendment. I count such
a delay as nothing, in comparison with so grand an object; especially too as
the privilege of amending must terminate after the use of it once.

I should now conclude this letter, which is already too long, were it not
incumbent on me, from having contended for amendments, to set forth the
particulars, which I conceive to require correction. I undertake this with
reluctance: because it is remote from my intentions to catch the prejudices or
prepossessions of any man. But as I mean only to manifest that I have not been
actuated by caprice, and now to explain every objection at full length would be
an immense labor, I shall content myself with enumerating certain heads, in
which the constitution is most repugnant to my wishes.

The two first points are the equality of suffrage in the senate, and the
submission of commerce to a mere majority in the legislature, with no other
check than the revision of the president. I conjecture that neither of these
things can be corrected; and particularly the former, without which we must
have risen perhaps in disorder.

But I am sanguine in hoping that in every other justly obnoxious cause,
Virginia will be seconded by a majority of the states. I hope that she will be
seconded, 1. In causing all ambiguities of expression to be precisely
explained. 2. In rendering the president ineligible after a given number of
years. 3. In taking from him the power of nominating to the judiciary officers,
or of filling up vacancies which there may happen during the recess of the
senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next
sessions. 4. In taking from him the power of pardoning for treason at least
before conviction. 5. In drawing a line between the powers of Congress and
individual states; and in defining the former, so as to leave no clashing of
jurisdictions nor dangerous disputes; and to prevent the one from being
swallowed up by the other, under cover of general words, and implication. 6. In
abridging the power of the senate to make treaties supreme laws of the land. 8.
In incapacitating the Congress to determine their own salaries. And 9. In
limiting and defining the judicial power.

The proper remedy must be consigned to the wisdom of the convention; and the
final step which Virginia shall pursue, if her overtures shall be discarded,
must also rest with them.

You will excuse me, Sir, for having been thus tedious. My feelings and duty
demanded this exposition; for through no other channel could I rescue my
omission to sign from misrepresentation, and no more effectual way could I
exhibit to the general assembly an unreserved history of my conduct.

I have the honor, Sir, to be with great respect, your most obedient servant,
EDMUND RANDOLPH.

SENTINEL. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA. NUMBER I.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
PERMIT one of yourselves to put you in mind of certain liberties and
privileges secured to you by the constitution of this commonwealth, and beg
your serious attention to his uninterested opinion upon the plan of federal
government submitted to your consideration, before you surrender these great
and valuable privileges up for ever. Your present frame of government secures
to you a right to hold yourselves, houses, papers, and possessions free from
search and seizure, and therefore warrants granted without oaths or
affirmations first made, affording sufficient foundation for them, whereby any
officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search your houses, or
seize your persons or property, not particularly described in such warrant,
shall not be granted. Your constitution further provides, "in controversies
respecting property, and in suits between man and man, the parties have a right
to trial by jury, which ought to be held sacred." It also provides and
declares, that the people have a right of FREEDOM OF SPEECH and of WRITING and
PUBLISHING their sentiments, therefore the FREEDOM OF THE PRESS OUGHT NOT TO BE
RESTRAINED." The constitution of Pennsylvania is yet in existence, as yet you
have the right of freedom of speech and of publishing your sentiments. How long
these rights will appertain to you, you yourselves are called upon to say,
whether your houses shall continue to be your castles; whether your papers,
your persons, and your property, are to be held sacred and free from general
warrants, you are now to determine, whether the trial by jury is to continue as
your birthright, the freemen of Pennsylvania, nay, of all America, are now
called upon to declare.

Without presuming upon my own judgment, I cannot think it an unwarrantable
presumption to offer my private opinion and call upon others for theirs; and if
I use my p^^^^^ the boldness of a freeman, it is because I know tha^ (...)
^^^ty of the press yet remains unviolated and juries you^ ^udge^.

The late convention have submitted to your consideration a plan of a new
federal government. The subject is highly interesting to your future welfare.
Whether it be calculated to promote the great ends of civil society, viz. the
happiness and prosperity of the community; it behooves you well to consider,
uninfluenced by the authority of names. Instead of that frenzy of enthusiasm,
that has actuated the citizens of Pennsylvania, in their approbation of the
proposed plan, before it was possible that it could be the result of a rational
investigation into its principles: it ought to be dispassionately and
deliberately examined, and its own intrinsic merit, the only criterion of your
patronage. If ever free and unbiassed discussion was proper or necessary, it is
on such an occasion. All the blessings of liberty and the dearest privileges of
freemen, are now at stake and dependent on your present conduct. Those who are
competent to the task of developing the principles of governmnnt, ought to be
encouraged to come forward, and thereby the better enable the people to make a
proper judgment; for the science of government is so abstrute, that few are
able to judge for themselves, without such assistance the people are too apt to
yield an implicit assent to the opinions of those characters, whose abilities
are held in the highest esteem, and to those in whose integrity and patriotism
they can confide; not considering that the love of domination is generally in
proportion to talents, abilities, and superior acquirements; and that the men
of the greatest purity of intention may be made instruments of despotism in the
hands of the artful and designing. If it were not for the stability and
attachment which time and habit gives to forms of government, it would be in
the power of the enlightened and aspiring few, if they should combine, at any
time to destroy the best establishments, and even make the people the
instruments of their own subjugation.

The late revolution having effaced in a great measure all former habits, and
the present institutions are so recent, that there exists not that great
reluctance to innovation, so remarkable in old communities, which accords with
reason, for the most comprehensive mind cannot forsee the full operation of
material changes on civil polity; it is the genius of the common law to resist
innovation.

The wealthy and ambitious, who in every community think they have a right to
lord it over their fellow creatures, have availed themselves, very
successfully, of this favorable disposition; for the people thus unsettled in
their sentiments, have been prepared to accede to any extreme of government;
all the distresses and difficulties they experience, preceding from various
causes, have been ascribed to the impotency of the present confederation, and
thence they have been led to expect full relief from the adoption of the
proposed system of government; and in the other event, immediate ruin an
annihilation as a nation. These characters flatter themselves that they have
lulled all distrust and jealousy of their new plan, by gaining the concurrence
of the two men in whom America has the highest confidence, and now triumphantly
exult in the completion of their long meditated schemes of power and
aggrandisement. I would be very far from insinuating, that the two illustrious
personages alluded to, have not the welfare of their country at heart; but that
the unsuspecting goodness and zeal of the one has been imposed on in a subject
of which he must be necessarily inexperienced, from his other arduous
engagements; and that the weakness and indecision attendant on old age, has
been practiced on in the other.

I am fearful that the principles of government inculcated in Mr. Adams's
treatise, and enforced in the numerous essays and paragraphs in the newspapers,
have misled some well designing members of the late convention. But it will
appear in the sequel, that the construction of the proposed plan of government
is infinitely more extravagant.

I have been anxiously expecting that some enlightened patriot would, ere this,
have taken up the pen to expose the sutility, and counteract the baneful
tendency of such principles. Mr. Adams's fine qua non of a good government is
three balancing powers, whose repelling qualities are to produce an equilibrium
of interests, and thereby promote the happiness of the whole community. He
asserts, that the administrators of every government, will ever be actuated by
views of private interest and ambition, to the prejudice of the public good;
that therefore the only effectual method to secure the rights of the people and
promote their welfare, is to create an opposition of interests between the
members of two distinct bodies, in the exercise of the powers of government,
and balanced by those of a third. This hypothesis supposes human wisdom
competent to the task of instituting three coequal orders in government, and a
corresponding weight in the community to enable them respectively to exercise
their several parts, and whose views and interests should be so distinct as to
prevent a coalition of any two of them for the destruction of the third. Mr.
Adams, although he has traced the constitution of every form of government that
ever existed, as far as history affords materials, has not been able to adduce
a single instance of such a government; he indeed says, that the British
constitution is such in theory, but this is rather a confirmation that his
principles are chimerical and not to be reduced to practice. If such an
organization of power were practicable, how long would it continue? not a day,
for there is so great a disparity in the talents, wisdom, and industry of
mankind, that the scale would presently preponderate to one or the other body,
and with every accession of power the means of further increase would be
greatly extended. The state of society in England is much more favorable to
such a scheme of government than that of America. There they have a powerful
hereditary nobility, and real distinctions of rank and interests; but even
there, for want of that perfect equality of power and distinction of interests,
in the three orders of government, they exist but in name; the only operative
and efficient check, upon the conduct of administration, is the sense of the
people at large.

Suppose a government could be formed and supported on such principles, would
it answer the great purposes of civil society? if the administrators of every
government are actuated by views of private interests and ambition, how is the
welfare and happiness of the community to be the result of such jarring adverse
interests

Therefore, as different orders in government will not produce the good of the
whole, we must recur to other principles. I believe it will be found that the
form of government, which holds those entrusted with power, in the greatest
responsibility to their constituents, the best calculated for freemen. A
republican or free government, can only exist where the body of the people are
virtuous, and where property is equally divided; in such a government the
people are the sovereign, and their sense or opinion is the criterion of every
public measure; for when this ceases to be the case, the nature of the
government is changed, and an aristocracy, monarchy, or despotism will rise on
its ruin. The highest responsibility is to be attained, in a simple struction
of government; for the great body of the people never steadily attend to the
operations of government, and for want of due information are liable to be
imposed on. -- If you complicate the plan by various orders, the people will be
perplexed and divided in their sentiments about the source of abuses or
misconduct: some will impute it to the senate, others to the house of
representatives, and so on, that the interposition of the people may be
rendered imperfect or perhaps wholly abortive. But if, imitating the
constitution of Pennsylvania, you vest all the legislative power in one body of
men (separating the executive and judicial) elected for a short period, and
necessarily excluded by rotation from permanency, and guarded from precipitancy
and surprise by delays imposed on its proceedings, you will create the most
perfect responsibility, for then, whenever the people feel a grievance, they
cannot mistake the authors, and will apply the remedy with certainty and
effect, discardin^ them at the next election. This tie of responsibility w^^^
obviate all the dangers apprehended from a single legislature, and will the
best secure the rights of the pe^^le.

Having premised thus much, I shall now proceed to the examination of the
proposed plan of government; and I trust shall make it appear to the meanest
capacity, that it has none of the essential requisites of a free government;
that it is neither founded on those ballancing restraining powers, recommended
by Mr. Adams and attempted in the British constitution, or possessed of that
responsibility to its constituents, which in my opinion, is the only effectual
security for the liberties and happiness of the people; but on the contrary,
that it is a (...) daring attempt to establish a despotic aristocracy among
freem^n, that the world has ever witnessed.

I (...) previously consider the extent of the powers intended ^^ be ve^ted in
Congress, before I examine the construction of the general government.

It will not be controverted that the legislative is the highest delegated
power in government, and that all others are subordinate to i^. The celebrated
Montesquieu (...) it a^ a maxim, that legislation necessarily follow, the power
of taxation. By section 8, of the first (...) of the proposed plan of
government, "the Congress are to have power to lay and collect taxes, duties,
imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and provide for the common defense and
general welfare of the United States; but all duties, imposts, and excises,
shall be uniform throughout the United States." Now what can be more
comprehensive than these words; not content by other sections of this plan, to
grant all the great executive powers of a confederation, and a standing army in
time of peace, that grand engine of oppression, and moreover the absolute
control over the commerce of the United States, and all external objects of
revenue, such as unlimited imposts upon imports, etc. they are to be vested
with every species of internal taxation: whatever taxes, duties, and excises
that they may deem requisite for the general welfare* may be imposed on the
citizens of these states, levied by the officer^ of Congress, distributed
through every district in America, and the collection would be enforced by the
standing army, however grievous or improper they may be. The Congress may
construe every purpose for which the state legislatures now lay taxes, to be
for the general welfare, and thereby seize upon every object of revenue.

The judicial power, by 1st section of article 3d, shall extend to all cases,
in law, and equity, arising under this constitution, the laws of the United
States, and treaties made, or which shall be made under their authority, and to
all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; to all
cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction, to controversies to which the
United States shall be a party, to controversies between two or more states,
between a state, and citizens of another state, between citizens of different
states, between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of
different states, and between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign
states, citizens or subjects.

The judicial power to be vested in one supreme court, and in such inferior
courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.

The objects of jurisdiction recited above, are so numerous, and the shades of
distinction between civil causes are oftentimes so slight, that it is more than
probable that the state judicatories would be wholly superceded; for in
contests about jurisdiction, the federal court, as the most powerful, would
ever prevail. Every person acquainted with the history of the courts in
England, knows by what ingenious sophisms they have, at different periods,
extended the sphere of their jurisdiction over objects out of the line of their
institution, and contrary to their very nature, courts of a criminal
jurisdiction obtaining cognizance in civil causes.

To put the omnipotency of Congress over the state government and judicatories
out of all doubt, the 6th article ordains, that "this constitution and the laws
of the United States, which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all
treaties made or which shall be made under the authority of the United States,
shall be the supreme law of the land, and the judges in every state shall be
bound thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the
contrary notwithstanding."

By these sections, the all-prevailing power of taxation, and such extensive
legislative and judicial powers are vested in the general government, as must
in their operation, necessarily absorb the state legislatures and judicatories;
and that such was in the contemplation of the framers of it, will appear from
the provision made for such event, in another part of it, but that fearful of
alarming the people by so great an innovation, they have suffered the forms of
the separate governments to remain, as a blind. By section 4th of the 1st art.
"the times, places, and manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof;
but the Congress may at any time, by law, make or alter such regulations,
except as to the place of choosing senators." -- The plain construction of
which is, that when the state legislatures drop out of sight, from the
necessary operation of this government, the Congress are to provide for the
election and appointment of representatives and senators.

If the foregoing be a just comment -- if the United States are to be melted
down into one empire, it becomes you to consider whether such a government,
however constructed, would be eligible in so extended a territory; and whether
it would be practicable, consistent with freedom? It is the opinion of the
greatest writers, that a very extensive country cannot be governed on
democratical principles, on any other plan, than a confederation of a number of
small republics, possessing all the powers of internal government, but united
in the management of their foreign and general concerns.

It would not be difficult to prove, that any thing short of despotism, could
not bind so great a country under one government; and that whatever plan you
might, at the first setting out, establish, it would issue in a despotism.

If one general government could be instituted, and maintained on principles of
freedom, it would not be so competent to attend to the various local concerns
and wants of every particular district; as well as the peculiar governments,
who are near the scene, and possessed of superior means of information:
besides, if the business of the whole union is to be managed by one government,
there would not be time. Do we not already see, that the inhabitants in a
number of larger states, who are remote from the seat of government, are loudly
complaining of the inconveniences and disadvantages they are subjected to, on
this account, and that, to enjoy the comforts of local government, they are
separating into smaller divisions.

Having taken a review of the powers, I shall now examine the construction of
the proposed general government.

Art. 1, sect. 1. "All legislative powers herein granted, shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States, which shall consist of a senate and house of
representatives." By an other section, the president (the principal executive
officer) has a conditional control over their proceedings.

Sect. 2. "The house of representatives shall be composed of members chosen
every second year, by the people of the several states. The number of
representatives shall not exceed one for every 30,000 inhabitants.

The senate, the other constituent branch of the legislature, is formed by the
legislature of each state, appointing two senators, for the term of six years.

The executive power, by Art. 2, sect. 1, is to be vested in a president of the
United States of America, elected for four years: section 2, gives him "power,
by and with the consent of the senate, to make treaties, provided two thirds of
the senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and by and with the advice
and consent of the senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other public ministers
and consuls, judges of the supreme court, and all other officers of the United
States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which
shall be established by law, etc. And by another section he has the absolute
power of granting reprieves and pardons for treason, and all other high crimes
and misdemeanors, except in cases of impeachment.

The foregoing is the outlines of the plan.

Thus we see the house of representatives are, on the part of the people, to
balance the senate, who I suppose will be composed of the better sort, the well
born, etc. The number of the representatives (being only one for every 30,000)
appears to be too few, either to communicate the requisite information, of the
wants, local circumstances and sentiments of so extensive an empire, or to
prevent corruption and undue influence in the exercise of such great powers;
the term for which they are to be chosen, too long to preserve a due dependence
and accountability to their constituents; and the mode and places of their
election not sufficiently ascertained; for as Congress have the control over
both, they may govern the choice, by ordering the representatives of a whole
state to be elected in one place, and that too may be the most inconvenient.

The senate, the great efficient body in this plan of government, is
constituted on the most unequal principles. The smallest state in the union has
equal weight with the great states of Virginia, Massachusetts, or Pennsylvania.
The senate, besides its legislative functions, has a very considerable share in
the executive; none of the principal appointments to office can be made without
its advice and consent. The term and mode of its appointment, will lead to
permanency; the members are chosen for six years, the mode is under the
control of Congress, and as there is no exclusion by rotation, they may be
continued for life, which from their extensive means of influence, would follow
of course. The president, who would be a mere pageant of state, unless he
coincides with the views of the senate, would either become the head of the
aristocratic junto in that body, or its minion; besides, their influence being
the most predominant, could the best secure his re-election to office.

And from his power of granting pardons, he might skreen from punishment the
most treasonable attempts on the liberties of the people, when instigated by
the senate.

From this investigation into the organization of this government, it appears,
that it is devoid of all responsibility or accountability to the great body of
the people, and that so far from being a regular balanced government, it would
be, in practice, a permanent ARISTOCRACY.

The framers of it, actuated by the true spirit of such a government, which
ever abominates and suppresses all free enquiry, and discussion, have made no
provision for the liberty of the press, that grand palladium of freedom, and
scourge of tyrants; but observed a total silence on that head. It is the
opinion of some great writers, that if the liberty of the press, by an
institution of religion, or otherwise, could be rendered sacred even in Turkey,
that despotism would fly before it. And it is worthy of remark, that there is
no declaration of personal rights, premised in most free constitutions; and
that the trial by jury in civil cases is taken away; for what other
construction can be put on the following, viz. Art. 3. sect. 2. " In all cases
affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those in which a
state shall be a party, the supreme court shall have original jurisdiction. In
all the other cases above mentioned, the supreme court shall have appellate
jurisdiction, both as to law and fact!" It would be a novelty in jurisprudence,
as well as evidently improper to allow an appeal from the verdict of a jury, on
the matter of fact; therefore it implies and allows of a dismission of the jury
in civil cases, and especially when it is considered, that jury trial in
criminal cases is expressly stipulated for, but not in civil cases.

But our situation is represented to be so critically dreadful, that, however
reprehensible and exceptionable the proposed plan of government may be, there
is no alternative between the adoption of it and absolute ruin. My fellow
citizens, things are not at that crisis, it is the argument of tyrants; the
present distracted state of Europe secures us from injury on that quarter, and
as to domestic dissentions, we have not so much to fear from them, as to
precipitate us into this form of government, without it is a safe and a proper
one. For remember, of all possible evils, that of despotism is the worst and
the most to be dreaded.

Besides, it cannot be supposed, that the first essay on so difficult a
subject, is so well digested as it ought to be; if the proposed plan, after a
mature deliberation, should meet the approbation of the respective states, the
matter will end; but if it should be found to be fraught with dangers and
inconveniences, a future general Convention being in possession of the
objections, will be the better enabled to plan a suitable government.

"Who Is HERE SO BASE THAT WOULD A BONDSMAN BE?
"IF ANY, SPEAK; FOR HIM HAVE I OFFENDED.
"Who Is HERE SO VILE, THAT WILL NOT LOVE HIS COUNTRY?
"IF ANY, SPEAK; FOR HIM HAVE I OFFENDED."
SENTINEL. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA. NUMBER II.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
AS long as the liberty of the press continues unviolate, and the people have
the right of expressing and publishing their sentiments upon every public
me^sure, it is next to impossible to enslave a free nation* The state of
society must be very corrupt and base indeed, when the people, in possession of
such a monitor as the press, can be induced to exchange the heaven-born
blessings of liberty, for the galling chains of despotism. Men of an aspiring
and tyrannical disposition, sensible of this truth, have ever been inimical to
the press, and have considered the shackling of it, as the first step toward
the accomplishment of their hateful domination, and the entire suppression of
all liberty of public discussion, as necessary to its support. For even a
standing army, that grand engine of oppression, if it were as numerous as the
abilities of any nation could maintain, would not be equal to the purposes of
despotism over an enlightened people.

The abolition of that grand palladium of freedom, the liberty of the press, in
the proposed plan of government, and the conduct of its authors, and patrons,
is a striking exemplification of these observations. The reason assigned for
the omission of a bill of rights, securing the liberty of the press, and other
invaluable personal rights, is an insult on the understanding of the people.

The injunction of secrecy imposed on the members of the late Convention during
their deliberation, was obviously dictated by the genius of aristocracy; it was
deemed impolitic to unfold the principles of the intended government to the
people, as this would have frustrated the object in view.

The projectors of the new plan, supposed that an ex part discussion of the
subject, was more likely to obtain unanimity in the Convention; which would
give it such a sanction in the public opinion, as to banish all distrust, and
lead the people into an implicit adoption of it without examination.

The greatest minds are forcibly impressed by the immediate circumstances with
which they are connected; the particular sphere men move in, the prevailing
sentiments of those they converse with, have an insensible and irresistible
influence on the wisest and best of mankind, so that when we consider the
abilities, talents, ingenuity, and consummate address of a number of the
members of the late convention, whose principles are despotic, can we be
surprised that men of the best intentions have been misled in the difficult
science of government? It is derogating from the character of the illustrious
and highly revered WASHINGTON, to suppose him fallible on a subject that must
be in a great measure novel to him? As a patriotic hero, he stands unequalled
in the annals of time.

The new plan was accordingly ushered to the public with such a splendour of
names, as inspired the most unlimited confidence; the people were disposed to
receive upon trust, without any examination on their part, what would have
proved either a blessing or a curse to them and their posterity. What
astonishing infatuation! to stake their happiness on the wisdom and integrity
of any set of men! In matters of infi^^^tel smaller concern, the dictates of
prudence are not disregarded! The celebrated Montesquieu, in his Spirit of
Laws, says, that "slavery is ever preceded by sleep." And again, in his account
of the rise and fall of the Roman empire, page 97, "That it may be advanced as
a general rule, that in a free state, whenever a perfect claim is visible, the
spirit of liberty no longer subsists." And Mr. Dickenson, in his Farmer's
Letters, No. XI, lays it down as a maxim, that "A perpetual jealousy respecting
liberty is absolutely requisite in all free states."

Happy are the men, and happy the people, who grow wise by the misfortunes of
others. Earnestly, my dear countrymen, do I beseech the author of all good
gifts, that you may grow wise in this manner, and I beg leave to recommend to
you in general, as the best method of obtaining this wisdom, diligently to
study the histories of other countries. You will there find all the arts that
can possibly be practiced by cunning rulers or false patriots among yourselves,
so fully delineated, that changing names, the account would serve for your own
times.

A few citizens in Philadelphia (too few, for the honor of human nature) who
had the wisdom to think consideration ought to precede approbation, and the
fortitude to avow that they would take time to judge for themselves on so
momentous an occasion, were stigmatized as enemies to their country; a^
monsters, whose existence ought not to be suffered, and the destruction of them
and their houses recommended as meritorious. The authors of the new plan,
conscious that it would not stand the test of enlightened patriotism,
tyrannically endeavored to preclude all investigation. If their views were
laudable -- if they were honest -- the contrary would have been their conduct,
they would have invited the freest discussion. Whatever specious reasons may be
assigned for secrecy during the framing of the plan, no good one can exist, for
leading the people blindfold into the implicit adoption of it. Such an attempt
does not a^gur the public good. It carries on the face of it an intention to
juggle the people out of their liberties.

The virtuous and spirited exertions of a few patriots, have, at length, roused
the people from their fatal infatuation, to a due sense of the importance of
the measure before them. The glare and fascination of names is rapidly abating,
and the subject begins to be canvassed on its own merits; and so serious and
general has been the impression of the objections urged against the new plan,
on the minds of the people, that its advocates, finding mere declamation and
scurrility will no longer avail, are reluctantly driven to defend it on the
ground of argument. Mr. Wilson, one of the deputies of this state in the late
convention, has found it necessary to come forward. From so able a lawyer, and
so profound a politician, what might not be expected, if this new act of
convention be the heavenly dispensation which some represent it. Its divinity
would certainly be illustrated by one of the principal instruments of the
Revelation; for this gentleman has that transcendent merit! But if on the other
hand, this able advocate has failed to vindicate it from the objections of its
adversaries, must we not consider it as the production of frail and interested
men.

Mr. Wilson has recourse to the most slimsey sophistry in his attempt to refute
the charge that the new plan of general government will supercede and render
powerless the state governments. His quibble upon the term corporation, as
sometimes equivalent to communities which posse^^ sovereignty, is unworthy of
him. The same comparison in the case of the British parliament assuming to tax
the colonies, is made in the Xth of the Farmer's Letters, and was not
misunderstood in 1768 by any. He says, that the existence of the proposed
federal plan depends on the existence of the state governments, as the senators
are to be appointed by the several legislatures, who are also to nominate the
electors who choose the president of the United States; and that hence all
fears of the several states being melted down into one empire, are groundless
and imaginary. But who is so dull as not to comprehend, that the semblance and
forms of an ancient establishment, may rem^in, after the reality is gone.
Augustus, by the aid of a great army, assumed despotic power, and
notwithstanding this, we find even under Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, princes
who disgraced human nature by their excesses, the shadows of the ancient
constitution held up to amuse the people. The senate sat as formerly; consuls,
tribunes, of the people, censors and other officers, were annually chosen as
before, and the forms of republican government continued. Yet all this was in
appearance only. Every senatus consultum was dictated by him or his ministers,
and every Roman found himself constrained to submit in all things to the despot.

Mr. Wilson asks, What control can proceed from the federal government to
shackle or destroy that sacred palladium of national freedom, the liberty of
the press?" What? cannot Congress, when possessed of the immense authority,
proposed to be devolved, restrain the printers, and put them under regulation.
Recollect that the omnipotence of the federal legislature over the state
establishments is recognized by a special article, viz. "that this constitution
and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and
all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state
shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitutions or laws of any state to
the contrary notwithstanding." After such a declaration, what security does the
constitutions of the several states afford for the liberty of the press, and
other invaluable personal rights, not provided for by the new plan? Does not
this sweeping clause subject every thing to the control of Congress?

In the plan of confederation of 1778, now existing, it was thought proper by
article the 2d, to declare, that "each state retains its sovereignty, freedom
and independence, and every power, jurisdiction and right, which is not by this
confederation expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled."
Positive grant was not then thought sufficiently descriptive and restraining
upon Congress, and the omission of such a declaration now, when such great
devolutions of power are proposed, manifests the design of reducing the several
states to shadows. But Mr. Wilson tells you that every right and power not
specially granted to Congress is considered as withheld. How does this appear?
Is this principle established by the proper authority? Has the convention made
such a stipulation? By no means. Quite the reverse; the laws of Congress are to
be "the supreme law of the land, any thing in the constitutions or laws of any
state to the contrary notwithstanding," and consequently, would be paramount to
all state authorities. The lust of power is so universal, that a speculative
unascertained rule of construction would be a poor security for the liberties
of the people.

Such a body as the intended Congress, unless particularly inhibited and
restrained, must grasp at omnipotence, and before long swallow up the
legislative, the executive, and the judicial powers of the several states.

In addition to the respectable authorities quoted in my first number, to show
that the right of taxation includes all the powers of government, I beg leave
to adduce the Farmer's Letters, see particularly letter 9th, in which Mr.
Dickenson has clearly proved, that if the British parliament assumed the power
of taxing the colonies, internally, as well as externally, and it should be
submitted to, the several colony legislatures would soon become contemptible,
and before long fall into disuse. Nothing, says he, would be left for them to
do, higher than to frame bye-laws for empounding of cattle, or the yoking of
hogs.

By the proposed plan, there are diverse cases of judicial authority to be given
to the courts of the United States, besides the two mentioned by Mr. Wilson. In
maritime causes about property, jury trial has not been usual; but in suits in
equity, with all due deference to Mr. Wilson's professional abilities (which he
calls to his aid) jury trial, as to facts, is in full exercise. Will this
jurisperitus say, that if the question in equity should be, did John Do make a
will, that the chancellor of England would decide upon it? He well knows, that
in this case, there being no mode of jury trial before the chancellor, the
question would be referred to the court of king's bench for discussion
according to the common law, and when the judge in equity should receive the
verdict, the fact so established, could never be re-examined or controverted.
Maritime causes, and those appertaining to a court of equity, are, however, but
two of the many and extensive subjects of federal cognizance mentioned in the
plan. This jurisdiction will embrace all suits arising under the laws of
impost, excise, and other revenue of the United States. In England, if goods be
seized, if a ship be prosecuted for noncompliance with, or breach of the laws
of the customs, or those for regulating trade, in the court of exchequer, the
claimant is secured of the transcendant privilege of Englishmen, trial by a
jury of his peers. Why not in the United States of America? This jurisdiction
also goes to all cases under the laws of the United States, that is to say,
under all statutes and ordinances of Congress. How far this may extend, it is
easy to foresee; for upon the decay of the state powers of legislation, in
consequence of the loss of the purse strings, it will be found necessary for
the federal legislature to make laws upon every subject of legislation. --
Hence the state courts of justice, like the barony and hundred courts of
England, will be eclipsed, and gradually fall into disuse.

The jurisdiction of the federal court goes, likewise, to the laws to be
created by treaties made by the president and senate (a species of legislation)
with other nations; 'to all cases affecting foreign ministers and consuls; to
controversies wherein the United States shall be a party; to controversies
between citizens of different states," as when an inhabitant of New York has a
demand on an inhabitant of New Jersey. This last is a very invidious
jurisdiction, implying an improper distrust of the impartiality and justice of
the tribunals of the states. It will include all legal debates between
foreigners in Britain or elsewhere, and the people of this country. A reason
has been assigned for it, viz. "That large tracts of land, in neighboring
states, are claimed under royal or other grants, disputed by the states where
the lands lie, so that justice cannot be expected from the state tribunals."
Suppose it were proper indeed to provide for such case, why include all cases,
and for all time to come? Demands as to lands for 21 years would have satisfied
this. A London merchant shall come to America, and sue for his supposed debt,
and the citizen of this country shall be deprived of jury trial, and subjected
to an appeal (though nothing but the fact is disputed) to a court 500 or 1000
miles from home; when if this American has a claim upon an inhabitant of
England, his adversary is secured of the privilege of jury trial. This
jurisdiction goes also to controversies between any state and its citizens,
which though probably not intended, may hereafter be set up as a ground to
divest the states, severally, of the trial of criminals; inasmuch as every
charge of felony and misdemeanour, is a controversy between a state and the
citizens of the same: that is to say, the state is plaintiff, and the party
accused is defendant in the prosecution. In all debts about jurisprudence, as
was observed before, the paramount courts of Congress will decide, and the
judges of the state, being sub graviore lege, under the paramount law, must
acquiesce.

Mr. Wilson says, that it would have been impracticable to have made a general
rule for jury trial in the civil cases assigned to the federal judiciary,
because of the want of uniformity in the mode of jury trial as practiced by the
several states. This objection proves too much, and therefore amounts to
nothing. If it precludes the mode of common law in civil cases, it certainly
does in criminal. Yet in these we are told, "the oppression of government is
effectually barred, by declaring, that in all criminal cases trial by jury
shall be preserved." Astonishing, that provision could not be made for a jury
in civil controversies, of 12 men, whose verdict should be unanimous, to be
taken from the vicinage; a precaution which is omitted as to trial of crimes,
which may be any where in the state within which they have been committed. So
that an inhabitant of Kentucky may be tried for treason at Richmond.

The abolition of jury trial in civil cases, is the more considerable, as at
length the courts of Congress will supersede the state courts, when such mode
of trial will fall into disuse among the people of the United States.

The northern nations of the European continent, have all lost this invaluable
privilege: Sweden, the last of them, by the artifices of the aristocratic
senate, which depressed the king, and reduced the house of commons to
insignificance. But the nation, a few years ago, preferring the absolute
authority of a monarch to the vexatious domination of the well-born few, an end
was suddenly put to their power

"The policy of this right of juries (says judge Black-stone) to decide upon
fact, is founded on this: that if the power of judging were entirely trusted
with the magistrates, or any select body of men named by the executive
authority, their decisions, in spite of their own natural integrity, would have
a bias toward those of their own rank and dignity; for it is not to be
expected, that the few should be attentive to the rights of the many. This,
therefore, preserves in the hands of the people, that share which they ought to
have in the administration of justice, and prevents the encroachments of the
more powerful and wealthy citizens."

The attempt of governor Colden, of New York, before the revolution, to
re-examine the facts, and to re-consider the damages, in the case of Forsey
against Cunningham, produced, about the year 1764, a flame of patriotic and
successful opposition, that will not be easily forgotten

To manage the various and extensive judicial authority, proposed to be vested
in Congress, there will be one or more inferior courts immediately requisite in
each state; and laws and regulations must be forthwith provided to direct the
judges; here is a wide door for inconvenience to enter. Contracts made under
the acts of the states respectively, will come before courts acting under new
laws and new modes of proceeding, not thought of when they were entered into.
An inhabitant of Pennsylvania, residing at Pittsburgh, finds the goods of his
debtor, who resides in Virginia, within the reach of his attachment; but no
writ can be had to authorize the marshal, sheriff, or other officer of Congress
to seize the property about to be removed, nearer than 200 miles: suppose that
at Carlisle, for instance, such a writ may be had, mean while the object
escapes. Or if an inferior court, whose judges have ample salaries, be
established in every county, would not the expense be enormous? Every reader
can extend in his imagination, the instances of difficulty which would proceed
from this needless interference with the judicial rights of the separate
states, and which, as much as any other circumstance in the new plan, implies
that the dissolution of their forms of government is designed.

Mr. Wilson skips very lightly over the danger apprehended from the standing
army allowed by the new plan. This grand machine of power and oppression may be
made a fatal instrument to overturn the public liberties, especially as the
funds to support the troops may be granted for two years, whereas in Britain,
the grants ever since the revolution in 1688, have been from year to year. A
standing army with regular provision of pay and contingencies, would afford a
strong temptation to some ambitious man to step up into the throne, and to
seize absolute power. The keeping on foot a hired military force in time of
peace, ought not to be gone into, unless two thirds of the members of the
federal legislature agree to the necessity of the measure, and adjust the
numbers employed. Surely Mr. Wilson is not serious when he adduces the instance
of the troops now stationed on the Ohio as a proof of the propriety of a
standing army. They are a mere occasional armament for the purpose of
restraining diverse hostile tribes of savages. It is contended, that under the
present confederation, Congress possess the power of raising armies at
pleasure; but the opportunity which the states severally have of withholding
the supplies necessary to keep these armies on foot, is a sufficient check on
the present Congress.

Mr. Wilson asserts, that never was charge made with less reason, than that
which predicts the institution of a baneful aristocracy in the federal senate.
In my first number, I stated, that this body would be a very unequal
representation of the several states, that the members being appointed for the
long term of six years, and there being no exclusion by rotation, they might be
continued for life, which would follow of course from their extensive means of
influence, and that possessing a considerable share in the executive as well as
legislative, it would become a paramount aristocracy, and swallow up the other
orders in the government.

That these fears are not imaginary, a knowledge of the history of other
nations, where the powers of government have been injudiciously placed, will
fully demonstrate. Mr. Wilson says, "the senate branches into two characters;
the one legislative and the other executive. In its legislative character it
can effect no purpose without the cooperation of the house of representatives,
and in its executive character it can accomplish no object without the
concurrence of the president. Thus fettered, I do not know any act which the
senate can of itself perform, and such dependence necessarily precludes every
idea of influence and superiority." This I confess is very specious, but
experience demonstrates, that checks in government, unless accompanied with
adequate power, and independently placed, prove merely nominal, and will be
inoperative. Is it probable, that the president of the United States, limited
as he is in power, and dependent on the will of the senate, in appointments to
office, will either have the firmness or inclination to exercise his
prerogative of a conditional control upon the proceedings of that body,
however injurious they may be to the public welfare: it will be his interest to
coincide with the views of the senate, and thus become the head of the
aristocratic junto. The king of England is a constituent part of the
legislature, but although an hereditary monarch, in possession of the whole
executive power, including the unrestrained appointment to offices, and an
immense revenue, enjoys but in name the prerogative of a negative upon the
parliament. Even the king of England, circumstanced as he is, has not dared to
exercise it for near a century past. The check of the house of representatives
upon the senate will likewise be rendered nugatory for want of due weight in
the democratic branch, and from their constitution, they may become so
independent of the people as to be indifferent of its interests: nay, as
Congress would have the control over the mode and place of their election, by
ordering the representatives of a whole state to be elected at one place, and
that too the most inconvenient, the ruling power may govern the choice, and
thus the house of representatives may be composed of the creatures of the
senate. Still the semblance of checks, may remain, but without operation.

This mixture of the legislative and executive moreover highly tends to
corruption. The chief improvement in government, in modern times, has been the
complete separation of the great distinctions of power; placing the legislative
in different hands from those which hold the executive; and again severing the
judicial part from the ordinary administrative. "When the legislative and
executive powers (says Montesquieu) are united in the same person, or in the
same body of magistrates, there can be no liberty."

Mr. Wilson confesses himself nor satisfied with the organization of the
federal senate, and apologizes for it, by alleging a sort of compromise. It is
well known that some members of convention, apprized of the mischiefs of such a
compound of authority, proposed to assign the supreme executive powers to the
president and a small council, made personally responsible for every
appointment to office, or other act by having their opinions recorded; and that
without the concurrence of the majority of the quorum of this council, the
president should not be capable of taking any step. Such a check upon the chief
magistrate would admirably secure the power of pardoning, now proposed to be
exercised by the president alone, from abuse. For as it is placed, he may
shelter the traitors whom he himself, or his coadjutors in the senate, have
excited to plot against the liberties of the nation.

The delegation of the power of taxation to Congress as far as duties on
imported commodities, has not been objected to. But to extend this to excises,
and every species to internal taxation, would necessarily require so many
ordinances of Congress, affecting the body of the people, as would perpetually
interfere with the state laws and personal concerns of the people. This alone
would directly tend to annihilate the particular governments; for the people,
fatigued with the operations of two masters, would be apt to rid themselves of
the weaker. But we are cautioned against being alarmed with imaginary evils,
for Mr. Wilson has predicted that the great revenue of the United States, will
be raised by impost. Is there any ground for this? Will the imposts supply the
sums necessary to pay the interest and principal of the foreign loan, to defray
the great additional expense of the new constitution; for the policy of the new
government will lead it to institute numerous and lucrative civil offices, to
extend its influenee and provide for the swarms of expectants, the people
having in fact no control upon their disbursements, and to afford pay and
support the supposed standing army, that darling and long wished for object of
the well born of America; and which, if we may judge from the principles of the
intended government, will be no trifling establishment, for cantonments of
troops in every district of America, will be necessary to compel the submission
of the people to the arbitrary dictates of the ruling powers? I say will the
impost be adequate? By no means. To answer these there must be excises and
other indirect duties imposed, and as land taxes will operate too unequally to
be agreeable to the wealthy aristrocracy in the senate who will be possessed of
the government, poll taxes will be substituted as provided for in the new plan
for the doctrine then will be, that slaves ought to pay for wearing their heads.

As the taxes necessary for these purposes, will drain your pockets of every
penny, what is to become of that virtuous and meritorious class of citizens the
public creditors. However well disposed the people of the United States may be
to do them justice, it would not be in their power: and, after waiting year
after year, without prospect of the payment of the interest or principal of the
debt, they will be constrained to sacrifice their certificates in the purchase
of waste lands in the distant wilds of the western territory.

From the foregoing illustration of the powers to be devolved to Congress, it
is evident that the general government would necessarily annihilate the
particular governments, and that the security of the personal rights of the
people by the state constitutions is superceded and destroyed; hence results
the necessity of such security being provided for by a bill of rights to be
inserted in the new plan of federal government. What excuse can be then made
for the omission of this grand palladium, this barrier between liberty and
oppression. For universal experience demonstrates the necessity of the most
express declarations and restrictions, to protect the rights and liberties of
mankind, from the silent, powerful and ever active conspiracy of those who
govern.

The new plan, it is true, does propose to secure the people of the benefit of
personal liberty by the habeas corpus; and trial by jury for all crimes, except
in cases of impeachme^^ but there is no declaration, that all men have a
natural and unalienable right to worship almighty God, according to the
dictates of their own conscience and understanding; and that no man ought, or
of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or erect or support
any place of worship, or maintain any minister, contrary to, or against his own
free will and consent; and that no authority can or ought to be vested in, or
assumed by any power whatever that shall in any case interfere with, or in any
manner control, the right of conscience in the free exercise of religious
worship; that the trial by jury in civil causes as criminal prosecutions shall
be held sacred; that the requiring of excessive bail, imposing of excessive
fines and cruel and unusual punishments be forbidden; that monopolies in trade
or arts, other than to authors of books or inventors of useful arts, for a
reasonable time, ought not to be suffered; that the right of the people to
assemble peaceably for the purpose of consulting about public matters, and
petitioning or remonstrating to the federal legislature ought not to be
prevented; that the liberty of the press be holden sacred; that the people have
a right to hold themselves, their houses, papers, and possessions, free from
search or seized; and that therefore warrants, without oaths or affirmations
first made, affording a sufficient foundation for them, and whereby any officer
or messenger may be commanded or required to search suspected places, or to
seize any person or his property, not particularly described, are contrary to
that right and ought not to be granted; and that standing armies in time of
peace are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be permitted but when
absolutely necessary; all which is omitted to be done in the proposed
government.

But Mr. Wilson says, the new plan does not arrogate perfection, for it
provides a mode of alteration and correction, if found necessary. This is one
among the numerous deceptions attempted on this occasion. True there is a mode
prescribed for this purpose. But it is barely possible that amendments may be
made. The fascination of power must first cease, the nature of mankind undergo
a revolution, that is not to be expected on this side of eternity. For to
effect this (Art. 9.) it is provided, that if two thirds of both houses of the
federal legislature shall propose them; or when two thirds of the several
states, by their legislatures, shall apply for them the federal assembly shall
call a convention for proposing amendments, which when ratified by
three-fourths of the state legislatures, or conventions, as Congress shall see
best, shall control and alter the proposed confederation. Does history abound
with examples of a voluntary relinquishment of power, however injurious to the
community? No; it would require a general and successful rising of the people
to effect any thing of this nature. -- This provision therefore is more sound.

The opposition of the new plan (says Mr. Wison) proceeds from interested men,
viz. the officers of the state governments. He had before denied that the
proposed tranfer of powers to Congress would annihilate the state governments.
But he here lays aside the masque and avows the fact. For, the truth of the
charge against them must entirely rest on such consequence of the new plan. For
if the state establishments are to remain unimpaired, why should officers,
peculiarly connected with them, be interested to oppose the adoption of the new
plan. Except the collector of the impost, judge of the admiralty and the
collector of excise (none of whom have been reckoned of the opposition) they
would otherwise have nothing to apprehend. But the charge is unworthy, and may
with propriety be retorted on the expectations of office and emolument under
the intended government.

The opposition is not so partial and interested as Mr. Wilson asserts. It
consists of a respectable yeomanry throughout the union, of characters far
removed above the reach of his unsupported assertions. It comprises many worthy
members of the late convention, and a majority of the present Congress, for a
motion made in that honorable body, for their approbation and recommendation of
the new plan, was, after two days animated discussion, prudently withdrawn by
its advocates, and a simple transmission Upon the last motion being made, those
who had strenuously and successfully opposed Congress giving any countenance of
approbation or recommendation to this system of oppression, said, "We have no
objection to transmit the new plan of government to the several states, that
they may have an opportunity of judging for themselves on so momentous a
subject." Whereupon it was unanimously agreed to in the following words, viz.
"Congress having received the report of the Convention lately assembled in
Philadelphia, Resolved unanimously, That the said report, with the resolutions
and letter accompanying the same, be transmitted to the several legislatures,
in order to be submitted to a Convention of delegates, chosen in each state by
the people thereof, in conformity to the resolves of the Convention, made and
provided in that case."
of the plan to the several states could only be obtained; yet this has been
palmed upon the people as the approbation of Congress; and to strengthen the
deception, the bells of the city of Philadelphia, were rung for a whole day.

Are Mr. W -- n, and many of his coadjutors in the late C -- n, the
disinterested patriots they would have us believe? Is their conduct any
recommendation of their plan of government? View them the foremost and loudest
on the floor of Congress, in our assembly, at town meetings in sounding its
eulogiums: view them preventing investigation and discussion, and in the most
despotic manner endeavoring to compel its adoption by the people, with such
precipitancy as to preclude the possibility of a due consideration, and then
say, whether the motives of these men can be pure.

My fellow citizens, such false detestable patriots in every nation, have led
their blind confiding country, shouting their applauses, into the jaws of
despotism and ruin. -- May the wisdom and virtue of the people of America, save
them from the usual fate of nations.

SENTINEL.

SENTINEL. NUMBER III. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
John iii. ver. 20th. -- "For every one that does evil, hates light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." -- But "there is
nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid that shall not be
known. Therefore, whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the
light: and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets, shall be proclaimed
on the house tops." -- St. Luke, chap. xii. 2d and 3d verses.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
THE formation of a good government, is the greatest effort of human wisdom,
actuated by disinterested patriotism; but such is the cursed nature of
ambition, so prevalent in the minds of men, that it would sacrifice every thing
to its selfish gratification; hence the fairest opportunities of advancing the
happiness of humanity, are so far from being properly improved, that they are
too often covered with the votaries of power and domination, into the means of
obtaining their nefarious ends. It will be the misfortune of America to add to
the number of examples of this kind, if the proposed plan of government should
be adopted; but I trust, short as the time allowed you for consideration is,
you will be so fully convinced of the truth of this, as to escape the impending
danger; it is only necessary to strip the monster of its assumed garb, and to
exhibit it in its native colors, to excite the universal abhorrence and
rejection of every virtuous and patriotic mind.

For the sake of my dear country, for the honor of human nature, I hope, and
am persuaded, the good sense of the people will enable them to rise superior to
the most formidable conspiracy against the liberties of a free and enlightened
nation, that the world has ever witnessed. How glorious would be the triumph!
How it would immortalize the present generation in the annals of freedom.

The establishment of a government, is a subject of such momentous and lasting
concern, that it should not be gone into without the clearest conviction of its
propriety; which can only be the result of the fullest discussion, the most
thorough investigation and dispassionate consideration of its nature,
principles, and construction. You are now called upon to make this decision,
which involves in it, not only your fate, but that of your posterity for ages
to come. Your determination will either ensure the possession of those
blessings, which render life desirable, or entail those evils which make
existence a curse: that such are consequences of a wise or improper
organization of government, the history of mankind abundantly testifies. If you
viewed the magnitude of the object in its true light, you would join with me in
sentiment, that the new government ought not to be implicitly admitted.
Consider then, duly, before you leap, for after the Rubicon is once passed,
there will be no retreat.

If you were even well assured, that the utmost purity of intention
predominated in the production of the proposed government, such is the
imperfection of human wisdom and knowledge, that it would not be wise in you to
adopt it with precipitation in toto, for all former experience must teach you
the propriety of a revision on such occasions, to correct the errors, and
supply the deficiencies that may appear necessary. In every government, whose
object is the public welfare, the laws are subjected to repeated revisions, in
some by different orders in the government, in others by an appeal to the
judgments of the people, and deliberative forms of procedure. A knowledge of
this, as well as of other states, will show, that if every instance where a law
has been passed without the usual precautions, it has been productive of great
inconvenience and evils, and frequently has not answered the end in view, a
supplement becoming necessary to supply its deficiencies.

What then are we to think of the motives and designs of those men who are
urging the implicit and immediate adoption of the proposed government? Are they
fearful, that if you exercise your good sense and discernment, you will
discover the masqued aristocracy that they are attempting to smuggle upon you,
under the suspicious garb of republicanism? When we find that the principal
agents in this business, are the very men who fabricated the form of
government, it certainly ought to be conclusive evidence of their ins;idious
design to deprive us of our liberties. The circumstances attending this matter,
are such as should in a peculiar manner excite your suspicion; it might not be
useless to take a review of some of them.

In many o^ the states, particularly in this and the northern states, there are
aristocratic juntos of the well-born few, who had been zealously endeavoring
since the establishment of their constitutions, to humble that offensive
upstart, equal liberty; but all their efforts were unavailing, the ill-bred
churl obstinately kept his assumed station.

However, that which could not be accomplished in the several states, is now
attempting through the medium of the future Congress. Experience having shown
great defects in the present confederatian, particularly in the regulating of
commerce and maritime affairs, it became the universal wish of America to grant
further powers, so as to make the federal government adequate to the ends of
its institution. The anxiety on this head was greatly increased, from the
impoverishment and distress occasioned by the extensive importations of foreign
merchandise and luxuries, and consequent drain of specie since the peace: thus
the people were in the disposition of a drowning man, eager to catch at any
thing that promised relief, however delusory. Such an opportunity for the
acquisition of undue power, has never been viewed with indifference by the
ambitious and designing in any age or nation, and it has accordingly been too
successfully improved by such men among us. The deputies from this state (with
the exception of two) and most of those from the other states in the union were
unfortunately of this complexion, and many of them of such superior endowments,
that in an ex part discussion of the subject, by specious glosses, they have
gained the concurrence of some well-disposed men in whom their country have
great confidence, which has given great sanction to their scheme of power.

A comparison of the authority under which the convention acted, and their form
of government, will show that they have despised their delegated power, and
assumed sovereignty; that they have entirely annihilated the old confederation,
and the particular governments of the several states, and instead thereof have
established one general government that is to pervade the union; constituted on
the most unequal principle^, destitute of accountability to its constituents,
and as despotic in its nature as the Venetian aristocracy; a government that
will give full scope to the magnificent designs of the well-born; a government
where tyranny may glu^ its vengeance on the low-born, unchecked by an odious
bill of rights, as has been fully illustrated in my two preceding numbers; and
yet as a blind upon the understanding of the people, they have continued the
forms of the particular governments, and termed the whose a confederation of
the United States, pursuant to the sentiments of that profound, but corrupt
politician Machiavel, who advises any one who would change the constitution of
a state, to keep as much as possible to the old forms; for then the people,
seeing the same officers, the same formalities, courts of justice, and other
outward appearances, are insensible of the alteration, and believe themselves
in possession of their old government. Thus Caesar, when he seized the Roman
liberties, caused himself to be chosen dictator (which was an ancient office)
continued the senate, the consuls, the tribunes, the censors, and all other
offices and forms of the commonwealth; and yet changed Rome from the most free,
to the most tyrannical government in the world.

The convention, after vesting all the great and efficient powers of
sovereignty in the general government, insidiously declared, by section 4th of
article 4th, "that the United States shall guarantee to every state in this
union, a republican form of government;" but of what avail will be the form
without the reality of freedom?

The late convention, in the majesty of its assumed omnipotence, have not even
condescended to submit the plan of the new government to the consideration of
the people, the true source of authority, but have called upon them by their
several conventions, "to assent to, and ratify" See a resolution of Convention
accompanying the instrument of the proposed government.
in toto, what they have been pleased to decree; just as the grand monarque of
France requires the parliament of Paris to register his edicts without revision
or alteration, which is necessary previous to their execution.

The authors and advocates of the new plan, conscious that its establishment
can only be obtained from the ignorance of the people of its true nature, and
their unbounded confidence in some of the men concurring, have hurried on its
adoption with a precipitation that betrays their design; before many had seen
the new plan, and before they had time to examine it, they, by their ready
minions, attended by some well-disposed, but mistaken persons, obtained the
subscriptions of the people to papers, expressing their approbation of, and
wish to have it established; thus precluding them from any consideration, but
lest the people should discover the juggle, the elections of the state
conventions are urged on at very early days; the proposition of electing the
convention of this state in nine days after the date of the resolution, for all
the counties east of Bedford, and supported by three or four of the deputies of
the convention, and who were also members of the then assembly, is one of the
most extravagant instances of this kind; and even this was prevented by the
secession of nineteen virtuous and enlightened members. The message of the
president and council, sent into the present general assembly, on the 27th of
October last, discloses another imposition. The board sent to the house the
official transmission of the proposed constitution of the United States,
enclosed in a letter from the president of Congress, which proves that the
paper produced to the last house on the day before the final rising of the
same, was a surreptitious copy of the vote of Congress, obtained for the
purpose of deluding the legislature into the extravagance of directing an
election of Convention within nine days.

The provisions made by the Convention of Pennsylvania, which sat in 1776 for
amending the Constitution, is guarded with admirable wisdom and caution. A
council of censors is to be holden every seven years, which shall have power
(two thirds of the whole number elected agreeing) to propose amendments of the
same government, and to call a Convention to adopt and establish these
propositions: but the alterations must be "promulgated at least six months
before the day appointed for the election of such Convention, for the previous
consideration of the people, that they may have an opportunity of instructing
their delegates on the subject." The present measures explain the conduct of a
certain party of Censors who sat in 1784, (much fewer than two thirds of the
whole) that proposed to abolish the 47th article of the constitution, whereby
the manner of amending the same was regulated.


In order to put the matter beyond all recall, they have proceeded a step
farther, they have made the deputies nominated for the state convention, of
this city, and elsewhere, pledge their sacred honor, previous to their
election, that they would implicitly adopt the proposed government, in toto;
thus, short as the period is, before the final fi^t is to be given,
consideration is rendered nugatory, and conviction of its danger or impropriety
unavoidable. A good cause does not stand in need of such means; it scorns all
indirect advantages and borrowed help, and trusts alone to its own native merit
and intrinsic strength: the lion is never known to make use of cunning, nor can
a good cause suffer by a free and thorough examination. It is knavery that
seeks disguise. Actors do not care that any one should look into the tiring
room, nor jugglers or sharpers into their hands or boxes.

Every exertion has been made to suppress discussion by shackling the press;
but as this could not be effected in this state, the people are warned not to
listen to the adversaries of the proposed plan, lest they should impose upon
them, and thereby prevent the adoption of this blessed government. What figure
would a lawyer make in a court of justice, if he should desire the judges not
to hear the counsel of the other side, lest they should perplex the cause and
mislead the court? Would not every by-stander take it for granted, that he was
conscious of the weakness of his client's cause, and that it could not
otherwise be defended, than by not being understood.

All who are friends to liberty are friends to reason, the champion of liberty;
and none are foes to liberty but those who have truth and reason for their
foes. He who has dark purposes to serve, must use dark means; light would
discover him, and reason expose him: he must endeavor to shut out both, and
make them look frightful by giving them ill names.

Liberty only flourishes where reason and knowledge are encouraged; and
wherever the latter are stifled, the former is extinguished. In Turkey printing
is forbid, enquiry is dangerous, and free speaking is capital; because they are
all inconsistent with the nature of the government. Hence it is that the Turks
are all stupidly ignorant, and are all slaves.

I shall now proceed in the consideration of the construction of the proposed
plan of government -- By sect. 4th of art. 1st, of the proposed government, it
is declared, "that the times, places, and manner of holding elections for
senators and representatives shall be prescribed in each state by the
legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any time by law make or alter such
regulations, except as to the place of choosing senators." Will not this section
put it in the power of the future Congress to abolish the suffrage by ballot,
so indispensible in a free government. -- Montesquieu, in his Spirit of laws,
vol. 1, page 12, says, "that in a democracy there can be no exercise of
sovereignty but by the suffrages of the people, which are their will; now the
sovereign's will is the sovereign himself. The laws, therefore, which establish
the right of suffrage, are fundamental to this government. In fact it is as
important to regulate in a republic, in what manner, by whom, and concerning
what suffrages are to be given, as it is in a monarchy to know who is the
prince, and after what manner he ought to govern. This valuable privilege of
voting by ballot, ought not to rest on the discretion of the government, but be
irrevocably established in the constitution.

Will not the above quoted sect. also, authorize the future Congress to
lengthen the term for which the senators and representatives are to be elected,
from 6 and 2 years respectively, to any period, even for life? as the
parliament of England voted themselves from triennial to septennial; and as the
long parliament under Charles the 1st became perpetual?

Sect. 8th, of art. 1st, vests Congress with power "to provide for calling
forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress insurrections and
repel invasions; to provide for the organizing, arming and disciplining the
militia, and for governing such part of them as may be employed in the service
of the United States, reserving to the states respectively, the appointment of
the officers, and the authority of training the militia according to the
discipline prescribed by Congress." -- This s^ct. will subject the citizens of
these states to the most arbitrary military discipline; even death may be
inflicted on the disobedient; in the character of militia, you may be dragged
from your families and homes to any part of the continent, and for any length
of time, at the discretion of the future Congress; and as militia, you may be
made the unwilling instruments of oppression under the direction of government;
there is no exemption upon account of conscientious scruples of bearing arms:
no equivalent to be received in lieu of personal services. The militia of
Pennsylvania may be marched to Georgia or New Hampshire, however incompatible
with their interests or consciences; in short, they may be made as mere
machines as Prussian soldiers.

Sect. the 9th begins thus -- "The migration or importation of such persons, as
any of the states, now existing, shall think proper to admit, shall not be
prohibited by Congress prior to the year 1808, but a duty or tax may be imposed
on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person." And by the 5th
art. this restraint is not to be removed by any future convention. We are told,
that the objects of this article are slaves, and that it is inserted to secure
to the southern states the right of introducing negroes for twenty-one years to
come, against the declared sense of the other states to put an end to an odious
traffic in the human species; which is especially scandalous and inconsistent
in a people, who have asserted their own liberty by the sword, and which
dangerously enfeebles the districts, wherein the laborers are bondmen. The
words are dark and ambiguous; such as no plain man of common sense would have
used, are evidently chosen to conceal from Europe, that in this e^^ghtened
country, the practice of slavery has its advocates among men in the highest
stations. When it is recollected that no poll tax can be imposed on five
negroes above what three whites shall be charged: when it is considered, that
the impost on the consumption of the Carolina field negroes, must be trifling,
and the excise, nothing, it is plain that the proportion of contributions,
which can be expected from the southern states under the new constitution, will
be very unequal; and yet they are to be allowed* to enfeeble themselves by the
further importation of negroes till the year 1808. Ha^ not the concurrence of
the five southern states in the convention, to the new system, been purchased
too dearly by the rest, who have undertaken to make good their deficiencies of
revenue, occasioned by their wilful incapacity, without an equivalent?

The general acquiescence of one description of citizens in the proposed
government, surprise me much, if so, many of the Quakers have become
indifferent to the sacred rights of conscience, so amply secured by the
constitution of this commonwealth; if they are satisfied, to rest this
inestimable privilege on the discretion of the future government, yet, in a
political light, they are not acting wisely; in the state of Pennsylvania, they
form so considerable a por^ion of the community, as must ensure them great
weight in the government; but in the scale of general empire, they will be lost
in the balance.

I intended in this number to have shown from the nature of things, from the
opinions of the greatest writers, and from the peculiar circumstances of the
United States, the impracticability of establishing and maintaining one
government on the principles of freedom, in so extensive a territory; to have
shown, if practicable, the inadequacy of such government, to provide for its
many and various concerns; and also to have shown, that a confederation of
small republics, possessing all the powers of internal government, and united
in the management of their general and foreign concerns, is the only system of
government by which so extensive a country can be governed, consistent with
freedom: But a writer under the signature of Brutus, in the New York paper,
which has been republished by Messrs. Dunlap and Claypoole, has done this in so
masterly a manner, that it would be superfluous in me to add any thing on the
subject.

My fellow citizens, as a lover of my country, as the friend to mankind, whilst
it is yet safe to write, and whilst it is yet in your power to avoid it, I warn
you of the impending danger. To this remote quarter of the world has liberty
fled. Other countries, now subject to slavery, were once as free as we yet are;
therefore, for your own sakes, for the sake of your posterity, as well as for
that of the oppressed of all nations, cherish this remaining asylum of liberty.

SENTINEL.
Philadelphia, Nov. 5th, 1787.
SENTINEL. NUMBER IV. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
THAT the present confederation is inadequate to the objects of the union,
seems to be universally allowed. The only question is, what additional powers
are wanting to give due energy to the federal government? We should, however,
be careful in forming our opinions on this subject, not to impute the temporary
and extraordinary difficulties that have hitherto impeded the execution of the
confederation, to defects in the system itself. Taxation is, in every
government, a very delicate and difficult subject; hence it has been the policy
of all wise statesmen, as far as circumstances permitted, to lead the people by
small beginnings, and almost imperceptible degrees; into the habits of
taxation; where the contrary conduct has been pursued, it has ever failed of
full success, not unfrequently proving the ruin of the projectors. The imposing
of a burdensome tax at once on a people, without the usual gradations, is the
severest test that any government can be put to; despotism it self has often
proved unequal to the attempt. Under this conviction, let us take a review of
our situation before and since the revolution. From the first settlement of
this country, until the commencement of the late war, the taxes were so light
and trivial as to be scarcely felt by the people; when we engaged in the
expensive contest with Great Britain, the Congress, sensible of the difficulty
of levying the moneys necessary to its support, by direct taxation, had
recourse to an anticipation of the public resources, by emitting hills of
credit, and thus postponed the necessity of taxation for several years; this
means was pursued to a most ruinous length: but about the year 1780 or 1781, it
was wholly exhausted; commerce had been suspended for near six years; the
husbandman, for want of a market, limited his crops to his own subsistence; the
frequent calls of the militia, and long continuance in actual service, the
devastations of the enemy, the subsistence of our own armies, the evils of the
depreciation of the paper money, which fell chiefly upon the patriotic and
virtuous part of the community, had all concurred to produce great distress
throughout America. In this situation of affairs, we still had the same
powerful enemy to contend with, who had even more numerous and better appointed
armies in the field, than at any former time. Our allies were applied to in
this exigence, but the pecuniary assistance that we could procure from them,
was soon exhausted; the only resource now remaining, was to obtain by direct
taxation, the moneys necessary for our defense; the history of mankind does not
furnish a similar instance of an attempt to levy such enormous taxes at once,
of a people so wholly unprepared and u^inured to them -- the lamp of sacred
liberty must indeed have burned with unsullied luster, every sordid principle
of the mind must have been then extinct, when the people not only submitted to
the grievous impositions, but cheerfully exerted themselves to comply with the
calls of their country; their abilities, however, were not equal to furnish the
necessary sums -- indeed the requisition of the year 1782, amounted to the
whole income of their farms and other property, including the means of their
subsistence; perhaps the strained exertions of two years, would not have
sufficed to the discharge of this requisition; to whom then, can we impute the
difficulties of the people to a due compliance with the requisitions of
Congress to a defect in the confederation, for any government, however
energetic, in similar circumstances, would have experienced the same fate. If
we review the proceedings of the states, we shall find that they gave every
sanction and authority to the requisitions of Congress, that their laws could
confer; that they attempted to collect the sums called for, in the same manner
as is proposed to be done in future by the general government, instead of the
state legislatures.

It is a maxim, that a government ought to be cautious not to govern over much,
for when the cord of power is drawn too tight, it generally proves its
destruction; the impracticability of complying with the requisitions of
Congress has lessened the sense of obligation and duty in the people, and thus
weakened the ties of the union; the opinion of power in a free government is
much more efficacious than the exercise of it; it requires the maturity of time
and repeated practice to give it due energy and certainty to the operations of
government, especially to such as affect the purses of the people.

The thirteen Swiss Cantons confederated by more general and weaker ties than
these United States are by the present articles of confederation, have not
experienced the necessity of strengthening their union by vesting their general
diet with further or greater powers; this national body has only the management
of their foreign concerns, and in case of a war can onl^ call by requisition on
the several Cantons for the necessary supplies, who are sovereign and
independent in every internal and local exercise of government; and yet this
rope of sand, as our confederation has been termed, which is so similar to
that, has held together for ages without any apparent chain.

I am persuaded, that a due consideration will evince, that the present
inefficacy of the requisitions of Congress is not owing to a defect in the
confederation, but the peculiar circumstances of the times.

The wheels of the general government having been thus clogged, and the
arrearages of taxes still accumulating, it may be asked what prospect is there
of the government resuming its proper tone, unless more compulsory powers are
granted? To this it may be answered, that the produce of imposts on commerce
which all agree to vest in Congress, together with the immense tracts of land
at their disposal, will rapidly lessen and eventually discharge the present
encumbrances; when this takes place, the mode by requisition will be found
perfectly adequate to the extraordinary exigencies of the union. Congress have
lately sold land to the amount of eight millions of dollars, which is a
considerable portion of the whole debt.

It is to be lamented that the interested and designing have availed themselves
so successfully of the present crisis, and under the specious pretense of
having discovered a panacea for all the ills of the people, they are about
establishing a system of government that will prove more destructive to them,
than the wooden horse filled with soldiers did in ancient times to the city of
Troy; this horse was introduced by their hostile enemy the Grecians, by a
prostitution of the sacred rites of their religion; in like manner, my fellow
citizens, are aspiring despots among yourselves, prostituting the name of a
Washington to cloak their designs upon your liberties.

I would ask how is the proposed government to show, or down those treasures
upon every class of citizens as is so industriously inculcated and so fondly
believed? -- Is it by the addition of numerous and expensive establishments? Is
it by doubling our judiciaries, instituting federal courts in every county of
every state? Is it by a superb presidential court? Is it by a large standing
army? In short, is it by putting it in the power of the future government to
levy money at pleasure, and placing this government so independent of the
people as to enable the administration to gratify every corrupt passion of the
mind, to riot on your spoils, without check or control?

A transfer to Congress of the power of imposing imposts on commerce, and the
unlimited regulation of trade, I believe is all that is wanting to render
America as prosperous as it is in the power of any form of government to render
her; this properly understood would meet the views of all the honest and well
meaning.

What gave birth to the Continental Convention? -- Was it not the situation of
our commerce, which lay at the mercy of every foreign power, who from motives
of interest or enmity could restrict and control it, without risqueing a
retaliation on the part of America, as Congress was impotent on this subject?
Such indeed was the case with respect to Britain, whose hostile regulations
gave such a stab to our navigation as to threaten its annihilation, it became
the interest of the American merchant to give a preference to foreign bottoms;
hence the distress of our seamen, ship-wrights, and every mechanic art
dependent on navigation.

By these regulations too we were limited in markets for our produce, our
vessels were excluded from their West India islands, many of our staple
commodities were denied entrance in Britain; hence the husb^ndmen were
distressed by the demand for their crops being lessened, and their prices
reduced. This is the source to which may be traced every evil we experience,
that can be relieved by a more energetic government. Recollect the language of
complaint for years past, compare the recommendations of Congress founded on
such complaints, pointing out the remedy; examine the reasons assigned by the
different states for appointing delegates to the late convention, view the
powers vested in that body; they all harmonize in one sentiment, that the due
regulation of trade and navigation was the anxious wish of every class of
citizens, was the great object of calling the convention.

This object being provided for by the proposed constitution, the people
overlook, and are not sensible of the needless sacrifice they are making for
it. Of what avail will be a prosperous state of commerce, when the produce of
it will be at the absolute disposal of an arbitrary and unchecked government,
who may levy at pleasure the most oppressive taxes; who may destroy every
principle of freedom; who may even destroy the privilege of complaining.

If you are in doubt about the nature and principles of the proposed
government, view the conduct of its authors and patrons, that affords the best
explanation, the most striking comment.

The evil genius of darkness presided at its birth, it came forth under the
veil of mystery, its true features being carefully concealed, and every
deceptive art has been and is practicing to have this spurious brat received as
the genuine offspring of heaven-born liberty. So fearful are its patrons that
you should discern the imposition that they have hurried on its adoption with
the greatest precipitation; they have endeavored also to preclude all
investigation, they have endeavored to intimidate all opposition; by such
means as the^e have they surreptitiously procured a convention in this st^te,
favorable to their views; and here again investigation and discussion are
abridged, the final question is moved before the subject has been under
consideration! An appeal to the people is precluded even in the last res^rt,
lest their eyes should be opened; the convent^on have denied the minority the
privilege of entering, the reasons of their dissent on its journals. Thus
despotism is already triumphant, and the genius of liberty is on the e^e of her
exit, is about bidding an eternal adieu to this once happy people.

After so recent a triumph over British despots, after such torrents of blood
and treasure have been spent, after involving ourselves in the distresses of an
arduous war, and incurring such a debt, for the express purpose of asserting
the rights of humanity, it is truly astonishing that a set of men among
ourselves should have the effrontery to attempt the destruction of our
liberties. -- But in this enlightened age to hope to dupe the people by the
arts they are practicing, is still more extraordinary. How do the advocates of
the proposed government combat the objections urged against it? Not even by an
attempt to disprove them, for that would the more fully confirm their truth,
but by a species of reasoning that is very congenial to that contempt of the
understandings of the people that they so eminently possess, and which policy
cannot even prevent frequent ebullitions of; they seem to think that the
oratory and fascination of great names and mere sound will suffice to ensure
success; -- that the people may be diverted from a consideration of the merits
of the plan, by bold assertions and mere declamation. Some of their writers for
instance, paint the distresses of every class of citizens with all the glowing
language of eloquence, as if this was a demonstration of the excellence, or
even of the safety of the new plan, which notwithstanding the reality of this
distress, may be a system of tyranny and oppression; other writers tell you of
the great men who composed the late convention, and give you a pompous display
of their virtues, instead of a justification of the plan of government; and
others again urge the tyrants plea, they endeavor to make it a case of
necessity, now is the critical moment; they represent the adoption of this
government as our only alternative, as the last opportunity we shall have of
peaceably establishing a government; they assert it to be the best system that
can be formed, and that if we reject it we will have a worse one or none at
all; nay, that if we presume to propo^^ ^lterations we shall get into a
labyrinth of difficulti^^ ^^om which we cannot be extricated, as no two state
^^ll agree in amendments, that therefore it would involve us in irreconcilable
discord. But they all sedulously avoid the fair field of argument, a rational
investigation into the organization of the proposed government. I hope the good
sense of the people will detect the fallacy of such conduct, will discover the
base juggle, and with becoming resolution resent the imposition.

That the powers of Congress ought to be strengthened all allow, but is this a
conclusive proof of the necessity to adopt the proposed plan; is it a proof
that because the late convention in the first essay upon so arduous and
difficult a subject, harmonized in their ideas, that a future convention will
not, or that after a full investigation and mature consideration of the
objections, they will not plan a better government, and one more agreeable to
the sentiments of America; or is it any proof that they can never again agree
in any plan? The late convention must indeed have been inspired, as some of its
advocates have asserted, to admit the truth of these positions, or even to
admit the possibility of the proposed government being such a one as America
ought to adopt; for this body went upon original ground foreign from their
intentions or powers, they must therefore have been wholly uninformed of the
sentiments of their constituents in respect to this form of government, as it
was not in their contemplation when the convention was appointed to erect a new
government, but to strengthen the old one. Indeed they seem to have been
determined to monopolize the exclusive merit of the discovery, or rather, as if
darkness was essential to its success, they precluded all communication with
the people, by closing their doors; thus the well disposed members, unassisted
by public information and opinion, were induced, by those arts that are now
practicing on the people, to give their sanction to this system of despotism.

Is there any reason to presume that a new Convention will not agree upon a
better plan of government? Quite the contrar^, for perhaps there never was such
a coincidence of sentiment on any occ^sion as on the present; the opponents to
the proposed plan, at the same time in every part of the continent, harmonized
in the same objections; such an uniformity of opposition is without example,
and affords the strongest demonstrations of its solidity. Their objections too
are not local, are not confined to the interests of any one particular state to
the prejudice of the rest, but with a philanthropy and liberality that reflects
luster on humanity, that dignifies the character of America, they embrace the
interests and happiness of the whole union; they do not even condescend to
minute blemishes, but show that the main pillars of the fabric are bad* that
the essential principles of liberty and safety are not to be found in it, that
despotism will be the necessary and inevitable consequence of its establishment.

SENTINEL.

SENTINEL, NUMBER V. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
MR. WILSON, in a speech delivered in our convention on Saturday the 24th
instant, has conceded, nay forceably proved, that one consolidated government
will not answer for so extensive a territory as the United States includes,
that slavery would be the necessary fate of the people under such a
government^, his words are so remarkable, that I cannot forbear reciting them;
they are as follows, viz. "The extent of country for which the new constitution
was required, produced another difficulty in the business of the federal
convention. It is the opinion of some celebrated writers, that to a small
territory, the democratical, to a middling territory, as Montesquien has termed
it, the monarchical, and, to an extensive territory, the despotic form of
government is the best adapted. Regarding, then, the wide and almost unbounded
jurisdiction of the States, at first view the hand of despotism seemed
necessary to control, connect, and protect it; and hence the chief
embarrassment arose. For, we knew, that although our constituents would
chearfu^ly submit to the legislative restraints of a free government, they
would spurn at every attempt to shackle them with despotic power." See page
five of the printed speech. And again in page seven, he says, "Is it probable,
that the dissolution of the state governments, and the establishment of one
consolidated empire, would be eligible in its nature, and satisfactory to the
people in its administration? I think not, as I have given reasons to show,
that so extensive a territory could not be governed, connected, and preserved,
but by the supremacy of despotic power. All the exertions of the most potent
emperors of Rome, were not capable of keeping that empire together, which, in
extent, was far inferior to the dominion of America."

This great point having been now confirmed by the concession of Mr Wilson,
though indeed it was self evident before, and the writers against the proposed
plan of government, having proved to demonstration, that the powers proposed to
be vested in Congress, will necessarily annihilate and absorb the legislatures
and judiciaries, and produce from their wreck one consolidated government, the
question is determined. Every man therefore who has the welfare of his country
at heart, every man who values his own liberty and happiness, in short, every
description of persons, except those aspiring despots who hope to benefit by
the misery and vassalage of their countrymen, must now concur in rejecting the
proposed system of government, must now unite in branding its authors with the
stigma of eternal infamy. The anniversary of this great escape from the fangs
of despotism, ought to be celebrated as long as liberty shall continue to be
dear to the citizens of America.

I will repeat some of my principal arguments, and add some further remarks, on
the subject of consolidation.

The legislative is the highest delegated power in government; all other are
subordinate to it. The celebrated Montesquie^ ^^tablishes it as a maxim, that
legislation necessarily follows the power of taxation. By the 8th ^ection of
article the first of the proposed governm^^t, "the Congress are to have power
to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts, and
provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States." Now,
what can be more comprehensive than these words? Every species of taxation,
whether external or internal, are included. Whatever taxes, duties, ^^d
excises, that the Congress may deem necessary to the general welfare, may be
imposed on the citizens of these states and levied by their officers. The
Congress are to be the absolute judges of the propriety of such taxes, in short
they may construe every purpose for which the state legislatures now lay taxes,
to be for the general welfare, they may seize upon every source of taxation,
and thus make it impracticable for the states to have the smallest revenue; and
if a state s^^^ld presume to impose a tax or excise, that would interfere with
the federal tax or excise, Congress may soon terminate the contention, by
repealing the state law, by virtue of the following section; "To make all laws
which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing
powers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of
the United States, or in any department thereof." Indeed every law of the
states may be controuled by this power. The legislative power granted by these
sections, is so unlimited in its nature, may be so comprehensive and boundless
in its exercise, that this alone would be amply sufficient to carry the co^p d^
grace to the state governments, to swallow them up in the grand vortex of
general empire. But the legislative has an able auxiliary in the judicial
department, for a reference to my second number will show, that this may be
made greatly instrumental in effecting a consolidation; as the federal
judiciary would absorb all others. Lest the foregoing powers should not suffice
to consolidate the United States into one empire, the convention, as if
determined to prevent the possibility of a doubt, as if to prevent all clashing
by the opposition of state powers, as if to preclude all struggle for state
importance, as if to level all obstacles to the supremacy of universal sway,
which in so extensive a territory would be an iron handed despotism, have
ordained by article the 6th, "That this constitution, and the laws of the
United States, which shall be made in pursuance thereof, and all treaties made,
or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be the
supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby,
any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the contrary
notwithstanding."

The words, "pursuant to the constitution," will be no restriction to the
authority of Congress; for the foregoing sections give them unlimited
legislation; their unbounded power of taxation does alone include all others,
as whoever has the purse strings will have full dominion. But the convention
has superadded another power, by which the Congress may stamp with the sanction
of the constitution every possible law; it is contained in the following
clause: "To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution in the government of the United States, or in any department or
officer thereof." Whatever law Congress may deem necessary and proper for
carrying into execution any of the powers vested in them, may be enacted; and
by virtue of this clause, they may control and abrogate any and every of the
laws of the state governments, on the allegation that they interfere with the
execution of any of their powers; and yet these laws will "be made in pursuance
of the constitution," and of course will "be the supreme law of the land, and
the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution
or laws of any state, to the contrary notwithstanding.

There is no reservation made in the whole of this plan in favor of the rights
of the separate states. In the present plan of confederation made in the year
1778, it was thought necessary by article the 2d to declare, that each state
retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and every power,
jurisdiction, and right, which is not by this confederation expressly delegated
to the United States in Congress assembled. Positive grant was not thought
sufficiently descriptive and restrictive upon Congress, and the omission of
such a declaration now, when such great devolutions of power are proposed,
manifests the design of consolidating the states.

What restriction does Mr. Wilson pretend there is in the new constitution to
the supremacy of despotic sway over the United States? What barrier does he
assign for the security of the state governments? Why truly a mere cobweb of a
limit! By interposing the shield of what will become mere form, to check the
reality of power. He says, that the existence of the state governments are
essential to the organization of Congress, that the former is made the
necessary basis of the latter, for the federal senators and president are to be
appointed by the state legislatures; and that hence all fears of a
consolidation are groundless and imaginary. It must be confessed, as reason and
argument would have been foreign to the defense of the proposed plan of
government, Mr. Wilson has displayed much ingenuity on this occasion; he has
involved the subject in all the mazes of sophistry, and by subtle distinctions
he has established principles and positions, that exist only in his own fertile
imagination. It is a solecism in politics for two coordinate sovereignties to
exist together; you must separate the sphere of their jurisdiction, or after
running the race of dominion for some time, one would necessarily triumph over
the other; but in the mean time the subjects of it would be harrassed with
double impositions to support the contention; however, the strife between
Congress and the states could not be of long continuance, for the former has a
decisive superiority in the outset, and has moreover the power by the very
constitution itself to terminate it when expedient.

As this necessary connection, as it has been termed, between the state
governments and the general government, has been made a point of great
magnitude by the advocates of the new plan, as it is the only obstacle alleged
by them against a consolidation, it ought to be well considered. It is declared
by the proposed plan, that the federal senators, and the electors who choose
the president of the United States, shall be appointed by the state
legislatures for the long period of six and four years respectively; how will
this connection prevent the state legislatures being divested of every
important, every efficient power? may not they, will not they dwindle into mere
boards of appointment, as has ever happened in other nations to public bodies,
who in similar circumstances have been so weak as to part with the essentials
of power? does not history abound with such instances? And this may be the
mighty amount of this inseparable connection which is so much dwelt upon as the
security of the state governments. Yet even this shadow of a limit against
consolidation may be annihilated by the imperial fiat, without any violation of
even the forms of the constitution; section 4th of article 1st has made a
provision for this, when the people are sufficiently fatigued with the useless
expense of maintaining the forms of departed power and security, and when they
shall pray to be relieved from the imposition. This section cannot be too often
repeated, as it gives such a latitude to the designing, as it revokes every
other part of the constitution that may be tolerable, and as it may enable the
administration under it to complete the system of despotism: It is in the
following words, viz. "The times, places, and manner of holding elections for
senators and representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the
legislature thereof; but the Congress may by law at any time make or alter such
regulations, except as to the place of choosing senators." The only apparent
restriction in this clause is, as to the place of appointing senators, but even
this may be rendered of no avail; for as the Congress have the control over
the time of appointment of both senators and representatives, they may, under
the pretense of an apprehension of invasion, upon the pretense of the
turbulence of what they may style a faction, and indeed pretenses are never
wanting to the designing, they may postpone the time of the election of the
senators and the representatives from period to period to perpetuity: Thus they
may, and if they may they certainly will, from the lust of dominion so inherent
in the mind of man, relieve the people from the trouble of attending elections
by condescending to create themselves. Has not Mr. Wilson avowed it in fact?
Has he not said in the convention that it was necessary that Congress should
possess this power, as the means of its own preservation; otherwise says he, an
invasion, a civil war, a faction, or a secession of a minority of the assembly,
might prevent the representation of a state in Congress.

The advocates of the proposed government must be hard driven, when they
represent, that because the legislatures of this and the other states have
exceeded the due bounds of power, notwithstanding every guard provided by their
constitutions; that because the lust of arbitrary sway is so powerful as
sometimes to get the better of every obstacle, that therefore we should give
full scope to it, for that all restriction would be useless and nugatory. And
further, when they tell you that a good administration will atone for all the
defects in the government, which, say they, you must necessarily have; for how
can it be otherwise, your rulers are to be taken from among yourselves. My
fellow citizens, these aspiring despots must indeed have a great contempt for
your understandings, when they hope to gull you out of your liberties by such
reasoning; for what is the primary object of government, but to check and
control the ambitious and designing: How then can moderation and virtue be
expected from men who will be in possession of absolute sway, who will have the
United States at their disposal? They would be more than men who could resist
such temptation! Their being taken from among the people would be no security,
tyrants are of native growth in all countries; the greatest bashaw in Turkey
has been one of the people, as Mr. Wilson tells you the president general will
be. What consolation would this be, when you shall be suffering under his
oppression.

SENTINEL.

SENTINEL, NUMBER VI. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
"Man is the glory, jest, and riddle of the world." POPE.
INCREDIBLE transition! The people who, seven years ago, deemed every earthly
good, every other consideration as worthless when placed in competition with
liberty, that heaven-born blessing, that zest of all others; the people who,
actuated by this noble ardor of patriotism, rose superior to every weakness of
humanity, and shone with such dazzling luster amidst the greatest difficulties;
who, emulous of eclipsing each other in the glorious assertion of the dignity
of human nature, courted every danger, and were ever ready when necessary, to
lay down their lives at the altar of liberty: I say, the people who exhibited a
spectacle that commanded the admiration, and drew the plaudits of the most
distant nations, are now reversing the picture; are now lost to every noble
principle, are about to sacrifice that inestimable jewel liberty to the genius
of despotism. A golden phantom held out to them by the crafty and aspiring
despots among themselves, is alluring them into the sangs of arbitrary power;
and so great is their infatuation, that it seems as if nothing short of the
reality of misery, necessarily attendant on slavery, will rouse them from their
false confidence, or convince them of the direful deception; but then, alas I
it will be too late, the chains of despotism will be fast rivetted, and all
escape precluded.

For years past the harpies of power have been industriously inculcating the
idea, that all our difficulties proceed from the impotency of Congress, and
have at length succeeded to give to this senti^ent almost universal currency
and belief: The devastations, losses and burdens, occasioned by the late war,
the excessive importations of foreign merchandise and luxuries, which have
drained the country of its specie and involved it in debt, are all overlooked,
and the inadequacy of the powers of the present confederation is erroneously
supposed to be the only cause of our difficulties; hence persons of every
description are revelling in the anticipation of the ^alcyon days consequent on
the establishment of the new constitution. What gross deception and fatal
delusion! Although very considerable benefit might be derived from
strengthening the hands of Congress, so as to enable them to regulate commerce,
and counteract the adverse restrictious of other nations, which would meet with
the concurrence of all persons; yet this benefit is accompanied in the new
constitution with the scourge of despotic power, that will render the citizens
of America tenants at will of every species of property, of every enjoyment,
and make them mere drudges of government. The gilded bait conceals corrosive^
that will eat up their whole substance.

Since the late able discussion, all are now sensible of great defects in the
new constitution, are sensible that power is thereby granted without limitation
or restriction; -- yet such is the impatience of the people to reap the golden
harvest of regulated commerce, that they will not take time to secure their
liberty and happiness, nor even to secure the benefit of the expected wealth;
but are weakly trusting their every concern to the discretionary disposal of
their future rulers; are content to risk every abuse of power, because they are
promised a good administration, because moderation and self-denial are the
characteristic features of men in possession of absolute sway. What egregious
folly What superlative ^gnorance of the nature of power does such conduct
discover!

History exhibits this melancholy truth, that slavery has been the lot of
nearly the whole of mankind in all ages, and that the very small portion who
have enjoyed the blessings of liberty, have soon been reduced to the common
level of slavery and misery. The cause of this general vassalage may be traced
to a principle of human nature, which is more powerful and operative than all
the others combined; it is that lust of dominion that is inherent in every
mind, in a greater or less degree; this is so universal and ever active a
passion as to influence all our ancestors; the different situation and
qualifications of men only modifies and varies the complexion and operation of
it.

For this darling pre-eminence and superiority, the merchant, already possessed
of a competency, adventures his all in the pursuit of greater wealth; it is for
this, that men of all descriptions, after having amassed fortunes, still
persevere in the toils of labor; in short, this is the great principle of
exertion in the votaries of riches, learning, and same.

In a savage state, pre-eminence is the result of bodily strength and
intrepidity, which compels submission from all such as have the misfortune to
be less able; therefore the great end of civil government is, to protect the
weak from the oppression of the powerful, to put every man upon the level of
equal liberty; but here again the same lust of dominion by different means
frustrates almost always this salutary intention. In a polished state of
society, wealth, talents, address and intrigue are the qualities that attain
superiority in the great sphere of government.

The most striking illustration of the prevalence of this lust of dominion is,
that the most strenuous assertors of liberty in all ages, after successfully
triumphing over tyranny, have themselves become tyrants, when the unsuspicious
confidence of an admiring people have entrusted them with unchecked power: Rare
are the instances of self-denial, or consistency of conduct in the votaries of
liberty, when they have become possessed of the reins of authority; it has been
the peculiar felicity of this country, that her great deliverer did not prove a
Cromwell, nor a Monk.

Compare the declarations of the most zealous assertors of religious liberty,
whilst under the lash of persecution, with their conduct when in power; you
will find that even the benevolence and humility inculcated in the gospels,
prove no restraint upon this love of domination. The mutual contentions of the
several sects of religion in England some ages since, are sufficient evidence
of this truth.

The annals of mankind demonstrate the precarious tenure of privileges and
property dependent upon the will and pleasure of rulers; these illustrate the
fatal danger of relying upon the moderation and self-denial of men exposed to
the temptations that the congress under the new constitution will be. The lust
of power or dominion is of that nature, as seeks to overcome every obstacle,
and does not remit its exertions, whilst any object of conquest remains,
nothing short of the plenitude of dominion, will satisfy this cursed demon:
Therefore liberty is only to be preserved by a due responsibility in the
government, and by the const^nt attention of the people; whenever that
responsibility has been lessened, or this attention remitted, in the same
degree has arbitrary sway prevailed.

The celebrated Montesquieu has warned mankind of the danger of an implicit
reliance on rulers; he says, that "a perpetual jealousy respecting liberty, is
absolutely requisite in all free states," and again, "that slavery is ever
preceeded by sleep."

I shall conclude this number with an extract from a speech delivered by lord
George Digby, afterward earl of Bristol, in the English parliament, on the
triennial bill in the year 1641. viz. "It has been a maxim among the wisest
legislators that whoever means to settle good laws must proceed in them, with a
sinister opinion of all mankind; and whosoever is not wicked, it is for want
only of the opportunity. It is that opportunity of being ill, Mr. speaker, that
we must take away, if ever we mean to be happ^, which can never be done, but by
the frequency of parliaments.

"No state can wisely be confident of any public minister's continuing good
longer than the rod is held over him.

"Let me appeal to all those that were present in this house at the agitation
of the petition of rights: and let them tell themselves truly of whose
promotion to the management of public affairs do they think the generality
would, at that time, have had better hopes, than of Mr. Noy, and sir Thomas
Wentworth; both having been at that time and in that business, as I have heard,
most keen and active patriots, and the latter of them, to the eternal
aggravation of his infamous treachery to the commonwealth be it spoken, the
first mover, and insister, to have this clause added to the petition of rights,
viz.

"That for the comfort and safety of his subjects, his majesty would be pleased
to declare his will and pleasure, that all his ministers should serve him
according to the laws and statutes of the realm.

"And yet, Mr. speaker, to whom now can all the inundations upon our liberties,
under pretense of law, and the late ship-wreck at once of all our property, be
attributed more than to Noy, and all those other mischiefs whereby this
monarchy has been brought almost to the brink of destruction, so much to any
as to that grand apostate to the commonwealth, the new lieutenant of Ireland,
sir Thomas Wentworth? Let every man but consider these men as once they were."

British Liberties, page 184 and 185.

SENTINEL.
Philadelphia, Dec. 22, 1787.
SENTINEL, NUMBER VII. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow Citizens,
THE admiring world lately beheld the sun of liberty risen to meridian splendour
in this western hemisphere, whose cheering rays began to dispel the gloom of
even transatlantic despotism; the patriotic mind, enraptured with the glowing
scene, fondly anticipated an universal and eternal day to the orb of freedom;
but the horrison is already darkened, and the glooms of slavery threaten to fix
their empire. How transitory are the blessings of this life! Scarcely have four
years elapsed since these United States, rescuced from the domination of
foreign despots, by the unexampled heroism and perseverance of its citizens, at
such great expense of blood and treasure, when they are about to fall a prey to
the machinations of a profligate junto at home, who, seizing the favorable
moment, when the temporary and extraordinary difficulties of the people have
thrown them off their guard, and lulled that jealousy of power so essential to
the preservation of freedom, have been too successful in the sacrilegious
attempt; however I am confident that this formidable conspiracy will end in the
confusion and infamy of its authors; that, if necessary, the avenging sword of
an abused people will humble these aspiring despots to the dust, and that their
fate, like that of Charles the First of England, will deter such attempts in
future, and prove the confirmation of the liberties of America until time shall
be no more.

One would imagine, by the insolent conduct of those harpies of power, they had
already triumphed over the liberties of the people; that the chains were
rivetted, and tyranny established. They tell us all farther opposition will be
in vain, as this state has passed the Rubicon. Do they imagine the freemen of
Pennsylvania will be thus trepanned out of their liberties; that they will
submit without a struggle? They must indeed be inebriated with the lust of
dominion, to indulge such chimerical ideas. Will the act of one sixth of the
people, and this too, founded on deception and surprise, bind the community. Is
it thus that the altar of liberty so recently crimsoned with the blood of our
worthies, is it to be prostrated, and despotism reared on its ruins? Certainly
not. The solemn mummery that has been acting in the name of the people of
Pennsylvania, will be treated with the deserved contempt, it has served,
indeed, to expose the principles of the men concerned, and to draw a line of
discrimination between the real and affected patriots.

Impressed with an high opinion of the understanding and spirit of my fellow
citizens, I have in no stage of this business entertained a doubt of its
eventual defeat; the momentary delusion, arising from an unreserved confidence
placed in some of the characters whose names sanctioned this scheme of power,
did not discourage me: I foresaw that this blind admiration would discover it,
native deformity.

Already the enlightened pen of patriotism, aided by an able public discussion,
has dispelled the mist of deception, and the great body of the people are
awakened to a due sense of their danger, and are determined to assert their
liberty, if necessary, by the sword, but this mean need not to be recurred to,
for who are their enemies? A junto, composed of the lordly and high minded
gentry, of the profligate and the needy office hunters, of men, principally,
who, in the late war, skulked from the common danger. Would such characters
dare to face the majesty of a free people? No: All the conflict would be
between the offended justice and generosity of the people, whether these
sacrilegious invaders of their dearest rights should suffer the merited
punishment, or escape with an infamous contempt.

However, as additional powers are necessary to Congress, the people will no
doubt see the expediency of calling a convention for this purpose as soon as
may be, by applying to their representatives in assembly, at their next
session, to appoint a suitable day for the election of such convention.

SENTINEL.
Philadelphia, Dec. 27th, 1787.
SENTINEL, NUMBER VIII. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
UNDER the benign influence of liberty, this country, so recently a rugged
wilderness, and the abode of savages and wild beasts, has attained to a degree
of improvement and greatness, in less than two ages, of which history furnishes
no parallel; it is here that human nature may be viewed in all its glory, man
assumes the station designed him by the creation, a happy equality and
independency pervades the community; it is here the human mind, untrammelled by
the restraints of arbitrary power, expands every faculty: as the field to fame
and riches is open to all, it stimulates universal exertion and exhibits a
lively picture of emulation, industry and happiness. The unfortunate and
oppressed of all nations fly to this grand asylum, where liberty is ever
protected, and industry crowned with success.

But as it is by comparison only, that men estimate the value of any good, they
are not sensible of the worth of these blessings they enjoy until they are
deprived of them; hence, from ignorance of the horrors of slavery, nations that
have been in possession of that rarest of blessings, liberty, have so easily
parted with it: When groaning under the yoke of tyranny, what perils would they
not encounter, what consideration would they not give to regain the inestimable
jewel they had lost; but the jealousy of despotism guards every avenue to
freedom, and confirms its empire at the expense of the devoted people, whose
property is made instrumental to their misery; for the rapacious hand of power
seizes upon every thing, despair presently succeeds, and every noble faculty of
the mind being depressed, and all motive to industry and exertion being
removed, the people are adapted to the nature of the government, and drag out a
listless existence.

If ever America should be enslaved, it will be from this cause, that they are
not sensible of their peculiar felicity, that they are not aware of the value
of the heavenly boon committed to their care and protection; and if the present
conspiracy fails, as I have no doubt will be the case, it will be the triumph
of reason and philosophy, as these united states have never felt the iron hand
of power, or experienced the wretchedness of slavery.

The conspirators against our liberties have presumed too much on the maxim,
that nations do not take the alarm, until they feel oppression. The enlightened
citizens of America have, on two memorable occasions, convinced the tyrants of
Europe, that they are endued with the faculty of foresight, that they will
sedulously guard against the first introduction of tyranny, however speciously
glossed over, or whatever appearance it may assume: It was not the mere amount
of the duty on stamps, or tea, that America opposed; they were considered as
signals of approaching despotism, as precedents whereon the superstructure of
arbitrary sway was to be reared.

Notwithstanding such illustrious evidence of the good sense and spirit of the
people of these united states, and contrary to all former experience of
mankind, which demonstrates, that it is only by gradual and imperceptible
degrees that nations have hitherto been enslaved, except in case of conquest by
the sword; the authors of the present conspiracy are attempting to seize upon
absolute power at one grasp; impatient of dominion, they have adopted a
decisive line of conduct, which if successful would obliterate every trace of
liberty. I congratulate my fellow citizens, that the infatuated confidence of
their enemies has so blinded their ambition, that their defeat must be certain
and easy; if imitating the refined policy of successful despots, they had
attacked the citadel of liberty by sap, and gradually undermined its outworks,
they would have stood a fairer chance of effecting their design; but in this
enlightened age thus rashly to attempt to carry the fortress by storm, is folly
indeed. They have even exposed some of their batteries prematurely, and thereby
unfolded every latent view; for the unlimited power of taxation would alone
have been amply sufficient for every purpose; by a proper application of this,
the will and pleasure of the rulers would of course have become the supreme law
of the land; therefore there was no use in pourtraying the ultimate object, by
superadding the form to the reality of supremacy in the following clauses, viz.
that which impowers the new congress to make all laws that, may be necessary
and proper for carrying into execution any of their powers by virtue of which
every possible law will be constitutional, as they are to be the sole judges of
the propriety of such laws; that which ordains that their acts shall be the
supreme law of the land, any thing in the laws or constitution of any state to
the contrary notwithstanding; that which gives congress the absolute control
over the time and mode of its appointment and election, whereby, independent of
any other means; they may establish hereditary despotism; that which authorizes
them to keep on foot at all times a standing army; and that which subjects the
militia to absolute command. And to accelerate the subjugation of the people,
trial by jury in civil cases, and the liberty of the press are abolished.

So flagrant, so audacious a conspiracy against the liberties of a free people,
is without precedent; mankind in the darkest ages, have never been so insulted
-- even then tyrants found it necessary to pay some respect to the habits and
feelings of the people; and nothing but the name of a Washington could have
occasioned a moment's hesitation about the nature of the new plan, or saved its
authors from the execration and vengeance of the people, which eventually will
prove an aggravation of their treason, for America will resent the imposition
practiced upon the unsuspicious zeal of her illustrious deliverer, and
vindicate her character from the aspersions of these enemies of her happiness
and fame.

The advocates of this plan have artfully attempted to veil over the true
nature and principles of it, with the names of those respectable characters
that by consummate cunning and address they have prevailed upon to sign it, and
what ought to convince the people of the deception and excite their
apprehensions, is, that with every advantage which education, the science of
government, and of law, the knowledge of history, and superior talents and
endowments furnish the authors and advocates of this plan, they have, from its
publication, exerted all their power and influence to prevent all discussion of
the subject, and when this could not be prevented, they have constantly avoided
the ground of argument, and recurred to declamation, sophistry, and personal
abuse, but principally relied upon the magic of names. Would this have been
their conduct, if their cause had been a good one? No: they would have invited
vestigation, and convinced the understandings of the people.

But such policy indicates great ignorance of the good sense and spirit of the
people; for if the sanction of every convention throughout the union was
obtained by the means these men are practicing, yet their triumph would be
momentary, the favorite object would still elude their grasp, for a government
founded on fraud and deception could not be maintained without an army
sufficiently powerful to compel submission, which the well-born of America
could not speedily accomplish. However, the complexion of several of the more
considerable states does not promise even this point of success. The Carolinas,
Virginia, Maryland, New York, and New Hampshire, have, by their wisdom in
taking a longer time to deliberate, in all probability saved themselves from
the disgrace of becoming the dupes of this gilded bait, as experience will
evince, that it need only be properly examined to be execrated and repulsed.

The merchant, immersed in schemes of wealth, seldom extends his view beyond
the immediate obje^^ of gain; he blindly pursues his seeming interest, and sees
not the latent mischief; therefore it is, that he is the last to take the
alarm, when public liberty is threatened. This may account for the infatuation
of some of our merchants, who, elated with the imaginary prospect of an
improved commerce under the new government, overlook all danger; they do not
consider that commerce is the handmaid of liberty, a plant of free growth that
withers under the hand of despotism, that every concern of individuals will be
sacrificed to the gratification of men in power, who will institute injurious
monopolies, and shackle commerce with every device of avarice; and that
property of every species will be held at the will and pleasure of rulers.

If the nature of the case did not give birth to these well founded
apprehensions, the principles and characters of the authors and advocates of
the measure ought. View the monopolizing spirit of the principal of them See
him converting a Bank instituted for the common benefit, to his own and
creatures emolument, and by the aid thereof controuling the credit of the
state, and directing the measures of government. View the vassalage of our
merchants, the thraldom of the city of Philadelphia, and the extinction of that
spirit of independency in most of its citizens, so essential to freedom. View
this Colossus attempting the grasp to commerce of America, and meeting with a
sudden repulse; in the midst of his immense career receiving a shock that
threatens his very existence. View the desperate fortunes of many of his
coadjutors and dependents, particularly the bankrupt situation of the principal
instrument under the great man in promoting the new government, whose
superlative arrogance, ambition, and rapacity, would need the spoils of
thousands to gratify. View his towering aspect, he would have no bounds of
compassion for the oppressed, he would overlook all their sufferings. Recollect
the strenuous and unremitted exertions of these men, for years past, to destroy
our admirable constitution, whose object is, to secure equal liberty and
advantages to all, and the great obstacle in the way of their ambitious
schemes, and then answer, Whether these apprehensions are chimerical; whether
such characters will be less ambitious, less avaricious, more moderate, when
the privileges, property, and every concern of the people of the United States
shall be at their mercy, when they shall be in possession of absolute sway.

SENTINEL.
Philadelphia, Dec. 27th, 1787.
SENTINEL, NUMBER IX. To the PEOPLE of PENNSYLVANIA.
Friends, Countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
YOU have the peculiar felicity of living under the most perfect system of
local government in the world; prize then this invaluable ble^^^ng as it
deserves; suffer it not to be wrested from you, and the scourge of despotic
power substituted in its place, under the specious pretense of vesting the
general government of the United States with necessary power; that this would
be the inevitable consequence of the establishment of the new constitution, the
least consideration of its nature and tendency is su^^cient to convince every
unprejudiced mind. If you were sufficiently impressed with your present favored
situation, I should have no doubt of a proper decision of the question in
discussion.

The highest illustration of the excellence of the constitution of this
commonwealth, is, that from its first establishment, the ambitious and
profligate have been united in a constant conspiracy to destroy it; so sensible
are they that it is their great enemy, that it is the great palladium of equal
liberty, and the property of the people from the rapacious hand of power: the
annals of mankind do not furnish a more glorious instance of the triumph of
patriotism over the lust of ambition, aided by most of the wealth of the state.
The few generally prevail over the many by uniformity of council, unremitted
and persevering exertion, and superior information and address; but in
Pennsylvania, the reverse has happened; here the well-born have been baffled in
all their efforts to prostrate the altar of liberty for the purpose of
substit^ting their own insolent sway, that would degrade the freemen of this
state into servile dependence upon the lordly and great: however, it is not the
nature of ambition to be discouraged; it is ever ready to improve the first
opportunity to rear its baneful head, and with irritated fury to wreak its
vengeance on the votaries of liberty.

The present conspiracy is a continental exertion of the well-born of America
to obtain that darling domination, which they have not been able to accomplish
in their respective states. Of what complexion were the deputies of this state
in the general convention? Six out of eight were the inveterate enemies of our
inestimable constitution, and the principles of that faction that for ten years
past have kept the people in continual alarm for their liberties. Who are the
advocates of the new constitution in this state? They consist of the same
faction, with the addition of a few deluded well-meaning men, but whose number
is daily lessening.

The conspirators have come ^^rward at a most favorable conjuncture, when the
state of public affairs has lulled all jealousy o^ power: emboldened by the
sanction of the augu^l name of a Washington that they have prostituted their
purpose, they have presumed to overleap the usual gradations to absolute power,
and have attempted to seize at once upon the supremacy of dominion. The new
instrument of government does indeed make a sallacious parade of some remaining
privileges, and insults the understandings of the people with the semblance of
liberty in some of its artful and deceptive clauses, which form but a flimsy
veil over the reality of tyranny, so weakly endeavored to be concealed from
the eye of freedom. For, of what avail are the few inadequate stipulations in
favor of the rights of the people, when they may be effectually counteracted
and destroyed by virtue of other clauses; when these enable the rulers to
renounce all dependence on their constituents, and render the latter tenants at
will of every concern? The new constitution is in fact a carte blanch, a
surrender at discretion to the will and pleasure of our rulers; as this has
been demonstrated to be the case, by the investigation and discussion that have
taken place, I trust the same good sense and spirit which have hitherto enabled
the people to triumph over the wiles of ambition, will be again exerted for
their salvation. The accounts from various parts of the country correspond with
my warmest hopes, and justify my early predictions of the eventual defeat of
this scheme of power and office making.

The genius of liberty has sounded the alarm, and the dormant spirit of her
votaries is reviving with enthusiastic ardor; the like unanimity which formerly
distinguished them in their conflict with foreign despots, promise to crown
their virtuous opposition on the present occasion, with signal success. The
structure of despotism that has been reared in this state, upon deception and
surprise, will vanish like the baseless fabric of a dream, and leave not a
trace behind.

The perasites and tools of power in Northampton county ought to take warning
from the fate of the Carlisle junto, lest like them, they experience the
resentment of an injured people. I would advise them not to repeat the
imposition of a set of fallacious resolutions as the sense of that county, when
in fact, it was the act of a despicable few, with Alexander Patterson at their
head, whose achievements at Wyoming, as the meaner instrument of unfeeling
avarice, have rendered ins^nously notorious; but yet, like the election of a
Mr. Sedgwick for the little town of Stockbridge, which has been adduced as
evidence of the unanimity of the western counties of Massachusetts state in
favor of the new constitution, when the fact is far otherwise, this act of a
few individuals will be founded forth over the continent as a testimony of the
zealous attachment of the county of Northampton to the new constitution. By
such wretched and momentary deceptions do these harpies of power endeavor to
give the complexion of strength to their cause. To prevent the detection of
such impositions, to prevent the reflection of the rays of light from state to
state, which producing general illumination, would dissipate the mist of
deception, and thereby prove fatal to the new constitution, all intercourse
between the patriots of America is as far as possible cut off; whilst on the
other hand, the conspirators have the most exact information, a common concert
is every where evident, they move in unison. There is so much mystery in the
conduct of these men, such systematic de^^ption, and fraud, characterises all
their measures, such extraordinary solicitude shown by them to precipitate and
surprise the people into a blind and implicit adoption of this government that
it ought to excite the most alarming apprehensions in the minds of all those
who think their privileges, property and welfare, worth securing.

It is a fact that can be established, that during almost the whole of the time
that the late convention of this state were assembled, the newspapers
published in New York, by Mr. Greenleaf, which contain the essays written there
against the new government, such as the patriotic ones of Brutus, Cincinnatus,
Cato, etc. sent as usual by the printer of that place, to the printers of this
city, miscarried in their conveyance, which prevented the re-publication in
this state, of many of these pieces, and since that period great irregularity
prevails; and I stand informed, that the printers in New York complain that the
free and independent newspapers of this city do not come to hand; whilst on the
contrary, we find the devoted vehicles of despoti^m pass uninterrupted. I would
ask what is the meaning of the new arrangement at the post office, which
abridges the circulation of newspapers at this momentous crisis, when our
every concern is dependent upon a proper decision of the subject in discussion.
No trivial excuse will be admitted; the Sentinel will, as from the first
approach of despotism, warn his countrymen of the insidious and base stratagems
that are practicing to hoodwink them out of their liberties.

The more I consider the maneuvers that are practicing, the more am I alarmed
-- foreseeing that the juggle cannot long be concealed, and that the spirit of
the people will not brook the imposition, they have guarded, as they suppose,
against any danger arising from the opposition of the people, and rendered
their struggles for liberty impotent and ridiculous. What otherwise is the
meaning of disarming the militia, for the purpose, as it is said, of repairing
their muskets at such a particular period? Does not the timeing of the measure
determine the intention. I was ever jealous of the select militia, consisting
of infantry and troops of horse, instituted in this city, and in some of the
counties, without the fanction of law, and officered principally by the devoted
instruments of the well born, although the illustrious patriotism of one of
them, has not corresponded with the intention of appointing him. Are not these
corpse provided to suppress the first efforts of freedom, and to check the
spirit of the people until a regular and sufficiently powerful military force
shall be embodied to rivet the chains of slavery on a deluded nation. What
confirms these apprehensions, is the declaration of a certain major, an active
instrument in this business, and the echo of the principal conspirators, who
has said, he should dee^ the cutting off of five thousand men, as a small
sacrifice, a cheap purchase, for the establishment of the new constitution.

SENTINEL.
Philadelphia, Jan. 5, 1788.
APPENDIX.
THE CONSTITUTION, AGREED ON BY THE GENERAL CONVENTION, Seventeenth of
September, 1787, at Philadelphia.
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union,
establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defense,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United
States of America.

ARTICLE I.
ALL legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the
United States, which shall consist of a senate and house of representatives.

Sec. 2. The house of representatives shall be composed of members chosen every
second year by the people of the several states, and the electors in each state
shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous
branch of the state legislature.

No person shall be a representative who shall not have attained to the age of
twenty-five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who
shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be
chosen.

Representatives, and direct taxes, shall be apportioned among the several
states which may be included within this union, according to their respective
numbers, which shall be determined by adding to the whole number of free
persons, including those bound to service for a term of years, and excluding
Indians not taxed, three-fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the Congress of the
United States, and within every subsequent term of ten years, in such manner as
they shall by law direct. The number of representatives shall not exceed one
for every thirty thousand, but each state shall have at least one
representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the state of
New Hampshire shall be entitled to choose three, Massachusetts eight,
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six,
New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten,
North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.

When vacancies happen in the representation from any state, the executive
authority thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

The house of representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers,
and shall have the sole power of impeachment.

Sect. 3. The senate of the United States shall be composed of two senators
from each state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and each
senator shall have one vote.

Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first
election, they shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The
seats of the senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of
the second year; of the second class at the expiration of the fourth year; and
of the third class at the expiration of the sixth year; so that one third may
be chosen every second year: and if vacancies happen by resignation or
otherwise, during the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the
legislature, which shall then fill such vacancies.

No person shall be a senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty
years, and been nine years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not,
when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.

The vice president of the United States shall be president of the senate, but
shall have no vote unless they be equally divided

The senate shall choose their other officers, and also a president pro tempore
in the absence of the vice president, or when he shall exercise the office of
president of the United States.

The senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When fitting for
that purpose they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the president of the
United States is tried, the chief justice shall preside: and no person shall be
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.

Judgment in cases of impeachment, shall not extend further than to removal
from office, and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust,
or profit, under the United States; but the party convicted shall nevertheless
be liable and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment according
to law.

Sect. 4. The times, places, and manner of holding elections for senators and
representatives, shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature the cos^:
but the Congress may, at any time, by law make or alter such regulations,
except as to the place (...) senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting
shall be on the first Monday in December, unless they shall ^^ law appoint ^^
different day.

Sect. 5. Each (...) shall be the (...) of the elections, returns, and
qualification of its own members, and a majority of each shall constitu^^^^
quorum to do business; but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and
may be authorized to compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner,
and under such penalties, as each house may provide.

Each house way determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for
disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member.

Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time
punish the same, excepting such parts as may, in their judgment, require
secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the members of either house, on any question,
shall, at the desire of one fifth of those present, be entered on the journal.

Neither house, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of
the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that
in which the two houses shall be sitting.

Sect. 6. The senators and representatives shall receive a compensation for
their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the
United States. They shall, in all cases, except treason, felony, and breach of
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance at the session of
their respective houses, and in going to, and returning from the same, and for
any speech or debate in either house, they shall not be questioned in any other
place.

No senator or representative shall, during the time for which he was elected,
be appointed to any civil ^^^ice under the authority of the United States,
which shall have been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been
increased during such time; and no person, holding any office under the United
States, shall be a member of either house during his continuance in office.

Sect. 7. All bills for raising revenue shall origina^^ in the house of
representatives; but the senate may propose or concur with amendments as on
other bills.

Every bill, which shall have passed the house of representatives and the
senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the president of the
United States; if he approve, he shall sign it, but if not, he shall return it,
with his objections, to that house in which it shall have originated, who shall
enter the objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it.
-- If, after such re-consideration, two-thirds of that house shall agree to
pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other
house, by which it shall be re-considered, and, if approved by two-thirds of
that house, it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both
houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons
voting for and against the bill shall be entered on the journal of each house
respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the president within ten
days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same
shall be a law in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress, by
their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the concurrence of the senate and
house of representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment)
shall be presented to the president of the United States: and before the same
shall take effect, shall be approved by him, or, being disapproved by him,
shall be repassed by two-thirds of the senate and house of representatives,
according to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of a bill.

Sect. 8. The Congress shall have power,

To lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts, and excises, to pay the debts and
provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States; but
all duties, imposts, and excises, shall be uniform throughout the United States;

To borrow money on the credit of the United States;

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and
with the Indian tribes;

To establish an uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the
subject of bankruptcies throughout the United States;

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the
standard of weights and measures;

To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current
coin of the United States;

To establish post-offices and post roads;

To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing, for limited
times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their respective
writings and discoveries;

To constitute tribunals inferior to the supreme court;

To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and
offenses e^gainst the law of nations;

To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules
concerning captures on land and water;

To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall
be for a longer term than two years;

To provide and maintain a navy;

To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;

To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union,
suppress insurrections, and repel invasions;

To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining the militia, and for
governing such part of them as may be employed in the service of the United
States, reserving to the states respectively, the appointment of the officers,
and the authority of training the militia according to the discipline
prescribed by Congress.

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever over such district
(not exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular states, and
the acceptance of congress, become the seat of the government of the united
states, and to exercise like authority over all places purchased by the consent
of the legislature of the state in which the same shall be, for the erection of
forts, magazines, arsenals, dock-yards, and other needful buildings; -- And

To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into
execution the foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this
constitution in the government of the united states, or in any department or
officer thereof.

Sect. 9. The migration or importation of such persons, as any of the states
now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the
Congress prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or
duty may be imposed on such importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each
person.

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when
in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

No bill of attainder, or ex post sacto law, shall be passed.

No capitation, or other direct tax, shall be laid, unless in proportion to the
sensus, or enumeration, herein before directed to be taken.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state. No
preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports
of one state over those of another: Nor shall vessels bound to, or from one
state, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay duties in another.

No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of
appropriations made by law; and a regular statement and account of the receipts
and expenditures of all public money shall be published from time to time.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: And no person,
holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of
the congress, accept of any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind
whatever, from any king, prince, or foreign state.

Sect. 10. No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation;
grant letters of marque or reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make any
thing but gold or silver coin a tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of
attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing the obligation of contracts, or
grant any title of nobility.

No state shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts, or
duties on imports, or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for
executing its inspection laws; and the net produce of all duties and imposts,
laid by any state, on imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury
of the United States; and all such laws shall be subject to the revision and
control of the Congress. No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay
any duty of tonnage, keep troops, or ships of war, in time of peace, enter into
any agreement or compact with another state, or with a foreign power, or engage
in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent danger as will not admit
of delay.

ARTICLE II.
Sect. 1. The executive power shall be vested in a president of the United
States of America. He shall hold his office during the term of four years, and,
together with the vice president, chosen for the same term, be elected as
follows:

Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the legislature thereof may
direct, a number of ele^^ors, equal to the whole number of senators and
representatives to which the state may be entitled in the Congress: but no
senator or representative, or person holding an office of trust or profit under
the United States, shall be appointed an elector.

The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for two
persons, of whom one at least shall be an inhabitant of the same state with
themselves. And they shall make a list of all the persons voted for, and of the
number of votes for each; which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit,
sealed, to the government of the United States, directed to the president of
the senate. The president of the senate shall, in the presence of the senate
and house of representatives, open all the certificates, and the votes shall
then be counted. The person having the greatest number of votes shall be the
president, if such number be a majority of the whole number of the electors
appointed; and if there be more than one who have such majority, and have an
equal number of votes, then the house of representatives shall immediately
choose, by ballot, one of them for president; and if no person have a majority,
then, from the five highest on the list, the said house shall in like manner,
choose the president. But in choosing the president, the votes shall be taken
by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for
this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two thirds of the
states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. In
every case, after the choice of the president, the person having the greatest
number of votes of the electors, shall be the vice president. But if there
should remain two or more who have equal votes, the senate shall choose from
them, by ballot, the vice president.

The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on
which they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the
United States.

No person, except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States at
the time of the adoption of this constitution, shall be eligible to the office
of president; neither shall any person be eligible to that office, who shall
not have attained to the age of thirty-five years, and been fourteen years a
resident within the united states.

In case of the removal of the president from office, or of his death,
resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said
office, the same shall devolve on the vice president, and the Congress may, by
law, provide for the case of removal, death, resignation, or inability, both of
the president and vice president, declaring what officer shall then act as
president, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a president shall be elected.

The president shall, at stated times, receive for his services a compensation,
which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he
shall have been elected, and he shall not receive, within that period, any
other emolument from the United States, or any of them.

Before he enters on the execution of his office, he shall take the following
oath or affirmation:

"I do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I will faithfully execute the office of
president of the United States, and will^ to the best of my ability, preserve,
protect, and defend the constitution of the United States."

Sect. 2. The president shall be commander in chief of the army and navy of the
United States, and of the militia of the several states, when called into the
actual service of the United States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of
the principal officer in each of the executive departments, upon any subject
relating to the duties of their respective offices, and he shall have power to
grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the United States, except in
cases of impeachment.

He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to make
treaties, provided two thirds of the senators present concur; and he shall
nominate, and by and with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint
ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, judges of the supreme court,
and all other officers of the United States, whose appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by law. But the Congress
may, by law, vest the appointment of such inferior officers, as they think
proper, in the president alone, in the courts of law, or in the heads of
departments.

The president shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during
the recess of the senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end
of their next session.

Sect. 3. He shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information of the
state of the union, and recommend to their consideration such measures as he
shall judge necessary and expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions,
convene both houses, or either of them, and in case of disagreement between
them, with respect to the time of adjournment, he may adjourn them to such time
as he shall think proper; he shall receive ambassadors and other public
ministers; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed, and shall
commission all the officers of the United States.

Sect. 4. The president, vice president, and all civil officers of the United
States shall be removed from office on impeachment for, and conviction of
treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.

ARTICLE III.
Sect. 1. The judicial power of the United States shall be vested in one
supreme court, and in such inferior courts as the Congress may, from time to
time, (...) and establish. The judges, both o^ the supreme and inferior courts,
shall hold their offices during good behavior, and shall, at stated times,
receive for their services, a compensation which shall not be diminished during
their continuance in office.

Sect. 2. The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity,
arising under this constitution the laws of the United States, and treaties
made, or which shall be made, under their authority; to all cases affecting
ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls; to all cases of admiralty ^^d
maritime jurisdi^^ion; to controversies to which the United States shall be a
party; to controversies between two or more states, between a state and
citizens of another state, between citizens of different states, between
citizens of the same state claiming lands under the grants of different states,
and between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens, or
subjects.

In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers, and consuls, and
those in which a state shall be party, the supreme court shall have original
jurisdiction. In all other cases before mentioned, the supreme court shall have
appellate jurisdiction, both as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and
under such regulations as the Congress shall make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and
such trial shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been
committed; but when not committed within any state, the trial shall be at such
place or places as the Congress may by law have directed.

Sect. 3. Treason against the United States shall consist only in levying war
against them, or in adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No
person shall be convicted of treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses
to the same overt act, or on confession in open court.

The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no
attainder of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture, except
during the life of the person attainted.

ARTICLE IV.
Sect. 1. Full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public
acts, records, and judicial proceedings of every other state. And the Congress
may, by general laws, prescribe the manner in which such acts, records, and
proceedings shall be proved, and the effect thereof.

Sect. 2. The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and
immunities of citizens in the several states.

A person, charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall
flee from justice, and be found in any other state, shall, on demand of the
executive authority of the state from which he fled, he delivered up, to be
removed to the state having jurisdiction of the crime.

No person, held to service or labor in one state^ under the laws thereof,
escaping into another, shall, ^n consequence of any law or regulation therein,
be discharged from such service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim
of the party to whom such service or labor may be due.

Sect. 3. New states may be admitted by the Congress into this union; but no
new state shall be formed or ere^^ed within the jurisdiction of any other
state; nor any state be formed by the junction of two or more states, or parts
of states, without the consent of the legislatures of the states concerned, as
well as of the Congress.

The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and
regulations respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United
States; and nothing in this constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice
any claims of the United States, or of any particular state.

Sect. 4. The United States shall guarantee to every state in this union, a
republican form of government, and shall protect each of them against invasion;
and on application of the legislature, or of the executive (when the
legislature cannot be convened) against domestic violence.

ARTICLE V.
The Congress, whenever two-thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary,
shall propose amendments to this constitution, or, on the application of the
legislatures of two-thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for
proposing amendments, which in either case shall be valid to all intents and
purposes, as part of this constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of
three-fourths of the several states, or by conventions of three-fourths
thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the
Congress: Provided, that no amendment which may be made prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight, shall in any manner affect the first and
fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no state,
without its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the senate.

ARTICLE VI.
All debts contracted, and engagements entered into, before the adoption of
this constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this
constitution, as under the confederation.

This constitution, and the laws of the United States, which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the
judges in every state shall be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution, or
laws of any state, to the contrary notwithstanding.

The senators and representatives before mentioned, and the members of the
state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United
States, and of the several states, shall be bound, by oath or affirmation, to
support this constitution; but no religious test shall ever be required as a
qualification to any office, or public trust, under the United States.

ARTICLE VII.
The ratification of the conventions of nine states shall be sufficient for the
establishment of this constitution between the states so ratifying the same.

Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent of the States present, the
seventeenth day of September, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty seven, and of the Independence of the United States of
America, the twelfth. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.

GEORGE WASHINGTON, President, And Deputy from Virginia. NEW HAMPSHIRE,
John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman.
MASSACHUSETTS,
Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King.
CONNECTICUT,
William S. Johnson, Roger Sherman.
NEW YORK,
Alexander Hamilton.
NEW JERSEY,
William Livingston, David Brea^ly, William Patterson, Jonathan Dayton.
PENNSYLVANIA,
Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Miffiin, Robert Morris, George Clymer, Thomas
Fitzsimons, Jared Ingerso^l, James Wilson, Gouverneur Morris.
DELAWARE.
George Read, Gunning Bedford, jun. John Dickinson, Richard Basset, Jacob Broom.
MARYLAND,
James M'Henry, Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer, Daniel Carrol.
VIRGINIA,
John Blair, James Madison, jun.
NORTH CAROLINA,
William Blount, Richard Dobbs Spaight, Hugh Williamson.
SOUTH CAROLINA.
John Rutledge, Charles C. Pinckney, Charles Pinckney, Pierce Butler.
GEORGIA,
William Few, Abraham Baldwin.

Attest. WILLIAM JACKSON, Secretary

In CONVENTION, Monday September 17, 1787. PRESENT, The States of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connectic^t, Mr. Hamilton, from New York,
New Jersey, Pen^sylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia:
RESOLVED,
THAT the preceding Constitution be laid before the United States in Congress
assembled, and that it is the opinion of this Convention, that it should
afterward be submitted to a convention of delegates, chosen in each state by
the people thereof, under the recommendation of its legislature, for their
assent and ratification; and that each convention, assenting to, and ratifying
the same, should give notice thereof to the United States in Congress assembled.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this convention, that as soon as the
conventions of nine states shall have ratified this constitution, the United
States in Congress assembled, should fix a day on which the electors should be
appointed by the states which shall have ratified the same, and the day on
which the electors should assemble to vote for the president, and the time and
place for commencing proceedings under this constitution. That after such
publication, the electors should be appointed, and the senators and
representatives elected: That the electors should meet on the day fixed for the
election of the president, and should transmit their votes, certified, signed,
sealed, and directed, as the constitution requires, to the secretary of the
United States in Congress assembled, that the senators and representatives
should convene at the time and place assigned; that the senators should appoint
a president of the senate, for the sole purpose of receiving, opening, and
counting the votes for president; and, that after he shall be chosen, the
Congress, together with the president, should, without delay, proceed to
execute this constitution.

By the unanimous order of the Convention, GEORGE WASHINGTON, President. WM.
JACKSON, Secretary.


FINIS.

