Mr. POTTER's ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE General Assembly OF THE STATE OF VERMONT, ON THE
DAY OF THEIR ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, OCTOBER 11, 1787, AT NEWBURY.

BY LYMAN POTTER, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN NORWICH.

WINDSOR: PRINTED BY HOUGH and SPOONER.

M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
2 SAMUEL, xxiii. 3. He that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear
of God.
CIVIL government is an institution appointed by God, for the good and
well-being of mankind. The necessity and importance of this institution may be
inferred from the wisdom and goodness of him who has appointed the same. The
divine being has seen fit to establish his law, as a perfect, unerring rule for
men to walk by* a due regard to which is the foundation of all true happiness.
And were every one disposed to walk agreeably to this rule, it would supersede
the necessity of any civil establishment; for then every one would do to others
as he would have them do unto him. But such is the unhappy state of mankind,
since the apostasy, that they are disposed, every man to seek his own, and not
the thing of another. And if there is nothing to prevent their covetous
desires, and wicked pursuits, but their own consciences, and the divine law,
the penalty of which none can inflict but God only, they will lie, and steal,
and destroy both themselves and others. Hence arises the necessity of civil
government, which God, in his infinite wisdom, has seen fit to establish, and
which, duly administered, is the foundation of the peace, order and happiness
of civil society; and is one excellent mean to advance the peace, order and
happiness of christian society; so that the inspired writer (speaking of civil
government) says, If the foundation be destroyed, what can the righteous do,
Psalm. x. 3. King David had peculiar advantage to (...) what influence the one
had upon the other, as he was called in the early part of life, not only to
fill an important ^eat in the civil department, but also to fill a more
important one in the religious department* to be a type and forerunner of
Christ, the great head of the church. And as the faithful administrations of
government in these two different branches, is of vast importance to mankind,
so he earnestly prays for each; Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness,
Psalm. cxxxii. 9. Give to the king thy judgments, and thy righteousness unto the
king's son; that he may judge the poor, and save the needy, and break in pieces
the oppressor, Psalm. lxxii. 1. 4. David was now old and stricken in age; his
long improved judgment, which was ripened with the experience of many years,
qualified him to give the best advice in matters of the greatest importance:
For days shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom, Job xxxii.
7. The words of the text come with peculiar weight and solemnity, as they are
the last words of a dying prince, giving advice to his surviving kingdom; and
are therefore worthy to become the object of our serious attention and diligent
enquiry at this time, which will be in the following manner.

I. It is the will of Heaven, that there should be civil rulers. II. It is
required of those who rule, that they be just men. III. Show the reasons why
they ought to rule in the fear of God. IV. Close the whole with a brief
application.
I. It is the will of Heaven, that there should be civil rulers.

Moses was called immediately by God to take the rule and government of his
people Israel. Saul, David, and many others, received their royal crowns by
special direction from heaven. Not only kings but those who fill stations of
less importance in civil government, are equally appointed by God, as may be
seen, Prove. viii. 13. By me kings reign, and princes decree justice; by me
princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth. Our Savior was
subject to their authority, and paid tribute, when (...) was demanded of him.
And the apostle Paul is very particular in the point. Let every soul be subject
unto the higher powers, for there is no power ^^t of God; the powers that be,
are ordained of God: Romans xiii. 1. The apostle Peter enjoins the same; Submit
yourselves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the
king as supreme, or (...) governors as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well; 1 Peter, ii.
14. God has testified his will, in the establishment of civil rulers, in
requiring that supplications, prayers and intercessions be made for all men,
for kings, and for all in authority, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet
life, in all godliness and honesty; 1 Timothy ii. 1, 2. And in that we are forbid
to speak evil of rulers: for it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the
ruler of thy people; Acts xxiii. 5. Also from a consideration of the great use
which God has made of them in days past, and the use which he says he will make
of them in time to come* when he will pour out his spirit, and cause his church
to increase, and become universal; even then kings shall be their nursing
fathers, and queens thy nursing mothers; Isa. xlix. 23. Thou shall also suck
the breasts of kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord, am thy Savior and
thy Redeemer; Isa. lx. 16. These passages, from the many that might be adduced,
are sufficient to show, that it is the will of Heaven, that there should be
civil rulers. I now pass on to show in the

II. Place, that it is required of those who rule, tha^ they be just men. And
this will appear, if we consider the nature and importance of the business
assigned them to do: -- as they are appointed to use their power to suppress
iniquity, and all acts of injustice. It is exceedingly natural for the human
heart to break forth into those acts of wickedness and impiety, which are
dishonorable to God, and destructive to the happiness of human society. The
hearts of the sons of men are full of evil, and because sentence against an
evil work is not speedily executed, their hearts are fully set within them to
do evil; Eccle. viii. 11: and madness is in their hearts while they live.
Notwithstanding Heaven is continually using the most powerful means to curb
those wicked passions, and prevent the outbreaking of injustice -- such as the
various calamities and sorrows of life, which fill the world with pain and
distress; the terrors of death, the alluring prospects of a heavenly paradise,
and the fearful glooms of eternal darkness; yet mankind will break over these
restraints, as if they were but shadows, or mere ciphers of no avail: and if
there was nothing more, the earth would be filled with violence. But God has
(...) pleased to appoint other means: -- even civil rulers, who by the blessing
of Heaven, have oftentimes curbed those wicked passions, and prevented their
breaking out into open acts of injustice.

Rulers are appointed to stand in the gap, and draw the sword of civil justice
against all open offenders, and so to become a terror to evil doers: and the
nature of their business, and design of their office is such, that no one can
act in the character of a faithful ruler, but he who is just: -- there is no
way to prevent the growth of injustice, but only in a way of justice. The
prevalency of some things may be prevented many ways, but the prevalency of
injustice can be prevented only in one way, viz. in a way of justice: therefore
it is required of those who are appointed to suppress acts of injustice, that
they be just men.

2. It will further appear, if we consider that the ruler is appointed to
defend the liberty and property of his subjects. Liberty and property have ever
been the objects of lawless ambition and avarice. An unbounded desire to have
dominion over these, has been that great spring which has moved those mighty
wheels, which have brought on those revolutions which have taken place in the
rising and falling of kingdoms and empires. What inspired Alexander, the
Cesars, and other mighty conquerors, but the prospect of obtaining dominion
over their fellow creatures, and having their liberty and property at their
dispose? What moved ancient Pharaoh to pursue, with his numerous hosts, the
children of Israel, with such intrepid zeal, but the prospects of making them
his servants for ever? And what has actuated so many of our brethren, in a
Christian land, to counteract their own profession of liberty, to brave the
dangers of the sea, and hazard their lives among the African tribes, but a
thirst after riches, obtained at the expense of the liberty and property of
their fellow creatures? And how ready were we to take the alarm, when our
British rulers called for some of our interest? They touched then the apple of
our eye -- and the universal cry was, "Liberty and property are invaded; the
king and parliament are unjust in government; they must be resisted even unto
blood:" And by the blessing of Heaven, we maintained our liberties, and some
part of our properties, though at the expense of much treasure, at the hazard
of a long and sore war, and the loss of many thousand lives. Yet our liberties
and property were a treasure so rich, that we thought the conquest great, and
the victory glorious. This treasure we commit to the care of our civil rulers;
we hold our property under the civil power; we enjoy our liberty from their
friendly aid and assistance. Let this establishment be removed, and we have
nothing that we can call our own. Our liberty and property would lie at the
mercy of those, who have no bounds to their lusts and avarice. -- Therefore,
rulers who are appointed to defend these, ought to be just; for there is
nothing that endangers them, but injustice: but when rulers are unjust, the
interest and liberty of the people become an easy prey to them, and the yoke of
bondage is laid on by those hands which are appointed to keep it off. As when
an honest traveller, having fifty pounds in cash for his support, and fearing
lest he fall into the hands of wicked men, who will rob him of his treasure,
commits it to the care of his landlord, to keep safe; who takes the advantage
of this betrustment, and keeps the whole, and leaves the traveller to earn his
passage by constant labor: thus, when the wicked rule, the righteous mourn;
but the just ruler will save the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor.

3. It is required of civil rulers, that they be just, as they are raised up
and appointed by God, to be the ministers of his kingdom for good to the
people, and to act in concert with the divine government, and be co-workers
with God. The Divine Being never invested any of his ministers with power to
act in opposition to his just and righteous laws, but agreeably thereto: and
therefore, not only the safety of the people, but the honor of God, requires,
that those who rule, be just men. So far as we can discover, through the medium
of divine revelation, the administrations of government in the other world, it
is perfectly just; God renders to every one according to his just deserts: but
the civil ruler is not to pattern after the examples of government in that
world; but after Christ, who is our pattern in all things, who never inflicts
punishment upon any of his creatures in this world above what they deserve, but
often far less than what they deserve. Rulers may lay that measure of
punishment upon offenders, which will secure the honor of government, and the
good of the people, and yet display their lenity and goodness, in making it
much less than their crimes deserve. This is consistent with public justice,
and agreeable to the example of our Savior, who does good to the evil and
unthankful, and sends rain upon the unjust as well as the just. It is
conceded by all, that ministers of the gospel must be just, and exemplary, both
in a public and private capacity: it is equally required of civil rulers, that
they be just, both in their public and private capacity. Since they are both
appointed by God, as his ministers for good to the people, they are both called
to labor in the same field, to carry on the same important cause, to support
truth and righteousness; though they are called to minister in two different
ways, yet they are to carry on the same work. Every thing that the civil power
is called to do, is with a direct view to build up the kingdom of Christ, and
to advance his cause and interest in the world. Any thing more or less is not
required by him, who is given to be head over all things to his church.
Therefore, those who rule, must be just.

III. I come now, in the next place, to show, why those who rule, should rule
in the fear of God.

And the first reason, which comes under consideration, is, that they are
accountable to God for all they do.

As they are dependent upon God for every degree of that power and authority,
with which they are invested, and for all those abilities and advantages, with
which they are favored; so they are accountable to God for the improvement of
them: and if they are just and faithful in their station, their rewards will be
proportionably great. Their reward will be great in this world, their
characters will shine as lights on the earth, they will have the best wishes
and fervent prayers of the just and wise, and the testimony of every man's
conscience in their favor. Above all, they will have inward peace, arising
from a consideration of their being just and faithful, which will give them
most sensible joy, upon every turn of serious thought and inquiry, which will
remove the fearful glooms of decripped age, brighten the dark prospects of
death and the grave, and open to their view an inexhaustible treasure of good
in the world beyond, where they shall rest from their labors, and their works
shall follow them; where they shall receive their full reward, even life
everlasting.

2. Another weighty reason may arise from the fearful state of those, who do
not rule in the fear of God. These are also accountable, and must receive a
just recompense of reward. Their titles, pompous names, and dignified stations,
among men, will be no defense for them in the fight of God; "for he brings
princes to nothing, and makes the judges of the earth as vanity;" Isa. xl. 23.
Proud Pharaoh, with all his chariots and horses, finds no more relief from the
raging waves, than the meanest of his subjects. Belshazzar, that mighty prince
of Babylon, when he saw the handwriting upon the wall, was filled with sore
surprise; the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against
another. -- Wicked rulers are not only exposed to the judgments of God here,
but to a more fearful doom hereafter: for, when the Heavens depart as a scroll,
when it is rolled together, and every mountain and island moved out of their
places; then the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and
the chief captains, and the mighty men, will hide themselves in the dens, and
in the rocks of the mountains; and will say to the rocks and mountains, Fall on
us, and hide us from the face of Him that sitting on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand. Rev. vi. 14, 15, 16, 17.

Reason 3. God will be glorified hereby. If rulers rule in the fear of God, it
will give a visible display of God's glory. -- The sun which rules the day, the
moon and stars which rule the night, display God's glory in the natural world.
Rulers are like suns and stars, in the moral world; and when they rule in the
fear of God, divine grace and glory appear in them, as it did in Moses, when he
had been with God in the mount, or in our Savior, on mount Tabor, when his
face did shine as the light.

Reason 4. Great good will not only arise to them, but to their subjects, and
perhaps to generations yet unborn, if they rule in the fear of God. In ancient
times, holy kings and just rulers were a great blessing to the people: things
went well with the nation for their sakes; their holy example, and pious walk
with God, were a continual testimony of the truth and reality of religion, and
had an excellent tendency to preserve the morals, and guide the minds of those
who were young and tender. Time would fail me to tell of Moses, Joshua, David,
Josiah and Hezekiah, those just men, who ruled in the fear of God; what
blessings they received, what deliverances were wrought for them and their
people. Time would also fail, to speak of Saul, Reoboam, Jeroboam, Ahab, Herod,
and many other wicked rulers, and relate what judgments fell upon them and
their people, for their unholy examples and wicked practices. Nothing but
eternity can unfold to the view of angels and men, the happiness of the one,
and the miseries of the other.

But it is now time to close this subject with some improvement.

And 1. We learn from whence rulers have their appointment; it is from God.
Though they are said to be chosen of men, yet they are ordained of God. This
consideration gives great weight to their office. It is a small thing to be
chosen by men; but to be appointed by God, gives such honor and dignity to
their appointment, that satan himself durst not bring against them a railing
accusation. How careful should rulers then be to obey and glorify God, who has
thus honored and dignified them?

2. We learn from what has been said, how great the work and business of rulers
is. They are to stand as pillars to support truth, which would otherwise fall
in the st^ee^s; and to stop those innumerable streams of wickedness which would
otherwise overspread the land, and bring on a deluge far more dreadful than
that which destroyed the old world. They are the shields of the earth, which
belong unto God. Though weak in themselves, yet in God they are mighty: he is
their refuge and strength, a very present help in a time of trouble. Therefore
they need not fear; he breaks the bow, and cu^eth the spear in sunder; he
burns the chariots in the fire; the Lord of hosts is with them, the God of
Jacob is their refuge; Psalm. xl. 1, 9, 11.

Their work is great, as the liberty and property of thousands are committed to
their care; in consequence of which, they are reputed as fathers of the people.
It is a great charge to stand in the relation of a father to a small family;
how much more to stand in that relation to a whole nation? How unnatural for a
father to sacrifice the interest and liberty of his children, and bring them
into bondage? How much more for rulers to sacrifice the interest and liberties
of their subjects, and bring into bondage and distress that people, who
confided in them, as their fathers, to defend and protect their rights? Rulers
need be very careful: a little injustice, which does not seem to affect the
community now, may be as a leaven, which may break forth hereafter, and bring
distress on many.

3. We learn how much the good of generations to come depends upon the wise
administrations, and pious examples, of civil rulers, who lay the foundation
for future peace and glory. If our rulers, at this day, like David, should lay
the foundations of this rising empire, in the wisdom and fear of God, we might
expect the building would become exceeding magnificial of fame and of glory
throughout all countries. Schools and colleges established upon the best
footing, enriched with every advantage possible, adorned with the best masters,
and most able professors; and churches supplied with faithful ministers,
government with just rulers, and the field with excellent officers, would not
only strengthen the cords of government, and make strong the bonds of union;
but adorn the empire with such inconceivable glory and beauty, as to become the
envy of nations, the wonder of angels, and the temple of God.

4. We learn the duty of subjects to their rulers, to treat them with all that
respect and reverence, which their station requires, to encourage their hearts,
and strengthen their hands, by paying due regard to their just and righteous
laws. As we are favored with the privilege of choosing our rulers, we should
highly prize the privilege, and always be ready to give in our voice agreeably
to the advice which Jethro gave to Moses: -- Choose ye out of all the people,
able men, such as fear God; men of truth, hating covetousness -- And after we
have thus chosen our rulers, we should receive the exhortation of the apostle,
That first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks
be made for all men, for kings, and for all that are in authority, and then we
may hope to lead peaceable and quiet lives, in all godliness and honesty.

I shall now close with a brief address to the various characters which compose
this assembly: and I shall first speak to his Excellency the Governor.

HONORED SIR, Permit me to address you with that respect and reverence which is
due to one in your exalted station. You have been raised up by the providence
of God to preside over the people of this state. -- This day completes the
round of several years, in which you have filled the chief seat in the civil
department. Many anxious cares, perplexing thoughts, and gloomy scenes, have
doubtless marked your various steps; while reviving hopes, and gladning rays,
have inspired your breast with the most pleasing prospects, which have been
like pillars to support you; and ever will be a source of unspeakable joy and
peace, if you are just and rule in the fear of God. Great, yea, very great, is
the trust which the people have committed to your charge! and very important
are the labors which Heaven calls you to perform. On your wise and pious
counsels, just and prudent measures, depends, in some degree, the weal and
tranquillity of the people through this state. If you are wise and faithful, if
you are just and righteous, generations to come will rise up and call you
blessed. The course of your administration will so^^ be over; your sun has now
passed the zenith, and descended far toward the western hills: methinks I see
your venerable head now clothed in gray: the almond tree begins to flourish,
and those which look out of the windows grow dim, and the strong men begin to
bow themselves. You may say to the surrounding multitude, as an ancient ruler
in Israel once said, I am this day going the way of all the earth; and it must
give you unspeakable joy to see this infant state, which took its rise under
your patronage, advancing from the dark shades of obscurity, into the fields of
light and liberty.

Honored sir, we wish you all the blessings that time can bestow! and when you
are called to resign all by the bold demands of death, we wish a convoy of
angels to conduct you to higher courts, where you may hear the voice of your
enthroned Redeemer, saying, Come thou blessed of my Father, thou have been
faithful in a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things; enter thou
into the joy of my Lord!

In the next place I would address myself to his Honor the Deputy Governor, the
Council, and ^ll the Members of this Court.

MUCH RESPECTED SIRS, The power and authority which you have over this people,
render you worthy of their highest esteem and regard; since to you is committed
the care of that political ship, in which our property, liberty, lives and
earthly all are embarked. If you are just and faithful, if you rule in the fear
of God, we shall ride safe through all the winds and storms which the kingdoms
of this world can raise. Yea, the powers of hell cannot prevail against us, for
then the Lord Jehovah will be on our side. But if you are unjust, the ship may
overset, and the whole cargo be lost: the people may fall a sacrifice to the
rage and violence of those men whose tender mercies are cruel. However, we hope
better things; we look up to you as the guardians and protectors of our rights
and privileges, which we have maintained at the expense of a long war, in which
we have shed much blood, lost many lives, and expended vast sums of treasure;
which we consider as small, compared to those liberties which we now enjoy, and
which we commit to your care, as to the care of wise and faithful men. This
state is now beginning; the foundations of it are now laying; the wheels of
government now begin to roll: and how much depends upon what is done in this
early period, the good or evil effects of which will extend to generations to
come? The glory and felicity of this state in future time, depends upon your
wise and prudent measures. You may now provide for the support of schools; you
may do much for the support of the gospel, and for the good of the church; you
are set up for lights in the world, that you may be eyes to the blind, feet to
the lame; and that the blessing of those who are ready to perish, may descend
and rest upon you. We look up to you as our leaders; if you are just, and walk
in the fear of God, and we do not follow you, our guilt will be upon our own
heads, and you will deliver your own souls; -- but, if your examples are
unholy, and we follow you, our blood will be required at your hands. Christ
pronounces the woe upon you; woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for ye shut up
the kingdom of Heaven against men; for ye neither go in yourselves, nor suffer
them that are entering to go in; Mat. xxiii. 13. As examples in rulers have a
surprising influence upon subjects, we wish to see you ready to every good word
and work! And whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, if there
be any praise, think on these things; Phil. iv. 8. And may Christ, who will
erelong call you to give an account of your stewardship, say unto you, Well
done good and faithful servants, because you have been faithful in a few
things, I will make you rulers over many things, enter ye into the joy of your
Lord.

The ministers of the gospel deserve our notice upon this occasion, and to whom
I would now pay my respects.

Reverend Sirs, Permit me, as one of your brethren and companions in the
kingdom and patience of our Lord, to address you in the sacred character of
Ambassadors for Jesus Christ. We are called to preach the everlasting gospel of
our divine (...) the joyful news of pardon and (...) the atoning merits of his
blood. The field (...) entered into is extended far and wide; -- the harvest
before us is great, and the laborers are few: therefore it is required of us,
that we be found faithful, and attend to the duties of our station, as those
who must give an account. Though we are not called to take any active part in
the civil department, yet we are to help them by our prayers and preaching; and
while they use the weapons of their warfare, and draw the sword of civil
justice against open offenders, we are to use the weapons of our warfare, and
proclaim the terrors of the Lord against the guilty sinner. Let us never grow
faint nor weary in well doing, but be faithful until the death. The employment
we have engaged in is noble and important: the rewards of those who are
faithful, are great and glorious; and the master whom we serve, is no less than
the King of kings, and Lord of lords, who will at last bring forth the many
which sleep in the dust; and they that are wise shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament, and those who have turned many to righteousness, as the stars
forever and ever.

I will now close this discourse with a word of exhortation to this whole
assembly.

Permit me to remind you of the bonds of gratitude we are under to God, for the
smiles of his providence, which are this day upon us. We are not assembled in
arms, to oppose an invading foe. Our ears are not assailed with the alarms of
war, nor our hearts struck with fear and surprise at the sounding of trumpets
and roaring of cannon. Our eyes do not see the garments of our brethren rolled
in blood, nor their bodies wounded and torn with the cruel weapons of death;
but we see our land in peace, and hear the voice of joy and gladness. We are
called to choose our rulers, to make our laws, and govern ourselves, according
to our wish and desire. O how different the scene, and how much happier are our
prospects, than they were a few years ago, when we were involved in all the
horrors of war. This place was then the seat of distress and confusion! How
often did we hear the alarms of war, and bend our course with hasty speed to
this and other places, to defend our houses and families, and all that was dear
unto us, from the sword of our enemies, and from those savages whose tender
mercies are cruel!

How long did the important cause lie in suspense, when we stood as fair to
lose our all, as to win the day? But Heaven gave the decision in our favor:
our enemies were brought to shame and confusion. Princes wandered in the
wilderness unpitied and forlorn, and their hands were not able to perform their
enterprise.

The Captain of our salvation bowed the Heavens and come down; darkness was
under his feet; he rode upon a cherub and did fly; yea he did fly upon the
wings of the wind; he brought salvation to us in a very acceptable time* and
now we dwell in our houses, and there is none to make us afraid: we assemble
for the purpose of establishing government, supporting peace, order, and
harmony, among us.

Such late and wonderful deliverances, which we have been made to experience,
should lead our minds, when we are thus assembled, to that great and solemn
day, when the universe shall be assembled before the Judge of all worlds; when
the just ruler, the faithful subject, the wise parent, the dutiful child, and
every pious Christian, shall obtain a complete victory over all their enemies;
and ascend with a glorious triumph to their everlasting abodes in the New
Jerusalem; be crowned with immortal honors, and reign as kings and priests
unto God and his Father forever. Then shall these happy ones behold this world,
which has been the seat of confusion and discord, in her last convulsions; the
rocks rending, the mountains and hills departing, the earth opening to her deep
foundations, and continents and oceans mingling together into their ancient
chaotic state; -- while pillars of smoke, and peals of thunder, and streams of
lightning, fill the teeming air, and cause the elements to melt with fervent
hear. Then hell will enlarge herself, and open her mouth without measure; and
wicked kings, and unjust rulers, with all their pomp and glory, shall descend
into it. Let this assembly remember, that this day is approaching, and not
forget those solemn and eternal realities, while we are attending to the
affairs of this world: but let those who are subjects, obey their rulers in the
Lord, for this is right; and those who rule, let them be just, ruling in the
fear of the Lord. Amen.


