OBSERVATIONS ON THE WHALE-FISHERY.
WHALE oil enters, as a raw material, into several branches of manufacture, as
of wool, leather, soap: it is used also in painting, architecture and
navigation. But its great consumption is in lighting houses and cities. For
this last purpose however it has a powerful competitor in the vegetable oils.
These do well in warm, still weather, but they fix with cold, they extinguish
easily with the wind, their crop is precarious, depending on the seasons, and
to yield the same light, a larger wick must be used, and greater quantity of
oil consumed. Estimating all these articles of difference together, those
employed in lighting cities find their account in giving about 25 per cent.
more for whale than for vegetable oils. But higher than this the whale oil, in
its present form, cannot rise; because it then becomes more advantageous to the
city-lighters to use others. This competition then limits its price* higher
than which no encouragement can raise it, and becomes, as it were, a law of its
nature, but, at this low price; the whale fishery is the poorest business into
which a merchant or sailor can enter. If the sailor, instead of wages, has a
part of what is taken, he finds that this, one year with another, yields him
less than he could have got as wages in any other business. It is attended too
with great risk, singular hardships, and long absences from his family. If the
voyage is made solely at the expense of the merchant, he finds that, one year
with another, it does not reimburse him his expenses. As, for example, an
English ship of 300 ton, and 42. hands brings home, communibus annis, after a
four months voyage, 25. ton of oil, worth 437l. 10s. sterling. but the wages of
the officers and seamen will be 400l. The Outfit then and the merchant's profit
must be paid by the government. And it is accordingly on this idea that the
British bounty is calculated. From the poverty of this business then it has
happened that the nations, who have taken it up, have successively abandoned
it. The Basques began it. But, though the most economical and enterprising of the
inhabitants of France, they could not continue it; and it is said they never
employed more than 30. ships a year. The Dutch and Hanse towns succeeded them.
The latter gave it up long ago though they have continued to lend their name to
British and Dutch oils. The English carried it on, in competition with the
Dutch, during the last, and beginning of the present century. But it was too
little profitable for them in comparison with other branches of commerce open
to them. In the mean time too the inhabitants of the barren Island of Nantucket
had taken up this fishery, invited to it by the whales presenting themselves on
their own shore. To them therefore the English relinquished it, continuing to
them, as British subjects, the importation of their oils into England duty
free, while foreigners were subject to a duty of 18l. 5s. sterling. a ton. the
Dutch were enabled to continue it long, because, 1. They are so near the
northern fishing grounds, that a vessel begins her fishing very soon after she
is out of port. 2. They navigate with more economy than the other nations of
Europe. 3. Their seamen are content with lower wages: and 4. their merchants
with a lower profit on their capital. Under all these favorable circumstances
however, this branch of business, after long languishing, is at length nearly
extinct with them. It is said they did not send above half a dozen ships in
pursuit of the whale this present year. The Nantuckois then were the only
people who exercised this fishery to any extent at the commencement of the late
war. Their country, from its barrenness, yielding no subsistence, they were
obliged to seek it in the sea which surrounded them. Their economy was more
rigorous than that of the Dutch. Their seamen, instead of wages, had a share in
what was taken. This induced them to fish with fewer hands, so that each had a
greater dividend in the profit. It made them more vigilant in seeking game,
bolder in pursuing it, and parcimonious in all their expenses. London was their
only market. When therefore, by the late revolution, they became aliens in
great Britain, they became subject to the alien duty of 18l. 5s. the ton of
oil, which being more than equal to the price of the common whale oil, they
were obliged to abandon that fishery. So that this people, who before the war
had employed upwards of 300 vessels a year in the whale fishery, (while great
Britain had herself never employed one hundred) have now almost ceased to
exercise it. But they still had the seamen, the most important material for
this fishery; and they still retained the spirit of fishing: so that at the
reestablishment of peace they were capable in a very short time of reviving
their fishery in all its splendour. The British government saw that the moment
was critical. They knew that their own share in that fishery was as nothing.
That the great mass of fishermen was left with a nation now separated from
them: that these fishermen however had lost their ancient market, had no other
resource within their country to which they could turn, and they hoped
therefore they might, in the present moment of distress, be decoyed over to
their establishments, and be added to the mass of their seamen. To effect this
they offered extravagant advantages to all persons who should exercise the
whale fishery from British establishments. But not counting with much
confidence on a long connection with their remaining possessions on the
continent of America, foreseeing that the Nantuckois would settle in them
preferably, if put on an equal footing with those of great Britain, and that
thus they might have to purchase them a second time, they confined their high
offers to settlers in Great Britain. The Nantuckois, left without resource by
the loss of their market, began to think of removing to the British dominions:
some to Nova Scotia, preferring smaller advantages, in the neighborhood of
their ancient country and friends; others to great Britain postponing country
and friends to high premiums. A vessel was already arrived from Halifax to
Nantucket to take off some of those who proposed to remove; two families had
gone on board and others were going, when a letter was received there, which
had been written by Monsieur le Marquis de la Fayette to a gentleman in Boston,
and transmitted by him to Nantucket. The purport of the letter was to dissuade
their accepting the British proposals, and to assure them that their friends in
France would endeavor to do something for them. This instantly suspended their
design: not another went on board, and the vessel returned to Halifax with only
the two families.

In fact the French Government had not been inattentive to the views of the
British, nor insensible of the crisis. They saw the danger of permitting five
or six thousand of the best seamen existing to be transferred by a single
stroke to the marine strength of their enemy, and to carry over with them an
art which they possessed almost exclusively. The counterplan which they set on
foot was to tempt the Nantuckois by high offers to come and settle in France.
This was in the year 1785. The British however had in their favor a sameness
of language, religion, laws, habits and kindred. 9 families only, of 33 persons
in the whole came to Dunkirk; so that this project was not likely to prevent
their emigration to the English establishments, if nothing else had happened.

France had effectually aided in detaching the U. S. of America from the force
of Great Britain. But as yet they seemed to have indulged only a silent wish to
detach them from her commerce. They had done nothing to induce that event. In
the same year 1785, while M. de Calonne was in treaty, with the Nantuckois, an
estimate of the commerce of the U. S. was submitted to the count de Vergennes,
and it was shown that, of 3. millions of pounds sterling to which their exports
amounted, one third might be brought to France and exchanged against her
productions and manufactures advantageously for both nations, provided the
obstacles of prohibition, monopoly, and duty were either done away or moderated
as far as circumstances would admit. A committee, which had been appointed to
investigate a particular one of these subjects, was thereupon instructed to
extend its researches to the whole, and see what advantages and facilities the
Government could offer for the encouragement of a general commerce with the
United States. The Committee was composed of persons well skilled in commerce;
and, after laboring assiduously for several months, they made their report:
the result of which was given in the letter of his Majesty's Comptroller
General of the 2d of October. 1786. wherein he stated the principles which should
be established for the future regulation of the commerce between France and the
United States. It was become tolerably evident, at the date of this letter,
that the terms offered to the Nantuckois would not produce their emigration to
Dunkirk; and that it would be safest in every event to offer some other
alternative which might prevent their acceptance of the British offers. The
obvious one was to open the port of France to their oils, so that they might
still exerci^e their fishery, remaining in their native country, and find a new
market for its produce instead of that which they had lost. The article of
Whale oil was accordingly distinguished, in the letter of M. de Calonne, by an
immediate abatement of duty, and promise of further abatement after the year
1790. This letter was instantly sent to America, and bid fair to produce there
the effect intended, by determining the fishermen to carry on their trade from
their own homes, with the advantage only of a free marker in France, rather
than remove to Great Britain where a free market and great bounty were offered
them. An Arret was still to be prepared to give legal sanction to the letter of
M. de Calonne. M. Lambert, with a patience and assiduity almost unexampled,
went through all the investigations necessary to assure himself that the
conclusions of the Committee had been just. Frequent conferences on this
subject were held in his presence; the Deputies of the Chambers of Commerce
were heard, and the result was the Arret of Dec. 29. 1787. confirming the
abatements of duty present and future, which the letter of October. 1786. had
promised, and reserving to his Majesty to grant still further favors to that
production, if on further information he should find it for the interest of the
two Nations.

The English had now begun to deluge the markets of France with their whale
oils: and they were enabled by the great premiums given by their Government to
undersell the French fisherman, aided by feebler premiums, and the American
aided by his poverty alone. Nor is it certain that these speculations were not
made at the risk of the British Government, to suppress the French and American
fishermen in their only market. Some remedy seemed necessary. Perhaps it would
not have been a bad one to subject, by a general law, the merchandise of every
nation and of every nature to pay additional duties in the ports of France
exactly equal to the premiums and drawbacks given on the same merchandise by
their own government. This might not only counteract the effect of premium in
the instance of whale oils, but attack the whole British system of bounties and
drawbacks by the aid of which they make London the center of commerce for the
whole earth. A less general remedy, but an effectual one, was to prohibit the
oils of all European nations: the treaty with England requiring only that she
should be treated as well as the most favored European nation. But the remedy
adopted was to prohibit all oils without exception.

To know how this remedy will operate we must consider the quantity of whale
oil which France consumes annually, the quantity she obtains from her own
fishery; and if she obtains less than she consumes, we are to consider what
will follow this prohibition.

The annual consumption of France, as stated by a person who has good
opportunities of knowing it, is as follows.

pesant. quintaux. tons. Paris according to the registers of 1786 2,800,000
28,000 1750 27. other cities lighted by M. Sangrain 800,000 8,000 500 Rouen
500,000 5,000 312 Bordeaux 600,000 6,000 375 Lion 300,000 3,000 187 Other
cities, leather and light 3,000,000 30,000 1875 8,000,000 80,000 5000

Other calculations, reduce the consumption to about half this. It is treating
these with sufficient respect to place them on an equal footing with the
estimate of the person before alluded to, and to suppose the truth half way
between them. We will call then the present consumption of France only 60,000
quintals, or 3750 ton a year. This consumption is increasing fast as the
practice of lighting cities is becoming more general, and the superior
advantages of lighting them with whale oil are but now beginning to be known.

What do the fisheries of France furnish? she has employed this year 15.
vessels in the Southern, and 2 in the Northern fishery, carrying 4500 tons in
the whole or 265 each on an average. The English ships, led by Nantuckois as
well as the French, have as I am told never averaged, in the Southern fishery,
more than one fifth of their burden, in the best year. The 15 ships of France,
according to this ground of calculation, and supposing the present to have been
one of the best years, should have brought, one with another, one fifth of 265
tons, or 53 tons each. But we are told they have brought near the double of
that, to wit 100 tons each and 1500 tons in the whole. Supposing the 2.
Northern vessels to have brought home the cargo which is common from the
Northern fishery, to wit, 25 tons each, the whole produce this year will then
be 1550 tons. This is 5 months provision or two fifths of the annual
consumption. To furnish for the whole year would require 40 ships of the same
size, in years as fortunate as the present, and 85 communibus annis, 44 tons,
or one sixth of the burden, being as high an average as should be counted on,
one year with another: and the number must be increased with the increasing
consumption. France then is evidently not yet in a condition to supply her own
wants. It is said indeed she has a large stock on hand unsold occasioned by the
English competition. 33,000 quintals, including this year's produce, are spoken
of. This is between 6. and 7. months provision: and supposing, by the time this
is exhausted, that the next year's supply comes in, that will enable her to go
on 5. or 6. months longer; say a twelvemonth in the whole. But, at the end of
the twelvemonth, what is to be done? The Manufactures depending on this article
cannot maintain their competition against those of other countries, if deprived
of their equal means. When the alternative then shall be presented of letting
them drop, or opening the ports to foreign whale oil, it is presumable the
latter will be adopted, as the lesser evil. But it will be too late for
America: her fishery, annihilated during the late war, only began to raise its
head on the prospect of market held out by this country. Crushed by the Arret
of Sept. 28. in its first feeble effort to revive, it will rise no more.
Expeditions, which require the expense of the outfit of vessels, and from 9. to
12 months navigation, as the Southern fishery does, most frequented by the
Americans, cannot be undertaken in sole reliance on a market which is opened
and shut from one day to another, with little or no warning. The English alone
then will remain to furnish these supplies, and they must be received even from
them. We must accept bread from our enemies, if our friends cannot furnish it.
This comes exactly to the point to which that government has been looking. She
fears no rival in the whale fishery but America. Or rather, it is the whale
fishery of America of which she is endeavoring to possess herself. It is for
this object she is making the present extraordinary efforts by bounties and
other encouragements: and her success so far is very flattering. Before the war
she had not 100 vessels in the whale trade, while America employed 309. in
1786. Great Britain employed 1^1 vessels, in 1787* 286. in 1788. 314. yearly
the ancient American number; while the latter is fallen to about 80. They have
just changed places then, England having gained exactly what America has lost.
France by her ports and markets holds the balance between the two contending
parties, and gives the victory, by opening and shutting them, to which she
pleases. We have still precious remains of seamen educated in this fishery, and
capable by their poverty, their boldness and address, of recovering it from the
English, in spite of their bounties. But this Arret endangers the transferring
to Great Britain every man of them who is not invincibly attached to his native
soil. There is no other nation in present condition to maintain a competition
with Great Britain in the whale fishery. The expense at which it is supported
on her part seems enormous. 255 vessels, of 75 4^6 tons, employed by her this
year in the Northern fishery, at 42 men each; and 59. in the Southern at 18 men
each makes 11,772 men. These are known to have cost the government 15l. each,
or 176,580l. in the whole, and that to employ the principal part of them from
3. to 4. months only. The Northern ships have brought home 20. and the Southern
60. tons of oil on an average, making 8,640 tons, every ton of oil then has
cost the government 20l. in bounty. Still, if they can beat us out of the field
and have it to themselves, they will think their money well employed. If France
undertakes solely the competition against them, she must do it at equal
expense. The trade is too poor to support itself. The 85 ships necessary to
supply even her present consumption, bountied as the English are, will require
a sacrifice of 1,285,200 livres a year, to maintain 3,570 seamen, and that a
part of the year only. And if she will push it to 12,000 men in competition
with England, she must sacrifice, as they do, 4. or 5. millions a year. The
same number of men might, with the same bounty, be kept in as constant employ
carrying stone from Bayonne to Cherburg, or coal from Newcastle to Havre, in
which navigations they would be always at hand, and become as good seamen. The
English consider among their best sailors those employed in carrying coal from
Newcastle to London. France cannot expect to raise her fishery, even to the
supply of her own consumption, in one year or in several years. Is it not
better then, by keeping her ports open to the U. S. to enable them to aid in
maintaining the field against the common adversary, till she shall be in
condition to take it herself, and to supply her own wants? Otherwise her
supplies must aliment that very force which is keeping her under. On our part,
we can never be dangerous competitors to France. The extent to which we can
exercise this fishery is limited to that of the barren island of Nantucket, and
a few similar barren spots; its duration to the pleasure of this government, as
we have no other market.

A material observation must be added here. Sudden vicissitudes of opening and
shutting ports, do little injury to merchants settled on the opposite coast,
watching for the opening, like the return of a tide, and ready to enter with
it. But they ruin the adventurer whose distance requires 6 months notice. Those
who are now arriving from America, in consequence of the Arret of Dec. 29. will
consider it as the false light which has led them to their ruin. They will be
apt to say that they come to the ports of France by invitation of that Arret,
that the subsequent one of Sept. 28. which drives them from those ports, founds
itself on a single principle, viz. 'that the prohibition of foreign oils is the
most useful encouragement which can be given to that branch of industry.' They
will say that, if this be a true principle, it was as true on the 29th. of Dec.
1787. as on the 28th. of Sept. 1788. it was then weighed against other motives,
judged weaker, and overruled, and it is hard it should be now revived to ruin
them.

The Refinery for whale oil lately established at Rouen, seems to be an object
worthy of national attention. In order to judge of its importance, the
different qualities of whale oil must be noted. Three qualities are known in
the American and English markets. 1. That of the Spermaceti whale. 2. Of the
Groenland whale. 3. Of the Brazil whale. 1. The Spermaceti whale found by the
Nantucketmen in the neighborhood of the western Islands, to which they had
gone in pursuit of other whales, retired thence to the coast of Guinea,
afterward to that of Brazil, and begins now to be best found in the latitude
of the cape of good hope, and even of cape Horn. He is an active, fierce animal
and requires vast address and boldness in the fisherman. The inhabitants of
Brazil make little expeditions from their coast, and take some of these fish.
But the Americans are the only distant people who have been in the habit of
seeking and attacking them in numbers. The British however, led by the
Nantuckois whom they have decoyed into their service, have begun this fishery.
In 1785 they had 18 ships in it; in 1787, 38: in 1788, 54. or as some say 64. I
have calculated on the middle number 59. still they take but a very small
proportion of their own demand. We furnish the rest. Theirs is the only market
to which we carry that oil, because it is the only one where its properties are
known. It is luminous, resists coagulation by cold to the 41st. degree of
Farenheit's thermometer, and 4th. of Reaumur's, and yields no smell at all. It
is used therefore within doors to lighten shops, and even in the richest houses
for antichambers, stairs, galleries, etc. it sells at the London market for
treble the price of common whale oil. This enables the adventurer to pay the
duty of 18l. 5s. sterling. the ton, and still to have a living profit. Besides the
mass of oil produced from the whole body of the whale, his head yields 3. or 4.
barrels of what is called head-matter, from which is made the solid Spermaceti
used for medicine and candles. This sells by the pound at double the price of
the oil. The disadvantage of this fishery is that the sailors are from 9. to
12. months absent on the voyage, of course they are not at hand on any sudden
emergency, and are even liable to be taken before they know that a war is
begun. It must be added on the subject of this whale, that he is rare, and shy,
soon abandoning the grounds where he is hunted. This fishery being less losing
than the other, and often profitable, will occasion it to be so thronged soon,
as to bring it on a level with the other. It will then require the same
expensive support, or to be abandoned.

2. The Groenland whale oil is next in quality. It resists coagulation by cold
to 36. of Farenheit and 2. of Reaumur; but it has a smell insupportable within
doors, and is not luminous. It sells therefore in London at about 16l. the ton.
This whale is clumsy and timid, he dives when struck, and comes up to breathe
by the first cake of ice, where the fishermen need little address or courage to
find and take him. This is the fishery mostly frequented by European nations;
it is this fish which yields the sin in quantity, and the voyages last about 3.
or 4. months.

3. The third quality is that of the small Brazil whale. He was originally
found on the coast of Nantucket, and first led that people to this pursuit. He
retired first to the banks of Newfoundland, then to the western islands; and is
now found within soundings on the coast of Brazil, during the months of
December, January, February and March. This oil chills at 50. of Farenheit and
8. of Reaumur, is black and offensive, worth therefore but 13l. the ton in
London. In warm summer nights however it burns better than the Groenland oil.

The qualities of the oils thus described, it is to be added that an individual
has discovered methods 1. of converting a great part of the oil of the
spermaceti whale into the solid substance called spermaceti, heretofore
produced from his head alone. 2. Of refining the Groenland whale oil, so as to
take from it all smell and render it limpid and luminous, as that of the
spermaceti whale. 3. of curdling the oil of the Brazil whale into tallow,
resembling that of the beef, and answering all its purposes. This person is
engaged by the company which has established the Refinery at Rouen: their works
will cost them half a million of livres, will be able to refine all the oil
which can be used in the kingdom, and even to supply foreign markets. -- The
effect of this refinery then would be 1. to supplant the solid spermaceti of
all other nations by theirs of equal quality and lower price. 2. to substitute,
instead of spermaceti oil, their black whale oil, refined, of equal quality and
lower price. 3. to render the worthless oil of the Brazil whale equal in value
to tallow: and 4. by accomodating these oils to uses, to which they could never
otherwise have been applied, they will extend the demand beyond its present
narrow limits to any supply which can be furnished, and thus give the most
effectual encouragement and extension to the whale fishery. But these works
were calculated on the Arret of Dec. 29. which admitted here freely and fully
the produce of the American fishery. If confined to that of the French fishery
alone, the enterprise may fail for want of matter to work on.

After this review of the whale fishery as a Political institution, a few
considerations shall be added on its produce as a basis of Commercial exchange
between France and the United States. The discussions it has undergone on
former occasions, in this point of view, leaves little new to be now urged.

The United-States not possessing mines of the precious metals, they can
purchase necessaries from other nations so far only as their produce is
received in exchange. Without enumerating our smaller articles, we have three
of principal importance, proper for the French market, to wit, Tobacco, whale
oil, and rice. The first and most important is Tobacco. This might furnish an
exchange for 8. millions of the productions of this country: but it is under a
monopoly, and that not of a mercantile, but a financiering company, whose
interest is to pay in money, and not in merchandise; and who are so much
governed by the spirit of simplifying their purchases and proceedings, that
they find means to elude every endeavor on the part of government to make them
diffuse their purchases among the merchants in general. Little profit is
derived from this then as an article of exchange for the produce and
manufactures of France. Whale oil might be next in importance; but that is now
prohibited. American Rice is not yet of great, but it is of growing consumption
in France, and being the only article of the three which is free, it may become
a principal basis of exchange. Time and trial may add a fourth, that is,
timber. But some essays, rendered unsuccesful by unfortunate circumstances,
place that at present under a discredit, which it will be found hereafter not
to have merited. The English know its value, and were supplied with it before
the war. A spirit of hostility, since that event, led them to seek Russian
rather than American supplies. A new spirit of hostility has driven them back
from Russia, and they are now making contracts for American timber. But of the
three articles before mentional, proved by experience to be suitable for the
French market, one is prohibited, one under monopoly, and one alone free, and
that the smallest and of very limited consumption. The way to encourage
purchasers is to multiply their means of payment. Whale oil might be an
important one. In one scale is the interest of the millions who are lighted,
shod or clothed with the help of it, and the thousands of laborers and
manufacturers who would be employed in producing the articles which might be
given in exchange for it, if received from America. In the other scale are the
interests of the adventurers in the whale fishery; each of whom indeed,
politically considered may be of more importance to the state than a simple
labourer or manufacturer: but to make the estimate with the accuracy it merits,
we should multiply the numbers in each scale into their individual importance,
and see which preponderates.

Both governments have seen with concern that their commercial intercourse does
not grow as rapidly as they would wish. The system of the United States is to
use neither prohibitions nor premiums. Commerce there regulates itself freely,
and asks nothing better. Where a government finds itself under the necessity of
undertaking that regulation, it would seem that it should conduct it as an
intelligent merchant would: that is to say, invite customers to purchase, by
facilitating their means of payment, and by adapting goods to their taste. If
this idea be just, government here has two operations to attend to, with
respect to the commerce of the United States. 1. To do away, or to moderate, as
much as possible, the prohibitions and monopolies of their materials for
payment. 2. To encourage the institution of the principal manufactures which
the necessities, or the habits of their new customers call for. Under this
latter head a hint shall be suggested which must find its apology in the motive
from which it flows, that is, a desire of promoting mutual interests and close
friendship. 600,000 of the laboring poor of America, comprehending slaves
under that denomination, are clothed in three of the simplest manufactures
possible, to wit, Oznabrigs, Plains, and Duffel blankets. The first is a linen,
the two last woollens. It happens too that they are used exactly by those who
cultivate the tobacco and rice and in a good degree by those employed in the
whale fishery. To these manufactures they are so habituated, that no substitute
will be received. If the vessels which bring tobacco, rice and whale oil, do
not find them in the ports of delivery, they must be sought where they can be
found. That is in England at present. If they were made in France they would be
gladly taken in exchange there. The quantities annually used by this
description of people, and their value are as follows. Oznabrigs 2,700,000
aunes a 16. sous the aune worth 2,160,000l. Plains 1,350,000 aunes a 2. livres
the aune 2,700,000 Duffel blankets 300,000 a 7 livres. 4 sous. each 2,160,000
7,020,000
It would be difficult to say how much should be added for the consumption of
inhabitants of other descriptions. A great deal surely. But the present view
shall be confined to the one description named* 7 millions of livres, are 9
millions of days work of those who raise card, spin and weave the wool and
flax; and at 300 working days to the year, would maintain 30,000 people. To
introduce these simple manufactures suppose government to give 5 per cent. on
the value of what should be exported of them, for 10. years to come. If none
should be exported, nothing would be to be paid: but on the other hand, if the
manufactures, with this encouragement should rise to the full demand, it will
be a sacrifice of 351,000 livres. a year for 10. years only, to produce a
perpetual subsistence for more than 30,000 people, (for the demand will grow
with our population) while she must expend perpetually 1,285,000 livres. a year
to maintain the 3,570 seamen, who would supply her with whale oil: that is to
say, for each seaman as much as for 30. laborers and manufacturers.

But to return to our subject, and to conclude.

Whether then we consider the Arret of Sept. 28. in a political or a commercial
light, it would seem that the U. S. should be excepted from its operation.
Still more so when they invoke against it the amity subsisting between the two
nations, the desire of binding them together by every possible interest and
connection, the several acts in favor of this exception, the dignity of
legislation which admits not of changes backwards and forwards, the interests
of commerce which require steady regulations, the assurances of the friendly
motives which have led the king to pass these acts, and the hope that no cause
will arise to change either his motives or his measures toward us.


