A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY
COMPANY, IN BOSTON, JUNE 2, 1788, BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF
OFFICERS.

BY DAVID OSGOOD, A. M. PASTOR of the CHURCH in MEDFORD.

PRINTED BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, STATE-STREET, BOSTON. 1788.

AN ARTILLERY SERMON.
ISAIAH IV. 5. -- FOR UPON ALL THE GLORY SHALL BE A DEFENSE.
FOR the support and comfort of those among the Jews, who might escape the
judgments predicted in the preceding chapter, the prophet in this fortels the
approach of happier times, and the flourishing state of the true Israel of God,
under the influence and protection of an illustrious person here called the
Branch of the Lord. After the appearance of this divine Branch, the children of
Zion, cleansed from their pollutions by the spirit of judgment and adorned with
vital holiness, shall rejoice in all the blessings of evangelical grace and
consolation. The favorable presence of God with them shall secure to them the
continued enjoyment of these blessings. For his presence brings protection and
defense to all who are thus favored. So long as he abode in the temple at
Jerusalem, and his visible glory was beheld in the holy of holies, that city
bid defiance to all earthly powers. But, after the voice had been heard "LET US
DEPART HENCE," its defense was gone, its enemies prevailed against it, and Zion
was plowed as a field.

In allusion to the pillar of cloud and fire, the ancient symbol of God's
presence with Israel in the wilderness, it is promised, with reference to the
people of the Messiah, The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount
Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night: The meaning is, that they shall be as certainly under
the divine care and guardianship, as were God's people of old, while favored
with these extraordinary signs of his gracious presence, and shall as fully
experience the happy effects of his Almighty protection. For upon all the glory
shall be a defense: Providence will watch for the safety of the church, and
"the gates of hell shall never prevail against it."

The prophecy evidently refers to the state of the christian church under the
reign of the Messiah. As a part of this church, we may be allowed, perhaps, to
consider the words of the text as applicable to ourselves; and be led by them,
on the present occasion, into a view of those signal and distinguishing
advantages which are the glory of this land; and then, to some remarks on the
means of defense as proper and necessary to crown these advantages and complete
the glory.

The latter idea is, indeed, the principal and ultimate design of the
discourse. This, however, will be aided by considering the worth of those
blessings and privileges which we have to defend. All these are so many motives
to the means of defense. And surely no people upon earth can have more, or
weightier. That their influence may be felt, this Assembly will allow me to set
before them some of our natural, civil, and religious advantages.

Had it been left to our own election, on what part of the globe we would have
wished to spend the days of our pilgrimage here below, we could not, perhaps,
have chosen better for ourselves, than Providence has chosen for us. "The
lines are fallen to us in a pleasant place, and we have a goodly heritage."
Falling, as our country does, within the temperate climes, its inhabitants are
subjected to the extremes of neither heat, nor cold: Both of which are deemed
unfriendly to the human frame, prejudicial not only to the body, but to the
mind too, as tending to debilitate, or deaden its powers, and limit its
exertions. Philosophers tell us, that it is in the temperate climates only,
other circumstances being equal, that we are to expect the greatest display of
human abilities. Upon this principle, should we not feel grateful to HIM who
"separateth the sons of Adam, and divides to the nations their inheritance,"
for casting our lot on a portion of the earth the most favorable to our growth
and improvement in whatever dignifies and adorns the character of man?

It is not pretended that the soil which we cultivate, equals, in richness and
fertility, that of some other countries. In those regions of the earth which
lie more exposed to the sun, there is a greater variety of vegetation, and a
more luxuriant and abundant growth. These advantages, however, are often more
than balanced by poisonous productions, noxious animals, and a putrid air,
breeding all kinds of disease; and by tempests, hurricanes, earthquakes, and
such violent commotions of the elements as are frequently fatal to the wretched
inhabitants. Exempt from these fatalities, our own country is rich in whatever
contributes to the support and solid enjoyment of life. The earth so far repays
the labor of the husbandman, that the horrors of famine, often experienced in
other parts of the world, have never been known here.

And it is a signal advantage in our situation, that the cultivators of the
soil are also its proprietors. In the old countries the common people are in
general tenants, having no other right or interest in the lands which they
improve, but leases from great proprietors, upon whom they are so abjectly
dependent, that they are often considered and treated as nearly upon a par with
the other animals belonging to the soil. How incomparably more eligible is the
condition of the commonalty of this country? In these northern States
especially, the lands are divided with a degree of equality, and a happy
mediocrity generally prevails. The body of the people is composed of a
substantial yeomanry, who cultivate their own freeholds, and feel no other
dependence but upon Providence and their own industry.

It is a fact known and acknowledged, that in no other part of the world, the
generality of the people are so independent, or possess so large a share of the
conveniences of life. The facility with which the means of a comfortable
subsistence are obtained, is the main cause of that rapid increase of
population which here exceeds any thing, of which any other country can boast.
From a few emigrants and scattered planters, in a little more than a century
and an half, we are multiplied into millions. And this increase is likely to
continue through the course of many future generations, until the immense
wilderness on our back shall be turned into a fruitful field.

The progress of cultivation and improvement must be greatly accelerated by the
mild, gentle and free governments which are here established. In this respect,
these States are "the glory of all lands," and privileged above every other
nation. As for liberty, it is a stranger hardly known to the rest of mankind.
In two quarters of the globe the sound thereof is not heard, nor its likeness
seen. If you range through the great empires of Asia, and among all the
millions that people Africa, you will hardly find an individual into whose mind
the idea of a rational, civil freedom has ever entered. Europe alone is the
enlightened quarter of the world. But even in Europe despotism is almost
universal. The governments of France, Spain, Italy, Germany, and Muscovy are in
general absolute monarchies. Among these, indeed, a few republics are
interspersed: But the most of these republics partake of the aristocratick
form. Venice the most ancient of them, and once the most respectable, is a
proper aristocracy, the powers of government being wholly in the hands of the
nobles, independent of the voice, the election, or the control of the people.
In a limited monarchy Britain boasts of freedom; but, considering how far she
has deviated from the principles and spirit of her constitution -- the manner
in which her House of Commons is elected, and the influence of the Crown in
those elections, her freedom seems but little more than a boast -- a shadow
without the substance. Nor is the government of the United Netherlands thought
to be much better, considering the weight of the aristocratick influence and
the powers of an hereditary Stadtholder. -- In short, Liberty, banished from
the other quarters of the globe, has withdrawn to the American shores. In these
States she has found an asylum, and seems to be fixing her residence. Her
spirit breathes in, and animates the several branches of our political
constitutions; and her features are strongly impressed on the respective forms
of government which have been here constructed. The people themselves are made
the guardians of their own rights; and from them all power originates. Rulers
exist not but by their suffrages; and the greatest of them are but servants to
the public, and are liable to be dismissed from that service whenever they
displease their masters. Created by the people, such is their situation, they
are made to feel their dependence upon their creators.

We have no accounts of any republics, whether ancient or modern, in which
such principles of equal liberty prevail. In this respect our glory outshines
that of the whole world besides.

I mean not, however, that our political constitutions are perfect. It would be
next to a miracle, if in a struggle to avoid impending danger from one extreme,
we did not expose ourselves to hazard on the opposite. Defects there certainly
are in the modes of government adopted by these States -- principally
resulting, in the opinion of the wise, from the excess of their popularity.

But do we not hope, ere long, to see these defects happily supplied and
remedied by that admirable form of federal government which is now rearing over
the whole union? May God Almighty aid the exertions of true patriots in raising
the remaining Pillars of this noble Structure! And when completed, may his
providence so smile upon the institution, as to cause it to answer the most
sanguine expectations of its illustrious framers! May it prove an effectual
shelter from popular heats and commotions on the one part, and from foreign
tempests and invasions on the other!

To the latter, indeed, our situation does not immediately expose us. It must
be reckoned among the advantages of these States, that they lie not in the
neighborhood of any formidable power. A thousand leagues of ocean rolling
between us and the wrangling powers of Europe, lessens the danger of our being
involved in their quarrels.

But, as another circumstance reflecting a distinguished glory upon our
country, we may consider the means of education which are here enjoyed, and the
advantages we are under for pushing our improvements in every branch of useful
knowledge, and in all those arts which embellish society, and give to man his
principal preeminence above the beasts that perish. From the beasts, at his
birth, he is no otherwise distinguished but by a capacity for these
improvements: Which yet he will not make, unless he be furnished with the means
of education. If his hard lot be cast in the regions of darkness, where he has
no helps or advantages for cultivating his reason, and meliorating and
governing his passions; if he be nourished in the dens of uncivilized men --
among savages and barbarians, he proves a barbarian himself, wild and
intractable, and but little superior to the irrational animals.

It is a melancholy reflection, that this character belongs to so many tribes
and nations of the posterity of Adam. Was it owing to his apostasy, that his
children who inhabit the regions of Africa, from the tropic of Cancer to the
Cape of Good-Hope, who form the clans and hords which range the immense tracts
on the north of Europe, and north-west of Asia; and who compose the tribes of
Indians that are scattered in America, from the north of Canada to the straits
of Magellan? -- Was it owing to the fall of our common ancestor, that these his
descendants suffer such a degradation of their nature, and are sunk in
deplorable, brutish ignorance and barbarism? -- Whatever may have been the
original, meritorious or judicial; yet certainly the immediate cause is their
neglect of education and of all attempts toward mental improvement.

The main difference in the characters of different nations results from the
neglect or the improvement of those powers of reason which their Creator has
given them. In proportion as any people have cultivated arts and knowledge,
they have risen to distinction and eminence. The never fading luster of the
Grecian and Roman name -- the figure which they make in the annals of mankind
-- and the unceasing eclat and renown with which they are transmitted from one
generation to another -- are all ultimately derived from the assiduity and
success with which they labored in accumulating intellectual treasures -- in
improving their own minds -- in polishing society -- and civilizing the rude
and barbarous nations around them. To those learned ancients every succeeding
age, and even the present, is indebted for many of the first rudiments of
knowledge.

In the convulsions and revolutions which attended the decline and fall of that
immense fabric, the Roman empire; the progress of science, and of the arts of
civilization was not only at a stand; but many of the improvements which had
been already made, were lost. Nor did they revive again, until toward the
close of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth century of the Christian
era. At this period, many different causes conspired for delivering the
understandings of men from the bondage of ignorance -- such as the invention of
the art of printing -- the improvements in navigation -- the extension of
commerce -- the breaking forth of a spirit of industry, enterprise and inquiry;
and above all, the reformation from popery which emancipated the human mind
from the shackles of superstition, and gave scope to its various abilities.

From that day to this, knowledge has been rapidly increasing; new discoveries,
new arts and new improvements have been constantly adding to former
acquisitions, until the learning of the present age as far exceeds that of the
ancients, as their's did that of the rude ages which preceded them.

When our ancestors removed into this new world, they brought the learning of
the old along with them; and upon their arrival here, their first care was, to
plant it in this new soil. They founded colleges and seminaries of learning,
and formed excellent regulations for the support of public schools, and a
learned, pious clergy in all their different plantations. In consequence of
their early care and great exertions for the education of youth and training
them up in the various branches of useful knowledge, the growth of the arts and
sciences has, from the beginning, kept pace with our other improvements.
Knowledge is generally diffused, and like our property and our government, is
shared among the people at large. And though it should not be pretended that in
new discoveries, and in the number of rare original geniusses, we have exceeded
every other nation; yet, it is a truth which foreigners will not deny, that the
body of the common people in New England, at least, are the most enlightened of
any other now upon the globe. In a freedom from many ridiculous prejudices,
whims and customs, the relics of gothic barbarity, or of popish superstition,
retained and handed down from age to age among the common people of Europe --
in a freedom from these, and for a good education, good sense, and a sound,
enlarged understanding, the people here are distinguished from, and rise
superior to, any other people of their rank in the known world.

This is especially true with respect to religious knowledge, and the
advantages we are under for enjoying the glorious privileges of the gospel.
Though it be more than seventeen hundred years since this religion was
introduced and published to the world, still the knowledge of it is far from
being universal. A large proportion of the human tace are pagans to this day:
The Jews persist in adhering to the law of Moses: Many of the eastern nations
are the disciples of Mahomet; and a great part of Christendom remains under the
delusions of popery. It is in the reformed churches only, that the gospel
shines; and in these it too generally shines through the mist of creeds and
formularies. In the European reformed churches the rights of conscience are too
little regarded: Religious liberty too much restrained. The people are rarely
allowed to choose their own teachers: Their teachers themselves are entangled
and perplexed with human articles of faith and forms of subscription: And their
modes of worship are frequently encumbered with useless rites and ceremonies.
From all these clogs and embarrassments the churches of New England are perhaps
the freest of any in the world; and in their mode of worship and method of
discipline approach the nearest to the simplicity of the gospel and the forms
in use with the primitive christians.

We ought never to forget, that for the sake of enjoying these privileges, and
transmitting them to their children, our ancestors encountered all the
hardships and dangers which attended their emigration into this wilderness.
After repeated efforts, they found it impossible to obtain them in the land of
their nativity. More than a century elapsed after the reformation, before
protestants could be persuaded to entertain the idea of a religious toleration.
The first reformers, though they renounced the Pope, yet retained one of the
worst dregs of popery -- a spirit of intolerance and persecution toward every
one who ventured to dissent from their creeds, or to profess what they deemed
heresy. The contending parties whether papists or protestants, and the
different sects among each of these, however opposed in other respects, yet,
all agreed in this one horrible point, "that it was lawful to extirpate by fire
and sword the enemies of the true religion, and such they reciprocally appeared
to be in each other's eyes."

To them all, and to the age in general, were applicable the words of our
Savior to his disciples, when they would have called for fire from heaven to
consume a village of Samaritans: "Ye know not what spirit ye are of: For the
son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them." The people of
these States are happy beyond our forefathers, and beyond all former ages of
the church, in having found out the meaning of this text. It is a most
important and interesting discovery -- a discovery of something very essential
to the christian temper -- a discovery of the gracious design and benevolent
spirit of the gospel. This is adopted into all our respective forms of
government, which expressly provide for the equal protection of all sects and
denominations, while they demean themselves as good and peaceable subjects.

Such, my respected hearers, are the peculiar and distinguishing advantages
which constitute the glory of this land. But to crown all these advantages and
complete our glory, DEFENSE is necessary. The value of every blessing rises in
proportion to the degree of security which we have for its continued enjoyment.
And however advantageously situated these States may be, to escape foreign
invasion; yet, if like the inhabitants of Laish, we dwell careless, quiet and
secure, unprepared for defense; we shall invite an evil of which we might
otherwise have been in no danger: And those advantages and privileges which are
our boast and our glory, may strongly tempt the ambition of an invader. Nor is
it impossible but that the power, to which we were once in subjection, may
still wish to recover its lost dominion, and for years yet to come, watch for
an opportunity to effect its purpose. Nor are the other nations of the world
free from avarice and ambition, and those unruly passions and lusts which
occasion wars and fightings. And while these lusts remain, the earth will be
more or less, filled with violence. Partaking, as we all do, of the same
depraved principles, we cannot be secure from intestine commotions,
insurrections and usurpations. Among ourselves Catalines have already appeared:
Antonies and Caesar's may ere long spring up. Either by a foreign, or a
homebred tyrant, our liberties may be wrested from us; if we do not stand
prepared to defend them. A people ignorant of the art of war and destitute of
the qualifications and virtues which adorn the character of soldiers, must be
in constant danger of falling under the yoke of bondage.

Nor would our character as christians, were it free from its present defects,
and more perfect than we may venture to pretend, prove our security. For though
upon all the glory of Christ's church a defense is promised in the text; yet
our own exertions are necessary in order to our receiving the fulfillment of the
promise. In this sense most of the promises in scripture, whether refering to
things temporal or spiritual, are to be understood. To his church of old, the
seed of Jacob, God promised the land of Canaan; but, in order to their getting
possession, they were obliged to fight many a rough battle, and to encounter
the dangers and hardships of many successive campaigns. They had also a promise
of protection and defense when in possession of this promised land; but were
never so senseless, as to expect the benefit of the promise without their own
endeavors to defend themselves. Hence, it was their care, in a time of peace,
to provide against the breaking out of war. Their most pious as well as
patriotick princes were vigilant in keeping their country in a state of
defense, in forming magazines of arms, maintaining garrisons and strong holds
on their frontiers, and cherishing a military spirit among their subjects --
teaching them the use of the bow and the art of war. In the use of these means
good men of old relied upon providence for its promised protection.

In the same way christians are to expect the fulfillment of those promises of
defense which are made to the church under the gospel dispensation. And, in
this sense, these promises have been always understood. As the religious
character of the best christians has not preserved them from the assaults of
enemies, so neither has it been considered by them as inconsistent with the
profession of arms: They have not scrupled to grasp the sword in their own
defense.

No part of the christian church, since the apostolic age, stood higher,
perhaps, in the favor of the Almighty, than did the first settlers of this
country; nor were more remarkable for relying upon his aid, or more diligent
and fervent in seeking it. This, however, did not preserve them from being
exposed to danger, nor was it considered by them as precluding the necessity of
providing for their own defense. They had their trials, their fears and dangers
from surrounding enemies.

Great as were the distresses and horrors of the war in which we, a few years
since, were engaged, it may yet be doubted, whether while suffering them, our
condition in general was so dreadful as was that of our ancestors in some of
their wars with the natives of this land.

Our fathers were few in number, remotely scattered along these shores. The
whole country was a thick wilderness, filled with numerous tribes of savages.
These were enemies in whom human depravity and wickedness appeared in all their
naked deformity, neither disguised nor restrained by the principles of honor
and education, or the maxims of civilized society. They were perfidious,
inhuman and cruel beyond what we can easily imagine. Indiscriminate destruction
was their constant mode of war. They knew no distinction of sex or age. Human
misery was their highest sport. On their wretched captives they inflicted every
torture which their barbarous invention could contrive Their attack was always
a surprise. The dark forests concealed their motions: From the thicket they
suddenly darted upon the unapprehensive husbandman at his labor: They
butchered or captivated his distracted family, rifled his house, and left it in
flames. In the dead of night, or at the dawn of day, the vast silence of the
neighboring wilderness was interrupted; and the warhoop and savage yell
announced to the slumbering unguarded village a host of these monsters of
cruelty. Having accomplished the desolation, they retired with such celerity,
that pursuers knew not where to find them, until a repetition of the mischief
in some distant settlement gave the information.

In times like these, and while exposed to such dangers and fears, among other
means of defense, our ancestors, a century and an half since, honored with
chartered privileges THE COMPANY OF ARTILLERY, at whose request we are now
assembled. Not mere show and parade, but public utility was the laudable
design of this ancient institution. To learn the art of war, to keep alive a
martial spirit, and diffuse abroad in the country military knowledge, were the
purposes proposed by this establishment. The worthy gentlemen now composing it,
will still keep them in view; and by their example and influence endeavor,
that not only the present, but the rising generation may possess all those
military accomplishments requisite to their proving able defenders of their
country.

At this juncture, our youth are under special advantages for obtaining these
accomplishments, by having so many among us able to instruct them, who have
seen so much actual service -- had many years experience in the field -- and
whose characters are adorned with laurels acquired in the late war. Their
knowledge and experience must greatly facilitate the improvements to be wished
in the state of our militia; while their recent example cannot fail to inspire
with martial ardour the bosoms of our young men.

Such a country as this, is well suited to produce a continued race of heroes.
Our militia are naturally hardy, brave and resolute -- not easily appalled at
the prospect of difficulties and dangers. And should they be well disciplined
and instructed in the art of war, possessing a dexterity and exactness in its
exercises and maneuvers; -- should they become, in the language of scripture,
expert in war -- mighty men of valor -- fit for the battle; they will
undoubtedly prove the best human defense. And if to these accomplishments they
add a public spirit, the love of their country, just ideas of its rights and
privileges, a reverential respect for its constitution and laws; and have all
these virtues inspired and animated by a true sense of religion; they cannot
fail to render us formidable to all who may attempt to molest us. At the same
time, the regulations and habits of obedience and subordination essential to a
well organized and disciplined militia must, in their natural tendency, secure
internal tranquillity, and prevent seditions and insurrections.

Impressed with the weight of this motive alone, our civil fathers will be ever
attentive in rendering our militia laws as perfect as possible. Nor will the
endeavors of our Commander in Chief be wanting in carrying these laws into
effect, and giving them the fullest energy. Seated in the esteem and affection
of this people, he has every advantage for promoting their welfare: His plans
for improvement will be received without jealousy or suspicion, and his orders
obeyed without murmuring or reluctance. And that love of his country and zeal
for its prosperity, which have assigned him so distinguished a rank among the
patriots of the age, will prompt his continued vigilance in providing for the
common safety.

It is the interest, and ought to be the endeavor of us all, in our respective
places and stations, to encourage and promote, in every suitable way, these
means of defense. A sense of the good land which heaven has given us, and of
the glorious privileges which are here enjoyed, should quicken our citizens at
large, to do all in their power, toward rendering the continued enjoyment of
them as secure and permanent as possible. In concurrence with this care, and
with whatever else prudence may dictate for our own preservation, we may seek,
and hope to obtain, the protection and defense of the Almighty.

I may not put an end to this discourse without observing, that as christians
we all sustain the character of soldiers under Christ Jesus the Captain of our
salvation; and are engaged in a warfare against Sin and Satan, the pollutions
that are in the world, and our own lusts. Exposed to the most alarming dangers
from these spiritual enemies, we infinitely need the defense of heavenly grace.
This is promised in the gospel; but here as well as in what relates to our
temporal safety, we are to expect the fulfillment of the promise only in
concurrence with our own exertions in striving against sin, and fighting the
good fight of faith. We are accordingly directed to put on the whole armor of
God, and become expert in the use of our spiritual weapons. And in this way are
encouraged to hope for victory and triumph, and to be brought off finally more
than conquerours through him who has loved us -- and given himself for us --
to whom be glory forever.

AMEN.

