MR. PARSONS's ELECTION SERMON. MAY 28, 1788.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE. GOVERNOR; THE
HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 28, 1788. BEING THE
DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

By DAVID PARSONS, A.M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN AMHERST.

BOSTON: Printed by ADAMS and NOURSE, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE GENERAL COURT

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. In the House of Represensatives, May 28, 1788.
ORDERED, That Mr. Cooley, Mr. Carnes, and Mr. Parsons, be a Committee to wait
on the Reverend DAVID PARSONS, and thank him, in the name of the House, for the
SERMON delivered by him, this day, before His Excellency the Governor, the
Council, and the two Branches of the General Court; and also to request of him
a copy thereof for the press.

Attest. GEORGE R. MINOT, Clerk.

AN Election SERMON.
PROVERBS, CHAP. XXIV. VERSE 2. WHEN THE RIGHTEOUS ARE IN AUTHORITY, THE PEOPLE
REJOICE; BUT WHEN THE WICKED BEARS RULE, THE PEOPLE MOURN.
THE preacher considers it to be the special design of our present meeting in
this place (according to common usage, and the laudable example of our pious
Ancestors) to seek the divine influence and direction in the important concerns
of the day -- to express our grateful and devout praises for the inestimable
blessings of government -- to implore the divine blessing upon our civil
magistrates in the discharge of the duties of their several departments -- and
to meditate on such suggestions from the oracles of truth, as may be pertinent
to such an occasion.

THEREFORE he shall hope to have acquitted himself to the satisfaction of this
numerous and respectable assembly in the part assigned him, if pursuant to the
line of his own ministerial character, he shall offer such religious
considerations, as may be thought proper for the business of the day; though he
should avoid political disquisitions -- though he should not decide in matters
of controversy; or dictate in matters of state, or attempt to give instructions
to politicians who are furnished with much better means of knowledge, and must
be presumed to be already well informed, respecting the proper duties of their
station.

WAVING therefore whatever might savor of impertinency upon such subjecis, I
would observe, that the sentiment contained in the words under consideration,
is clearly this, that the subjects of every government, however depraved, or
insensible they may be to some purposes, have usually an ability to discern the
virtues or defects of their rulers -- that they quickly feel the advantages or
embarrassments of a virtuous or vicious administration, and usually discover
their internal sentiments, by exhibiting external demonstrations of sorrow or
joy.

THE Words seem also to carry with them this further implication, that
righteousness (which in the scriptures is used to signify sincere piety, or the
fear of God) makes an important part of the character of a ruler. Yet there are
many professors of christianity, who, (not much to the honor of their
profession) will strenuously maintain, that between religion and politics,
there ought to be little or no connection -- that an Infidel or an Atheist
ought to stand as fair a candidate for the suffrages of a people, as the pious
man, or the exemplary christian. Indeed it must not be disputed that persons of
ability and accomplishments, who act from no higher motives than those of
honor, popularity or ambition, are often improved by Divine Providence, to
render very essential services to a community. But after all, must it not be
allowed, that sincere piety, the true fear of God, refines and exalts the
character of the ruler? Does not this firm and unshaken principle which ever
directs his actions, give him a better foundation for the people's confidence?
He acts from the purest motives -- he meditates the noblest actions -- prompted
by so divine a principle, his salutary influence, like the beams of the morning
sun, disperseth the gloomy horrors of vice, tyranny and oppression; and
diffuseth over the whole community, the blessings of light, joy, liberty and
peace. Thus are the words of inspiration, "the spirit of the Lord spoke by me,
and his word was in my tongue; the God of Israel said; the rock of Israel spoke
to me, he that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of God; and he
shall be like the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a morning
without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain."

OUR subject naturally resolves itself into the two following propositions by
way of enquiry, viz.

I. What evidence may be reasonably expected from rulers, that they possess
those virtues which are the source of joy to the people?

II. When a people may reasonably express their grief on account of the
corruption or ill administration of rulers?

JOY and grief are human passsions, which are readily excited, and often very
srongly expressed: and they are to be commended or blamed, according to the
various causes whereby they are produced, and the measure to which they extend.
The body of a people, may not always judge right respecting the qualifications
of their rulers; yet with proper means of information, they generally form a
just opinion: and the opinion which they form, is not to be holden in contempt:
For no wise and good magistrate will wish to hide his character from the view
of the people, or refuse to give them the best possible evidence of his
integrity and virtue.

RULERS therefore in the legislative department, ought to enact laws which are
well calculated to suppress vice, and punish the transgressor. The laws of men
have often a more immediate influence upon mankind, than the laws of God;
because human penalties, though not more certain, yet are expected to be more
immediately inflicted. This makes it necessary that rulers should pay the
utmost attention to the enacting good laws; for without these the community can
never be safe; vice must reign and triumph, virtue be unprotected and depressed.

RULERS in the executive department, ought to see that good laws be well
executed; for to what purpose does it prove to enact the most excellent laws,
with the proper penalties, when these penalties are never to be inflicted, nor
the laws carried into execution? When the boldest transgressors may bid
defiance to the laws of justice, and flatter themselves with impunity? To
indulge the violators of law, with frequent instances of impunity -- to make it
easy for them to evade public justice, has always a tendency to destroy the
influence of the magistrate, and bring government itself, into a state of
contempt. When the guilty escape, the number of offenders is quickly found to
increase: But when the laws are held sacred, and their penalties inflicted, the
authority of the magistrate is established, his person respected, and the
government severed.

RULERS are obliged to do justice, not only in respect to the laws, but in
respect to the subjects; and they are to enforce the execution of them, (unless
where some particular reasons of state may require a suspension, or omission)
in order to make the best compensation that may be, for the injury of the
offense. The neglect: of punishment justly merited, is often the cause of God's
heavy judgments upon a people. The Benjamites refused to do justice upon the
man who had occasioned the death of the Levite's Concubine; multitudes of them
were slain in battle, their cities were laid in ashes, and their whole tribe
almost extinguished. To punish great and notorious acts of injustice, is called
in scripture, "to put away evil from the land;" because to this purpose the
sword is put into the hands of rulers; and they bear the sword in vain who
refuse to protect their people. I am speaking in general of the neglect to put
good and wholesome laws into execution, without having reference to particular
instances; for surely not to punish an offense, is to encourage it, unless, as
was said before, the indemnity is justified by particular reasons of state; and
will not be an inducement to others to commit the like offenses. In all other
cases, that sin which was personal at first, becomes national, by the neglect
of the government to punish or suppress it. And it is certain that the impunity
of the offender, is spring of universal mischief -- it is not owing to the
public magistrate, if the best man in the community is not as vicious as the
worst. -- A law had better be annihilated, than to exist with universal
contempt. And no good magistrate will be an unconcerned spectator, and see the
righteous laws of the State openly violated; but recollecting the duty of his
office, will endeavor to bring offenders to their merited punishment.

RULERS ought to furnish the people with this further evidence of their virtue,
that they are friendly to religion among their people, and use their influence
and authority to uphold and promote it. Religious worship and order maintained
among a people, has a most salutary effect upon their morals; it promotes
vital piety, and due obedience to the laws of God and man. Rulers therefore
should, by their example and authority, encourage the worship of God, and see
that it is maintained with dignity and reputation. For in this the glory of the
great Supreme, and the best interest of men are jointly concerned, which are
the great designs of the providential government of God in the world. It is by
no means beneath the dignity of the greatest magistrate or monarch on earth, to
yield the most profound subjection to God, and pay homage to the Redeemer of
men; nor to consecrate themselves, their power and authority, to his service.
God requires that they cooperate with him in his designs to effect the best
interest of his people -- that they should be hearty friends to religion --
devout worshippers of God -- afford protection and encouragement to his
servants -- that they should be patrons, and nursing Fathers to the church of
Christ; and use their utmost endeavors to advance his kingdom. All which they
may do without binding the rights of conscience, or exerting their authority to
impose articles of faith, or modes of worship; or enforcing these by penalties.
Indeed such an exercise of power in a ruler would be to extend his commission
beyond its limits, and to defeat its design, which was to protect and preserve
the rights of conscience. The authority of rulers may be exercised in matters
of religion, so far as to tolerate, encourage and support the worship of God in
some form or other. The pleas of conscience are frequently made to cover a
design, and with intent only to form an excuse from contributing to the support
of religion, or upholding any form of social worship. In this case the
constitutional power of government ought to be employed to disappoint the
disssembler, and enforce the rights of religion.

RIGHTEOUS rulers will also attend to the morals of their people. Morality is
an essential part of religion, and intimately affects the very being of
society: and the magistrate bears the sword in vain, who pays no attention to a
matter which so much concerns the peace of society. He forgets the design of
his commission, which is "to be a terror to evil doers, a praise to such as do
well." A proper use of the authority vested in civil rulers is commonly
effectual to check the rapid growth of impiety, to curb and restrain the
vicious inclinations of men. The profanation of God's sacred name and worship,
as well as other enormous crimes against the laws of God and the community,
will be duly noticed and punished by the vigilant magistrate. The happy effects
produced by the vigilant care of rulers in promoting religion and virtue -- and
by their attention to the morals of the people -- by their exertions for the
establishment of schools and seminaries of instruction, to form the morals of
youth to virtue and religion, are hardly to be described. The community have
had large experience of these salutary influences of the magistrate; and it is
ardently to be wished that the sense of their importance, might produce a still
greater degree of attention.

A PEOPLE may reasonably expect to find in their rulers, a love and esteem for
virtuous men; and a disposition to advance those of that character to places of
honor and trust. Thus the royal Psalmist, "Mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me;" "he that walks in a
perfect way, shall serve me".

SURELY a man ought not to be advanced to a station of honor merely because he
has a high sense of his own merit -- nor because he requires very great respect
to be paid him -- or because he is able to flatter, and willing to do any thing
for preferment -- nor perhaps because he may be used as an instrument to effect
a particular purpose -- nor because he is indigent, yet scorns to submit to the
duties of his proper calling -- or because he has important friends to solicit
for him. Therefore good rulers will regard the safety and true interest of the
public, and will let those share their favors who best deserve them; having
regard both to their accomplishments and virtues. They will commit no trust to
a man devoid of principle, sensible that he would be likely to oppose every
good purpose, as he who hates to be reformed, will hinder reformation. The
unprincipled person is never to be trusted; for the most trifling consideration
he will betray his trust, and make use of his power and influence to subvert
the government that gave them. The frequent instances of this nature which have
happened, furnish matter of caution to every government, respecting the
servants they employ, and what characters they trust, with such powers as they
have a constitutional right to confer. Those who are strangers to a principle
of virtue and conscience, and who contemn the laws of God, will not hesitate to
trample upon the laws of men, whenever it answers any sinister purpose of their
own. But the man of virtue will be ready to sacrifice every private
consideration, that he may promote the interest of his country, and discharge
the duties of his trust with fidelity and success. He will hazard both
reputation and life, as the case may be, in support of the dignity of
government, and the honor of the laws. Such an one will be proof against the
evil insinuations of the designing and crafty; and both in public and private
will bear testimony against faction, sedition, and every evil work. Such
characters therefore, will be in great estimation with righteous rulers.

IT is not degrading the character of righteous rulers to pay a decent and
candid attention to the complaints of their subjects, expressed in a decent
manner; but it is such an evidence of their virtue as may excite a peoples'
joy. Rulers derive their authority from the people, and they cannot suppose
themselves elevated beyond the reach of their addresses or applications. They
hold their offices for a short term, after which, they must stand upon a level
with their subjects. Those who are worthy of the honor, and who accept their
election with proper view, will be desirous to know the particular state and
circumstances of their subjects, that they may be under the greater advantage
to subserve their interest. They will therefore pay a particular regard to
their complaints, and as far as they can (consistently with the interest,
reputation and safety of the commonwealth) afford them relief: or assign a
satisfactory reason why supposed grievances are not redressed; and convince the
people that their want of success in their applications to government, is not
owing to want of sympathy and affection; but because their petitions are
incomepatible with the interest of the state. Such attention paid to the
supposed grievances of subjects, naturally procures affection and confidence,
and seldom fails of establishing such rulers' interest in the hearts of a
grateful people. It disposes their subjects to pay to them all due subjection
and honor, according to the inspired Apostle, "not for wrath, but for
conscience sake;" and to do it from interest, inclination and choice. Thus will
they become the joy of their subject, and the terror of their foes. As the wise
man asserts, "when the righteous are in authority the people rejoice." -- They
will enjoy peculiar satisfaction to see persons of known virtue and integrity
promoted in the government, and the administration put into the hands of such,
as both understand in what manner to use their power; and are disposed to use
it with equity and moderation. This will have a tendency to conciliate the
esteem, and procure the veneration of the people; one and all will be ready to
unite their influence to render their administration easy and happy.

LET us now attend to the second question, viz. When a people may reasonably.
express their grief on account of the corruption or ill administration of
rulers?

BY contrasting the former character, we have the answer. For if a people have
reason to rejoice when their rulers give the most plenary evidence of a
righteous and faithful administration, by suppressing and punishing vice,
encouraging virtue -- protecting the virtuous, and religious, promoting such to
office, and cherishing a fellow feeling of the distresses of the community at
large, they cannot forbear to mourn and weep when they observe in their rulers,
a reverse of this excellent character. For as we have before remarked, mankind
have not lost all sense of the excellency of virtue -- they retain such an idea
of goodness, that they are willing to see it exemplified in the character of
their rulers, even when they find it not in themselves. They have an exalted
opinion of it in others, however averse they maybe from admitting its influence
in their own practice.

NOTHING occasions more grief to a people than to find their rulers like Omri,
the Israelitish king, making ungodly statutes -- when mischief is established
by laws, and the people enjoined to enforce them under severe penalties. God
has oftentimes permitted the rulers of a people to be so devoid of all sense of
justice and equity, as to frame the most pernicious statutes, which in their
operation, have been productive of infinite mischiefs: and which, with
tolerable discernment, might have been easily foreseen. When therefore a people
have the extreme misfortune to have rulers of such a description, they can
expect nothing from them; but such administration as will be the occasion of
sorrow and mourning as long as it shall continue.

AND hence originates that dishonor and contempt in which the rulers of a
people are sometimes holden by their subjects. When a people despise their
magistrates, contemn their government, profane the worship of God, and insult
the ministers of religion, we are ready to consider such conduct as the effect
of some weakness in government, or want of virtue in the magistrate. But when a
people discover a disposition in their rulers, to subvert the principles of
natural justice, and injure them of their just rights under color of law; is
it matter of surprise, in the present state of human nature and passions, to
see them meditating to reform government, and to procure deliverance from such
intolerable oppression?

ADD to this, when the great political characters who ought to be the most
exemplary persons, are without a sense of religion -- show no proper reverence
of authority, or regard for the church of Christ; do not act under the
influence of conscience, or the fear of God; this is a sufficient cause for
public mourning and lamentation! As such persons are greater in power and
influence, so much greater is the calamity of the people; for they are not only
unhappy by natural and immediate consequences, but are thereby exposed to the
more severe judgments of God, which will undoubtedly succeed. When iniquity or
irreligion is "framed into a law," and God must be dishonored, or the rights
of his people invaded, this surely is a source of grief to every good man.

NO injury so great, no iniquity so much to be abhorred as a wicked law,
therefore it concerns every state to see that their laws are righteous and
just. And whenever any Legislature, find on a review, that laws have been
passed, though perhaps by inadvertency, which deserve that description, justice
to God and man, demands that they be instantly repealed. That rulers should
frame laws notoriously unjust, deprive innocent citizens of their liberty,
subject them to grievous penalties, for no cause but to gratify their own evil
passions, is such a direct violation of the laws of God, and the rights of men,
as must fill every sensible heart with grief and horror. Every citizen of
every description, as he contributes an equal share toward the support of
government, has a right to expect equal justice and protecttion; unless by
some crime or errors in his conduct, he has forfeited that right; and when the
right is denied, unless on account of some defect of his own, he has certainly
a good cause to complain. And when causes of complaint, by the administration
of unprincipled and tyrannicle magistrates, became general, and perhaps almost
universal, the effects will also be as extensive as the causes; little beside
expressions of lamentation, and sorrow, will be seen or heard through the whole
community.

THE people have equal reason to mourn when wicked men are preferred by their
rulers, and distinguished by their special favors. In times of confusion and
degeneracy, wicked and designing men, obtain promotion; and oftimes such
persons are entrusted with the more important concerns of the public, who were
never possessed of virtue and economy, sufficient to transact their own. Hence
the public are deprived of the abilities of such in the Commonwealth, who are
persons of the best understanding, and the greatest wisdom. This is a sure
consequence of the promotion of wicked men, that many of the most valuable
characters, retire into-obscurity, and decline any part in government. As
Solomon observes, "when the wicked rise, men hide themselves, but when they
perish the righteous increase." Flatterers and parasites are the men who find
favor with a wicked administration, but such as govern their lives by the
maxims of religion, and the laws of virtue, if not; wholly neglected, will
commonly be disposed to excuse themselves. If they are possessed of large
property, they will soon find that their exertions in favor of virtue, will
render their property insecure -- have they great talents and abilities, they
will soon find that to use them in favor of virtue, will be to expose them to
the depredations and persecutions of a wicked, lawless power -- do they exert
themselves in favor of the public interest, and to deliver their country from
embarrassments and distresses, they find that their virtuous efforts, do but
expose them to the fury of a wicked administration.

HAPPY is it for a land, when good men increase, and more happy when their
talents are exercised for the good of the community. "But when the wicked rise,
a man is hidden." They who are void of principle, detest every thing which is
sacred, as far as they have power they thrust good men into obscurity, and they
are forced to abscond for their own safety. Those who are lost to all sense of
virtue, duty or moral obligation, will improve their power to the worst
purposes; and by this means they debase their character in the estimation of
the people, who feel themselves truly miserable under their oppressive
admistration. They cannot but mourn to see their rulers so devoid of the
principles of virtue, while they behold the melancholy effects of their
wickedness, wherever they turn their eyes -- they cannot but mourn when they
anticipate the event of such unrighteous measures of government, and the
miserable consequences which must necessarily be produced. Sad indeed is the
condition of that people, who have just occasion for such complaints! They
cannot but give their attestation to the truth of the observation, in the text,
"when the wicked bears rule the people mourn."

IMPROVEMENT.
A very natural reflection, which may be made Upon the subject is this, viz.
That virtue is honorable, and adds an eminent luster to the reputation of a
ruler. And in this view particularly that it is praised and admired by those
that love it not, that it is honored by the followers and family of vice --
that it forces glory out of shame, honor from contempt -- that it reconciles
men to the fountain of honor, the Almighty God, "who will ever honor those
that honor him." Certain it is, that religion subserves even our temporal
purposes; no great end of state, can be well attained without it; even ambition
itself often seeks to derive its support from a pretense of religion. "If a new
opinion be commenced, and the author would make a party, and draw disciples
after him, at least he must be thought to be religious." This is a
demonstration how great an instrument or means of reputation, piety and
religion are. Now if only the pretense will do us such good offices amongst
men, the reality will do us much more, besides the advantages we may hope to
receive from the divine benediction. The power of godliness, will certainly do
more than the form alone.

NO one it is presumed, can infer from any thing which has been suggested,
that obedience is not due to rulers from their subjects, although they might
have reason to be suspicious of their moral character, and although there be
many things in their administration, which might be a just cause of grief and
mourning. The obedience we owe to magistrates, differs essentially from that
which we owe to God. We ought to obey God with our understanding, and will,
that is, weought to obey him intelligently and freely; our obedience resulting
from a sense of the rectitude of his precepts. But such obedience to human laws
is not always required; for we may sometimes doubt of the fitness or equity of
them. For so long as magisrates are liable to error, though it be highly
necessary, considering ourselves as members of society, that we conform our own
actions to their laws; yet it is not always our duty to believe that their laws
are most salutary or convenient, because human laws may be sometimes otherwise.
But our social obligations require us to be subject to laws which we may think
very inconvenient, provided they be not sinful in themselves. It would be happy
if inferiors would not employ themselves too much in disputing the policy and
prudence of their rulers, and the propriety of their laws. We are not to obey
laws, which cannot be obeyed without conscience; but an action may be wrong in
respect of the person commanding it, and yet innocent in respect of the person
who executes the command.

IN the case of wars between nations or States, the subject cannot be supposed
always to be a competent judge of the equity of the dispute, yet perhaps he
must bear arms, i. e. he must pay due obedience to the powers of the State. And
in the case of executing an unjust sentence on a supposed criminal; not the
executioner, but the judge is commonly considered as the author of the injury.
He who serves his Prince in an unjust war, is but the executioner of an unjust
sentence. It is generally true, that subjects are obliged to yield obedience to
the laws of the State, without questioning the policy of them, if they are not
apparently repugnant to the laws of God: Whereas to oppose the ruler, on any
other principle than this, tends to introduce confusion into society; weakens
the bands of government; destroys the authority and influence of rulers, and is
in danger to issue in the subversion of the State.

HUMAN government is of divine ordination, and our understandings are
impressed, at first view, with the necessity of it. Every one must feel and
acknowledge the propriety and utility of that subordination in society, which
is required by the divine constitution. And he who is ever ready to impeach the
conduct of rulers, reproach their administration, and dispute the wisdom,
propriety or policy of their laws, obstructs their usefulness, weakens their
influence, and cxposeth himself to the displeasure of him, whose servants or
vicegerents they are: He does all in his power to bring the wisdom and power of
the magistrate into contempt, and plunge the State into confusion and disorder.
Suffer me to add, that he who is confident of his own understanding (and who is
more so than he who thinks himself wiser than the laws?) needs no other
tempter, than himself, to pride and vanity, which are the natural parents of
disobedience. The laws which are enacted by wise and just legislators, are not
dictated by an arbitrary will, but result from the principles of reason and
justice. They are reasonable and good in themselves; they are calculated not to
subserve any sinister purposes, or private views, but to advance and secure the
happiness of men. Whenever it happens otherwise, the legislators are
tyrannical, and the government oppressive: Statutes contradictory and
inconsistent are to be expected, and even such as might invert the order of
things, and substitute vice, in the room of virtue. From the rotations of
subjects to rulers, obligation to rulers, and duties upon those obligations, do
necessarily result. Subjection to laws being considered the first and most
essential of those duties, ought to be cheerfully yielded by the good subject,
though in some cases it may be apprehended that the laws are not the most
salutary to the interest of the people. Every citizen cannot be supposed to be
able to determine absolutely on a subject of so great importance. But it must
be his duty to persevere in his subjection and allegiance, till his rulers may
perhaps be convinced that their measures ought to be changed; which conviction,
if there be real foundation, they may quickly receive from the complaints of
the people, and from such regular remonstrances, as will proceed from the most
loyal and virtuous citizens.

LET us all endeavor to cultivate within our sphere, a reverence for
authority, and a due submission to laws and government. Lifting up our desires
to God that he would ever favor this Commonwealth with righteous rulers, who
shall not feel indifferent to the rejoicings, or complaints of their subjects.
And that under their wise and prudent administration, "the people may lead
quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty."

THE usual addresses on such occasions as the present, will close the subject.

AND as decency and propriety dictate, I would address my subject to his
Excellency the Governor and Commander in Chief of this Commonwealth.

May it please your Excellency,

GOD in his good providence has conferred a signal honor upon you in
repeatedly placing you in the highest seat in government, and entrusting you
with the principal management of the most important concerns of this
Commonwealth. It cannot, Honored Sir, but excite in your breast the most
pleasing sensation, to find your character thus revered, and your person holden
in such high estimation by so numerous and respectable a people as compose this
State; and to see the evidence which it gives that your administration is of a
similar complexion with that mentioned in our text, which is ever a source of
general joy.

AND however gloomy and difficult the day is in which you preside, your
administration being of the description above, you may look for and expect all
needed aid from him "who gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that
know understanding."

YOUR Excellency's early and intimate acquainttance with the situation of the
Commonwealth, and a thorough knowledge of the constitution particularly, render
you a more able instrument in the hands of Providence, and give you peculiar
advantages for guiding our public affairs with a skilful hand. An uncommon
share of knowledge, prudence and wisdom in a Governor is specially necessary
in such an important and critical day as the present; to steer the helm of
government with discretion -- to afford light to a people enveloped in darkness
and doubtful expectation -- to relieve them of unnecessary burdens -- and to
protect their liberties from any encroachments. Your Excellency will find
occasion for the improvement and exercise of all your peculiar talents in
directing and regulating the public affairs of government, so as to preserve
the rights of conscience, and give satisfaction to all your citizens. The
popular eclat is very uncertain; and though the important services rendered to
your country in the most hazardous transactions, have raised your Excellency's
reputation, and enrolled your name among the patriotic heroes of the age, yet
such is the uncertainty of human things, that it is possible that some
inconsiderable circumstance, which might counteract the wishes of a misguided
people, might fully the luster of all your former glories.

IF your Excellency had no higher spring of action, and were not actuated by
the noblest, and most disinterested motives, in your arduous and unwearied
endeavors to promote the lasting reputation, interest and peace of your
citizens, your situation might expose you to the severest mortification. But we
flatter ourselves that you have a more stable foundation of security and honor
from a conscience witnessing your integrity; and your sincere endeavors that
righteousness shall mark all the steps of your administration; that the present
and future joy of your citizens may not be interrupted or diminished.

AS your Excellency's character stands high in the estimation of this people,
it gives you a greater advantage, and should be no less a motive with you to
study, and invariably to pursue their best interest and happiness. In seeking
the common good and welfare of your people, you will secure your interest in
their affections, and live in their hearts; which must afford the greatest
satisfaction to a good magistrate. You will doubtless think it your duty to
discover a becoming zeal in promoting and maintaining that righteousness among
the people "which exalts a nation;" and for the want of which, the basis of
the happiest governments, in other respects, have been wholly subverted.

YOUR example and influence will not be wanting to the support of religion and
religious order -- that the worship of God be upheldmdash;the Sabbath duly
sanctified -- the ministers of Christ encouraged and supported -- that schools
of learning be duly maintained, according to the true spirit and intent of the
good laws of our Land, and the pious examples of our ancestors.

BUT especially will your Excellency be disposed to use the influence of your
dignified and exalted station, to bring vice and irreligion into disrepute, the
rapid growth of which, is truly alarming! As the minister of God you cannot be
an unconcerned spectator, while his enemies are profaning his sacred name,
degrading his worship, contemning his Sabbaths, and treating his faithful
servants with scorn. Your pious indignation in this case, will be roused, and
(...) zeal will you countenance and support the arm of the proper magistrate,
in executing the laws of the land, against bold transgressors, that they may
flee or fall before them. In this way, Honored Sir, you will mightily subserve
the cause of reformation, and lay a restraint upon vice, which will, in the
final issue of things, be branded with eternal infamy.

IN every part of your Excellency's administration, your reverence for God and
zeal for his cause, will induce you to make his revealed will, that unerring
standard of truth and righteousness, the basis of your conduct: not unmindful
that this is not only the rule by which your administration is to be regulated;
but whereby Deity itself will be guided in the final decisions of the last day;
in which the greatest Potentate will be equally interested with the meanest
peasant. -- A suggestion which your Excellency will not judge unseasonable,
from the recent instance of the death of your worthy, pious and truly excellent
cotemporary in office, His Honor THOMAS CUSHING, the first Lieutenant-Governour
of this Commonwealth, who died Feb. 28, 1788.
since the last anniversary Election: -- Whose virtuous character, and
unwearied endeavors to promote the true interest and reputation of his
country, will render his memory clear, and lasting, with all the sons of
freedom.

THAT your Excellency may long live the joy and ornament of this great people;
that your health may be confirmed, and your usefulness protracted -- that your
administration may be productive of still greater rejoicing with the people of
this Commonwealth; and when filled with days and replete with grace, you shall
be discharged from further services here, that you may share the honors of the
heavenly world, will be the unceasing prayers of the virtuous and good.

OUR subject is next addressed with due humility to the Honorable the Senate,
and House of Representatives.

Honored and respectable Gentlemen,

THE sovereign powers of this Commonwealth vested in you, by the united voice
of this large people, give high importance to your character, and entitle you
to their respect and confidence. And that you may not disappoint their most
sanguine expectations, you will make religion and righteousness the basis of
your administraiton and rule of your proceedings. That all your laws shall
favor of piety and a sacred regard for the honor of God, and the best good of
your constituents.

THIS was the original design of the institution of civil government, and so
far as you should deviate there from, you would defeat the end of your
promotion.

THERE is no positive certainty, indeed, that the best rulers will wholly
escape the invectives of disappointed individuals, but integrity and
uprightness will be sure to establish the approbation and esteem of all that
are truly virtuous. Such persons are not unapprised of the difficulties and
embarrassments with which all public busness is attended -- and they very well
know that great allowances are to be made for the seeming inconsistencies that
are many times discoverable in governmental matters; and are more likely to be
found in republican governments, where it is so peculiarly necessary to comply
with the humors and conform to the wishes of the people. When rulers make it
evident that they are governed by principles of integrity; and there is no
appearance of injustice in any of their acts, the judicious part of the
community will revere their authority and obey the laws, even when they may not
be exactly conformed to their own political sentiments. The public are in no
danger from its virtuous citizens; for they never will be found to lessen the
influence of authority, or unhinge the bands of government, even though they
should consider the operation of some particular laws as being unjust,
oppressive, and severe, if at the same time, they considered their legislators
as honest men, who had no intention to oppress.

RULERS therefore should study to approve themselves to God, to their own
consciences, and to the virtuous among their people, if they would be desirous
to be useful, and increase the joy of their citizens. Envious and disappointed
individuals will be able to make but a feeble opposition to the measures of
government, if the character and conduct of rulers justly command a general
reverence with the virtuous and good in the Commonwealth* These will feel
themselves constrained from a love of order, from a respect to real merit, from
a sense of interest, from a regard to the morals of the people, and from the
more important conviction of duty to God's institution, to exert their
influence in favor of established government.

IF then, Gentlemen, you would answer the end of your delegation, and would "be
a terror to evil doers, and a praise and encouragement to them who do well," it
will be a principal object of your attention to rule in righteousness. And in
order to rule well, it will be equally necessary that you should exhibit an
example of virtue, that religion and piety may not only be discovered in your
laws, but in your conversation, -- "rendering you conspicuous for piety and
mercy, justice and sobriety;" in this way will your authority be strengthened,
and your administration supported. Your coustituents will be induced to take
their measures and example from you. And they will be encouragers of peace or
licentiousness, in some measure, as they shall find countenance or
encouragement from your conversation and example.

THE eyes of the people are upon their rulers, and upon you, Gentlemen, in
particular, to hear your sentiments in the most critical cases, and disputable
subjects; and may expect from you such things as do not fall within your
department. In such a case, Gentlemen, you will doubtless recollect the powers
vested in you by your commission, and keep within its limits.

HOWEVER, Gentlemen, I would not presume to go out of my line, to dictate to
you any measures of a civil or political nature; your wisdom and good sense do
not require this from me.

PERMIT me to say, that as magistracy is of God's ordination, you have a right
to expect and demand due respect and obedience from our subjects. And we "ought
for ever to consider it as a peculiar favor of Heaven, that Christians are
promoted to be rulers and judges among Christians."

IT belongs to your department, Gentlemen, hot only to enact righteous laws,
but according to your constitutional department, to judge righteous judgment --
to plead the cause of the oppressed; to relieve the fatherless and widow, and
him that has no helper; to render to every one according to the justice of his
cause which shall be brought before you. You will remember, gentlemen, that
your commission is limited by God. He who has dignified you above your
brethern, has limited your powers by his holy word. You are not authorized to
obey the dictates of passion or arbitrary will, but to act agreeably to the
revealed will of God. When Joshua was appointed chief magistrate, God inst^lled
him in his powers, and put the law into his hand saying. "this book of the law
shall not depart out of thy mouth." Look then gentlemen upon the copy that is
before you, then upon the commission which is given you. And as you are God's
vicegerents to carry on the affairs of his kingdom on earth, you will take your
directions from his word, and imbibe his spirit.

WE being sensible, gentlemen:, that your work is difficult, and that you have
an arduous task to cure all the disorders of the political body, restore
harmony and peace, and to unite the jarring interests of parties, and fix them
to one common center, do most sincerely commend you to that God, "who gives
wisdom to the wise, and understanding to the prudent". Ye yourselves cannot but
be sensible of your need of divine aid and direction: "In all your ways then
acknowledge God, and he shall direct your paths." Let a consciousness of human
weakness prompt you, to repair to the fountain of light and knowledge, and may
you improve them, when obtained, to the honor of God and the good of your
constituents. And may you obtain the divine presence and blessing in the
faithful discharge of the duties of your department during your whole
administration. And as a reward for your services, may you be honored as the
political saviors of this people, and meet their most cordial approbation with
great rejoicing. And more especially may you reap the effects of a serene and
acquiting conscience. And having served your generation according to the will
of God, may you participate the joys of the blessed forever.

THIS whole assembly of God's people will permit me to make the suggestion,
that virtue in rulers is not more necessary than in the body of the citizens
collectively. The more virtuous the community, the less is the occasion for the
exercise of the gifts and graces of those in authority, and the less is the
danger of injury from rulers if they were ill disposed. When we are tempted to
complain of our rulers and feel anxious least they should betray their trust,
and expose the people to the loss of their liberties, we may recollect that a
virtuous people cannot be enslaved, and that it would be impracticable for
rulers to involve their citizens in calamities that are grievous and mournful,
if there were not a large proportion of abandoned and unprincipled men to give
countenance to, and aid them in their evil designs. And if a community are so
lost to a sense of their own interst, and so regardless of their obligations to
God and each other, as justly to expose themselves to the most fatal injuries,
who can declare that their calamity is unmerited?

THAT the administration of civil rulers may be such as may occasion rejoicing,
it becomes us not only to solicit God's presence with them and his blessing
upon them; but to demean ourselves as good citizens, and remove all the
embarrastments which may render it excessively difficulty if not wholly
impracticable, to do equal justice in all cases.

IT cannot be denied but that a people may have sometimes a mighty influence
upon a righteous administration, and procure such measures to be adopted as are
fraught with matter for grief and mourning. But this evil ought not to be
palmed upon our rulers. We ought, in such cases, as honest men, to reprobate
our own conduct, and keep within our own province. There is not a greater
mischief which can basal a people, than to be divided into fects and parties,
either in respect to religion or civil policy. The consequences are fatal to
peace, harmony and order; and it is this, my friends, which renders our present
situation very threatening.

On all accounts it is our interest, and we are bound in honor and conscience
faithfully to adhere to, and vigorously to pursue the same glorious cause. We
are bound to unite our influence that religion and righteousness may spread and
prevail -- that practical piety and holiness may be more visible in our lives,
and that the worship of God in private and public, may ornament our society,
and that our own hearts especially, may become a fit habitation for the holy
spirit.

TRUE piety in the hearts of men, will render them the best citizens. And both
rulers and people are under the same divine laws, are subject to the same
authority, encouraged and animated by the same motives, and favored with the
same example. It would be happy if their objects might be the same: and they
were equally studious to promote the honor and glory of their common Lord.

LET us not forget that the same rules that will teach, and the same grace and
integrity, that will dispose rulers to discharge the duties of their office
faithfully, are equally necessry and ought to be equally regarded by those whom
God has made subject to them:

AND that all opposition to lawful authority, "is resisting the ordinance of
God," who has made it our duty to be "subject not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake."

AND let me suggest, that as we make our religious character our boast, and
have so often made our appeal to Heaven, that we are God's people, and our cause
the cause of God, we ought strenuously to endeavor to make the sincerity of
this profession, more evident to the world; otherwise we shall justly desrve
the imputation of having our hearts and tongues at the greatest remove from
each other.

IT declarations entitled us to credit abroad, and even with Deity itself, our
deserts could hardly be compensated. But let us deal faithfully with ourselves
and confess our personal and national unworthiness, if we expect God's
forgiveness and blessing. And let us cultivate a principle of justice, of
public spirit, and benevolence in the community; and live as the grace of God
teaches. Let us be sensible of the invaluable blessings, which indulgent
Heaven bestows -- and particularly, that we enjoy the great advantage of civil
government, by the continuance and support of which, we are, for the present,
secure in our persons and properties. And while we all affect to seek a mild
and equal government, may we unite our influence to support the same, that "in
the peace thereof, we may have peace."

AND though we might be apprehensive that there were grievances which ought to
be redressed, yet ought we to let a manly firmness and resolution be discovered
in pursuing the paths of virtue till the object be obtained.

A people may be as criminal in adopting means of relief, as they can suppose
those to be, who originated the cause of complaint. And while our conduct is
such as it ought to be toward our rulers, and we suitably address them upon
the suject of public burdens, let us encourage ourselves that they will feel
our distresses, and ease our complaints.

LET us resume courage and hope for better times -- when peace and good order
shall be established upon a proper basis -- when justice shall be impartially
administered -- when friendship, brotherlv, love, and christian fellowship,
shall be universal. When it shall be reckoned an honor to be sincerely
religious, and to be subjected to the rules of righteousness in all our
transactions with men. When none but the virtuous shall rule and judge the
people of God, the administration of whom shall greatly increase their joy and
gladness.

THEN truly "blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk,
O Lord, in the light of thy countenance. In thy name shall they rejoice all the
day, and thy righteousness shall they be exalted. For thou art the glory of
their strength; and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted. For the Lord is our
defense, and the holy one Israel is our King."

AMEN.

