[ Note. The passages of the Convention of 1784, which are not in that of 1788,
are printed in italics: those of 1788 which were not in that of 1784, are in a
small character.

1784. CONVENTION between His most Christian Majesty and the thirteen United
States of North America, for the purpose of determining and fixing the
functions and prerogatives of their respective Consuls, vice-Consuls, Agents
and Commissaries.
His Majesty the most Christian King and the thirteen United States of North
America, having by the 29th article of the Treaty of amity and commerce
concluded between them, mutually granted the liberty of having in their
respective States and Ports, Consuls, vice-Consuls, Agents and Commissaries and
being willing in consequence thereof, to determine and fix in a reciprocal and
permanent manner the functions and prerogatives of the said Consuls,
vice-Consuls, Agents and Commissaries, His M. C. Majesty has nominated the
Sieur Charles Gravier, Count of Vergennes, Baron of Wel^erding etc., Counselor
of the King in all his Councils, Commander of his Orders, Counselor of the
State of the Sword, Minister and Secretary of State, and of his Commands and
Finances; and the United States the Sieur Benjamin Franklin, their Minister
Plenipotentiary to His most Christian Majesty, who after having communicated to
each other their respective full powers, agreed upon what follows:

ART. 1. The Consuls and vice-Consuls nominated by H. M. C. M. and the U. S.
shall be bound to present their commissions on their arrival in the respective
States, according to the form which shall be there established. There shall be
delivered to them without any charges the Exequatur necessary for the exercise
of their functions; and on the exhibition they shall make of the said
Exequatur, the Governors, Commanders, Heads of justice, public bodies,
Tribunals and other Officers having authority in the ports and places of their
consulates, shall cause them to enjoy as soon as possible, and without
difficulty, the preeminencies, authority and privileges reciprocally granted,
without exacting from the said Consuls and vice-Consuls any duty, under any
pretext whatever.

ART. 4. The Consuls and vice-Consuls, the Officers of the consulate and in
general all persons attached to the consular functions, shall enjoy
respectively a full and entire immunity for their persons their papers, and
their houses. The list of the said persons shall be approved and inspected by
the executive power of the place of their residence. They shall be exempt from
all personal service and public officers, from soldiers billets, militia,
watch, guard, guardianship and trustee-ship, as well as from all duties, taxes,
impositions and charges whatsoever, except the real estates of which they may
be proprietors, which shall be subject to the taxes imposed on the estates of
all other individuals.

They shall place, over the outward door of their house, the arms of their
Sovereign, without that this mark of distinction shall give to the said house
the right of asylum for any malefactor or criminal, so that in case it should
happen that any malefactor or criminal takes refuge there, he shall be
instantly delivered up, on the first requisition, and without difficulty.

ART. 2. The respective Consuls shall have power to establish vice-Consuls in
the different ports and places of their departments where necessity shall
require. There shall be delivered to them likewise the Exequatur necessary to
the exercise of their functions in the form pointed out by the preceding
article (1) and, on the exhibition which they shall make of the said Exequatur,
they shall be admitted and acknowledged, in the terms and according to the
powers, authority and privileges stipulated by the 1 st. 4 th. and 5 th.
articles of the present Convention.

ART. 3. The respective Consuls and vice-Consuls. may establish Agents in the
different ports and places of their departments where necessity shall require.
These Agents may be chosen among the merchants, either national or foreign, and
furnished with a commission from one of the said Consuls: it shall be their
business respectively to render to their respective merchants, navigators and
vessels all possible service, and to inform the nearest Consul or vice-Consul
of the wants of the said merchants, navigators and vessels, without the said
Agents otherwise participating in the immunities, rights and privileges
attributed to the Consuls and vice-Consuls, and without power to exact from the
said merchants any duty or emolument whatever, under any pretext whatsoever.

ART. 5. Generally in all cases whatever, which concern the police or
administration of justice, where it may be necessary to have a juridical
declaration from the said Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively, the Governors,
Commandants, chief Justice, public bodies, tribunals or other Officers whatever
of their respective residence there having authority* shall be bound to inform
them of it, by writing to them, or sending to them a military or civil Officer
to let them know, either the object which is proposed, or the necessity there
is for going to them to demand from them this declaration, and the said Consuls
and vice-Consuls shall be bound on their part to comply faithfully with what
shall be desired of them on these occasions.

ART. 6. The Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively may establish a chancery
where shall be deposited the Consular acts and deliberations, all effects left
by deceased persons, or saved from shipwreck, as well as testaments,
obligations, contracts and in general all the acts and proceedings done
between, or by persons of their nation.

They may in consequence appoint for the business of the said chancery capable
persons, receive them, administer an oath to them, give to them the keeping of
the seal, and the right of sealing commissions, judgments and other acts of the
consulate, as well as there to discharge the functions of notaries and
registers.

ART. 7. The Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively shall have the exclusive
right of receiving in their chancery, or on board of vessels, the declarations
and all the other acts, which the captains, masters, seamen, passengers, and
merchants of their nation would make there, even their testaments and other
dispositions of last will; and the copies of the said acts, duly authenticated
by the said Consuls or vice-Consuls, and under the seal of their ^^nsulate,
shall receive faith in law in all the tribunals of France and the United States.

They shall have also, and exclusively the right to inventory, liquidate, and
proceed to the sale of the moveable effects of the estates left by subjects of
their nation, who shall die within the extent of their consulate: they shall
proceed therein with the assistance of two merchants of their said nation, of
their own choosing, and shall deposit in their chancery the effects and papers
of the said estates; and no officer military or civil, or of the police of the
country, shall trouble them or interfere therein, in any manner whatsoever: but
the said Consuls and vice-Consuls shall not deliver up the same and their
product to the lawful heirs or their attorneys, until they shall have
discharged all the debts which the deceased shall have contracted in the
country by judgment, by acts or by notes, the writing and signing of which
shall be known and certified by two principal merchants of the nation of the
said deceased: and in all other cases the payment of debts cannot be ordered
but on the creditors giving sufficient and local security to repay the sums
unduly received, principal, interest and costs; which securities however shall
remain duly discharged after a year in time of peace, and two years in time of
war, if the demand in discharge cannot be formed before these delays against
the heirs which shall present themselves.

ART. 8. The respective Consuls and vice-Consuls shall receive the
declarations, consulates and other consular acts from all Captains and masters
of their respective nation on account of average losses sustained at sea by
leakage or throwing merchandise over board and these Captains and masters shall
leave in the chancery of the said Consuls and vice Consuls the consulates and
other consular acts which they may have had made in other ports, on account of
the accidents which may have happened to them on their voyage. If a subject of
his M. C. M. and a citizen of the U. S. are interested in the said cargo, the
average shall be fixed by the Tribunals of the country, and not by the Consuls
or Vice-Consuls: and the Tribunals shall admit the acts and declarations, if
any should have been passed before the said Consuls and Vice-Consuls: but when
only the subjects of their own nation, or foreigners shall be interested, the
respective Consuls or vice Consuls and in case of their absence or distance
their agents furnished with their commission shall officially nominate skilful
persons of their said nation to regulate the damages and averages.

ART. 9. In case by storms or other accidents, French ships or vessels shall
run ashore on the coasts of the U. S. and the ships and vessels of the U. S.
shall run a shore on the coasts of France, the Consul or vice-Consul nearest to
the place of shipwreck shall do whatever he may judge proper, as (...) for the
purpose of saving the said ship or ^^ssel, its cargo and appartunances, as for
the storing and security of the effects and merchandise saved. He may take an
inventory, without any officers military, of the custom house, justices or the
police of the country interfering, otherwise than to facilitate to the Consuls,
vice-Consuls, captain, and crew of the vessel shipwrecked or run a shore, all
the assistance and favor which they shall ask, either for the celerity and
security of the salvage and effects saved, or to prevent all disturbances.

To prevent even any kind of dispute and discussion in the said cases of
shipwreck, it has been agreed, that where no Consul or vice-Consul shall be
found to attend to the salvage, or that the residence of the said Consul or
vice-Consul (he not being at the place of shipwreck) shall be further distant
from the said place than that of the competent territorial Judge, the latter
shall immediately there proceed therein with all the celerity, safety and
precautions prescribed by the respective laws; but the said territorial Judge
shall retire on the coming of the Consul or vice-Consul and shall resign to him
the procedures by him done, the expenses of which the Consul or vice-Consul
shall cause to be reimbursed to him.

The merchandise and effects saved shall be deposited in the custom house, or
other nearest place of safety, with the inventory of them, which shall be made
by the Consul or vice-Consul* or, in their absence, by the Judge who shall have
had cognizance thereof, and the said merchandises and effects shall be
afterward delivered, after levying therefrom the costs, and without form of
process, to the proprietors, who, being furnished with a replevy from the
nearest Consul or vice-Consul, shall reclaim them by themselves, or by their
attorneys, either for the purpose of reexporting the merchandises, and in that
case they shall pay no kind of duties of exportation; or for the purpose of
selling them in the Country, if they are not prohibited, and in this latter
case, the said merchandises being averaged, there shall be granted them an
abatement of the entrance duties proportioned to the damage sustained, which
shall be ascertained by the verbal process formed at the time of the shipwreck,
or of the vessels running ashore.

ART. 10. The Consuls and vice-Consuls shall have on board of the vessels of
their respective Nations, full power and Jurisdiction in Matters, Civil. They
shall cause to be executed the respective laws, Ordinances and rules concerning
Navigation, on board the said vessels,

And for this purpose they shall go there without being interrupted by any
Officer or other person whatsoever.

They may cause to be arrested every vessel carrying the flag of their
respective Nation; they may sequester them and even send them back respectively
from the U. S. to France, or from France to the U. S. They may cause to be
arrested, without difficulty, every Captain, Master, Sailor or passenger of
their said re^pective Nation, they may cause to be arrested, or detained in the
Country* the Sailors and deserters of their respective Nations, or send them
back or transport them out of the Country.

It shall be sufficient proof that the Sailors and deserters belong to one of
the respective Nations, that their names be written in the ship's register, or
inserted in the roll of the crew.

One and the other of these proofs concerning Sailors and deserters being thus
given no Tribunals, Judges, and Officers whatsoever, shall in any manner
whatever take cognizance of the complaints which the said Sailors and deserters
may make, but they shall on the contrary be delivered up on an order signed by
the Consul or vice-Consul, without its being in any one's power in any manner
to detain, engage, or withdraw them. And to attain to the complete execution of
the arrangements contained in this article all persons having authority shall
be bound to assist the said Consuls or vice-Consuls, and on a simple
requisition signed by them, they shall cause to be detained and guarded in
prison at the disposal and expense of the said Consuls and vice-Consuls, the
said Sailors and deserters until they shall have an opportunity to send them
out of the Country.

Art. 11. In cases where the respective subjects shall have committed any
crime, they shall be amenable to the Judges of the Country.

Art. 12. All differences and suits between the subjects of His M. C. M.
settled in the U. S. or between the citizens and subjects of the U. S. settled
in France, and all differences and suits concerning Commerce, between the
subjects of His M. C. M. and one of the parties residing in France or else
where, and the other in the U. S. or between the citizens and subjects of the
U. S. one of the parties residing in the U. S. or elsewhere, and the other in
France

shall be determined by the respective C^^suls, either by a reference to
arbitration, or by a summary judgment and without costs.

No Officer Civil or Military, shall interfere or take any part whatever in the
affair: appeals shall be carried before the Tribunals of France or the U. S. to
whom it may appertain to take cognizance thereof. The Consuls or Vice-Consuls
shall not take cognizance of disputes or differences, which shall arise betwixt
a subject of His M. C. M. and a citizen of the U. S. but the said disputes
shall be brought before the Tribunals to which the defendant shall be amenable.

Art. 13. The general utility of Commerce having caused to be established in
France Tribunals and particular forms to accelerate the decision of commercial
affairs, the Merchants of the U. S. shall enjoy the benefit of these
establishments in France and the Congress of the U. S. shall recommend to the
Legislatures of the different States to provide equivalent advantages in favor
of the French Merchants, for the prompt dispatch and decision of affairs of the
same nature.

Art. 14. The subjects of his M. C. M. and those of the U. S. who shall prove
that they belong to the body of their respective Nations by the certificate of
the Consul or vice-Consul of the District, mentioning their names, surnames and
place of their settlement, as inscribed in the registers of the consulate,
shall not lose, for any cause whatever, in the respective Domains and States,
the quality of subjects of the Country of which they originally were,
conformably to the 11 th. article of the treaty of amity and commerce of the 6
th. of February 1778, of which the present article shall serve as an
interpretation in case of necessity, and the said subjects respectively shall
enjoy in consequence exemption from all personal service in the place of their
settlement.

Art. 15. If any other Nation acquires, by virtue of (...) convention whatever
either in France or in the U. S. a treatment more favorable with respect to
the consular pre-eminencies, powers, authority and privileges, the Consuls,
vice-Consuls and Agents of His M. C. M. or the U. S. reciprocally shall
participate therein, agreeable to the terms stipulated by the 2d. 3d. and 4th.
articles of the treaty of amity and commerce, concluded between His M. C. M.
and the U. S.

Art. 16.

The ratification of the present convention shall be given in proper form, and
exchanged on both sides within the space of six months, or sooner if possible.

In faith whereof we the underwritten Ministers plenipotentiaries of his most
Christian Majesty and the United States of North America have signed the
present convention and have thereto affixed the seal of our arms.

Done at Versailles, the 29th. July one Thousand seven hundred and eighty four.

Signed Gravier de Vergennes. L. S. B. Franklin. L. S.


1788. CONVENTION between His most Christian Majesty and the United States of
America, for the purpose of defining and establishing the functions and
privileges of their respective Consuls and vice-Consuls.
His Majesty the most Christian King and the United States of America having by
the 29th article of the Treaty of amity and commerce concluded between them,
mutually granted the liberty of having, in their respective States and Ports,
Consuls, vice-Consuls, Agents and Commissaries, and being willing in
consequence thereof to define and establish in a reciprocal and permanent
manner the functions and privileges of Consuls and vice-Consuls, which they
have judged it convenient to establish of preference, His M. C. Majesty has
nominated the Sieur Count of Montmorin of St. Herent, Marechal of his Camps and
Armies, Knight of his Orders and of the Golden Fleece, his Counselor in all
his Councils, Minister and Secretary of State and of his Commandments and
Finances, having the Department of foreign affairs, and the United States have
nominated Thomas Jefferson, Citizen of the United States of America and their
Minister Plenipotentiary near the King, who after having communicated to each
other their respective full powers, have agreed on what follows:

ART. I. The Consuls and vice-Consuls named by the M. C. K. and the U. S. shall
be bound to present their commissions according to the forms which shall be
established respectively by the M. C. K. within his dominions, and by the
Congress within the U. S. there shall be deliver* to them, without any charges,
the Exequatur necessary for the exercise of their functions; and on exhibiting
the said Exequatur, the Governors, Commanders, Heads of justice, bodies
corporate, Tribunals and other Officers having authority in the ports and
places of their consulates, shall cause them to enjoy immediately, and without
difficulty, the preeminencies, authority and privileges, reciprocally granted,
without exacting from the said Consuls and vice-Consuls any fee, under any
pretext whatever.

ART. II. The Consuls and vice-Consuls and persons attached to their functions
that is to say, their Chancellors and Secretaries, shall enjoy a full and
entire immunity for their Chancery and the papers which shall be therein
contained: they shall be exempt from all personal service, from soldiers
billets, militia, watch, guard, guardianship, trustee-ship, as well as from all
duties, taxes, impositions, and charges whatsoever, except on the estate real
and personal of which they may be the proprietors or possessors, which shall be
subject to the taxes imposed on the estates of all other individuals: and in
all other instances they shall be subject to the laws of the land as the
natives are.

Those of the said Consuls and vice-Consuls who shall exercise commerce shall
be respectively subject to all taxes, charges and impositions established on
other merchants.

They shall place over the outward door of their house the arms of their
Sovereign: but this mark of indication shall not give to the said house any
privilege of asylum for any person or property whatsoever.

ART. III. The respective Consuls and vice-Consuls may establish Agents in the
different ports and places of their departments where necessity shall require.
These Agents may be chosen among the merchants either national or foreign, and
furnished with a commission from one of the said Consuls: they shall confine
themselves respectively to the rendering to their respective merchants,
navigators, and vessels all possible service, and to inform the nearest Consul
of the wants of the said merchants, navigators and vessels, without the said
Agents otherwise participating in the immunities, rights and privileges
attributed to Consuls and vice-Consuls, and without power under any pretext
whatever to exact from the said merchants any duty or emolument whatsoever.

ART. IV. The Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively may establish a chancery,
where shall be deposited the Consular determinations, acts and proceedings as
also testaments, obligations, contracts, and other acts done by, or between
persons of their nation, and (...) left by (...) or saved (...) shipwreck.

They may consequently appoint fit persons to act in the said chancery, qualify
and swear them in, commit to them the custody of the seal, and authority to
seal commissions, sentences and other consular acts, and also to discharge the
functions of notaries and registers of the Consulate.

ART. V. The Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively shall have the exclusive
right of receiving in their chancery, or on board their vessels, the
declarations and all other the acts, which the captains, masters, crews,
passengers, and merchants of their nation may choose to make there, even their
testaments and other disposals by last will: and the copies of the said acts,
duly authenticated by the said Consuls or vice-Consuls, under the seal of their
consulate shall receive faith in law, equally as their originals would, in all
the tribunals of the dominions of the M. C. King and of the United States.

They shall also have, and exclusively, in case of the absence of the
testamentary executor, guardian or lawful representative, the right to
inventory, liquidate and proceed to the sale of the personal estate left by
subjects or citizens of their nation, who shall die within the extent of their
consulate: they shall proceed therein with the assistance of two merchants of
their said nation, or, for want of them, of any other at their choice, and
shall cause to be deposited in their chancery, the effects and papers of the
said estates; and no officer military, judiciary, or of the police of the
country shall disturb them or interfere therein, in any manner whatsoever: but
the said Consuls and vice-Consuls shall not deliver up the said effects, nor
the proceeds thereof to the lawful representatives or to their order, till they
shall have caused to be paid all debts which the deceased shall have contracted
in the country; for which purpose the creditor shall have a right to attach the
said effects in their hands as they might in those of any other individual
whatever, and proceed to obtain sale of them till payment of what shall be
lawfully due to them. When the debts shall not have been contracted by
judgment, deed or note, the signature whereof shall be known, payment shall not
be ordered but on the creditor's giving sufficient surety resident in the
country, to refund the sums he shall have unduly received, principal, interest
and costs: which surety nevertheless shall stand duly discharged after the term
of one year in time of peace, and of two in time of war, if the discharge
cannot be formed before the end of this term against the representatives who
shall present themselves.

And in order that the representatives may not be unjustly kept out of the
effects of the deceased the Consuls and vice-Consuls shall notify his death in
some one of the gazettes published within their consulate, and that they shall
retain the said effects in their hands four months to answer all just demands
which shall be presented: and they shall be bound after this delay to deliver
to the persons succeeding thereto what shall be more than sufficient for the
demands which shall have been formed.

ART. VI. The Consuls and vice-Consuls respectively shall receive the
declarations, protests and reports of all captains and masters of their
respective nation on account of average losses sustained at sea: and these
captains and masters shall lodge in the chancery of the said Consuls and
vice-Consuls, the acts which they may

have made in other ports on account of the accidents which may have happened
to them on their voyage. If a subject of the M. C. K. and a citizen of the U.
S. or a foreigner are interested in the said cargo, the average shall be
settled by the tribunals of the country and not by the Consuls or vice-Consuls;
but when only the subjects or citizens of their own nation shall be interested,
the respective Consuls or vice-Consuls shall appoint skilful persons to settle
the damages and average.

ART. VII. In cases where by tempest, or other accident, French ships or
vessels shall be stranded on the coasts of the U. S. and ships or vessels of
the U. S. shall be stranded on the coasts of the dominions of the M. C. K. the
Consul or vice-Consul nearest to the place of shipwreck shall do whatever he
may judge proper, as well for the purpose of saving the said ship or vessel,
its cargo and appurtenances, as for the storing and the security of the effects
and merchandise saved. He may take an inventory of them, without the
intermedling of any officers of the military, of the customs, of justice, or of
the police of the country, otherwise than to give to the Consuls, vice-Consuls,
captain and crew of the vessel shipwrecked or stranded all the succor and
favor which they shall ask of them, either for the expedition and security of
the saving and of the effects saved, as to prevent all disturbance.

And in order to prevent all kind of dispute and discussion in the said cases
of shipwreck, it is agreed that when there shall be no Consul or vice-Consul to
attend to the saving of the wreck, or that the residence of the said Consul or
vice-Consul (he not being at the place of the wreck) shall be more distant from
the said place than that of the competent Judge of the Country, the latter
shall immediately proceed therein, with all the dispatch, certainty and
precautions prescribed by the respective laws; but the said territorial Judge
shall retire, on the arrival of the Consul or vice-Consul, and shall deliver
over to him the report of his proceedings, the expenses of which the Consul or
vice-Consul shall cause to be reimbursed to him, as well as those of saving the
wreck.

The merchandise and effects saved shall be deposited in the nearest custom
house, or other place of safety, with the inventory thereof which shall have
been made by the Consul or vice Consul, or by the Judge who shall have
proceeded in their absence, that the said effects and merchandise may be
afterward delivered, (after levying therefrom the costs) and without form of
process, to the owners, who being furnished with an order for their delivery
from the nearest Consul or vice-Consul, shall reclaim them by themselves, or by
their order, either for the purpose of reexporting such merchandise, in which
case they shall pay no kind of duty of exportation, or for that of selling them
in the Country, if they be not prohibited there, and in this last case, the
said merchandise, if they be damaged, shall be allowed an abatement of entrance
duties proportioned to the damage they have sustained, which shall be
ascertained by the affidavits taken at the time the vessel was wrecked or
struck.

Art. VIII. The Consuls and vice-Consuls shall exercice Police over all the
vessels of their respective Nations and shall have on board the said vessels
all power and Jurisdiction in Civil Matters, in all the disputes which may
there arise, they shall have an entire inspection over the said vessels, their
crew and the changes and substitutions there to be made. For which purpose they
may go on board the said vessels whenever they may judge it necessary. Well
understood that the functions hereby allowed shall be confined to the interior
of the vessels, and that they shall not take place in any case which shall have
any interference with the Police of the ports where the said vessels shall be.

Art. IX.

The Consuls and vice-Consuls may cause to be arrested the Captains, Officers,
Mariners, Sailors, and all other persons being part of the crews of the vessels
of their respective Nation who shall have deserted from the said vessels in
order to send them back and transport them out of the Country. For which
purpose the said Consuls and vice-Consuls shall address themselves to the
courts, Judges and Officers competent, and shall demand the said deserters in
writing, proving by an exhibition of the registers of the vessel or ship's roll
that those men were part of the said crews: and on this demand so proved
(saving however where the contrary is proved) the delivery shall not be
refused; and there shall be given all aid and assistance to the said Consuls
and vice-Consuls for the search, seizure and arrest of the said deserters, who
shall even be detained and kept in the prisons of the Country, at their request
and expense until they shall have found an opportunity of sending them back.
But if they be not sent back within three months, to be counted from the day of
their arrest they shall be set at liberty, and shall be no more arrested for
the same cause.

Art. X. In cases where the respective subjects or citizens shall have
committed any crime, or breach of the peace, they shall be amenable to the
Judges of the Country.

Art. XI. When the said offenders shall be a part of the crew of a vessel of
their Nation, and shall have withdrawn themselves on board the said vessel they
may be there seized and arrested by order of the Judges of the Country: these
shall give notice thereof to the Consul or vice-Consul, who may repair on board
if he thinks proper: but this notification shall not in any case delay
execution of the order in question. The persons arrested shall not afterward
be set at liberty until the Consul or vice-Consul shall have been notified
thereof; and they shall be delivered to him, if he requires it* to be put again
on board of the vessel on which they were arrested, or of others of their
Nation, and to be sent out of the Country.

ART. XII. All differences and suits between the subjects of the M. C. K. in
the U. S. or between the citizens of the United States within the dominions of
the M. C. K. and particularly all disputes relative to the wages and terms of
engagement of the crews of the respective vessels, and all differences of
whatever nature they be, which may arise between the privates of the said
crews, or between any of them and their captains, or between the captains of
different vessels of their nation, shall b^ determined by the respective
Consuls and vice-Consuls, either by a reference to arbitrators, or by a summary
judgment and without costs.

No Officer of the country, civil or military, shall interfere therein or take
any part whatever in the matter: and the appeals from the said consular
sentences shall be carried before the tribunals of France or of the U. S. to
whom it may appertain to take cognizance thereof.

ART. XIII. The general utility of commerce having caused to be established
within the dominions of the M. C. K. particular tribunals and forms for
expediting the decision of commercial affairs, the merchants of the U. S. shall
enjoy the benefit of these establishments; and the Congress of the U. S. will
provide in the manner the most conformable to its laws equivalent advantages in
favor of the French merchants, for the prompt dispatch and decision of affairs
of the same nature.

ART. XIV. The subjects of the M. C. K. and citizens of the U. S. who shall
prove by legal evidence that they are of the said nations respectively shall in
consequence enjoy an exemption from all personal service in the place of their
settlement.

ART. XV. If any other nation acquires by virtue of any convention whatever, a
treatment more favorable with respect to the consular preeminencies, powers,
authority and privileges, the Consuls and vice-Consuls of the M. C. K. or of
the U. S. reciprocally shall participate therein, agreeable to the terms
stipulated by the 2d. 3d. and 4th. articles of the treaty of amity and
commerce, concluded between the M. C. K. and the U. S.

ART. XVI. The present Convention shall be in full force during the term of
twelve years to be counted from the day of the exchange of ratifications, which
shall be given in proper form, and exchanged on both sides within the space of
one year, or sooner if possible.

In faith whereof we Ministers Plenipotentiary have signed the present
Convention, and have thereto set the seal of our arms.

Done at Versailles the 14th. of November one thousand seven hundred and eighty
eight.

Signed L. C. De Montmorin. L. S. Th. Jefferson. L. S.



