PEACE: A SERMON. PREACHED ON OCCASION OF LEAVING HIS PASTORAL CHARGE OF THE
FIRST PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN NEW YORK. By JAMES WILSON, A. M.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. AND A. M'LEAN, NO. 41, HANOVER-SQUARE. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

As a small Testimony of the Author's sincere Gratitude and Regard, the
following Sermon is most respectfully inscribed to the first Presbyterian
Church in New York,

by their much obliged and most obedient humble Servant, JAMES WILSON.
New York, Feb. 4, 1788.
PEACE: A SERMON.
JOHN xiv.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Mr. Wilson
having received a Call from a Church in Charleston, South Carolina, was advised
by several Physicians that a Southern climate would prove more favorable to
his constitution, and was at present necessary for his health. This occasioned
his leaving New York, which he did with the sincerest regret. The following is
his FAREWELL SERMON, preached to a very numerous Audience, January 27 th, 1788,
and now published at the request of many in the Congregation.



JESUS CHRIST is styled, the Son of peace; and the dispensation of grace,
through him, is called the Gospel of peace. True, on a particular occasion, he
told his disciples, that he came not to send peace on earth but a sword: And
the history of man, since his appearance, has fully evinced the prediction.
Abusing this glorious dispensation of mercy, the wicked and designing, as well
as ignorant and misinformed pious men, have made it the source of contention
and strife; so that the father has frequently been found against the son, and
the son against the father, in religious contests. But although blind or wicked
zeal has often kindled into the wrath of man, which works not the
righteousness of God; yet still the native tendency of the Gospel is peace: And
it must be perverted and abused before it can engender any other than the
spirit of love.

As, under the Redeemer's gentle reign, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, we find Angels celebrate the birth of
the Prince of peace, with this seraphic song, Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men. Not only was he ushered into the world
with the song of peace, but, at his departure to the Father, he bequeathed
peace, as his last legacy to the disciples whom he had chosen.

The Apostle John, whom the Son of God distinguished as the object of his
peculiar affection, has given us the fullest account of the discourses which
Christ held with his disciples immediately before his passion. These have ever
been reckoned of great importance by all the genuine followers of the Lamb. In
the affecting moments of parting, when the Son of man said, hereafter I will
not talk much with you, behold him benignly saying, Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you.

In discoursing a little from these words, it is proposed, through the blessing
and assistance of God, to enquire what is implied in the expressions, Peace I
leave with you, my peace I give unto you; and then make some short practical
improvement of what may be said.

I. It is proposed to enquire what is implied in the expressions, Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you. A very little attention will convince us,
that more is implied in the text than in the common parting-salutation, peace
be with you. Christ gave not as the world gives. My peace suggests unto us,
that he is the author of it, and that he can freely bestow it as his own. This
verse was by no means intended for the Apostles alone. All, who call upon the
name of the Lord Jesus, in every place and age, are equally interested in it.
Considering the text then as if the great Redeemer had immediately addressed it
unto you, we think it implies in it the following things.

1st. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, implies, that Christ
has procured, for all his people, peace with God. We ought carefully to guard
against thinking that God hates any of the works he has made. God is love. His
tender mercies are over all his works. His every creature shares in his bounty,
and partakes of his diffusive goodness. But, by the wise and righteous
constitution of the government of the King eternal, immortal, invisible, misery
necessarily follows transgression. In the language of scripture, this misery is
called the wrath of God, and his vengeance. There is no peace to the wicked.
Our God is a consuming fire.

When our sins are pardoned, we are said to be reconciled unto God, and to have
peace with him. Thus the royal Psalmist says, Thou have forgiven the iniquity
of thy people, thou have covered all their Sin. Selah. Thou have taken away all
thy wrath: thou have turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger. Turn
us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease. Now it
is in consequence of the atonement of Jesus Christ alone that our sins are
forgiven. He is our peace. Through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins: and by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. But being justified
by faith, we have peace with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ: for there is
now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk, not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. Well, therefore, might Christ say, as in the text,
Peace I leave with you. The soul-reviving news of pardon, of reconciliation
with God, are still sounded in the Church. The great business of the Gospel
ministry is, to testify repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ. The tenor of the gospel of Christ is, He that believes shall be saved:
for him has God exalted to be a prince, and a savior, for to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness; of sins.

2d. Peace I leave with you, my peace give unto you, implies, that Christ
bestows. on all his people, inward tranquillity and peace. It is too notorious
to be denied, that we are guilty creatures. Guilt necessarily begets fear, and
raises in the mind the most tormenting emotions. It is possible, by long habits
or wickedness, to have the conscience feared as with a hot iron. But however
much temporary ease a person in this situation may feel, he is very far from
true peace. The absence of remorse or the freedom from despair, is owing to an
unhappy habit, the sinner too easily acquires, of turning off his attention
from his true character; and keeping himself from reflecting on the
consequences of his conduct. The peace, which the exalted Savior gives, is
very different, and founded on a solid, on an immovable basis.

Every man, who becomes a disciple of Jesus, must be made, in some considerable
degree, to know himself. He must feel that he is guilty, wretched and hateful.
The true penitent views his sins accompanied with their distressful
circumstances of aggravation. He sees that the law, which he has so wantonly
broken, is not only righteous, but good and holy. Thus he lothes and abhors
himself in dust and ashes. But when his heart is sprinkled from an evil
conscience, he feels the blessedness of the man whose sins are pardoned, whose
iniquities are covered, to whom the Lord will not impute sin. A sense of guilt
alarms. But when the sinner, knowing that a man is not justified by the works
of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, believes in Jesus Christ. that he
may be justified by the faith of Christ and not by the works of the law, he
rests on a sure and tried foundation. He believes on him that justified the
ungodly. He flees for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before him in the
Gospel.

Now he feels that there is none to condemn, but can according to the measure
and strength of his faith, adopt the animated language of the Apostle; Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies:
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also madeth intercession for
us. Here is peace which is the peculiar gift of the despised Nazarene. The
blood of Jesus cleanses from all sin. It speaks peace to the guilty mind. It
allays the fever of an upbraiding conscience. It dispels the fears of
condemnation, and makes us know that God is love. For we have not received the
Spirit of bondage again to fear; but we have received the Spirit of adoption
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

It deserves our attention, that, in the verse preceding our text, the Lord
mentions the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, without whose agency no sinner
can enter into the Kingdom of God. He shall teach you all things and bring all
things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. Sin has set our
powers and faculties at variance. The inward part of the ungodly is all
confusion and turmoil. It is true one violent passion after another usurps the
sway, and, during its imperious reign, overpowers all opposition, and bids
defiance to all control. Yet even in this situation, when all seems to move in
one direction, the soul is full of disquiet. But it more frequently happens,
that violent propensities and passions urge at once their opposite and
irreconciliable claims. Here the man without self-government is, like a ship
which has lost its rudder, driven by furious winds, while the transient
gratification of each passion, like the clashing of contending billows, vastly
increases the uproar and confusion within.

But, when the divine Comforter renews the heart, the unruly propensities,
passions and lusts lose their ferocity. Then the mind, recovered to a sense of
her immortal dignity, resumes her rightful sway. The inferior appetites are
taught to know their proper place. The objects, which kindled ambition, or
avarice, or lust, no longer glister in their wonted charms. The opening glories
of eternity captivate the Believer's heart. The powers of the world to come
sensibly influence him. A new series of activity engages all his faculties and
destroys the unworthy contests which formerly rent his heart. May not the Son
of God then say, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, when reason,
conscience, inclination, and all our powers lead to the service of God; when
the whole man is employed in righteousness, the fruit of which is peace.

3d. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, implies, that Christians
be at peace with one another. The character, which the Apostle gives of them
who are without God and without hope in the world, is, that they are hateful,
and hating one another. When a man is full of confusion within; when the
slightest degree of self-examination presents to him a monster, on which he
cannot bear to fix his eye, he must be irrascible and unlovely. And, though the
fear of encountering the fierce passions of others, which he knows to be as
ungovernable as his own, may make him act with caution; yet he cannot be said
to be at peace with others who is at enmity with himself.

Christ not only possessed the most undisturbed tranquillity within himself,
but he was at all times actuated by the purest benevolence and good will
toward all men. The expressions of the text may mean, that he has left us an
example of peace, which it is our duty and interest to imitate. But it implies
much more than this.

Christ has taken away every cause of contention among his followers. Wars and
sightings among men come from their lusts, which war against the Spirit. But
the lusts of the humble followers of the Lamb are subdued. Pride is another
fruitful source of contention and strife: But they, who learn of Jesus Christ,
are humble, meek and lowly. They think not of themselves above what they ought
to think, but esteem each other better than themselves. Self-conceit has often
interrupted the happiness of society.

The great Author and finisher of our faith has extinguished one of the
greatest causes of contention, by giving his followers a certain and fixed
standard of wisdom. While every man followed his own crude conceptions, and
deemed his own mind the seat of perfection, there was wrangling and disputes
without end. Now we can appeal to the law and to the testimony: and we know
that, if any man speak not according to them, there is no truth in him. Many
hot disputes have, no doubt, been kindled in the Christian world about the
meaning of the sacred oracles. All these however are foreign to the system of
peace. It appears, but too evidently, that the disputants, equally dissatisfied
with scripture, wish to substitute their own modes of expressions, and under
these their own conceits, in the room of the word of God. On the other hand the
true Christian is satisfied to receive divine truth in the very words which the
Holy Ghost teaches. He holds the unity of the faith in the bond of peace; and
finds his time and attention so completely engrossed with regulating his
conduct by the word of God, that he has no leisure for angry cavils with any
man.

Mutual neglects and injuries must be expected, in this imperfect state, as the
unavoidable concomitants of humanity. The true Christian, like his divine
master, is of a meek and forgiving temper. He has learned, when he is reviled,
not to revile again. He owes no man any thing but to love one another. He
overcomes evil with good. It is true many, who only come to spy out our
liberty in Christ, take upon themselves the venerable name of Christian, while
they are utter strangers to this divine temper. But, as these are none of
Christ's, we are to expect, no peace in them or from them.

Now, seeing the native tendency of the Gospel of Christ is peace; peace with
God, with ourselves and with one another: And, seeing it is impossible to have
disputings, strifes and contentions, without relinquishing all title to the
character of Christians, we see the truth, the meaning, and the propriety of
these expressions, Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you.

II. And now, my Brethren, as the improvement of what has been said, suffer me
to exhort you all to seek peace. Every person present knows the importance of
inward tranquillity. There is however no peace to the wicked. If you wish to be
in the delightful situation that your own consciences condemn you not, seek
peace and reconcillation with God, through Jesus Christ.

This is the true, this is the sole foundation of happiness. He, who looks for
it from any other quarter, is like a man who builds his house upon the sand.

Peace and reconciliation with God will not only by the foundation of internal
tranquillity, but it will lead you to be at peace among yourselves. That
christian society may be called a church of God, where the Son of peace dwells.
I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment.

Mutual forbearance must be the bond of peace among men. O remember that we are
all imperfect. We see but in part; we know but in part. Let each of us study to
approve ourselves to God through Jesus Christ; and then the only contention, if
it be lawful to give it so hard a name, will be who can forbear, who can yield,
and who can love the most.

My dearly beloved Brethren, in all probability, we shall meet no more, till we
are assembled before the last tribunal. It is impossible, without emotion, to
anticipate this awful scene. For more than three years I have now labored
among you in the Gospel ministry. God knows, and you also know, that I have not
been able, at all times, to restrain the tears, which involuntarily force
themselves from my eyes, when I figure, only in imagination, you and myself as
taking our respective places at the judgment seat of Christ. I dare not be so
bold as to say with the Apostle, I am pure from the blood of all men. How
cutting the thought, that perhaps some of you may rise up in judgment against
me; and that your blood shall be required at my hand.

O thou compassionate High Priest, who did shed thy blood for our salvation,
who art my Master, who shall be my judge, although I cannot say, before thee,
that I have declared all the counsel of God; yet I hope to be found of thee as
one who never designedly shunned to declare any part of his counsels, and whose
single aim, though with much imperfection, has been to promote religion,
righteousness and peace in this place, that I might present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus.

Allow me, my Brethren, to say, that my fears for myself, however pungent and
keen, often give way to my concern for you. It is possible for Ministers to
save their own souls, while their hearers, or some of their hearers, are cast
out into utter darkness, where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. You know
how that we have showed, and taught, from this sacred place, testifying, both
to old and young, both to rich and poor, repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. It is awful to think, that perhaps these pews,
which alas! are too often unfilled, may rise up in judgment against their
holders, and convict some of you as persons who have judged yourselves unworthy
of eternal life.

But, beloved, not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified* At the great day of Christ, he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Whosoever does not righteousness is
not of God; neither he that loves not his brother. These things being so, Oh!
how distressful the thought, that I must probably witness, in the great day of
accounts, against some of you. If while you were pricked to the heart; if,
while conscience, joining issue with the word, impressed you with a deep sense
of the necessity of your union with Christ, you stifled the conviction, and
still hold fast your iniquity, Oh! dream not of escaping with impunity. Take
heed how ye hear; for we must all give an account of ourselves unto God. Follow
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

And now, my dear friends, before I take my leave of you, permit me, in this
public manner, to return my most sincere and hearty thanks, for the great
affection and love with which you have always treated me. Many hasty
compositions, and but ill-digested thoughts have been delivered to you. No
doubt several youthful indiscretions have, from time to time, appeared. But,
instead of despising my youth, your approbation has been steady and sure; yea,
and you also afforded me the flattering, and I will add the supporting, sense
of it too.

You no doubt saw, that your approbation was only a secondary object, and that
your salvation was my constant and uniform aim. This necessarily led me to
subjects of correction and reproof, as well as instruction in righteousness. I
blush to own, that, on looking over several of these, I find, in many places,
an asperity of expression, which, to say the least of it, favors but too much
of the wrath of man, that works not the righteousness of God. All this
notwithstanding, there has been no interruption of the harmony between us. Nay
your love to me was, more and more, confirmed; so that I have served with you
in the gospel as a son rather than a stranger. This I have considered as no
inconsiderable evidence, that my preaching among you has not been altogether
fruitless. For God is not the Author of confusion but of peace, as in all
churches of the saints. Your warm and unremitting kindness has often affected,
and sometimes almost overcome me; so I hope I shall be excused for adding, that
I will bear you on my heart, while it continues to throb with the alternate
emotions of grief and joy. And may the peace of God, which passes all
understanding, keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

While I devoutly pray, that the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls may bestow
upon you his best blessings; and particularly that he may soon give you another
Minister to dispense in my room the Gospel of peace; permit me to remind you of
the great obligations to gratitude, under which you lie, to the exalted Head of
the Church, for the continuance of the life, of the health, and of the
usefulness of your present worthy Pastor. It fills me with the sincerest regret
to leave a colleague who who has been to me a Father. No commendation of mine
can add to his praise, which is already in the Church of Christ. Many of you, I
trust, are his epistle, written in your hearts, known and read of all men. I
beseech you, therefore, Brethren, to know him who labors among you, and is
over you in the Lord, and admonishes you; and to esteem him very highly in love
for his work's sake. And be at peace among yourselves. And the very God of
peace sanctify you wholly: And I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and
body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.


