A SERMON, PREACHED IN LENOX, IN THE COUNTY OF BERKSHIRE, AND COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, December 6, 1787; AT THE EXECUTION OF JOHN BLY AND CHARLES ROSE,
FOR CRIMES OF BURGLARY.

By STEPHEN WEST, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Stockbridge.

Published at the desire of a great number of the hearers.

HUDSON: Printed by ASHBEL STODDARD, M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

A SERMON, etc.
ROMANS xiii. 3, 4. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.
Will thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same: For he is the minister of God to thee for good.
But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in
vain; for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil.
THERE are particular occurrences, in providence, which are peculiarly fitted
to turn our attention to the nature and importance of civil government, and
lead us to prize and revere it as a divine institution. The present affecting
and melancholy occasion is one of those, and we are now called upon humbly to
adore and bless God, that there is a way, of his own appointment, in which the
world may rid itself of those who, by their crimes and violence, have made
themselves intolerable to society. That there is a way in which this may be
done, with the divine approbation, is evident from the words of our text. For
God has appointed civil rulers to bear his sword, to avenge the wrongs of
society, and to execute wrath upon evil doers.

But it has been a question, with some, what those crimes are for which capital
punishments may be inflicted. Many have imagined that nothing but murder or
shedding of man's blood might be punished with death by the civil ruler.

A little attention to the sacred writings may convince us of the contrary.
Happy for the world that, even in matters of civil government, we are favored
with so excellent a guide.

We find that, under the Mosaic law, many crimes, besides that of murder, were
made capital. And, as the civil government of the Hebrews was far more
excellent than that of any other nation, being framed and instituted by
infinite wisdom; it may well be patterned after by civil legislators: And such
of its laws and institutions as difference of circumstances will admir, be
adopted by other nations.

By the Jewish law, a variety of crimes were punishable with death: Such as --
Cursing, or smiting father or mother, Exodus, xxi. 15, 17. that disobedience to
authority might be nipped in the bad. -- Causing their children to pass through
the fire, and offering them to Moloch. Adultery, Incest, Lying with a beast,
see Levit. xx. Blasphemy, Levit. xxiv. 16. Idolatry, Deuteronomy. xvii. 5. Ravishing,
or Rapes, Deuteronomy. xxii. 25. If a Thief, found breaking up in the night, was put
to immediate death, he that killed him was not esteemed a criminal, Exodus xxii.
2. Witchcraft, which some learned men have supposed nothing materially
different from those base arts of fortune telling which have been imposed on
the credulity of mankind, and affronted common sense, in almost every age and
nation, was to be punished with death, Exodus xxii. 18.

If such a variety of crimes were to be punished with death, according to the
Mosaic law, it would be strange that nothing but murder might be made capital
by the laws of other nations. For there is great reason to suppose that none of
these crimes, not even murder itself, were made capital, by the Jewish law,
because they were sins against God; but because they were sins against society.
Sins as against God, he himself will punish. He only knows their malignity, and
their desert; and he only can inflict an adequate punishment. Accordingly, the
apostle says, Romans xii. 19. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather
give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine: I will repay,
says the Lord. But, that the peace of the community may be secured and
preserved, God has put his sword of justice into the hands of the civil
magistrate, to avenge the wrongs done to society.

Even Idolatry and Blasphemy, there is reason to believe, were not made capital
because they were sins against God, but because they were treason against the
state. As God was their civil king and head, these sins struck at the
fundamental laws of their society; and were a direct attempt to subvert their
government. The Hebrews had chosen Jehovah for their sole and supreme ruler and
king, and had sworn allegiance to him. They had no other form of civil
government than what had been framed and given them by Jehovah, and voluntarily
chosen and adopted by themselves. It is hence evident, that idolatry and
blasphemy were a renunciation of their allegiance to their sovereign, and
treason against their king.

And, that even these crimes were punished with death, not so much because they
were sins against God, as against the civil community, may reasonably be
inferred from the following considerations, viz.

1. There was no sacrifice of atonement instituted for these crimes. For sins
as against God, there then was, and now is an atonement. And the great
atonement typified by the bloody sacrifices instituted by the Mosaic law, is
unquestionably of sufficient worth to procure pardon even for these sins as
being against God. But sins as against God are infinitely more heinous and
criminal, than as against men: yet, as against men, they were unpardonable, no
atonement being appointed for them. Consequently they were punishable with
death, not so much because they were sins against God, as against men. Yea,
they were made capital only because they directly tended to subvert the
fundamental laws of their community.

The good of society, here in this world, forbids that any atonement should be
made for certain crimes, even be the criminal ever so humble and penitent; but,
absolutely requires, if on no other account, yet for a terror and warning to
others, the utter excision -- the death of the perpetrator. Even though the
criminal may be forgiven at the bar of God, still he may not be pardoned by the
civil magistrate.

2. That the crimes, even of Idolatry and Blasphemy, were punishable with death
only because they were against the peace and good of society, is evident from
this consideration, viz. that as against God, they might be forgiven. Thus our
Savior expressly asserts, Mark iii. 28. That all sins shall be forgiven unto
the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith they shall blaspheme; excepting only
the sin against the Holy Ghost. But, as against the laws of the Jewish
community, these sins were utterly unpardonable. But, where the penalty of the
law, as the crime respects the Deity, as moral governor of the universe, is
remitted by him, it is unreasonable to suppose that he should require man to
execute it. Where God forgives sins as against himself, as moral governor and
king, surely he would not put his sword into the hand of the civil magistrate
to execute his wrath.

3. From the extent of the last and general judgment it may be concluded that
no crimes ever are, or were, punishable by the civil magistrate, in any other
view, or on any other account, than as against the peace and good of human
society. All judgment is committed to Christ; and every crime of whatever
nature, whether it has been before any human tribunal, or not, will, at the
last day, be brought into public view, and receive a just recompense of reward.
But, had the Deity authorized the civil magistrate, either to punish, or to
pardon, sins as against himself, this would so far supersede the necessity of a
general judgment, and deprive the Son of God of the honor of being universal
judge.

Indeed, nothing can be more absurd than to suppose that men should be judges
and avengers in the cause of God. Men are, themselves, all infinitely guilty in
God's sight; and must, all, be arraigned as criminals at his bar. Though civil
magistrates are styled gods, they are nevertheless to die like men. But for the
protection and good of society civil rulers may be clothed with an authority
which is, in some respects, an image of the divine. This authority they are to
use for the ends which they are invested with it; which are, that they may be a
terror, not to good works, but to the evil.

But whenever the civil ruler attempts, in character of judge and avenger, to
animadvert upon crimes as against God, he assumes that to which he has not the
least imaginable right, steps into the seat of God, and wrests the sword out of
his hand.

From these considerations we may safely conclude that civil rulers may be
justified in making other crimes capital besides that of murder, and the civil
magistrate may lawfully inflict death upon the perpetrators of them. Men have a
right to inflict capital punishments in every case wherein the good of society
requires it: -- and, of this men must be the judges; not forgetting, however,
their obligations to judge with discretion, impartiality and candor; and that
they are accountable to God for the laws which they frame, and the sanctions by
which they establish them. God has put his sword into the hands of the civil
magistrate to avenge the wrongs done to society: and, therefore, men are
required to be subject to civil authority, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake, Romans xiii. 5.

From these considerations it appears that it is agreeable to the will of God,
yea, that it is his own appointment, that there should be lodged, some where in
society, a supreme power: -- a power to be controuled by nothing but by the
law: -- a power not to be resisted: -- a power to execute vengeance and
punishments. Without this power, the ends of the institution of civil
government never can be answered, nor the good and safety of society insured.
Without this, rulers can never be a terror to evil doers; nor encouragers of
them that do well. Without this, government cannot subsist; but society must be
dissolved.

It appears, further, from what has been said, that laws framed for the good of
civil society, are indeed binding upon the consciences of men. Were it
otherwise we could not be required, by the divine law, to be subject to them,
not only for wrath but for conscience sake. Crimes committed against civil
society are not expiated by enduring the wrath of the civil magistrate: but, as
against society must have another hearing, and undergo another trial, at the
bar of God. Though men may punish crimes only as being against society: yet God
will punish them as being not only against himself, but against our
fellow creatures. Laws, framed for the good of society, have, therefore, the
double sanction of human authority, and of the divine.

By the institution of civil government, and the authority with which rulers
are invested from on high to be avengers, and to execute wrath upon evil doers:
it appears that human governments are an image of the divine. One way,
therefore, in which we are to express our submission to God, and to his
authority, is by yielding a willing and due subjection to civil authority and
government. A member of the kingdom of Christ, will certainly be a good and
peaceable member of civil society: and where the divine law is written in the
heart, it will and must produce a regular and cheerful subjection to human laws
framed for the good of society. An uneasy, restless member of civil society,
impatient of every human restraint, is not qualified for that state of perfect
peace, subjection and harmony, which will reign in the world above,

Further, as in human governments punishments are inflicted only for the
general good; so also, in the divine. As it is an instance of goodness, and of
regard to the peace and welfare of society, in the civil magistrate, to execute
the penalties of the civil law; so is it an instance of goodness in God, and of
regard to the peace and welfare of his great family, where the sacrifice of
atonement is rejected, to execute the penalties of the divine law. For the good
of the universe can no more be secured, unless the spirit and honor of the
divine law be preserved in administration, than the peace of civil society can
be preserved, unless civil law and justice be faithfully administered. And as
civil rulers have no pleasure in the pains and misery of those whom they are
obliged to cut off from society: so the Great Ruler of the universe, as he
declares with an oath, Ezekiel. xxxiii 11. has no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live.

Though human governments are an image of the divine, yet the difference, in
many respects, between them, is exceedingly great: and the resemblance of the
former, to the latter, but very faint and imperfect. As the knowledge of God
extends to the secret motions and exercises of the heart, so do the laws of
this glorious kingdom and government. But human laws extend no further than to
the external actions and conduct of men; or rather to the tempers and exercises
of the heart, only as they appear and are expressed in overt acts: So that, in
those very instances wherein human laws may be obeyed, the penalties of the
divine may be incurred. The perfection of the divine government, also, far
transcends that of men, in this respect, that the great Governor of the world
does not descend from his high dignity as lawgiver and king, in exercising the
richest mercy and grace to innumerable multitudes of the vilest of criminals;
whereas, pardons may be so frequent, in civil governments, as to diminish the
authority of the magistrate, and take off the terror of the law.

We may also conclude, that, if the judgment of man, and the vengeance of the
civil magistrate, are attended with circumstances so striking and awful as
those now before us; the judgment and wrath of the eternal God must be
infinitely more awful and dreadful. If it be, as we now see, a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the civil magistrate; how fearful a thing indeed must it
be to fall into the hand of the living God!

If the circumstances of the criminals now before us, taking only into view the
punishment, the shameful death about to be inflicted on them by the hands of
men, be enough to excite the pity, and move the compassion of even obdurate
hearts; how extremely pitiable and affecting are the state, and circumstances
of all those who are yet in their sins, under the curse of the divine law, and
exposed, every moment, to have its most awful penalties inflicted, in full
measure upon them?

Again, as the dignity and honor of the divine government will be supported and
maintained, by God's adverting to the smallest crimes, and the least offenses
against his holy laws; is it not incumbent on the civil magistrate carefully to
notice even small offenses against the laws of the community, and animadvert
suitably upon them? And would not this as really tend to the honor of civil
government, and the peace and happiness of society, as the similar mode of
conduct in the great Governor of the world, does to the dignity and honor
divine government, and the peace and welfare of God's extended kingdom. Where
small, but real crimes, are passed unnoticed by the civil magistrate, the door
is open to the commission of greater; and vile and wicked men encouraged, by
and by, to bid defiance to all authority. And then, punishments for the
greatest crimes have a less beneficial effect, and the execution of them sits
more uneasy upon the minds of the public, than when the laws are punctually
executed, and every breach receives a just recompense of reward. Does not the
style and title of civil rulers, in the holy scriptures, where they are called
gods, imply that in this respect they should imitate the conduct and copy the
example of HIM whose commission they bear.

Notwithstanding the analogy there is, in a variety of respects, between human
governments and the divine, there is a wide and a material difference in the
latter from the former, which may suggest very comfortable reflections amid
such melancholy scenes as that now about to be presented before us. The
judgment of man is not absolutely final; nor, in many respects, similar to
that of God. God may forgive, where the civil magistrate is bound to hold
guilty: And the vengeance of Heaven may be averted from the unhappy object on
whom that of society must be executed. It is possible that a criminal may go
from the halter, or the stake, to a seat of honor and everlasting glory. The
vengeance of the civil magistrate, and of God, are not the same: nor is the
great Governor of the world circumscribed within the same rules and limits
respecting executions, as bind the civil magistrate. Human laws leave no room
for repentance; but, by the gracious constitution of God, this may be a mean of
obtaining pardon for the most heinous of crimes. When, therefore, we see one of
our fellow men cut off by the hand of civil justice, we cannot from thence
infer, with any certainty, that divine justice requires his final perdition.
Yea, the circumstances of the case may be such that we may have reason to
conclude that even the axe, or the halter, may be a passport to a world of
endless felicity and joy.

But, I must close with one or two addresses suited to the present solemn
occasion. And,

I. To the prisoners now brought out for execution.

Poor, unhappy, wretched creatures! As you are now just launching into the
eternal world, how shall I frame an address to you, preparatory to that
infinitely more solemn address which will soon be made to you from the seat of
eternal judgment!. By your daring crimes and wickedness, you have forfeited
the protection of society, and exposed yourselves to the highest expression of
the displeasure of the community to which you belong. And, as you have set
yourselves against the community, so the community now set themselves against
you. You have troubled society, and this day the Lord will trouble you. You
have been deaf to warnings and counsels, and to the cries and tears of those
whom you have plundered and abused; and now society must be deaf to your cries,
and harden itself against your tears. You have braved danger, and, I fear, have
defied death; But now the net is spread over you, and trouble on every side
has taken hold upon you.

I say not these things to insult you: I would insult no man, especially no one
in your awful and melancholy situation. But, I say these things, that now, if
it may be, in this last, infinitely important hour, you may be brought to a
suitable and proper sense of your great wickedness. You have heard that there
is an atonement made for sins against God. He is yet on a throne of mercy, with
the ever-glorious and all-prevalent intercessor at his right hand. Still the
scepter of mercy is holden out to you; and the infinitely gracious offer of
free and full pardon made to you

But oh! with what a voice of thunder, and in what solemn and piercing accents,
will you soon be addressed from the throne of everlasting judgment, unless
now, with penitent and broken hearts, you lift up your feeble voices in humble
cries and supplications for mercy. The Lord is a prayer-hearing God. No one
ever sought to him in vain. He has seated himself on a throne of grace,
purposely to hear the penitent cries of helpless distressed, undone sinners.
Not a groan from a broken heart, but what reaches his ears; not a sigh but what
is noticed by him. Even one prayer, now in your last moments, breathed forth
from such hearts, will ascend, enter within the veil, meet acceptance, and
through the riches of divine mercy secure you a welcome into the blessed abodes
of everlasting peace, where fraud and violence never come. Improve, then, these
your last moments, in humble, penitent, and fervent cries to God. Remember
eternity now hangs upon an hour! Infinitely important events are now gathering
and collecting (...), to a single point; and infinite wisdom is to give the
decision, and turn the balance! May divine sovereign mercy interpose for you,
and pardon and everlasting favor be your happy portion! But how your fate will
be, in fact, decided, another more solemn and important day than this will
declare. I ill then, I bid you a last, a cordial, a mournful farewell.

A few words to this great assembly shall conclude the discourse.

What an awful spectacle is now presented before you. The hand of heaven
visibly turned against the disturbers of the common peace; and the messengers
of death now just about to seize and devour their devoted prey! In one respect
we here behold a melancholy instance of the truth of what the apostle asserts,
James i. 15. That lust, when it has conceived, brings forth sin: and sin,
when it is finished, brings forth death. Let this instance be a warning, a
solemn warning to all, how they venture to break the bands of civil society,
defy its laws and vengeance, and, in that, bid defiance to the laws and
vengeance of the Almighty! If thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for the
ruler bears not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Be afraid of small crimes, and less
encroachments upon the rules of equity and righteousness; and by this
melancholy instance, see to what they may lead, and in what they may terminate.
Great things often succeed, but small beginings, and, the most henious
offenses, generally take their rise from smaller crimes. Let this consideration
make you afraid even to take a step in forbidden paths.

Let parents take warning how they educate their children, and what examples
they set before them. Early habits take deep root, and are with great
difficulty eradicated or overcome. Inure them to subjection and obedience, and
endeavor to instill into their minds a dread, a horror of every degree of
injustice and violence. Consider how much the peace of society, and their own
everlasting good, may depend upon it. Your own bad instructions and examples
will have the pernicious influence to encourage to greater crimes; and may
finally bring them to the gallows, and terminate to their everlasting
destruction.

But, however solemn the present scene may be to the devoted criminals now
before us, on account of the more awful judgment which awaits them; let us all
remember that the same solemn hour awaits each one of us. Our eyes must soon
see them, and see each other, at the tribunal of God. And whatever may be their
fate, if we die impenitent, whether we go from the gallows, from a stake, or
from a bed of down, we shall with equal certainty hear the awful sentence:
Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

O then improve, thankfully and wisely improve, the happy season of grace
indulged to you, but denied to them! Remember we are by nature, the same vile
creatures, in the sight of God, as they; and perhaps, many of us much more
criminal and vile. We stand in as absolute need of an infinite atonement, and
infinite mercy. Their conduct is but a specimen of human nature -- of what is
naturally in each of our hearts. And not unto ourselves, but to the kind
providence, and the restraining goodness of God, is it to be ascribed, that we
are not now in their mournful situation.

Let no one, then, glory over them: but, as we ourselves need infinite mercy as
well as they, let us put on bowels of mercy, and pour out our hearts in humble
cries, that divine grace may descend and arrest them. That God and Savior whom
we profess to worship, is able to wound and to pour grace into their hearts.
Once, when himself was making his soul an offering for sin, he displayed his
glory and saving power by converting one who was that moment hanging on a tree.
Let us all put up our humble and fervent cries to HIM, that a similar display
of his power and grace may now be made! And, if we, and these unhappy victims
of civil justice be made the subjects of his converting grace, let death come
when it may, or in whatever form, we may unite in singing that triumphant song,
O death where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory! May God of his
infinite mercy, grant that this may be the happy lot of us all, through JESUS
CHRIST. -- AMEN.


