FRONTISPIECE


THE AMERICAN JEST BOOK: CONTAINING A CURIOUS VARIETY OF JESTS, ANECDOTES, BON
MOTS, STORIES, etc.

PART I.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR M. CAREY, AND W. SPOTSWOOD.

M,DCC,LXXXIX.

THE AMERICAN JEST BOOK.
A BLACKSMITH in a country town, while shoeing a horse, was gazed at by a
number of negroes as they were passing by; being a little piqued at being the
object of the blacks' attention, and attempting to cast a slur upon them, he
said, " I believe hell's broke loose." -- " Yes, massa," says one, " I see de
devil got hold de horse's foot."

2. A tradesman, whose love of money made him prescribe, as beneficial to his
servants' health, and his own profit, the practice of early rising, one morning
gave a poor black man a severe scolding for suffering the sun to shine on him
while in bed -- concluding his lectures with a severe threat, if he should ever
after find him not up at sun rise. "At sunrise, massa?" asked the honest
African, in the native simplicity of his soul -- it was worth a casket of
diamonds to him -- "At sunrise, massa? But suppose, massa, the sun rise before
daylight -- what shall I do den, sir?" The master made no reply, and Sambo was
dismissed.

3. A very pious gentleman, but rather worldly, who lives not many miles from
Boston, made it his constant practice to call up his family before day, in
order that they might attend prayers, and be ready for their labor in good
season: one morning having mustered his family rather earlier than common, he
commenced family duties by prayer, during which, he returned thanks to the
Lord, that they were brought to see the light of another day: an old negro
standing by, cried out, " Top, top, vate a bit, no day yet, massa, sartin, no
day yet."

4. Soon after the peace, a merchant in Wilmington. North Carolina, wrote to
one of the principal shippers in London, an order to send out thirty thousand
black tacks; the writing being indifferent, the gentleman thought it meant
black jacks; and although the order appeared a little romantic, he used his
utmost endeavors to comply with it. After collecting in London, Birmingham and
Sheffield, he could only glean up ten thousand, which he dispatched with an
apology that he could not then complete the order, but was in hopes in a short
time he should be able to send the remainder.

5. When the French sleet, during the late war, entered the British channel,
the English fleet under sir Charles Hardy, stood away, as if bearing for port;
a jack tar, on board the Royal George, seeing this proceeding, went below, and
bringing up his hammock, went to the head of the ship, which had the figure of
George II. for its ornament -- " Let me, old boy," said he, " muffle you, for
damn me but it would hurt you too much to see us running away."

6. Mr. Mackenzie, who has sometimes been called the Scots Addison, is by
profession an attorney. He was lately in company with sir William How, in the
Highlands of Scotland. After dinner, the conversation happened to turn upon
poison; the various effects of different species were mentioned, and among
others, those of ratsbane and laurel water. "We say in England," said the
general to mr. Mackenzie, "that ratsbane will not kill a lawyer." -- "And we
say in Scotland," replied the wit, "that some generals are in no danger from
laurel."

7. A certain young gentleman, well known among the choice spirits of
Charleston, South Carolina, for singing a good song, being lately recovered
from an indisposition, which made him look rather down in the mouth, was
accosted by an old acquaintance, with, "how are you, my buck? don't you feel
very ugly at present?" "very ugly, indeed," replied the valetudinarian --
"that is not to be wondered at neither," replies the other, "for ever since I
first saw you, I always looked upon you to be a d -- d ugly fellow."

8. Some years since, one Tom Hide, an Indian, famous for his cunning, went
into a tavern at Brookfield, in Massachusetts, and after a little talk, told
the landlord, he had been hunting, had killed a fine fat deer, and that if he
would give him a quart of rum, he would tell him where it was. -- The landlord
did not wish to let slip so good an opportunity to obtain the venison, and
immediately measured the Indian his rum -- "Well," says Tom, "do you know where
the great meadow is?" "Yes" -- "Well, do you know, where the great marked
mapletree that stands in it, is?" -- "Yes" -- "Well there lies the deer." A way
posted the taverner with his team, in quest of his purchase: he found the
meadow and the tree, it is true; but his searchings after the deer were in
vain; and he returned no heavier, but in chagrin, than he went. Some days
after, he met the Indian, and violently accused him of the deception. Tom heard
him out, and with the coolness of a philosopher replied, "did you not find the
meadow, as I said?" -- "Yes," "and the tree?" -- "Yes" -- "and the deer?" --
"No." -- "Very good," continues he -- "you found two truths to one lie, which
was very well for an Indian."

9. A certain trading justice in Boston, notorious for his professional
ingenuity, some time since employed a poor man to saw a load of wood, for which
he agreed to give him eighteen-pence. The man, in order to be more expeditious
in the business, stripped off his coat and laid it in the street. -- After
finishing the job, he found, to his surprise, that the coat had vanished, and
asking the justice, who had been at the door, nearly the whole time, if he had
seen any thing of it -- the worthy magistrate replied, "he had found a coat in
the street," and producing it desired to know, "if he could swear to the
property;" on the poor man's answering in the affirmative, he proceeded to
administer the oath: after which, on restoring the coat, he shrewdly observed
to the poor fellow, that they were now clear of each other, the price of the
work being eighteen pence, and his fees amounting to the same.

10. A few years since, some boys, equipped in mock military accoutrements,
such as paper-caps, paper-belts, wooden swords, etc. were beating up for
recruits in Parliament-street, Boston; their sergeant made a stand at a corner,
and a number of people soon collected about him, among whom were some officers
of the British army, of the delicate cast, then quartered in Boston: young Kite
delivered his speech at the drum-head; after which many boys, candidates for
military fame, presented themselves to be enlisted, were approved, and after
having received dumps, in lieu of entrance-money, joined the party: among the
rest, a wretched little boy, bow-legged and otherwise deformed, offered himself
as a volunteer to this corpse of real infantry: on his approach, sergeant Kite,
with a profound importance, cocked his hat, and after viewing him cap-apee,
with an air of supreme importance, "sirrah," says he, "what do you mean? how
durst you insult his majesty's service you a soldier! why you are a disgrace to
human nature; march off directly, or I shall chastise your presumption." On
this the poor rejected lad was retiring apace, when an arch boy, eyeing the
spectators in scarlet with a look shrewdly expressive, at the same time pulling
the sergeant by the sleeve, " sir," says he, " call him back, call him back,
he will (...) for an officer."

11. During the late war, an English frigate having come up the Patowmac, a
party was landed, who set fire to and destroyed some gentlemen's houses on the
Maryland side in sight of mount Vernon, general Washington's house; after which
the captain, (I think captain Greaves of the Actaeon) sent a boat on shore to
the general's, demanding a large supply of provisions, etc. with a menace of
burning it, likewise, in case of a refusal. To which mr. Lund Washington
replied, "That when general Washington engaged in the contest, he had put all
to the stake, and was well aware of the exposed situation of his house and
property; in consequence of which, he had given him orders by no means to
comply with any such demands, for that he would make no unworthy compromise
with the enemy, and was ready to meet the fate of his neighbors" The captain
was highly incensed on receiving this answer, and removed his frigate to the
Virginia shore; but before he commenced his operations, he sent another message
to the same purport, offering likewise a passport to mr. Washington to come on
board: he went accordingly in the boat, carrying with him a small present of
poultry, of which he begged the captain's acceptance. His presence produced the
best effect -- he was hospitably received, notwithstanding he repeated the same
sentiments with the same firmness. The captain expressed his personal respect
for the character of the general, commending the character of mr. Lund
Washington, and assured him, nothing but his having misconceived the terms of
the first answer, could have induced him for a moment to conceive the idea of
taking the smallest measure offensive to so illustrious a character as the
general, explaining at the same time the real or supposed provocations which
had compelled his severity, on the other side of the river. Mr. Washington,
after spending some time in perfect harmony on board, returned, and instantly
dispatched sheep, hogs, and an abundant supply of other articles, as a present
to the English frigate.

12. The constitution of Pennsylvania makes a year's residence in the state,
and payment of taxes, the sole requisites to qualify a man for an elector.

At an election, when parties were violent, each warmly canvassing for
suffrages, a captain of a ship, then lying at the wharf, took his seamen to a
magistrate, paid a tax for each, and procured a certificate of the payment --
then putting such tickets or votes in their hands, as he pleased, led them to
the state-house, where they all lodged their votes.

On the return of the ship the next voyage, just before she arrived in Delaware
bay, she was surrounded by a vast multitude of porpoises, pursuing a westerly
course with the ship. "See here," says one of the sailors, to his ship-mate,
"what a merry company we have." "Yes, d -- n 'em," replies Jack, " they are
driving for Philadelphia, I believe, to pay taxes, and vote for assemblymen."
The captain, who was then walking on the quarter deck, heard the sarcastic wag,
and smiled, but said not a word.

13. A very worthy man in a neighboring state, was remarkable for his absence
of mind. In one of his profound reveries, he saddled his horse to carry a bag
of corn to a mill at some distance, but forgetting to place the bag and himself
too upon the horse, he took the corn upon his own shoulders, led the horse and
marched nearly a mile, before he discovered his mistake. At length one of his
neighbors met him, and to his great surprise, asked him whether it would not
be easier for him to let his horse carry the bag of corn? The man took the
hint, laid the load upon his horse, and proceeded on his way.

14. Dr. F --, being in England in the year 1775, was asked by a nobleman, what
would satisfy the Americans? He answered, that it might easily be comprised in
a few re's, which he immediately wrote on a piece of paper. -- Thus, Re -call
your forces, -store castle William, -pair the damage done to Boston, -peal your
unconstitutional acts, -nounce your pretensions to taxes, -fund the duties you
have extorted; after this -quire, and -ceive payment for the destroyed tea,
with the voluntary grants of the colonies, and then -joice in a happy
-conciliation.

15. Soon after the settlement of Virginia, captain Smith, then president of
the council, conducted a party of men a few miles from James-town, to cut
timber. -- Among the rest were two gentlemen, who had not been used to labor.
As they were at work, their fingers began to be blistered, and the pain of
holding their axes was such as to extort an oath at every third blow. To
prevent this, the president ordered the oaths each day to be numbered, and at
night condemned each man to have a cann of water for each oath poured into his
sleeve. These washings had the desired effect, and it was afterward rare to
hear an oath in a week.

16. Some years since, an Indian resided in the metropolis of a neighboring
state; he gained his subsistence by his industry, and being a very handy
fellow, he was frequently employed by many in the city, particularly by the
governor. The Indian, whose name was Joseph, took the liberty of enquiring of
the governor, how it came to pass he had so many fine things about him and
never worked any? The governor replied that he got them by headwork. Joe wished
to be instructed in the mystery, but was informed his scull was too thick for
it. Some time after, Joe was sent for by the governor, who demanded to know
what he would have for killing a calf? Joe said, he would do it for two
shillings: he was desired to go to the stable and perform the business; he
went, cut the calf's throat, and left him lying there; after some delay he went
to the house, and received his pay: soon after the governor went to see how his
veal looked, but was astonished to find the calf lying dead, and nothing more
done to it. He sent for the Indian, reprimanded him severely for treating him
so. Joe insisted that he had complied fully with his agreement; saying he had
killed the calf, and that for two shillings more he would dress it, asking the
governor, if that was not something like head-work?

17. When the American war was warmly agitaed by the British ministry, mrs.
Wright, who was modelling the head of lord North, anxious to hear something
respecting her native country, waited on him, to see how far she had improved
in the likeness: and soon turned the conversation to the affairs of America.
She assured him of the little probability of success, and with her usual warmth
declared, that if he did not immediately recall the troops, and make atonement
for the blood that had already been shed, he should lose his head. He laughed,
and told her, it was of little consequence, respecting himself, as long as he
preserved her friendship, which at all events he should be careful to do: for
you know, mrs. Wright, continued he, if they should cut my head off, it is in
your power to make me another.

18. Some years ago, immediately after the shock of a tremendous earthquake had
alarmed the inhabitants of Grenada, the conversation turned at the governor's
table, upon the latent occasion of the above phenomenon; after every one of
the company had assigned it to a different cause, an old negro woman was asked,
what was her opinion on the subject; she replied, " she thought the Great God
was passing by, and the earth had made him a curtsy."

19. Several runaway negroes being condemned to be hanged, one was offered his
life, on condition of being the executioner. He refused it: he would sooner
die. The master fixed on another of his slaves to perform the office. "Stay,"
said this last, "'till I prepare myself." He instantly retired to his hut, and
cut off his wrist with an axe. Returning to his master, "now," said he, "compel
me, if you can, to hang my comrades."

20. In the year 1785, a farmer of Bucks' county, assisted by his people,
working in harvest, killed a rattle-snake; and soon after having occasion to go
home, took up by mistake his son's jacket, and put it on; the son was a
stripling, and both their jackets were made of the same kind of cloth. The old
man being warm, did not button the jacket until he got to the house, then found
it much too little for him; he instantly conceived the idea, that he had been
imperceptibly bitten by the rattle-snake, and swelled from the effects of the
poison; he grew suddenly very ill, and was put to bed. The people about him
were very much alarmed, and sent for two or three physicians; one of whom
poured down his throat a pint of melted lard -- another gave him a dose of wild
plantain -- and the third made him drink hoar hound tea, made very strong.
Notwithstanding all, he grew worse and was to appearance on the verge of
dissolution, when his son came home, with the old gentleman's jacket hanging
like a bag about him. The whole mystery was at once unravelled, and the poor
farmer, notwithstanding his drenches of hogs'-fat, plantain and hoarhound, was
well in an instant.

21. While doctor Franklin was at Paris last war, he happened to mention at his
table, that he had but little Madeira wine; upon which an American guest sent
him three dozen. A few days afterward, this gentleman was thrown into the
Bastile, and confined there several weeks without the least intimation of what
he was accused of; only on his earnest enquiry, one of the officers told him he
was afraid it would go hard with him, and asked him whether he was a catholic,
and would be attended by a priest, which he, being a protestant, refused. After
some time a battle of wine was brought, and he was asked whether he knew what
wine it was, and was ordered to drink it: he complied, and answered that he
believed it was some of his own Madeira. At length he was released, and then he
discovered that doctor Franklin had been taken ill, soon after he received his
present, and it was imagined that he had been hired by the English court to
poison the doctor.

22. At the siege of Charleston, an American soldier had been bribed to convey
to the enemy a plan and state of the works, ammunition, etc. After he had
passed the lines, he was discovered by the piqu^^^; who, having repeatedly
called on him to return, were at length obliged to fire at him, and wounded him
so that he could not proceed. Upon examining the papers with which he was
charged, they were found so accurately and ingeniously executed, that general
Lincoln was convinced they were the work of another hand, and offered the
soldier his life, provided he would discover the person in the garrison, who
had employed him. This offer was rejected, with an observation, that he knew
the risque which accompanied his attempt, and had received an adequate
consideration. The usual arrangements were therefore made for his execution,
and the rope being tied about his neck, the general hoped that such
circumstances might have shaken his fortitude, and sent an aid-de-camp to make
another tender of pardon upon the same terms. "No!" exclaimed the resolute
victim, "you have my life in your power, but my honor is my own." The signal
was immediately given, he was consigned to eternity, under the impression of
this noble sentiment: and it is remarkable, that the hangman, as he descended
from his duty, was killed by a shot from the British piquette. Such conduct,
however, proves the inconsistency of the human character; nor is it easy to
conceive, how a mind, so solicitous to preserve its dignity in a matter merely
personal, should have condescended to engage in a treachery, destructive to
public confidence and allegiance.

23. During the late war, an elderly gentleman from New York, who was at bottom
a staunch loyalist, but so fond of argument, that he would occasionally take up
the subject of the war and argue upon it either pro or con -- being once at a
coffeehouse in London, when that topic was in agitation, and then defending the
cause of the Americans, one of the company, more sanguine than the rest,
roundly asserted, there could be no doubt of conquering the Americans,
notwithstanding the superiority of their numbers; for that one Englishman could
drive an hundred of them. -- Pray, do you think sir, said the Yankee, you could
atchieve so noble an exploit? Perhaps not, replied the hero, upon so great a
number -- Could you drive fifty? -- No -- Could you drive twenty? -- No --
Could you drive one? -- O yes. by G -- d, I could do that easily at any time.
-- Then, sir, said the old gentleman, as you are an Englishman, and I am an
American, if you please, drive me. The political braggadocio, drew in his
horns, and sneaked off.

24. During the late war, an old citizen of Charleston happened to fall into
the hands of a party of British troops, in one of their excursions to
Dorchester. On the party's returning toward town, they stopped to refresh
themselves at a plantation on Goose creek; and the soldiers began to jeer their
prisoner for rebelling against the king. He not wishing to offend them (as his
life had been threatened, and they were then preparing a halter for a prisoner)
answered, that he had enjoyed many happy days under the reign of George the
second, and some agreeable moments since the present gentleman came to the
crown. The commanding officer, a Caledonian, who was supposed to be asleep,
imagining the prisoner intended to degrade the royalty of his king, jumped up
in a violent rage, and asked how he had the audacious assurance of presuming to
call the king a gentleman, and told him that if such another word escaped his
lips, he would instantly cut him to atoms. The prisoner being terrified at the
menaces of this Highland butcher, replied, that he had no intention of casting
any reflection on his majesty, as he had always supposed him to be a gentleman.

25. Colonel Cockburn rose from a private soldier to the rank which he enjoyed
when St. Eustatius was re-taken. -- Of this circumstance he was continually
boasting, and upon occasions where it proved more pride than humility. -- One
day in the island of St. Eustatius, he was reviewing his troops, and took
notice of a man in the ranks who was excessively dirty. -- Going up to him, he
said, "how dare you, you rascal, appear on the parade with that dirty shirt? it
is as black as ink. -- Did you ever see me so nasty, with such a dirty shirt,
when I was a private man?" -- " No, your honor, to be sure I never did,"
answered the man -- " But then your honor will be pleased to recollect, that
your honor's mother was a washer-woman."

26. A person of the name of Palmer, who was a lieutenant in the tory new
levies, was detected in the camp at Peek's-kiln. Governor Tryon, who commanded
the new levies, reclaimed him as a British subject, represented the heinous
crime of condemning a man commissioned by his majesty, and threatened vengeance
in case he should be executed. General Putnam wrote him the following pithy
reply:

Sir,
Nathan Palmer, a lieutenant in your king's service, was taken in my camp as a
spy -- he was tried as a spy -- he was condemned as a spy -- and you may rest
assured, sir, he shall be hanged as a spy. I have the honor to be, etc.

ISRAEL PUTNAM.
P. S. Afternoon -- He is hanged.




27. A lady in Charleston, South Carolina, said, before one of her little
girls, that mrs. T -- (a rosy widow, whom they visited in the next street) was
a very good fort of a woman, and a very entertaining companion, when she had
not a drop in her eye.

A few days after, mrs. T -- came to the house, and little Charlotte took more
notice of her than she usually did. She stared in her face, indeed, in so
pointed a manner, that the lady could not help being desirous of knowing, "what
she saw in her countenance, to occasion so critical an examination."

" I am looking," replied the child, with a pretty innocent voice, " to see if
there is a drop in your eye."

28. A gentleman riding out one morning early in a place where he happened not
to be acquainted; coming up by the side of a young woman who was carrying a pig
in her arms, and hearing it scream violently, addressed her thus: "why, my
dear, your child cries amazingly!" The young woman, turning round, and looking
him in the face, said, with a smile upon her countenance. "I know it, sir, it
always does so, when it sees its daddy."

29. A wealthy Jew, who was tired of living in Berlin, and had made frequent
applications for leave to quit that place, which he dared not otherwise
attempt, at last sent a letter to the king, imploring permission to travel for
the benefit of his health. -- The king immediately sent him the following
answer, written with his own hand:

Dear Ephraim,
Nothing but death shall part us.

FREDERIC.


30. The Peruvians had a custom, on the death of any distinguished person, to
inter along with him to keep him company, the servant that had been attached to
him in his life. A young man who had lost his master, and who had also lost an
eye, was selected to have the honor of accompanying him to the other world:
but not being ambitious of the preference, he exclaimed -- "do you know what
you are doing? are you not wanting in respect to my master, thus to choose a
person who has but one eye to serve him in the other world?" The Peruvians
consulted, and the young man saved his life.

31. As a gentleman, in a certain coffee-house, was writing a letter to his
friend, there being a good deal of company present, a pert young fellow posted
himself behind him. -- The gentleman concluded his letter with these words: I
should write more, but there is an impudent puppy looking over my shoulder. --
The macaroni instantly turned upon his heels, and exclaimed aloud, " I Will be d
-- d if I was looking over your shoulder."

32. The great mr. Dalmahoy went in company with a friend lately to bedlam, to
see the lunatics there. Among other unhappy objects, he saw a man quite naked,
who called out for him to come to the grate. He did so. The madman said, come,
sir, you are admiral of the British fleet, -- I am admiral of the French fleet
-- let us not put our innocent men to death. Here, take this sword, (handing
him a straw) and I Will take this, holding in his hand another straw. Dalmahoy
took the straw, and the other throwing himself into an attitude, made several
passes through the grate, which Dalmahoy humoured. At last the madman dropped
his straw, and said, "you have disarmed me; but if you are a man of honor you
will permit me to take up my sword again." Dalmahoy said, "by all means." The
madman stooped, but instead of the straw, took up a large jordan, and dashed
the contents in Dalmahoy's face, crying out, " there, d -- n you, go and tell
your king what a stinking admiral he pitched upon to fight with me."

33. A fellow who had been engaged to prove an alibi on a late trial, after
declaring roundly that the prisoner was in his house at the time the robbery
was committed, was asked by the counselor for the prosecutor, whether he had
not heard that the prisoner had confessed his guilt? Yes, said he, gravely, but
he was always a d -- d lying dog.

34. The following example of laudable pride in a soldier, was mentioned in a
letter from an officer of the American army, written soon after the battle of
Monmouth. -- A soldier in that memorable action, fell into the hands of the
English cavalry, when one of them knocked him down, and attempted to pierce him
through the back with his sword, -- ' Strike me in the heart,' said he, turning
briskly about, ' that my friends may not blush for me after my death.'

35. A man went to see his neighbor who was ill, and sitting down by his
bedside, asked him several questions concerning the state of his health; which
the other, who was suddenly taken speechless, could not answer. This highly
offended his visitor, who was not conscious of the cause; and rising in a rage,
told him, " that please God he would be sick himself soon, and when he came to
see him, the d -- l a word he would say to him, that nothing might be lost."

36. Two chimney-sweeps having a bridge to pass, where the toll for one of them
amounted to all the money they could raise between them, one of the fellows got
into the foot-bag, which the other taking on his back, marched up to the gate,
paid the single fare, and passed off with his load unsuspected.

37. The day on which the federal convention agreed to the new constitution,
presented to the public, the great dr. Franklin asked a gentleman who sat next
to him, whether he had taken notice of the picture of the sun in the recess at
the back of the president's chair? He replied that he had, but not with a
particular attention. The doctor then observed that painters had been puzzled
to paint a single sun in such manner that the spectator could determine whether
it was a rising or a setting sun; he added, that he had viewed the picture
before mentioned as often as he had been in the hall, and never had been able
to come to a determination, but now he was sure it was a rising sun.

38. A notorious miser, having heard a very eloquent charity sermon, "this
sermon," said he, "strongly proves the necessity of alms; I had almost a mind
to beg."

39. When governor Johnston was president in West-Florida, at a public meeting
of the Indians and commissioners for determining the provincial boundaries, he
plied the sachems so briskly with liquor, that they were, according to the old
saying, as great as kings. Meeting the next morning with one of the Indian
chiefs, he asked him what he thought of the liquor he had drank. " It seems to
me," says the copper-coloured warrior, " to be a juice extracted from the
tongues of women and the hearts of lions; for, after drinking freely of it, I
was as loquacious as a woman, and felt as bold as a lion."

40. A young man, who has attended considerably to arithmetic, and formed
pretty towering ideas of his skill in that science, the other day addressed
himself to an African in the following manner; "Boston, I can take a pen and
ink, and in three minutes can cipher out and tell you how many minutes you have
to live." "Canna you, massa, you must be a very good cipher indeed. I aska you
a question. Which can see best, a mare stone blind, or a horse without eyes?"
Pho, that is no question at all." "I ask you another, -- 'pose he be ten rods
to Nichols's, how far you call him away out yonder?" "That I cannot tell
neither," replied he, "Well, I ask one more, 'pose fifty rail make one load,
how many ^e take to make a d -- d great pile?" So many unanswerable questions
quite confounded our young conceited arithmetician. He began to think he did
not know every thing, and retreated from the lists of his African antagonist,
with shame and confusion.

41. About fifty years ago, the general assembly of New Hampshire used to sit
in a tavern. A countryman happened to come into Portsmouth to buy nails, and
was enquiring at the shops for single-tens. A waggish fellow, known by the name
of doctor Moses, over-hearing him, directed him to the tavern, where he told
him were plenty of single-tens. The man went, and enquired of two members, who
happened to be in the porch -- they deemed it an insult on the honor of the
house, and made a complaint to the speaker. The man was taken into custody and
laid the blame on Moses. He was then sent for, and having acknowledged the
fact, was ordered to receive the speaker's reprimand and ask pardon on his
knees. Moses obeyed, and having performed his humiliation, as he was rising
from the floor, b^ushed his knees with his hand, and exclaimed, a dirty house!
a dirty house!

42. An Indian chief of the Creek nation, being once appointed to negociate a
treaty of peace with the people of South Carolina, was desired by the governor
and council to speak his mind freely, and not to be afraid, for he was among
friends. " I will speak freely, I will not be afraid," said he, " for why
should I be afraid among my friends, who never am afraid among my enemies?"

43. The Elizabeth, an English man of war, would infallibly have been lost in
the shoals on the coast of Florida, in 1746, had not captain Edwards ventured
into the Havannah. It was in time of war, and the port belonged to an enemy. "I
come," said the captain to the governor, "to deliver up my ship, my sailors, my
soldiers, and myself, into your hands: I only ask the lives of my men." "No,"
said the Spanish commander, "I will not be guilty of so dishonorable an
action. Had we taken you in fight, in open sea, or upon our coasts, your ship
would have been ours, and you would be our prisoners. But, as you are driven in
by stress of weather, and are come hither for fear of being cast away, I ought,
and do forget that my nation is at war with yours. You are men, and so are we;
you are in distress, and have a right to our pity. You are at liberty to unload
and refit your vessel; and, if you want it, you may trade in this port to pay
your charges: you may then go away, and you will have a pass to carry you safe
beyond the Bermudas. If, after this, you are taken, you will be a lawful prize;
but, at this moment, I see in Englishmen, only strangers, for wh^^ humanity
claims our assistance."

44. Sir Simon Stuart, of Hartley, England, amusing himself with some old
papers belonging to his family, found endorsed on the outside of a covenant,
that 15,000 pieces of gold were buried in a certain field, so many feet from
the ditch toward the south. These words appearing a kind of memorandum, the
baronet took a servant with him, and going to the place described, made him
dig, and found the treasure in a large iron pot, the mouth of which was covered
with parchment, on which were written in legible characters, the following
words: The devil shall have it sooner than Cromwell.

45. Soon after the peace of Vervins, Henry the fourth of France, returning
from hunting, in a plain garb, and only two gentlemen with him, crossed the
Seine in a common ferry-boat. Perceiving the waterman did not know him, he
asked him what the people said of the peace? "Faith," answered the waterman,
"as to this same fine peace, I know nothing of it; but every thing, I know, is
taxed, even this old tool of a boat, so that I can scarcely get a living."
"Well, but (continued Henry) does not the king intend to see the people eased?"
"The king, (replied Charon) is well enough of himself; but has a mistress who
must have so many fine clothes, and gewgaws; and it is we pay for all: however,
if he had her to himself it would not be so much, but she is devilishly belied,
master, if she does not play the beast with two backs with some others." The
king, who had been excessively diverted with the colloquy, sent next morning
for the waterman, and made him repeat before the duchess of Beaufort without
missing a word, what he had said the evening before. Her grace was so incensed
that nothing would serve her, but the king must immediately order him to be
hanged. "Pho!" said the good-natured monarch, "are you mad?" don't you see he
is a poor devil, soured by distress. His boat shall pay no tax, and then he will
be continually singing, Vive Henri! Vive Gabrielle!"

46. An agreeable woman, to whom Santeuil owed some money, meeting him one day
at a private house, asked him the reason she had not seen him so long; "is it
because you owe me something?" "No, madam, (replied the poet) that is not what
prevents my visiting, and you are the cause that you are not paid." "How so?"
said the lady. "Because, said he, whenever I see you, I forget every thing
else."

47. The mildness of sir Isaac Newton's temper through the course of his life,
commanded admiration from all who knew him, but in no one instance perhaps more
than the following: Sir Isaac had a favorite little dog, which he called
Diamond; and being one day called out of his study into the next room, Diamond
was left behind. When sir Isaac returned, having been absent but a few minutes,
he had the mortification to find, that Diamond, having thrown down a lighted
candle among some papers, the nearly finished labor of some years was in
flames, and almost consumed to ashes. This loss, as sir Isaac was then very far
advanced in years, was irretrievable; yet without once striking the dog, he
only rebuked him with this exclamation, " Oh! Diamond! Diamond! thou little
know the mischief thou have done."

48. At the siege of Lisle, in queen Anne's time, upon an attack on some of the
outworks, the grenadiers of the 15th regiment of foot, were obliged to retire,
by the springing of a mine, or by the superiority of the enemy's fire. In this
retreat, the lieutenant of those grenadiers, remarkable for his ill treatment
of them, was wounded, and fell. The grenadiers were passing on, nor heeded his
entreaties to help him off. At last he laid hold of a pair of shoes that was
tied to the waist-belt of one of them: The grenadier, regardless of his
situation, and in resentment of his former ill usage, took out a knife from his
pocket, with which he cut the string, and left them with him, with this
remarkable expression. " There! there is a new pair of shoes for you, to carry
you to hell."

49. On the thirtieth of January, (the martyrdom of king Charles the first)
Quin used to say, every king in Europe would rise with a crick in his neck.

50. One of the king's soldiers in the civil wars, being full of zeal and
liquor, staggered against a church, and clapping the wall of it repeatedly with
his hand, hiccupped out, d -- n you, you b -- h, never fear, I Will stand by you
to the last.

51. A dragoon was shot in Dublin for desertion, and taking away his horse and
accoutrements at the same time. When on his trial, an officer asked him what
could induce him to take away his horse? To which he replied, " he ran away
with him." What, said the officer, did you do with the money you sold him for?
"That, please your honor," said the fellow, with the utmost indifference, "
ran away too."

52. Two friends, who had not seen each other for a long time, met one day by
accident. -- "How do you do?" says one, "so, so," replied the other; "and yet I
was married, since you and I were together." -- "That is good news." -- "Not
very good -- for it was my lot to meet with a termagent." -- "It is pity." --
"I hardly think so -- for she brought me two thousand pounds." -- "Well, there
is comfort." -- "Not much -- for with her fortune I purchased a quantity of
sheep, and they all died of the rot." -- "That is indeed distressing." -- "Not
so distressing as you imagine -- for by the sale of their skins, I got more
than the sheep cost me." -- "In that case you are indemnified." -- "By no means
-- for my house and all my money have been destroyed by fire." -- "Alas! this
was a dreadful misfortune." -- " Faith, not so dreadful -- for my termagent
wife and my house were burned together."

53. La Fontaine, the celebrated French fabulist, a day or two after losing his
generous patroness, madame de la Subline, whose house was his home, met his
acquaintance, M. de Hervart: "My dear La Fontaine, (said that worthy man to
him) I have heard of your misfortune, and was going to propose your coming to
live with me." " I was going to you," -- answered La Fontaine.

54. The wife of a farmer, on an estate near Richmond, was taken in labor: the
farmer wished for a son, and waited in the next room for the intelligence: it
proved a boy, and the man jumped from his chair with ecstacy. A few minutes
after, the maid servant came in, and told him her mistress was delivered of
another child, a fine girl: "a girl, (said the farmer with astonishment) well,
well, we must endeavor to give it a bit of bread." A short while after, the
girl appeared again, and told him her mistress was delivered of a lovely boy!
"What, another child! (said the farmer almost frantic with surprise) d -- n it,
Nancy, is your mistress a pigging?"

55. While a sailor's sentence was pronouncing, who committed a robbery on the
highway, he raised a piece of rolled tobacco to his mouth, and held it between
his teeth. When the sentence was finished, he bit off a piece of the tobacco,
and began to chew it with great unconcern. -- "Sirrah! (said the judge, piqued
at his indifference) do you know that you are to be hanged in a very short
time?" "So I hear," said the sailor, squirting a little tobacco juice from his
mouth at the same time. -- "Do you know (rejoined the judge) where you shall go
when you die?" -- "I cannot tell, indeed, an't please your honor," said the
sailor. -- "Why then (replied the judge, with a tremendous voice) I will tell
you, you will go to hell." -- "If I should, (replied the sailor, with perfect
tranquillity) I hope, please your honor, I shall be able to bear it."

56. Dr. Hugh Latimer, one of the primitive reformers, was raised to the
bishopric of Worcester, in the reign of Henry VIII. It was the custom of those
times for each of the bishops to make presents to the king of a purse of gold
on a New Year's day. Bishop Latimer went with the rest of his brethren to make
the usual offering, but instead of a purse of gold, presented the king with a
New Testament, which was doubled down at this passage, " Whoremongers and
adulterers GOD will judge." Such characters as this, in the present age, would
be invaluable.

57. The noted Tom Bell, while on Long Island, passed part of the time by the
name of Brandt Schuyler, an alderman of New York, -- a custom of passing by
other men's names being very common to him. Some time after his passing by the
said Schuyler's name, he was taken up for some crime he had committed, and
brought to the jail at New York. -- Curiosity was such with men in general, to
see so noted a person, that many visited him while in confinement: among the
rest was Brandt Schuyler, who, after a variety of questions, asked him, whether
what he heard was true, namely, that you, mr. Bell, have passed in Long Island
by my name? upon which Bell answered, "Yes, I passed by your name, but as I
never was able to get even a drink of butter-milk by it, I soon left it off,
and am determined to make use of it no more." -- This so confounded the
alderman that he made no reply, but walked off immediately -- after which he
was called the butter milk alderman.

58. Mr. Pit, (afterward earl of Chatham) in a debate with lord Holland, took
occasion with great asperity to say, that nature had displayed in his
countenance the sign of a black and treacherous soul, and noticed the
pent-house of his sullen eyebrows, his hard, unsocial front, and dark,
unblushing cheeks. On this lord Holland arose, and complained bitterly of the
personal abuse, alleging that he could not help his looks, as he had not made
himself; and turning round to mr. Pit, "The honorable gentleman finds fault
with my features, but how would he have me look?" -- Mr. Pit starting up,
replied, "The honorable gentleman asks me how I would have him look? I would
have him look as he ought, if he could; I would have him look as he cannot, if
he would -- I would have him look like an honest man." -- This severe retort
threw his antagonist into silent and unconquerable confusion.

59. When lord Sandwich received the first intelligence from Lloyd's
coffee-house, of St. Vincent's being taken, he hurried to the king to inform
him of it, and when admitted to an audience, with great earnestness recommended
that it would be wise to smother the matter. -- " Smother it!" said the king,
with surprise, " by H -- n! the child is too big; we cannot smother it, my lord.

60. A fellow being stopped with four hogs that he had stolen, attempted to
make his escape, but running into a bye-road, through which there was no passage,
he was taken and lodged in jail. " Damn it," said he, as he entered, " I have
brought my hogs to a fine market."

61. A lady, celebrated in Scotland for her wit and beauty, happening to be at
an assembly in Edinburgh, a young gentleman, the son of his majesty's printer,
who had the patent for publishing bibles, made his appearance dressed in green
and gold. Being a new face, and extremely elegant, he attracted the attention
of the whole company. A general murmur prevailed in the room, to learn who he
was; the lady instantly made answer loud enough to be heard, "Oh! don't you
know him? it is young Bible, bou^^ in calf and gilt -- but not lettered."

62. When the amiable duchess of Northumberland was some years ago on the
continent, she stopped at an inn in French Flanders, at the Golden Goose; but
arriving late, and being somewhat fatigued with her journey, she ordered but a
slight repast for herself and her suite, which consisted of only five servants.
In the morning, when the landlord presented his bill, her secretary was much
surprised at one general item of " Expenses for the night, 14 louis d'ors." In
vain did he remonstrate; the artful Fleming knew the generous character of the
duchess, and was positive. The money was accordingly paid. When she was
preparing to depart, the landlord, as usual, attended her to the carriage; and
after making many congees, and expressing many thanks, he hoped he would have
the honor of her grace's company on her return. "Why, I don't know but you
may," said the duchess, with her usual good humor; "but it must be upon one
condition, that you do not mistake me again for your sign."

63. Foot, whose talent lay in lampooning and mimickry, even in his early
days, had once got the knack of imitating a late general officer, in the shrug
of his shoulders, the lisping of his speech, and some other things, for which
the general was remarkable, so that it grew a common topic among his
acquaintances, who used to say, "Come Sam, let us have the general's company." A
friend at length acquainted the officer with it, who sent for Foot. "Sir,"
says the general, "I hear you have an excellent talent at mimicking characters,
and among the rest, I find I have been the subject of your ridicule." "Oh,
sir," says Foot, with great pleasantry, "I take all my acquaintances off at
times, and, what is more particular, I often take myself off." "God so," says
the other, "pray let us have a specimen." Foot, on this, puts on his hat and
gloves, takes hold of his cane, and making a short bow, left the room. The
officer waited some minutes for his return, but at length, on enquiry, found he
had really taken himself off, by leaving the house. The officer was general
Blakeney, with whom he was afterward in the strictest friendship.

64. A brave tar, with a wooden leg, who was on board Admiral Parker's fleet in
the engagement with the Dutch, having the misfortune to have the other shot
off, as his comrades were conveying him to the surgeon, notwithstanding the
poignancy of his agonies, (being a man of humor) he could not suppress his
joke, saying, " It was high time for him to leave off play, when his last pin
was bowled down.

65. When the distinguished major Rogers took up his abode in a spunging-house,
like a true philosopher, he endeavored to make his situation as agreeable as
possible; he therefore one day, out of a whim, sent cards of invitation to all
the bailiffs who frequented the house, to come and dine with him. They
accordingly came, and being in high spirits, after dinner, one of them being
called upon for a toast, gave, "The d -- l ride rough-shod over the rascally
part of the creation." When every one was going to drink the toast, the major,
who was at the foot of the table, cried out, "Stop, gentlemen, every man fill a
bumper." -- "Oh, there is no occasion for that," says one of the company. "Yes
there is," says the major, " I consider it as a family toast, that ought to be
done justice to.

66. Foot and Garrick being at a tavern together at the time of the first
regulation of the gold coin, the former pulling out his purse to pay the
reckoning, asked the latter, "What he should do with a light guinea he had?"
"'Pshaw, it is worth nothing," says Garrick, " sting it to the devil." "Well,
David," says the other, "you are what I always took you for, ever contriving to
make a guinea go further than any other man."

67. Charles Fox, when a boy, delighted in arch tricks. In his walks, one
Easter Monday, meeting a blind woman, who was crying puddings and pies, he took
her by the arm and said, "Come along with me, dame, I am going to Moorfields,
where, this holiday-time you may chance to meet with good custom." "Thank'ee
kindly, sir," says she. Whereupon he conducted her to a church, and placed her
in the middle aisle. Now, says he, you are in Moorfields; which she believing
to be true, immediately cried out, "Hot puddings and pies! hot puddings and
pies! -- Come they are all hot," etc. which caused the congregation to burst
into a loud fit of laughter: and the clerk came and told her, she was in
church; "You are a lying son of a whore," says she; which so enraged the clerk,
that he dragged her out of the church; she cursing and damning him all the
while; nor could she believe, him 'till she heard the organs play.

68. A lady being ill, sent for a physician, and on his leaving the room gave
him a fee of two guineas. This she repeated several times, but one day she gave
him a single guinea. This by some accident fell upon the floor, when the doctor
picked it up, and turning to the lady, with a significant look, said, "Madam, I
believe I have dropped a guinea." "No, doctor," replied the lady, smartly, "
'Twas I who dropped the guinea."

69. Doctor Johnson being asked his opinion of a certain nabob, better known by
his riches than learning, "A mere sheep, sir, with a golden fleece," observed
the cynic.

70. A lady on the wrong side of fifty, having lost both her money and temper
at a rout, with very little grace, had the additional misfortune, in stooping,
to lose her entire head-dress, to the discovery of a bald pate; whereupon one
of the company observed, in her hearing, "That he could not but commend the
hair, for leaving so weak a head!

71. The prince of Conde, coming to congratulate his master, Louis XIV. on the
battle of Senef, in which his highness had the command, and gained great
honor; the king stood on the top of the stairs to receive him. The prince
being lame of the gout, mounted very slowly, and stopping midway, begged his
majesty's pardon, if he made him wait. "Cousin," said the king, "do not hurry
yourself; a person loaded with laurels as you are, cannot move very swiftly."

72. Foot, on seeing the earl of Antrim, who had very thin arms and legs, with
a pot belly, said, in his usual sarcastic spirit, he looked like a greyhound
that had got the dropsey.

73. At the last coronation, a gentleman paid six guineas for a feat in
Westminster Abbey: the instant the king entered, he turned to a gentleman
beside him, and protested he was the greatest fool in Britain; "Indeed?" said
the gentleman: "how so, sir?" Why, sir, I have paid six guineas for a seat
here; when his majesty, who can much better afford it, comes in for a crown!

74. When the late dauphin of France said to the facetious duke of Roquelaure,
"Stand farther off, Roquelaure, for you smell very strong;" the duke replied, I
ask your pardon, sir, it is you that smell, not I."

75. Old Charles Macklin being asked his opinion of Charles Fox, and the other
distinguished coalition characters, replied, I am no astronomer, sir, but they
seem to me to be wandering planets; though it would be much better for the
people of this distracted country, if they were fixed stars at Tyburn or
Temple Bar.

76. When Lewis XIV. came to the throne, he was remarkably obstinate, and it
could not be known whether he took advice of any one. He had no public council,
nor any private counselor. One day being hunting on a very small Britanny
bidet, cardinal Mazarin frequently repeated, "What a very strong horse that
must be!" "Why so, my good cardinal?" said the king, "Why, sire," answered his
eminence, " it not only carries your majesty, but the whole body of your
council." From that moment the king took the hint, and, of course, advice, and
became one of the greatest monarchs in the world.

77. Two (...) conversing, one observed that a certain (...) who (...) one
unfortunate match, was (...) to (...) repute, "Then," replied the other, "he
(...) fair way to double Cape Horn!"

78. The celebrated dr. ^^^ng invited old Jacob Tonson, the bookseller, to his
country-seat several times, but could never prevail on him to undertake the
journey. The last time the doctor was in London, before Tonson's death, he
asked the bookseller his reason for not visiting him? "Why really," replied
Jacob, "the truth of the matter is, I do not like the country:" "I believe you
are right," replied the wit, " a cucumber thrives best on its own dunghill."

79. Voltaire's stage-heroes and heroines at his theater at Ferney, were made
up of the butler, coachman, groom, dairy-maid, cook, etc. When any passage went
wrong, he never failed to proclaim it; and would cross the stage in his
nightcap and gown, to scold at an empress, or pull the cap of a queen. His
coachman, in the character of a Turkish slave, not entering time enough to lay
him down gently in the hour of death, he changed his tragedy part into
reasoning, and whimsically asked him for a receipt in full of all demands; "for
I am sure," said Voltaire, "I must be in your debt, or you would not have used
me so, as to let me die thus like a beggar."

80. When dr. Johnson was first patronized by lord Chesterfield, the doctor
called on him one morning, and being shown into an ante-chamber, either from
the mistake of the footman, or his lordship's paying a preference to other
company, the doctor was (...) waiting there for two hours, without his
lordship's appearance. Johnson growing piqued at this neglect, abruptly left
the house, and from that hour, resolved to break off all acquaintance with him.
Some time after this, lord Chesterfield endeavored all he could to recover
Johnson's friendship, by writing two essays in favor of his dictionary, in a
periodical paper then publishing, called "The World," as well as by other
indirect solicitations; but all in vain: Johnson was not only resolved, but
wrote his lordship word so, in a very remarkable letler, wherein, with great
dignity and philosophic pride, he begged leave to be dismissed his patronage
and acquaintance. Some time after this, a friend met the doctor in Dodsley's
shop, and asked him how he could desert a man who had been so serviceable to
him, in the public encouragement of his dictionary, as lord Chesterfield was?
"Serviceable to me, sir!" says the author, "in no respect whatsoever: I had
been for years sailing round the world of literature, and just as I was getting
into the chops of the channel, his lordship sends out two little cockboats,
more to partake of my triumphs, than to pilot me into harbor. No, no my lord
Chesterfield may be a wit amongst lords, but I fancy he is no more than a lord
amongst wits."

81. An honest clergyman in the country was reproving a married couple for
their frequent dissensions, which were very unbecoming, both in the eye of God
and man, seeing that you are both one; Both one! cried the husband, were you to
come by our door sometimes when we quarrel, you would swear we were twenty.

82. A large party of gentlemen were invited to dinner at a gentleman's house.
It so happened that one of the party was overheard to say to another, Fools
make feasts, and wise men eat them. The gentleman took it up immediately, and
said, Wise men make proverbs, and fools repeat them.

83. A young fellow who had made an end of all he had, even to his last suit of
clothes, was told one day by a friend, Now, I hope you will own yourself a happy
man, for there is an end put to all your cares. How so? replied the young
fellow. Because, said his friend, You have nothing left to take care of.

84. A country 'squire, not very famous for the brilliancy or the refinement of
his conversation, was paying his addresses to an accomplished young lady in his
neighborhood, and happened to have a very handsome Italian bitch with him: The
lady admired it very much, and said, Dear sir, what a pretty dog you have got;
You are mistaken, madam, answered the genius, It is not a dog, but one of your
own sex.

85. As the celebrated dr. Johnson was sitting in a coffee-room, where a dog
was very troublesome, he ordered the waiter to kick him out; the waiter not
being so alert as he should be, the doctor repeated his orders; upon which a
young genius said to the doctor, I perceive, Sir, you are not fond of dogs. No,
said the doctor, nor of puppies either.

86. A young member in the house of commons was tempted to display his
oratorial powers, by the success and applause with which some eloquent members
were attended; accordingly, on a certain subject he rose up with great
importance, and said, Mr. speaker, have we laws, or have we not laws? If we
have laws, and they are not cheyed, to what end were these laws made? After he
was seated some time, another member arose and and said, Mr. Speaker, did the
honorable gentleman who spoke last, speak to the purpose, or did he not speak
to the purpose? If he did not speak to the purpose, to what purpose did he
speak?

87. The following story is related of a gentleman who had no nose: As he was
walking along the street one day, a beggar woman followed him, saying, God
preserve your eyesight, sir! Why so, good woman? said he. Because, sir, said
she, if you should grow dim-sighted, your honor would have no place to hang
your spectacles on.

88. A certain lady of quality spoke to her butler to be very saving of a cask
of excellent small beer, and asked him how it could be best preserved -- The
butler replied, By placing a barrel of good ale by it.

89. A certain impertinent oculist once told a lady, that he was such a master
of penetration and discernment, that he could tell people's thoughts by their
eyes, and particularly, madam, said he, I can tell yours at this time. Can you
so sir, replied the lady, were I in your case I would endeavor to ke^^ them
secret, rather than tell them; for I am sure they are not at all to your
advantage.

90. Mr. Quin happening to call at a friend's house near Bath, which was not
quite finished, found only the servant at home; however, Quin being rather hard
pressed in a certain way, told the fellow to show him the little house; "Yes,
sir," said the servant "the house is little, but it is very compact." -- "I
mean," said Quin, "your necessary house." "I believe, sir," said the servant,
"when my master comes down, he will find it very necessary, and much preferable
to lodgings." Quin was almost out of all patience, and exclaimed, "'It Is your
convenience I mean, sir." "Yes, sir; I can assure you, sir, as I said before,
though small, it is very convenient." "You rascal, you," says Quin, " It Is your s
-- t-house, I mean, and if you don't show it me directly, I shall foul my
breeches." "Oh lord, sir," said the servant, " that is not built yet."

91. A certain gentleman more celebrated for his jollity than his religion,
notwithstanding his chaplain was at table, introduced a baboon dressed up in
the garb of a clergyman, in order to say grace; which conduct was very properly
resented by the chaplain, who said to the gentleman, I did not know till now,
that you had so near a relation in orders.

92. Waller, the celebrated poet, in Oliver Cromwell's protectorate, wrote many
extravagant poems in his praise. When Charles II. came to the throne, he
likewise wrote a poem upon the restoration, inscribed to that monarch, with
which he was introduced to his majesty. The king, after having read the poem,
told Waller, the lines were good, but not so good as some addressed to Oliver.
To which the poet, with admirable presence of mind, replied, that poets always
succeed best in fiction.

93. As a certain clergyman, who shall be nameless, was performing divine
service in his parish church, on the coast of Essex, where is a variety of
shipwrecks, and where the people are well known to be very fond of plunder; it
so happened that the alarm was given of A WRECK! A WRECK! with which the
congregation were much more moved than with the parson's sermon; he perceiving
it, opened the pulpit door, walked down stairs, and begged they would stay to
hear five words more, which he he had to say; the people consenting, the parson
said, Let us all start fair.

94. An old lady, who was not very much famed for good breeding and politeness,
whatever other qualities she might possess, being in a large party of very
genteel company, happened to break wind backwards -- a young gentleman who sat
near her, seeing the company observe it, took the shame upon himself, and
apologized very modestly for the rudeness he had been guilty of. It passed very
well, and the next day the lady sent him a pair of colors, with her
compliments, and this remark, That it was an ill wind that blew nobody good.

95. The celebrated Quin happened to be in a returned post-chaise betweeen Bath
and Bristol, when the post-boy, in order to increase his perquisite, took up
another passenger, who proved a very disagreeable one, having very sweaty feet,
as well as being guilty of many indecencies. Quin was determined to get rid of
him; a lucky opportunity offered, for the passenger asked him how long he meant
to stay at Bristol; that, said Quin, depends upon the effect the sea water has
upon me. What, said the other, are you going to drink it? No, said he, I am
going to be dipped for the bite of a mad dog, and immediately showed some
distortion of features, which the passenger took for indications of madness,
and precipitately left the chaise.

96. In the northern exertions last war, for raising men to serve his British
majesty, it was too customary for the Lairds and Highland chiefs to compel
their vassals into the service by main force, when they would not go by fair
means. -- A little disturbance of this sort happening one day, and a crowd
ensuing, a person stopped to ask what was the matter? Nae thing at aw, cried a
Scot, they are only forcing a mon to turn volunteer.

97. It is reported of lord chief justice Holt, who had been very wild in his
youth, that being once upon the bench at the old Bailey, a fellow was tried and
convicted of a robbery on the highway, whom the judge remembered to have been
one of his former companions. Curiosity induced him to enquire the fortune of
his contemporaries, with whom he once associated, and asked him what was become
of Tom such-a-one, and Jack such a-one -- The fellow fetched a deep sigh, and
replied, Ah, my lord, they are all hanged, but your lordship and I.

98. Foot one day said to a miser of his acquaintance, my friend, you are very
happy in being free from two dreadful plagues, that torment many thousands in
this metropolis. "What plagues are those?" demanded sir Gripus. "Why, a
scolding wife and a smoky house," said Foot: "Matrimonial expenses keep you
unmarried; and your antipathy to dressing food, at your own expense, renders
fires in your house unnecessary."

99. Before the penal laws against the Roman Catholics were repealed, it was
one of the principal restrictions upon the profession of that religion in
England, that if a junior branch of a family should commence protestant, he
should be entitled to the whole of his father's estate. It happened in a
gentleman's family, that his younger son being rather extravagant, applied to
his father for a sum, which the latter judged it inexpedient to grant. Upon his
refusal, the son threatened him with a public profession of the protestant
faith. This alarmed the old man, who consulting a friend on the occasion, asked
him what step he had best take? Why, said his friend, I would advise you to
turn first, and your estate will be secured.

100. When general Lee commanded a body of the army at an action in the
Jerseys, he observed one of his aid-de-camps to be rather fearful of the danger
he was in, from executing the general's orders. By way of encouragement, he
told his aid-de-camp, that in one action the king of Prussia had twenty
aid-de-camps slain, and therefore begged he would be courageous. O, replied the
latter, I was not at all alarmed for myself, but was rather apprehensive, that
the Congress could not spare so many.

101. Bishop Burnet, who was a tall, large-boned man, preaching once with some
vehemence before king Charles the Second, closed one of his sentences with a
violent thump upon the cushion, and this note of interrogation; "Who dares deny
it"? No body, said the king in a whisper, who stands within the reach of that
devilish great fist of yours.

102. The prince of Orange, afterward king William the Third, preparing for an
expedition, one of his officers begged to know what his intention was? Can you
keep a secret? said the prince. I can, Sir, said the officer; and so can I,
replied the prince.

103. A lady being asked, how she liked a gentleman's singing, who had a
stinking breath? The words are good, said she, but the air is intolerable.

104. King Charles the first, once going to dinner, when the chaplain was out
of the way, told Archee, his jester, to say grace; which he immediately
performed thus: All glory be to God on high, and little Laud to the devil. At
which all the courtiers smiling, because it reflected on Laud, archbishop of
Canterbury, who was a little man; the king told Archee, that he would give an
account of him to his grace the archbishop; and what will you do then? said the
king. O, said Archee, I Will hide myself in a place where he never will find me.
-- Where Is that, said the king? In his pulpit, replied Archee, for I Am sure he
never goes there.

105. A gentleman having paid his addresses to a young lady for some length of
time, was rather weary of his attendance, and demanded a categorical answer,
either yes or no. -- The young lady replied; Sir, I neither say yes nor no.

106. A gentleman one day complaining to another, that fortune had no later
than last night tricked him out of 1000 l. and thought it very hard that his
luck never turned; "I don't wonder at your losing money," said the other, "but
all the world is surprised how you get it to lose."

107. A young boy, remarkable for his shrewdness, had purchased of his
play-fellow a magpie, which he carried to his father's house, and was feeding
it at the door, when a gentleman in the neighborhood, who had an impediment in
his speech, coming up, said, T -- T -- T -- Tom, can your mag t -- t -- talk
yet? Yes, sir, said the boy, better than you, or I Would wring his head off.

108. An author after reading a play to Quin, which was totally devoid of
merit, Quin told him it would not do by any means. I wish, said the author, you
could advise me what is best to do with it. -- That I can, said Quin: blot out
one half, and burn the other.

109. In the reign of king Henry the Eighth, a facetious spendthrift nobleman,
having lately sold a whole manor, consisting of near a hundred tenements, came
strutting into court in a new rich suit, saying, "Am not I a mighty man, to
bear an hundred houses upon my back?" Which cardinal Wolsey hearing, said, "My
lord, you had much better have paid your debts." "What you say is very right,"
replied the nobleman, "and I owe your father The cardinal's father was a
butcher at Ispwich, in Suffolk.
three half pence for a sheep's head: come write me a receipt, there is two
pence for it."

110. A humorous divine visiting a gentleman one morning, was asked to stay to
dinner, which invitation he accepted of; the gentleman stepped into the next room
to tell his wife, and desired she would provide something extraordinary. -- The
lady was not of the best disposition in the world, and used such language, as
provoked the husband to say, Madam, was it not for the stranger in the next
room, I would kick you out of doors. -- Upon which the clergyman, who heard all
that had passed, immediately stepped in, saying, I beg, sir, you will make no
stranger of me.

111. A sailor who was traveling on the roof of a coach, one moonlight night,
carried a loaded blunderbuss with him; and desired the coachman to give him
timely information when he saw a highwayman coming; they had not gone far, when
the coachman gave the alarm; the sailor immediately fired, and wounded the man;
the coachman blamed him for his precipitancy, and told him he was not
justifiable in what he did: No? said the sailor; what! would you have him board
us first?

112. A very silly fellow once observing in company, that it was a great gift
to keep a secret, such a gift as he wished to obtain. "I can put you in the way
to acquire it," said one that stood by: "do but hold your peace, and then you
will conceal a secret of some consequence to you; for then you will not let any
body know that you are a fool."

113. A captain not much esteemed for his courage, on board admiral Rodney's
fleet, observing that if his ship had come up, he could have done wonders. "By
h -- n, captain," said a blunt sea-officer, "I thought I saw you perform
wonders today; for you hung an a -- e when the signal for chase was hung out:
and I think that is wonderful for an Englishman."

114. A noisy fellow hearing some people disputing, made more disturbance than
all the rest, by continually crying, "Keep the peace." -- "Friend," says a
quaker, who was present, "if thou would hold thy peace, it would contribute
much to so good an end."

115. An ignorant person being told that an acquaintance of his had died
insolvent -- "That must be a falsity," said he; "Jack did not die in Solvent,
for, to my certain knowledge, he died in Flanders."

116. If you marry, (said a father to his daughter) you will do well; if you do
not marry, you will do better. If that is the case," replied the daughter, "get
me a husband as soon as you can, I shall be content do well, and leave it to
others to do better."

117. A young priest, of greater pertness than wit or learning, being asked in
company, how he came to take it into his head to enter into the ministry of the
church? Because, said he, the Lord had need of me. That may be, replied a
gentleman present, for I often have read that the Lord once had need of an ASS.

118. A person happening to call one day upon an acquaintance, found him
exercising his wife with that discipline, which Jobson tries in the farce of
The devil to pay -- and being hurt at the ungenerous task undertaken by his
friend, he begged him by all the ties of honor to forbear -- at the same time
asking the occasion of such severe treatment -- 'The occasion is,' said the
enraged husband, 'She will not be mistress in her own house.' His friend
expressed great astonishment at the answer, and observed, 'The omission was
such as he believed no woman ever gave her husband occasion to thrash her for
before.' -- Ah! by G --, said the husband, 'My wife will not be mistress, because
she wants to be master.'

119. A famous painter agreed beforehand, for the price of a picture with a
gentleman, who was not indebted to Nature, either for shape or face; the
picture being finished, the gentleman endeavored to beat down the price,
alleging that if he did not purchase it, it would lie on the painter's hands.
"That is your mistake, says the painter, for I can sell it for the double the
price I demand." "How can that be?" says the gentleman, "for it is like nobody
but myself." "True," replied the painter, "but I will draw a tail to it, (that
is the time it will fetch me double) for, then it will make an excellent
monkey." The gentleman, to prevent being exposed, paid down the money demanded,
and carried off the picture.

120. Not long since, a countryman enquiring, in Charleston, for the best
bar-iron warehouse, a waggish young gentleman undertook to conduct him to the
cheapest in town, and carried him to the new prison, at which place he was
shown some of the iron-barred rooms, with an intimation that those fort of
warehouses had all the run of business at present; at the same time several of
the prisoners insisted on receiving a small sum of money for garnish. The
countryman complied with all they asked of him, but being one of those sour,
irascible mortals whom it is much safer to laugh with, than at, went back
immediately to the store where his kind conductor resided, and imprinted on his
rueful visage some marks of gratitude that will not easily be erased, and will
no doubt teach him the propriety of an adage -- All is well that ends well.

121. During the march of a detachment of the American army, through
New Jersey, in the late war, a silver spoon was missed in a house where a party
of the troops had been billeted.

Suspicion pitched on a soldier, who was seen to have entered the apartment
where the spoon was kept -- and he was accused of the theft:

" May I never meet salvation" -- exclaimed the soldier -- " May I be sunk into
the endless regions of perdition, if I have seen -- heard of -- or taken your
spoon."

"But no one else could have taken it." replied the host.

The soldier again went through the "manual" of his attestations of innocence
-- and imprecations against himself if he was guilty.

The landlord looked astonished -- and being an honest man, was obliged to
believe the soldier -- but just on the point to leave the examination -- he,
taking hold of the button of the soldier's coat, and looking him in the face --
said -- " Now say upon your honor, that you have not got my spoon -- and I
shall be satisfied." "Upon my honor," said the soldier to himself, after
thinking for a few minutes -- "Upon my honor" -- Poh! blast you, he cried --
pulling the spoon from his pocket, and giving it to its owner -- " Blast your
spoon -- take your spoon and be d -- d."

The host stared with surprise -- and while lamenting that the great principles
of religion and morality, should have less weight in the mind of an intelligent
being, than the principles of what he conceived to be a mere sound -- the
soldier swung his knapsack, and joining the corpse, marched off.

122. A military gentleman, in Paris, had invited much company to dinner. His
son six years old, came to the table, but was repulsed, and told that his beard
was too short to dine with his father. The mother, as much mortified as her
son, made up a little side-table for him, and ordered that he should be well
attended. A large cat, however, repeatedly tried to take away his victuals, on
which the child, out of all patience, exclaimed, go and eat with my papa, you
have a beard long enough.

123. A soldier in the late war having stolen a shirt from a farmer, to whom he
would not make restitution -- "Well, (said the farmer) if you keep it, you will
pay for it in this world or in the next. -- "Faith, (replied the soldier) if
you will trust so long, I will take another."

124. Lady B -- T --, was lately one of a large company, at the house of a
certain nobleman, remarkable for a large collection of books, but who had a
mere ignoramus of a fellow for a librarian. This her ladyship knew, and in
passing with several others, by the door of the library, she pointed to it,
saying, with her usual vivacity, "There is the seraglio, committed to the care
of an eunuch."

125. A clergyman in New Jersey, owned a negro by the name of Quash, who was by
no means fond of working, and one day told his master he conceived it a
hardship, "dat he poor negar man mus work so hard, and massa do noting." You
are mistaken Quash, my labor is more fatiguing than yours; I do head work,
and yours is merely bodily exercise. This hint was sufficient for Quash. The
next day he was ordered into the woods to procure fuel -- but Quash staying
longer than usual, the parson repaired to the woods to see what detained him --
when behold! the first object that presented itself to his view was Quash
astride on a large maple log in a pensive attitude. When he enquired the cause,
Quash starting up and rubbing his midnight brow, oh! massa me -- me have been
doing head work. -- Well let me hear what your head has done. -- Suppose massa,
dear be five pigeons on dis tree, and you take a gun and soot two of them, how
many dear be left? Why three, you old sinner. -- No massa, them toder tree fly
away.

126. When Cromwell was in Scotland with his troops, he went out one morning to
see the country, with only a few guards: A Scotch soldier coming, to make
himself remarkable by doing some great deed, fired at him from behind a dyke;
but having missed his aim, Cromwell's guards were going to seize and kill him.
"Let him alone," said Cromwell, no way discomposed, and darting a look at the
fellow -- "You lubberly rascal, if any of my soldiers had missed such a mark, I
would have tied him up to the halberds."

127. Voltaire being asked, which of his tragedies he was most pleased with,
replied, Olympia, "for the same reason," said he, "that a man is proud of
having a child at seventy-five."

128. Voltaire was passionately fond of dates, sweet-oranges, and pomegranates.
In the South of France, the orange being grafted on the pomegranate, acquires a
fine color: Voltaire would often hold it up, and say, " This must have been
the forbidden fruit."

129. When Pope Clement XIV. (Ganganelli) ascended the papal chair, the
ambassadors of the different states waited on him with congratulations: when
they were introduced, they bowed, and he returned the compliment by bowing
likewise; the master of the ceremonies told his holiness he should not have
returned their salute, "O, I cry your mercy," said the pontiff, " I have not
been pope long enough to forget good manners."

130. Colonel Bond, who had been one of king Charles the first's judges, died a
day or two before Cromwell, and it was strongly reported every where, that the
protector was dead; "No," said a gentleman, who knew better, " he has only
given Bond to the devil for his future appearance."

131. Lord Townshend, when young, being at the battle of Dettingen, as he was
marching down pretty close to the enemy, was so very thoughtful (as is usual
with most officers on their first battle,) that he took no notice of a
drummer's head that was shot off just before him, though he received some of
the brains on his coat. A veteran officer observing this, went up to him, and
endeavored to rouse him, by telling him the best way in these cases was not to
think at all. "Oh! dear sir," says his lordship with great presence of mind,
"you entirely mistake my reverie; I have been only thinking what the devil
could bring this little drummer here, who seems to possess such a quantity of
brains."

132. A gambler, being detected some years ago secreting a card, the company,
in the warmth of their resentment, threw him out of the window of a one pair of
stairs room, where they had been playing. Meeting a friend sometime after, he
loudly complained of this usage, and asked what he should do? "Do," says the
wit, "why it is a plain case, never play so high again as long as you live."

133. Sergeant Davy being concerned in a cause which he wanted to put off a few
days, asked lord Mansfield, when he would bring it on? "Friday next," says his
lordship. "Will you consider, my lord, Friday next will be Good Friday!" "I do
not care for that," says his lordship, "I shall sit on that day." "Well, my
lord, to be sure you may do as you please; but if you do, I believe you will be
the first judge who did business on Good Friday, since Pontius Pilate's time."

134. The celebrated mr. Whiston was a pensioner to queen Caroline, who
sometimes admitted him to the honor of her conversation, and paid the pension
with her own hands. One day, she said to him, mr. Whiston, I understand you are
a free speaker and honestly tell people of their faults: no one is without
faults, and I wish you would tell me of mine; and she pressed him to do so. He
was still upon the reserve, and she pressed him the more. Well, said he, since
your majesty insists upon it, I must obey you. There are abundance of people
who come out of the country every spring to London, and they all naturally
desire to see the king and queen, and have not an opportunity of seeing your
majesty's so conveniently as at the chapel-royal: but these country folks, who
are not used to such things, when they see your majesty talking with the king,
almost all the time of divine service, are perfectly astonished, and depart
with strange impressions into their respective countries, and make their
reports there (let me tell you) not at all to your majesty's honor. I am sorry
for it, answered the queen; I believe there may be too much truth in what you
say: But pray, mr. Whiston, tell me of another fault. No, madam, said he, let
me see you mend this, before I tell you of another.

135. The death of mr. Holland, of Drury Lane theater, who was the son of a
baker at Chiswick, had a very great effect upon the spirits of Foot, who had a
very warm friendship for him: being a legatee, as well as appointed by the will
of the deceased, one of his bearers, he attended the corpse to the family vault
at Chiswick, and there paid a plentiful tribute of tears to his memory. On his
return to town, by way of alleviating his grief, he called in at a
coffee-house, when Henry Woodward coming up to him, asked him if he had not
been paying his last compliments to his friend Holland? "Yes, poor fellow,"
says Foot, almost weeping at the same time, " I have just seen him shoved into
the family oven."

136. James the first, when he was duke of York, took it into his head to visit
Milton, merely out of curiosity. In the course of their conversation, the duke
asked Milton, "Whether he did not think the loss of his sight was a judgment
upon him for what he had written against his father, Charles the first?" The
immortal bard made the following reply. "If your highness thinks, that the
calamities which befall us here, are indications of the wrath of heaven; in
what manner are we to account for the fate of the king, your father? The
displeasure of heaven must, upon this supposition, have been much greater
against him than me, for I have only lost my eyes; but he lost his head."

137. When madame Bar became the mistress of Louis XV. such an elevation, of
one of her mean circumstances, necessarily became the topic of conversation.
Some young fellows talking this matter over one night at the English
coffee-house in Paris, a gentleman present said, "he remembered her, when she
was to be got for a six livre piece." "Very true, sir," says another, "but she
is now risen to a Louis."

138. Dr. P. an Irish parson, and a remarkably ordinary man in his person,
having a neat parsonage house very conveniently furnished, was one day showing
it to dr. Berkly, the celebrated bishop of Cloyne. "Well, my lord," says the
doctor, after they had returned to the dining parlour, "you see what a nice
marriage-trap I have got here." "Why, yes, doctor," says the bishop, looking
him full in the face, "I see you have; but I am afraid you will not find a lady
that will relish the bait."

139. The late excellent wit, counselor Crips of Cork, who, from a very fine
beau, dwindled into a mere sloven as he advanced in years, was invited by lady
Doneraile to dinner at her country house. Her ladyship, knowing his inattention
to dress, told him in the card, that the first personages in the neighborhood
of Doneraile were to dine with her, and requested he would be very spruce on
the occasion. But the request had no effect upon the counselor; he appeared
before her ladyship in an old rusty black coat and waist-coat, with a pair of
greasy velvet breeches; which so disgusted her that she lectured him pretty
smartly: "If I had not told you," says her ladyship, "in my card, that I
expected a brilliant company to dinner, I should not be angry, but I remember I
made it a particular request to see you decently dressed; instead of which this
old coat (taking hold of it) is not fit for a beggar; and the front of your
waistcoat begrimed with snuff, with the nastiest greasy velvet breeches I ever
beheld: for shame, counselor!" "Stop," says the wit; "my coat and waistcoat
are old to be sure, and should be thrown aside; but my velvet breeches I have
the utmost veneration for, -- they are an old pall I carry to cover a dead
friend."

140. When the distinguished duellist, George Robert Fitzgerald, was in Paris,
the English ambassador introduced him to the French king; prior to which
introduction, the ambassador informed his majesty, mr. Fitzgerald was a man of
such a mighty prowess, that he had fought thirty duels, and behaved equally
brave and honorable in them all. "Then, I think," says the king with a smile,
"this gentleman's life would make an admirable appendix to your renowned
countryman's history, JACK the GIANT KILLER."

141. The whimsical and immortal author of Tristram Shandy, was married to mrs.
Stern on a Saturday morning: his parishoners had timely notice of this
circumstance, and knowing he would preach the next morning at his parish
church, and desirous at the same time of seeing the bride, they assembled in
such crowds, that the church was full, before the bell was done tolling. The
bride, as was expected, made her appearance, and the country folks indulged
themselves with the usual observations, 'till Stern mounted the pulpit; then
every ear was ready to catch the words of his text, which turned out, to their
astonishment, to be the following; "WE HAVE TOILED ALL NIGHT, AND HAVE CAUGHT
NO FISH." The congregation looked at each other, some smiled, others stopped
their mouths with their handkerchiefs to prevent them from laughing, while the
old folks wore very serious faces, and thought the humourist a very odd (...)
for a pulpit lecturer: however, they attended to his discourse, which turned
out, as usual, very instructive; and all went home very highly delighted with
the text, but poor mrs. Stern, who blushed down to the finger's-ends every
step of the way to her house.

142. The famous John Baptist Santeuil, the Latin poet, being with a Parisian
husband, who was lamenting the infidelities of his wife: "A mere fleabite,'
said the poet, "or less, as it is only an imaginary complaint; few die of it,
and many live with it."

143. Philips, the noted harlequin, was taken up in London on suspicion of
debt, and dealt with the officer in the following manner: He first called for
liquor in abundance, and treated all about him, to the no small joy of the
bailiff, who was rejoiced to have a calf that bled so well, (as they term it.)
Harlequin made the honest bailiff believe he had six dozen of wine ready packed
up, which he would send for, to drink while in custody, and likewise allow him
sixpence a bottle for drinking it in his own chamber. Shoulderdab listened to
the proposal with pleasure. The bailiff went to the place, as directed, and
returned with joy, to hear that it was to be sent in the morning early.
Accordingly it came by a porter, sweating under his load: the turn-key called
to his master, and told him the porter and hamper were come in: very well, said
he, then let nothing but the porter and hamper out. The porter performed his
part very well: came heavily in with an empty hamper, and seemed to go lightly
out, with Philips on his back. He was dishampered at an alehouse on the water
side, crossed the Thames, and soon after embarked for Ireland. He was very fond
of this trick, and would take pride in his project, which was contrived long
before he was taken, to be ready on such an emergency.

144. Miss Hamilton, a maid of honor to the empress Catharine, wife to Peter
the Great, had an amor, which, at different times, produced three children.
She had always pleaded sickness; but Peter, being suspicious, ordered his
physician to attend her, who soon made the discovery. It also appeared that a
sense of shame had triumphed over her humanity, and that the children had been
put to death as soon as born. -- Peter enquired if the father of them was privy
to the murder; the lady insisted that he was innocent, for she had always
deceived him, by pretending they were sent to nurse. -- Justice now called upon
the emperor to punish the offense. The lady was much beloved by the empress,
who pleaded for her. -- The amor was pardonable, but not the murder. Peter
sent her to the castle, and went himself to visit her; and the fact being
confessed, he pronounced her sentence with tears; telling her, that his duty,
as a prince, and God's vicegerent, called on him for that justice which her
crime had rendered indispensably necessary, and that she must, therefore,
prepare for death. He attended her also to the scaffold, where he embraced her
with the utmost tenderness, mixed with sorrow; and some say, that when the head
was struck off, he took it up by the ear, whilst the lips were still trembling,
and kissed them: a circumstance of an extraordinary nature, and yet not
incredible, considering the particularities of his character.

145. The late David Hume, esquire. lived in the now town of Edinburgh; between
which and the old town, there is a communication by means of an elegant bridge
over a swamp. Desirous one day to cut his way shorter, mr. Hume took it into
his head to pass over a temporary one, which had been erected for general
accommodation, till the new one could be completed. Unfortunately, part of the
temporary one gave way, and our illustrious philosopher found himself stuck in
the mud. On hearing him call aloud for assistance, an old woman hastened to the
spot, from whence the sound seemed to proceed; but perceiving who he was,
refused giving him any help. "Why, (cried she) are you not Hume, the atheist?"
"Oh no! no! no! (returned the philosopher) I am no atheist; indeed you mistake,
good woman, you do indeed!" "Let me hear then (returned the woman) if you can
say the belief." -- Mr. Hume accordingly began the words, I believe in God,
etc. and finished them with so much propriety, that the old woman, convinced of
his christian education, charitably afforded him that relief, which otherwise
she would have thought it a duty of religion to deny him.

146. The most wonderful anecdote, perhaps, in the world of letters, is the
following. Milton, that glory of British literature, received not above ten
pounds, at two different payments, for the copy of Paradise Lost; yet mr.
Hoyle, author of the treatise on the game of whist, after having disposed of
all the first impression, sold the copy to the booksellers for two hundred
guineas.

147. Dean Swift was invited to a gentleman's house, where at dinner he
observed some beautiful children of his friend's; and on his looking eagerly
round, as if he wanted something, was asked what he would have; to which he
with too much ill nature, if not insolence, replied, "I am looking to see which
is the handsomest footman here," for the gentleman was remarkably deformed, and
ordinary both in person and features. I heard a gentleman observe, on this
story being told, that he deserved to be kicked down stairs, had he been the
archbishop of Canterbury; and indeed it is surprising the gentleman had not
spirit enough to do it.

148. Miss S --, one of the famous miss H -- 's filles de joye, in dancing a
masquerade at Carlisle-house, happened to trip and fall flat on her back; --
Foot, who was in a domino, and near her, stooping to take her up, said, "
never mind it, my pretty dear, -- practice makes perfect."

149. The father of a boy who was very fond of his bed, coming into his
bedchamber one morning seemingly angry at his sleeping so long, said, "the sun
had been up above three hours." -- "That Is no great wonder, sir," said the boy,
" if I had as many miles to travel today as the sun has, I would have risen as
soon as he."

150. A certain new-created lord standing at a bookseller's shop, in London, a
dissipated young nobleman, drove by in a remarkably high phaeton, with six as
remarkable horses. -- Struck with the tout-ensemble of such a groupe, his
lordship asked, "what strange figure that was?" -- "Oh, my lord," says Type, in
the true family pronunciation, "that is the celebrated lord --, who has long
figured away in the walks of fashion and extravagance." -- "Ah!" says the peer,
"we have got strange kinds of lords now-a days." -- "Indeed, my lord," replied
Type, without meaning to be pointed, " you may say that."

151. A military gentleman, coming to Foot in an elegant new phaeton, at
parting desired Foot would come to the door just to look at it: -- "'It Is a
pretty thing," said the son of Mars, "and I have it on a new plan." -- "Before
I set my eyes on it," said Foot, "my dear friend, I Am afraid you have it on
the old plan, -- never to pay for it."

152. A certain preacher held forth at St. Mary's without giving his auditory
any satisfaction. Santeuil, who was present, said, "he did better last year." A
bystander asserted, he must be mistaken; for he had not preached last year. "
That is the very reason," said the poet.

153. Santeuil having a confessional dress on, either to say vespers, or to
muse upon some production, a lady, who took him for a confessor, threw herself
upon her knees, and recounted all her sins. The poet muttered something to
himself, and the good penitent thinking he was reproaching her for her
wickedness, hastened the conclusion of her confession; when she found the
confessor quite silent, she then asked him for absolution. "What, do you take
me for a priest?" said Santeuil, "Why then," said the lady, quite alarmed, "did
you listen to me?" "And why,' replied Santeuil, "did you speak to me?" " I Will
this instant go and complain of you to your prior," said the enraged female. "
And I," said the poet, " am going to your husband to give him a full account of
your conduct."

154. Quin told lady Berkley that she looked blooming as the spring, but
recollecting that the season was not then very promising, he added, I would to
God, the spring would look like your ladyship!

155. In the war in Flanders, when the earl of Stair was commander in chief,
after a severe battle, which lasted from morning till evening, and terminated
in favor of the British troops, a veteran soldier, excessively fatigued, was
resting on his arms, and looking very grave; Lord Stair coming by, asked him
why he looked so dull? -- " Dull! your honor? I am not dull; I Am only thinking
what a damned hard day's work I have done for a groat."

156. The late earl of Chatham who bore no good will to a certain physician,
was rallying him one day about the inefficacy of his prescriptions. To which
the doctor replied, "he defied any of his patients to find fault with him. -- "
I believe you," replied the witty earl, " for they are all dead."

157. The celebrated Stern was walking with a friend in one of the streets of
Westminster, on a very windy day. The gentleman observed he never saw a season
so backward, for he did not reap half the corn he expected. At that instant, a
garretteer gentleman who had just shaved himself, threw the contents of his
chin, which were pretty large, out of the window, which, as the wind was very
high, blew full in the gentleman's face. The witty author smiled, and instantly
observed, " If you have not reaped a plentiful harvest of corn, my good friend,
some reaper, I see has favored you with a plentiful harvest of beard."

158. A lady on being detected in an amor, requested her maid would keep it a
secret, and if the other servants knew it, she begged she would bribe them to
secresy, for which she gave her some guineas, saying at the same time, if her
mamma heard of it, she was an undone woman; to which the girl smartly replied,
that could not be, for her ladyship was an undone woman already.

159. Milton was asked by a friend, whether he would instruct his daughter in
the different languages? To which he replied, "no, sir, one tongue is
sufficient for a woman."

160. A merchant in one of the back towns of Virginia, refusing to give a
planter what he thought too high a price, for some country produce, the planter
observed to him, that as he must load his wagons for Alexandria or Baltimore,
he might safely venture to pay the price demanded, supposing even he should
gain ever so little by the bargain. " No," replied the merchant, " rather than
submit to such an imposition, I Would load my wagons down empty."

161. A counselor of Grenada having refused to pay the sum of one hundred
pistoles for an image of St. Antonio de Padua, which Cano, a Spanish artist,
had made for him. The counselor astonished at the price demanded, began to
compute how many pistoles per day Cano had earned whilst the work was in hand:
you have been five and twenty days carving this image of St. Antonio, said the
niggardly arithmetician, and the purchase money demanded being one hundred, you
have rated your labor at the exorbitant rate of four pistoles per day, whilst
I, who am a counselor, and your superior, do not make half your profits by my
talents! -- Wretch, cried the enraged artist, to talk to me of your talents --
I have been fifty years learning to make this image in twenty-five days, and so
saying, he flung it with the utmost violence upon the pavement. The affrighted
counselor escaped out of the house, with the utmost precipitation, concluding
that the man who was bold enough to demolish a saint, would have very little
remorse in destroying a lawyer.

162. William Whiston dined with lady Jekyll, who, because she was sister to
lord Summers, thought she must know more than other women. She asked him "why
God Almighty made woman out of the rib?" Whiston scratched his head and said,
"indeed, madam, I don't know, except that the rib is the most crooked part of
the body."

163. A young Swiss recruit, when his regimentals were making, had procured a
round iron plate bordered with small holes, which he desired the tailor to
fasten on the inside of his coat, above his left breast, to prevent his being
shot through the heart: the tailor being a humorous fellow, fastened it in the
seat of his breeches, and the clothes being scarce on his back when he was
ordered to march into the field, having no opportunity to have this awkward
mistake rectified before he found himself engaged in battle, and being obliged
to fly before the army, in endeavoring to get over a thorn hedge in his way,
he unfortunately stuck fast till he was overtaken by a foe, who, on his coming
up, gave him a push in the b -- h with his bayonet, with no friendly design:
but it luckily hit on the iron plate, and pushed the young soldier clear out of
the hedge; this favorable circumstance made the Swiss honestly confess, that
the tailor had more sense than himself, and knew better where his heart lay.

164. Oldys, the historian, having been for several years in the Fleet prison,
had contracted such habits and connexions there, that when he was at length
enlarged, he made it a frequent practice to spend his evenings there, and lodge
with some friend all night. Rapping at the door one night rather late, the
keeper reprimanded him for giving him such constant trouble, adding, that,
though he had a great regard for him, yet if he kept such hours, he must be
under the necessity of locking him out.

165. A gentleman of Gascoine who inherited two thousand crowns a year from his
father, commenced marquis at Paris, and being a gay volatile genius, soon got
the better of his fortune, and was reduced to the lowest ebb of wretchedness.
Yet, in the midst of it, he never lost his spirit and courage, or impotently
repined at what was not to be remedied: but with the small pittance he had left
he purchased a mule, and turned water-carrier. Sometime afterward, as he was
trafficking his merchandise up and down the streets, he happened to meet two of
his old companions, who would have avoided him for fear of giving him pain, at
being caught in such an equipage. But he prevented them, sprung forward and
saluted them with his usual freedom, and, when they seemed to pity his ill
fortune, briskly interrupted them by saying, that he had forty thousand crowns
worth of water in the Seine, but for want of servants, he was obliged to sell
it himself.

166. A painter kept at his house the portrait of a very black man, who had not
paid him for it. Being out of patience, he told him one day; "Sir if you don't
take away your picture, the landlord of the blackamoor's head will have it."

167. The wife of a noble Venetian having seen her only son dying, abandoned
herself to the most exquisite grief. A friar endeavored to console her.
"Remember Abraham, said he, whom God commanded to plunge a dagger, with his own
hands into his son's heart, and who obeyed without murmuring." "Ah! father,
(replied she with impetuosity) God never commanded such sacrifices to be made
by a mother.

168. Dr. Pitcairn, who practiced about fifty years ago, being called to a
bricklayer on whom a chimney, which he had just erected, had fallen, finding
the man dead, gravely turned round and repeated the following apposite
quotation: -- "Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them."

169. An officer, who little deserved the dignity, foreseeing and trembling at
the dangers of a battle, requested of the Duc de Vendome, leave of absence to
go and see his father who was ill. "Go, sir, go," says the duke, "obey the
commandment -- Honor your father and mother, that your days may be long."

170. Two young soldiers had deserted from the American army and returned to
their father's house. Their father incensed at this action, loaded them with
irons, and conducted them himself to their general, Lord Stirling. He did what
every officer would have done in his place; he pardoned them. The father, as
patriotic, but less austere than a Roman, was happy to preserve his children;
nevertheless he seemed astonished, and approaching the general -- "My lord,
(says he, with tears in his eyes) it is more than I hoped for."

171. A very fond wife, who had the good of her family greatly at heart, gave
information against her husband for a highway robbery, in order to obtain the
reward.

As he was going to be hanged, she came up and said to him, "my dear Bob, I
hope you will forgive me, I did it all for the best: and as I knew you must be
scragged one time or other, I thought your wife and children might as well
benefit by your misfortune as a stranger -- never seem to mind it, Bob -- it is
well it is no worse."

172. A certain bishop Bluster, on his return to Oxford, from kissing hands at
St. James's, happened to espy a sign over the door of a beer-house, on which
was painted the head of bishop Blaze. -- The reverend prelate was so offended
at the audacity of a tippling house landlord, in thus daring to prostitute
clerical dignity, that he ordered the sign to be immediately taken down. -- A
wag of Trinity college pasted the following lines in its room: Two of a trade
can never agree,
No maxim ever was juster;
They take down bishop Blaze you see,
And set up bishop Bluster.


173. A country attorney happened to be at a tavern with an honest peasant, and
was very facetious at the countryman's expense. They nevertheless agreed to try
for a bottle of wine who could make the best rhyme. The lawyer enquired the
peasant's occupation, who cheerfully informed him he was a weaver, upon which
the lawyer wrote these lines: The world, though large, is but a span,
It takes nine weavers to make a man.


The weaver in his turn, enquired the lawyer's occupation, and being informed,
"I thought," said he, "you were of the law by the glibness of your tongue, but
since you have rhymed about the world, so will I too," and then he wrote, The
world is wide, and full of evil,
And half a lawyer makes a devil.


174. A dispute which happened some time since about a box at the opera-house
in Paris, occasioned a suit before the tribunal of the marechals of France:
this tribunal receives complaints against military men upon affairs of honor,
and in all cases in which military officers are accused of having behaved in a
manner unbecoming gentlemen. A young clerical buck of distinguished birth, had
taken one of the boxes at the opera-house. A marechal of France had set his
heart upon the same box, and requested that the Abbe would resign it to him:
this the latter peremptorily refused to do; upon which the marechal had
recourse to violent measures, and took by force what he could not obtain by
fair means. The Abbe, in order to obtain satisfaction for the affront that had
been put upon him, lodged a complaint against the marechal, in the court of the
marechals of France, and petitioned that he might be permitted to speak in
person in support of his charge. The prayer of the petitioner was readily
granted. -- He began by expressing his high sense of the honor he enjoyed in
being permitted to plead before so illustrious an assembly; at the same time
that he felt uncommon concern that he had been obliged, in vindication of his
own honor, to bring a charge against a person who had the honor of being a
member of the court: he rejoiced, however, when he reflected, that they were
too just and too equitable to refuse him justice, even against one of their own
brethren. He did not think proper at first to name the accused in his speech,
but took an effectual way of mortifying the general, by showing which of the
marechals was not the accused, and by mentioning the most memorable exploits of
each. "It is not, (said he) of marechal such-an-one that I complain; it is not
of marechal Broglio, who so gloriously distinguished himself in the last German
war; it is not marechal Clermont-Tonnerre, who has rendered his name so famous
by the most masterly retreats; it is not marechal de Contades, so renowned for
his victories; it is not marechal de Richelieu, who took Minorca: he of whom I
complain, never took a place in his whole life but my box at the opera-house,"
and here he named the accused. The lords generals by no means expected so
severe a conclusion; they were surprised, and at the same time not displeased
at it: after a short deliberation they resolved that the Abbe had just grounds
of complaint; but that the court, thinking he had obtained sufficient
satisfaction by the turn he had given to his arguments, and the severe and
witty conclusion of his speech, would not condemn the accused to any further
punishment than he had already suffered from the satirical turn of the accused.

175. A few nights since I was in company (says the writer) with a gentleman
that was in the Road of Algiers some years ago, and was an eye and an ear
witness to the following story. One day as some christian captives, who had
been ransomed, were going to be discharged, the town cruizers brought in a
Swedish vessel; one of them hearing it was of that nation, and being from
thence himself, was very desirous to see the crew, when to his great surprise
he saw his own father (who was master of the ship) in the company: the son knew
the father, but the father who had lost him when a youth, knew not his son,
having long given him up as dead. The son discovered himself to the father, who
embraced him with great tenderness: but the recollection of their situation
soon interrupted their joy, and introduced lamentation and despair. -- At
length the young man addressed himself to his father in this manner: "The
slavery you are going into, will be insupportable to you, and soon put an end
to your life, the thoughts of which are worse than death to me. I have been
here a great many years, and know the country, the people and their work; if
they will accept of me in your room, I will go back into slavery, and you shall
go home again: -- I know if I should be able to raise friends, I shall be
redeemed; -- if not -- God's will be done!" The Moors readily accepted the
exchange; so the father returned to freedom and his home, and the son to toil
and slavery. A memorable instance of filial piety.

176. A lady of high quality, and a relation of one who had the story from her
own mouth, having been married some years, but never having bore her lord a
child, was surprised one morning by a visit from lord Chesterfield, whom she
had frequently seen and conversed with at court. After the usual compliments
had passed, his lordship, in that easy gay style which he so strongly
recommends to his son, gave her to understand that he should be happy to form
such a connection with her ladyship, as it was more than probable might give
being to an heir to the honors and possessions of that noble family into which
she had matched. I will not attempt to describe the indignation which the lady
felt at such an unexampled instance of impudence as the proposal indicated. She
rose from her chair, and with all the dignity of insulted modesty, commanded
this well-bred lover, this minion of the graces, to quit her house, with this
menace, "Think yourself well off, my lord, that for this affront I do not order
my servants to push you headlong out of doors."

177. A Swiss captain burying pell-mell in the field of battle, the dead and
the wounded, it was represented to him that some of those whom he thus buried
were not quite dead, and with care might perhaps recover. "Poh! poh!" said he,
"if you take their word for it, there is not a man of 'em, will own himself
dead."

178. An ignorant fellow maintained in company that the sun did not turn round
the world; how then, said one present, does it happen, that he sets at west,
and rises again at east, unless he passes under the globe? -- Why, replied he,
the sun returns the same way that he came: but the reason why we don't observe
it, is that he goes back in the dark.

179. A man of approved integrity being nominated by a king, to an honorable
and lucrative employment, which he had not solicited, repaired to court to
thank his majesty, for this unexpected promotion. You need not thank me, said
the king: it was not for your sake I did this, but for the good of my subjects;
and, you should never have had the employment, if I thought there was a better
man than you in my whole dominions.

180. A governor of Virginia being saluted by a negro in the streets of
Williamsburg, and immediately returning the salute, "how," said a gentleman,
"do you demean yourself so far as to salute a slave?" -- "Undoubtedly,"
answered the governor, "I should be very sorry if a slave were to surpass me in
civility."

181. An attorney having a dispute with an old officer, who had lost an eye in
the wars, forgot himself so far, as to reproach him with that misfortune, and
call him blinkard. " It Is true," said the veteran, very coolly, " I am a
blinkard, but yet I can see better than you: for with my single naked eye I can
see a knave in this room; whereas you, with both your eyes cannot see him, till
you look into the glass."

182. An Indian sachem being in London, was asked whether his subjects were
free? Why not? said he, since I myself am free, though their king.

183. A German bishop went to Rome in hopes of obtaining from the Pope the
honor of a cardinal's hat. Being disappointed, he returned to his diocese,
where complaining one day of a headache, which he had contracted on the road,
No wonder, said a bye-stander, that his grace is so ill, since he traveled
from Rome to Germany without a hat.

184. A gentleman just married, telling Foot, he had that morning laid out
three thousand pounds in jewels for his dear wife. Faith, sir, says the wit, I
see you are no hypocrite, for she is truly your dear wife.

185. A person bought a pair of horns and brought them home; his wife asked
what he meant? he said to hang his hat on. Good lord, says she, cannot you keep
your hat on your own head?

186. A soldier being ordered by monsieur de Vauban to watch the enemy's
motions in a particular spot, repaired to the post, and there remained a
considerable time, notwithstanding repeated shots from the enemy, one of which
went through his body. When ordered back, he returned very deliberately; and,
though nearly exhausted with loss of blood, gave a circumstantial account of
every thing he had observed. The general, pleased with his behavior, offered
him a purse of money, which the brave fellow declined, saying, no, sir, that
would spoil the whole business.

187. Lord Strangford, who stammered so much, was telling a bishop that sat at
his table, that Balaam's ass spoke, because he was pri -- est -- "priest-rid,
sir," said a valet-de-chambre, who stood behind the chair, my lord would say.
No, friend, replied the bishop, Balaam could not speak himself; and so his ass
spoke for him.

188. King Charles II. on a certain time paying a visit to dr. Busby, the
doctor is said to have strutted through his school with his hat upon his head,
while his majesty walked complaisantly behind him, with his hat under his arm;
but when he was taking his leave at the door, the doctor with great humility,
thus addressed him: Sire, I hope your majesty will excuse my want of respect
hitherto; but if my boys were to imagine there was a greater man in the kingdom
than myself, I should never be able to rule them.

189. A Jew had a servant, who, having a relation lately dead, as usual
neglected shaving -- "Ephraim, why do you not shave?" was the master's
interrogation; "my relation is dead, sir, and you know Moses commanded" -- "
Moses commanded!" do not tell me about Moses. I say if Moses commanded any such
thing, he was a very slovenly fellow."

190. A sailor being on deck, one windy morning, a sudden gust of wind took him
into the sea; but putting out ropes, he regained the deck; his captain
sympathized with him, observing he had had but an indifferent breakfast; not so
bad, replied the mate, for you must allow he has had a good duck.

191. A nobleman having presented king Charles II. with a fine horse, his
majesty bade Killigrew, who was present, tell him his age; whereupon Killigrew
goes and examines his tail; What are you doing? said the king, that is not the
place to find out his age. O! sir, said Killigrew, Your majesty knows, one
should never look a gift horse in the mouth.

192. Two gentlemen, one named Woodcock, the other Fuller, walking together,
happened to see an owl; says the last, that bird is very much like a Woodcock.
You are very wrong, says the other, for it is Fuller in the head, Fuller in the
eyes, and Fuller all over.

193. A thief being brought to be executed, a friend asked him if he was not
sorry for having committed the robbery for which he was going to suffer? The
criminal answered, Yes, but that he was more sorry for not having stolen enough
to bribe the jury.

194. A soldier in the late wars, a little before an engagement, found a horse
shoe, and stuck it into his girdle: shortly after, in the heat of the action, a
bullet came and hit him upon that part. Well, said he, I find a little armor
will serve a turn, if it be put in the right place.

195. As a country gentleman in London was reading a newspaper in a
coffee-house, he said to a friend who sat next him, I have been looking some
time to see what the ministry are about, but I cannot find where those articles
are put, not being used to the London papers. -- Look among the robberies,
replied the other.

196. It was an annual custom with dr. Johnson's bookseller, whose name I have
forgotten, to invite his authors to dine with him, and it was upon this
occasion that dr. Johnson, and dr. Rose, of Chiswick, met; when a dispute
happened on the pre-eminency of the Scotch and English writers. In the course
of conversation, dr. Warburton's name was mentioned, when dr. Rose observed
what a proud imperious person he was -- Dr. Johnson answered, sir, so he was,
but he possessed more learning than has been imported from Scotland since the
days of Buchanan. Dr. Rose, after enumerating a great many Scotch authors, whom
Johnson treated with contempt, said, What think you of David Hume, sir? -- Ha!
a deistical scribbling fellow, Rose. Well, be it so: but what say you to lord
Bute? Johnson with a surly wow, wow, said, I did not know that he ever wrote
any thing, Rose -- No! I think he has written one line that has outdone any
that Shakespeare, or Milton, or any one else, ever wrote, Johnson -- Pray what
was that, sir? -- Why it was when he wrote an order for your pension. Johnson,
quite confounded, said, Why that was a very fine line to be sure, sir. Upon
which, the rest of the company got up, and laughed, and halloed till the room
was in a roar.

197. A certain smatterer in letters, took it into his head to abuse with great
freedom all the modern literati, observing that there was very little wit,
humor or learning in the present age. Some time after a wit came into the
room, when a gentleman told him how his friend had been abusing the moderns. I
have not the least doubt of his ill nature, says the wit, so he would the
ancients too, by G -- d, if he knew their names.

198. Alexander the Great, seeing Diogenes, looking attentively at a large
collection of human bones, piled one upon another, asked the philosopher what
he was looking for? "I am searching," says Diogenes, "for the bones of your
father, but I cannot distinguish them from those of his slaves."

199. Beau Nash took a hack one night at Temple Bar, and bade the man drive to
Berkeley-square. The fellow, who had been wishing for the usual time of his
going home, swore, as he was mounting the box, that he should be glad to drive
his fare to hell. Do you consider, said Nash, when they were come to
Berkeley-square, that if you had driven me to hell, as you said just now you
should be glad to do, you must have gone there yourself. You mistake, sir,
replied the fellow, for I should have backed you in.

200. Quin, having had an invitation from a nobleman, who was reputed to keep a
very elegant table, to dine with him; and having no manner of aversion to a
good repast, he accordingly waited on his lordship, but found the regale far
from answering his expectation -- Upon his taking leave, the servants, who were
very numerous, had ranged themselves in the hall. Quin finding that if he gave
to each of them, it would amount to a pretty large sum, asked, Which was the
cook? who readily answered, Me, sir. He then enquired for the butler, who was
as quick in replying as the other; when he said to the first -- Here is half a
crown for my eating -- and to the other -- Here is five shillings for my wine;
but by G --, gentlemen, I never made so bad a dinner for the money in my life.

201. The late Jonas Hanway having hired a coachman, was telling him the duty
he required, concluding, you will attend with the rest of my family every
evening at prayers. Prayers, sir! says the descendant of Jehu: Why did you
never say your prayers? asked mr. Hanway. I never lived in a praying family,
replied the coachman. But have you any objection to say your prayers? No, sir,
I have no objection, but hope you will consider it in my wages.

202. One evening when the passengers got into a stage coach, in a country town
in England, they found that one of the corners had been some time occupied by a
man who seemed to be asleep, with his hands folded before him, and his hat
drawn over his face. The other five passengers, after some time, entered into
conversation, and observed that this man still slept on, and took no notice of
any thing that was either said or done. In this manner they traveled all
night. In the morning at breakfast time, one of his fellow travelers civilly
addressed him, and desired he would accompany them, but no answer being
returned, they left him to his meditations. After breakfast, when the coachman
had swallowed a glass or two of brandy, one of the gentlemen said to him, you
have put along with us a very sulky fellow, for he will neither enter into
conversation, or answer when spoken to. I should wonder if he did, replied the
coachman, as he was hung two days ago for horse stealing, and is now going up
to a surgeon in London.

203. A lawyer and his clerk riding on the road, the clerk desired to know what
was the chief point of the law? His master said, if he would promise to pay for
their suppers that night, he would tell him; which was agreed to. Why then,
said the master, good witnesses are the chief points in law. When they came to
the inn, the master bespoke a couple of fowls for supper,; and when they had
supped, told the clerk to pay for them, according to agreement. O, sir, says
he, where is your good witness?

204. Dr. Graham being on his stage in a country town, in order to promote the
sale of his medicines, told the country people, that he had come there for the
good of the people, and not for want. Then, speaking to his merry Andrew, --
Andrew, says he, do we come for want? No, faith, sir, says Andrew, we have
enough of that at home; besides, continued he, my master has a very great
estate, but that is neither here nor there.

205. During the late war, a gentleman in London observed, that the very women
in England were able to beat back the French, if they should attempt an
invasion of that country; a naval gentleman immediately jumped up, and striking
his fist against the table, cried, Right, my boy! damme if I doubt it, and I
hope to see the day that some of the monsieurs shall receive a sound drubbing,
from a British ship manned with women.

206. A gentleman who had a numerous family, observing once at a table, that
thank God he could digest any thing; another asked him how he digested his ten
children? O, sir, said the gentleman, I bring them up.

207. A humourist asked a citizen whether he would sooner kiss a pretty girl,
or partak^ of a good feast? The citizen honestly replied, that he should prefer
the latter. To which the wag archly rejoined, I never thought you a man of the
ton before, but I find now that you have more taste than feeling.

208. A man having a scolding wife, he swore he would drown himself; she
followed him, and desired him to forbear, at least to let her speak with him.
Speak quickly then, said he. Pray, husband, if you will needs drown yourself,
pray take my council, to go into a deep place, for it will grieve my heart to
see you a long time dying.

209. A physician's horse being out of order, he sent him to the farrier to be
cured, which being done, the doctor went to pay him. No, said the farrier, We
doctors never take any money one of another.

210. A gentleman who possesses a small estate in Gloucestershire, in England,
was allured to town by the promises of a courtier, who kept him in constant
attendance for a long while to no purpose; at last the gentleman, quite tired
out, called upon his pretended friend, and told him that he had at last got a
place. The courtier shook him very heartily by the hand, and told him he was
very much rejoiced at the event. But pray, sir, said he, where is your place?
In the Gloucester coach, said he, sir; I secured it last night, as you, sir,
have cured me of higher ambition.

211. An honest Jack Tar being at a quaker's meeting, heard the friend that was
holding forth speak with great emotion, against the ill consequence of giving
the lie in conversation, and therefore, he advised, when a man was telling a
tale, that was not consistent with truth or probability, to cry twang, which
would not irritate the passions as the lie would. After digressing into the
story of the great miracle of five thousand being fed with five loaves of
bread, etc. he told them that they were not such loaves as are used now, but
were as big as a mountain; at the hearing of which, the tar uttered with a loud
voice, twang! What, says the quaker, do thou think I lie, friend? No, says
Jack, but I am thinking how big the ovens were that baked them.

212. The late general Elbert of Georgia, having burst a blood vessel, thought
it necessary to employ another physician, to consult with the gentleman who
usually attended him. After they had considered his situation, "Well,
gentlemen, (said he) what do you think of me?" "We are sorry to inform you,
that if you continue to bleed as you have done for some time past; you cannot
hold out above six hours longer." This answer would have had an awful effect on
most men, but to one whose life had always been spent in acts of charity, and
hospitality, it only produced this reply, "If I am so soon to die, it is no
small alleviation to your intelligence, that I shall die like a soldier." He
died in about five hours after.

213. Dr. Hough, bishop of Worcester, in England, was remarkable for his
sweetness of temper, as well as every other christian virtue; of which the
following story affords a proof. A young gentleman, whose family had been well
acquainted with the bishop, in making the tour of England before he went
abroad, called to pay his respects (...) lordship as he passed by his seat in
the count (...) happened to be dinnertime, and the room (...) company. The
bishop however received (...) much familiarity, but the servant in reaching
(...) chair, threw down a curious weather (...) cost twenty guineas, and broke
it. (...) was under infinite concern, and began (...) servant, and made an
apology for (...) occasion of the accident; when the bishop with great good
nature interrupted him, Be under no concern, sir, said his lordship, smiling,
for I am much beholden to you for it. We have had a very dry season; and now I
hope we shall have rain. I never saw the glass so low in my life. Every body
was pleased with the humor and pleasantry of the turn; and the more so, as his
lordship was then turned of eighty, a time of life when the infirmities of old
age make most men peevish and hasty.

214. A curate of great learning and merit, but without any view of preferment,
found an opportunity of preaching in Worcester cathedral, when dr. Hough was
bishop of that see; the curate made a most excellent discourse, in which he
discovered greater abilities than was usually found in the common run of young
clergymen. The bishop, who was present, and had remarked him, sent, after
service was over, his verger, with a message, desiring to know of the young
gentleman his name, and where his living was? My duty to his lordship, sir,
said he to the verger, and tell him, my name is Lewis; that living I have none,
but my starving is in Wales. His lordship was not displeased with the humor of
his answer, and in a short time remembered to provide for him.

215. Dean Swift having preached an assize sermon in Ireland, was afterward
invited to dine with the judges, and having in his discourse considered (...)
and abuse of the law, he had bore a little (...) those counselors who plead
causes which (...) in their consciences to be wrong; when (...) over and the
glass began to go round, (...) who happened to be present, took (...) retort
upon the dean, and after many (...) both sides, the counselor at last asked
(...) were to die, whether a parson might (...) money, to preach his funeral
sermon? (...) and I would gladly be the man, for I would then give the devil
his due, as I have this day his children.

216. The vicar of Bray, in Berkshire, being a catholic under the reign of
Henry VIII. and a protestant under Edward VI. a catholic again under queen
Mary, and a protestant in the reign of queen Elizabeth, was reproached as the
scandal of his gown, by turning from one religion to another; "I cannot help
that;" replied the vicar, "but if I changed my religion, I am sure I have kept
true to my principle, which is, to live and die the vicar of Bray."

217. Le Sac, a famous French dancing master, in the reign of queen Anne, in
great admiration asked a friend, whether it were true that mr. Harley,
afterward earl of Oxford, was made an earl and lord treasurer? and finding it
confirmed, said, Well, I wonder what the devil the queen could see in him? for
I attended him two years, and he was the greatest dance that ever I taught.

218. Dean Swift, having dined one day at a lord mayor's feast in. Dublin, was
teized by an opulent boisterous, half-intoxicated squire, who happened to sit
next to him: he bore the awkward raillery for some time, and then on a sudden
called out in a loud voice to the mayor, My lord, here is one of your bears
upon my shoulder, I desire you will order him to be taken off.

219. In the reign of Edward IV. a citizen of London, who lived at the sign of
the crown, was convicted of high treason for saying in a jocular manner, He
would make his son heir to the crown.

220. King James I. being apt to talk to his courtiers in time of divine
service, bishop Laud, one Sunday, when he knew his majesty was in high good
humor, made a full stop in his sermon as often as he perceived the king in
discourse. His majesty asking him after service the occasion of it -- the
bishop told him, he could not think it consistent with good manners to
interrupt his majesty's conversation. -- Then, good faith, said the king, I Will
be even with you, I Will ne mair interrupt your lordship's sermon.

221. Lewis XIV. of France, during queen Anne's war, made use of a very politic
stratagem to recruit his army after its being almost ruined by the siege of
Turin, the battle of Ramillies, and the relief of Barcelona. It happened to be
a time of prodigious scarcity, and therefore his majesty issued out money, and
sent ships to Egypt, Syria, Constantinople, and other places where corn was
cheap, and filled his magazines, and while his generals were surprised that he
issued no orders about levies, he only commanded them to take care that his
soldiers should have plenty of bread, and to publish it every where that it was
his majesty's strict orders. Upon this the poor starving peasants ran every
where to the officers, and listed so fast, that, though they wanted eighty
thousand men, the army was filled up without any expense for levies, besides
twenty new regiments by way of augmentation.

222. Captain Clarke, trafficking on the coast of Africa, went up the country,
where he was introduced to a Moorish king, who being taken with the polite
behavior of the captain, put such confidence in him as to entrust him with his
son, about eighteen years of age, and another sprightly youth of quality, to be
brought up in England. The captain received them with great civility, but
basely sold them for slaves. Shortly after he died, and on the ship's return
home, the officers related the whole affair; on which the government sent to
pay their ransom, and they were brought to England and put under the care of
the earl of Halifax, who gave orders for clothing and educating them in a very
genteel manner; after which they were introduced to his majesty, richly
dressed, who received them graciously and made them handsome presents. On the
first of February, 49, they went to Covent Garden theater to see the tragedy of
Oroonoko, where, on seeing persons of their own color on the stage, apparently
in the same distress from which they had been so lately delivered, the tender
interview between Imoinda and Oroonoko, who was betrayed by the treachery of a
captain, his account of his sufferings, and the repeated abuse of his
placability and confidence, so strongly affected the young prince, that he was
forced to retire at the end of the fourth act. His companion staid, but wept
the whole time, which attracted the eyes of the whole audience.

223. The late lord Courtney, who was of one of the oldest families in Britain,
being married to a miss Clack, who was much inferior in point of birth, a
conversation took place (at which the late bishop of Exeter was present) on the
disparity of the match. "What Is your objection?" says the bishop to a lady who
took the principal lead in the conversation. "Want of family, my lord" -- "Want
of family," echoed the bishop, "why I Will prove her of a better family than his
lordship. -- He perhaps may trace his ancestors as far back as the conquest,
but the family of the Clacks are as old as Eve."

224. Dean Swift being once traveling through England on foot, came to a
market town one evening, where he proposed putting up for the night. As there
had been a fair the preceding day, the town was crowded with strangers, and it
was not without the utmost difficulty he at last procured a lodging in a
miserable inn, upon condition a country farmer should be his bedfellow. The
dean, it is well known, could never endure a bedfellow, but upon this occasion
thought proper to conceal his chagrin, and trust to some lucky thought to rid
himself of the farmer's company. After they had been some time in bed together,
the farmer began to talk, informing his companion that he had made some pretty
clev^^ bargains that day in some purchase at vendue -- " (...) or myself," said
the dean, in a hoarse hollow voice, "I must confess I have had but very
indifferent luck, not having tucked up above seven this assizes." -- "Why, what
business do you follow?" cried the farmer, "I am the hangman of the next
county," replied the dean. "You the hangman," shrieked the countryman in a
fright. "Yes," said the dean, "and expect to hang nine more next Saturday at
Tyburn, one of whom is to be drawn and quartered." The fellow waited for no
further reply, but flew out of the bed with the violence of a man in fits,
burst open the door, tumbled down stairs in the dark, and awaked the landlord
with the noise, who demanded what was the matter. -- "Matter,' cried the
farmer, "by all the devils in hell, I have been put to bed with the hangman,
and never discovered it till this instant; is this the way you use strangers;
for God's sake open the door and let me get into the street." The landlord
thinking him mad, turned him out into the street without breeches or coat, and
the dean was left to enjoy the success of his contrivance.

225. Dr. Johnson being engaged by mr. Osborne, a bookseller, to translate a
work of some consequence, he thought it a respect which he owed his own
talents, as well as the credit of his employer, to be as circumspect in the
performance of it as possible. In consequence of which, the work went on
(agreeably to Osborne's ideas, who measured most things by the facility with
which they were done) rather slowly: accordingly he frequently spoke to dr.
Johnson of this circumstance; and being a man of a coarse mind, sometimes by
his expressions, made him feel the situation of dependence. Dr. Johnson,
however, seemed to take no notice of him, but went on according to that plan he
had prescribed to himself. Osborne, wishing to have the book out to answer some
temporary purpose, and perhaps irritated by what he thought an ignorant delay,
one day went into the room where dr. Johnson was, and abused him in the most
illiberal manner: amongst other things he told him he had been much mistaken in
his man; that he was recommended to him as a good scholar, and a ready hand;
but he doubted both: for that Tom such-a-one of the Old Baily (if he could rely
on his sobriety) would have turned out the work much sooner, and that being the
case, the probability was, that by this here time, the edition would have moved
off.

Dr. Johnson heard him for some time unmoved; but, at last, losing all
patience, he seized up a huge folio, which he was at that time consulting, and
aiming a blow at the bookseller's head, succeeded so forcibly, as to send him
sprawling to the floor: Osborne alarmed the family with his cries; but, dr.
Johnson, clapping his foot on his breast, would not let him stir, till he had
exposed him in that situation; and then left him with this triumphant
expression:

Lie there, thou son of dullness, ignorance, and obscurity!

226. The late duke of York going one morning to visit the king of England,
appeared in very low spirits, which occasioned his majesty to ask what ailed
him, and why he was so gloomy? "I am gloomy (replied the duke) because I owe
money which I cannot pay." "Owe money you cannot pay -- not much I suppose?"
"'It Is more than I have, however, (said the duke) for I have not any." The king
took out his pocket book and put into his brother's hands a bit of paper, which
the other unfolded, and read aloud, as follows: "The governor and company of
the bank of England, pay to the bearer two thousand pounds!" he got up and
marched with a military air, flourishing the paper in his hand, to the door
singing, God save great George our king,
Long live our noble king;
May he be victorious,
Happy and glorious," etc.


227. James Boswell, requested of his father, the lord president, his opinion;
of the immortal dr. Johnson, and whether he did not think him a " perfect
constellation in the literary hemisphere" -- "Yes, my son, said he,
emphatically, "he is -- the ursa major, the great bear."

228. The late mr. M. paid his devoirs to a lady, already prepossessed in
favor of a mr. Psalter; her partiality being evident in favor of the latter,
the former took occasion to ask, in a room full of company, " Pray, miss, how
far have you got in your Psalter?" -- "As far, as blessed is the man."

229. A young Indian missionary, at a catachetical lecture, demanded of a tawny
princess, "How many commands there were?" -- "Nine, sir," "What! have not I
learnt you ten?" -- "Yes, mr. Minister, and last night you learnt me to break
one."

230. A famous punster, giving his opinion respecting the stone chapel, at
Boston, observed it was superior to all the churches upon the globe; they
boasted of their cannons -- this, in addition had port holes -- alluding to the
smallness of the windows.

231. A mr. Wyman who was famed for nothing but his stupidity and indolence, as
he was going from home one day, was desired by his wife, not to be gone so much
-- "She was afraid to be left alone" -- "Po," said he, " Noug^t is never in
danger" -- "I know that," said she, "but Nought's wife is."

232. As a pretty large number of culprits were one day going to take their
last degree at Tyburn, the wife of one of them pressed through the crowd, and
told the sheriff she had come to see her poor husband executed, and begged
"that he might be hanged first in the morning, as she had a great way to go
home."

233. The late earl of Stair was one of the first characters of the age, and
not more celebrated for polite accomplishments than for magnificence,
generosity, and military talents. When a messenger brought the late king's
letter for him to take the command of the army, he had only ten pounds in the
house. He sent expresses for the gentlemen of his own family, showed the king's
letter, and desired them to find money to carry him to London. They asked him
how much he wanted, and when they should bring it? his answer was, "the more
the better, and the sooner the better." They brought him three thousand
guineas. The circumstance came to the late king's ears, who expressed to his
ministers the uneasiness he felt at lord Stair's difficulties in money-matters.
One proposed that the king should make him a present of a sum of money when he
arrived. Another said, lord Stair was so high spirited, that if he was offered
money, he would run back to his own country, and they should lose their
general. A third suggested, that to save his delicacy, the king should give him
six commissions of cornets to dispose of, which, at the time, sold for a
thousand pounds a-piece. The king liked this idea best, and gave the
commissions blank to lord Stair, saying, they were intended to pay for his
journey and equipage. But in going from court to his own house, he gave all the
six away.

234. When lord Stair was ambassador at Paris, during the regency, he gave
orders to his coachman to give way to nobody except the king; meaning that an
English ambassador should take the pass, even of the regent, but without naming
him. The host was seen coming down a street through which the coach passed.
Col. Young, who was master of the horse, rode to the window of the coach, and
asked lord Stair, if he would be pleased to give way to God Almighty? He
answered, "by all means, but to none else;" and then stepping out of the coach,
paid respect to the religion of the country in which he was, and kneeled in a
very dirty street.

235. Louis XIV. was told, that lord Stair was one of the best bred men in
Europe. "I shall soon put him to the tell," said the king; and asking lord
Stair to take an airing with him, as soon as the door of the coach was opened,
he bade him pass and go in: the other bowed and obeyed. The king said, "the
world is in the right in the character it gives: another person would have
troubled me with ceremony."

236. During the rebellion in the year 1745, the clan of Glenco were quartered
near the house of lord S^^ir. The pretender being afraid they would remember,
that the warrant for the massacre of their clan had been signed by the earl's
father, sent a guard to protect the house. The clan quitted the rebel army, and
were returning home: the pretender sent to know their reason. Their answer was,
that they had been affronted; and when asked what the affront was, they said,
"the greatest of any; for they had been suspected of being capable of visiting
the injuries of the father upon the innocent and brave son."

237. An old offender, who had frequently escaped the punishment due to his
crimes, was condemned to death at Norfolk, in England. Being asked why he had
engaged and persisted in a course of life so dangerous? For the same reason,
said he, that people run the hazards of commerce -- I have had many chances of
making considerable profits; many in which I never was discovered; several in
which, though discovered, I was (...) taken -- when I was taken, I had many
chances of (...) convicted; and even convicted and sentenced (...) I now am,
there is still a chance that I may not be hanged.

238. One very cold day in winter, the count de -- visited his friend the
chevalier de -- who, to a ridiculous passion for being thought a great poet,
added the tedious folly of reading his verses to every one who had the
misfortune to fall in his way. The chevalier immediately took the count into a
chamber, apart from the company, in order to read a very long poem he had newly
composed; having got through the performance, he asked the count his opinion of
it. My dear friend, said the count, shivering with cold, (for there was no fire
in the chamber,) if there had been more fire in your verses, or more of your
verses in the fire, I should not suffer as I now do.

239. The following is an account of the courageous behavior of one Gillet, a
French quartermaster, who going home to his friends, had the good fortune to
save the life of a young woman, attacked by two ruffians. He fell upon them,
sabre in hand, unlocked the jaw of the first villain, who held a dagger to her
breast, and at one stroke pared the nails of the other, (who was armed with a
pistol) just above the wrist. Money was offered by the grateful parents; he
refused it; they offered him their daughter, a young girl of 16, in marriage;
the veteran, then in his 73d year, declined, saying, "Do you think that I have
rescued her from instant death, to put her to a lingering one, by coupling so
lively a body with one worn out with age?"

240. A French officer at a general review before the king, dans la plain des
Sablon^ in Paris, while he was running on horseback through the ranks, happened
to let his hat fall on the ground; a soldier picking it up with a drawn sword,
made a hole into it, which put the officer in such a violent passion, that he
declared he would sooner have the sword through his guts than his hat. His
majesty hearing this st^ange declaration, asked him the reason: "Why," said he,
"there is a surgeon of my acquaintance, who, I am sure, would give me credit;
but I know of no hatter that will."

241. The abbe Gaglioni sent to Benedict XIV. at the desire of that pontiff, a
box filled with the natural curiosities of Mount Vesuvius. The box was
accompanied with a letter which contained nothing more than these words of the
Evangelist. "Command that stones shall become bread" The pope explained his
meaning by sending him a brief for a pension, to which he subjoined these words
in his own handwriting. -- "You have faith, I perceive, in the infallibility
of the sovereign pontiff, of which I now send you a fresh proof. It belongs to
me to expound the holy writ, in doing which I ought always to attend to the
spirit of the scripture, and I never explained it with more pleasure than on
this occasion."

242. Mr. Helvetius had a secretary named Baudot, who had known him from his
infancy: and presumed from this circumstance to treat him with as much rude
familiarity as a four preceptor would treat his pupil. One of the chief
pleasures of this captious and ill-tempered man, was to censure the conduct,
the genius, the character and the works of this mild and indulgent philosopher.
His strictures were always concluded with severe and personal satire. Having
once attended with great patience to the railings of Baudot, he went to his
lady, one of the most virtuous and amiable women in the world, and said, "Madam
Helvetius, can it be possible that I have all the faults Baudot finds in me:"
-- "Surely not," said madam Helvetius, "Nevertheless, I have some," replied he,
"and who will tell me of them, if I should turn away Baudot."

243. Dr. William Lions, who was preferred to the bishopric of Cork, C^oyne,
and Ross, toward the latter end of queen Elizabeth's reign, was originally a
captain of a ship, who had distinguished himself so gallantly in several
actions with the Spaniards, that on being introduced to the queen, she told him
he should have the first vacancy that offered.

The honest captain, who understood the queen literally, soon after hearing of
a vacancy in the sea of Cork, immediately set out for court, and claimed the
royal promise. -- The queen, astonished at the request, for a time remonstrated
against the impropriety of it, and what she could never think of as an office
suitable to for him. It was, however, in vain; he said, the royal word was
passed; and he relied on it. Her majesty then said, she would take a few days
to consider of it, when, examining into his character, and finding him a sober,
moral man, as well as an intrepid commander, she sent for Lions, and gave him
the bishopric, saying at the same time, "she hoped he would take as good care
of the church as he had done of the state.

Lions immediately set out for his bishopric, which he enjoyed for above twenty
years with great reputation to himself, but never attempted to preach but once,
and that was on the death of his royal mistress, and accordingly he mounted the
pulpit in Christ Church, in the city of Cork, when after giving a good
discourse on the uncertainty of life, and the great and amiable qualities of
the queen, he concluded in the following warm but whimsical manner:

"Let those who feel this loss, deplore with me on this melancholy occasion;
but if there be any that hear me who have secretly wished for this event (as
perhaps there may) they have now got their wish, and the (...) do them good
with it."

244. Two up^^arts, who, in the time of the rump parliament, were made
commissioners for examining the malignant church of England ministers, had one
brought before them of a very black visage, who having been surprised and
hurried before th^se scandalous magistrates in all that forlornness, of dress
and figure which he assumed, the better to lie concealed, the first question
that one of the rumpers asked him was, Friend, are you not a tinker? Yes, I am,
replied the poor devoted parson; and hearing you have a brazen face, if you
please to admit of my assistance, I will endeavor to mend it for you. One of
these judges, who was a wretch as crooked in mind as in body, incensed at this
repartee, and ready to burst with fury and froth, How dare you, says he, answer
thus rudely to a magistrate? You have a mind to show your impertinence, but you
shall be well rewarded mith a habitation in the lofty pile of Newgate. -- I
thank God, replied the parson, smartly, I can walk upright there, which is more
than you can do when you come thither. The other who seemed a good-natured sort
of a rascal, laughed loud, on hearing his partner thus roasted and fretted:
Come, brother, said he, never let us make a man sorrow who has made us merry;
this man has too much wit to have any criminal stock of malice; so cooled the
rage of his brother AEsop, and, instead of sending the man of God to Newgate,
detained him to dinner, and afterward enjoyed the pleasure and improvement of
his company and conversation.

245. A country innkeeper engaged a painter, to paint the sign of the bear.
The painter asked him whether he would have him, with, or without a chain?
"Without a chain," quoth he, "as the cheapest." The agreement being made, the
painter drew the bear in watercolors, so that after a few rainy days, the
bear disappeared. Hereupon the innkeeper taxing the painter with foul play, "If
you had given me more money," replied he, "I would have put a chain on him: and
then, my life for it, he never could have run away."

24. Soon after lord Chesterfield came into the privy council, a place of great
trust happened to become vacant, to which the king and the duke of Dorset
recommended two very different persons. His majesty espoused the interest of
his friend with some heat, and told them, He would be obeyed; but not being
able to succeed, he left the council chamger in great displeasure. As soon as
he retired, the matter was debated warmly, but at length, it was carried
against the king, because if they once gave him his way, he would expect it
again, and so it would rise at length to a precedent. However, in the humor
his majesty was then in, a question arose, who would carry the grant of the
office for his majesty to sign? and the lo^ fell upon lord Chesterfield. His
lordship expected to find his majesty in a very unfavourable mood; and
accordingly it happened so; wherefore he prudently forebore to incense him by
an abrupt request; and instead of bluntly asking him to sign the instrument,
very submissively asked whose name his majesty would be pleased to have
inserted, to fill up the blanks? -- The king answered in a passion, The
devil's, if you will. Very well, replied his lordship; but would your majesty
have the instrument run in the usual style, Our trusty and well beloved cousin
and counselor? The king laughed, and with all the goodnature in the world set
his name to the paper, though to promote a person not very acceptable to
himself.

247. A gentleman and his man riding into the country, they met a fellow
astride upon a cow. The man calls out to his master, O, sir, says he, yonder is
a strange sight! a fellow is on horseback on a cow. That Is a bull, said the
gentleman. Nay, sir, said the man, it is not a bull, I know it is a cow by its
teats.

248. A Virginian farmer, happening to be at Norfolk, soon after the arrival of
a vessel from Ireland, and observing that some Irish potatoes, which she had
brought over, were sold at a good price, resolved to take advantage of this
circumstance. Accordingly on his return home, he collected all the eggs, that
could be found within ten miles of his plantation; and bringing them to Norfolk
on the next market day, strongly recommended them to his customers, as fine
fresh eggs, just imported from Ireland.

249. The great general Ponsonby, some days before he went to Fontenoy, was
walking through a coffee-house in London, pairing his nails. An ill-bred
country 'squire being present, said, "that is a clever fellow; but he smells of
the potatoes." An Irish waiter, who attended, came up to the general, and told
him what the other had said. Upon which general Ponsonby came up to him, and
asked him if he had said that he smelled of potatoes? The 'squire with some
hesitation, at length owned that he said so; upon which the general took him by
the nose, and cut off a piece of it, with the penknife he had in his hand,
saying you scoundrel, you shall never smell potatoes or any thing else again.

250. A young negro wench of colonel Mason's in Maryland, began to breed very
early, and had at the first a black child. In less than twelve months after,
she was delivered of twins, a mulatto girl and a negro boy. Though born at one
time, they were believed in the family to be the children of different fathers,
as, besides her negro husband, it was well known, that her overseer, a white
man, called Thomas Phim, kept company with her, to the no small uneasiness of
her black husband. But the appearance of the children was a proof stronger than
any witnesses; for Austin, the boy, was as black a negro as could be seen, and
had short, curled, woolly hair, and in every other respect was like other
negroes; but Sarah was remarkably white, with blue eyes, and long, black hair,
that reached to her waist. The mother being asked the reason of this
difference, in the color of her children, replied, she had looked at pealed
reeds in the water, and that, she believed, had made her children black and
white.

251. Henry Carey, first cousin to queen Elizabeth, used frequently to attend
her majesty in her palace, and was thought very acceptable to her, till a
trifling accident happened, by which he forfeited her favor. He was one day
walking in a thoughtful mood, in the garden before her window; when her
majesty, thinking to divert his melancholy, said to him in Italian, what does a
man think of when he thinks of nothing at all? On a woman's promise, replied
he. -- " Cousin," said the queen, " I must not confute you," and so retired.
Soliciting afterward the honor of a peerage, and being denied, he laid the
disappointment so much to heart, that he languished for a long time on a sick
bed, and at length died of a broken heart.

252. A gentleman met another in the street, who was ill of a consumption, and
accosted him thus -- "Ah! my friend, you walk exceedingly slow" -- "Yes
(replied the sick man) but I am going very fast."

253. A wag putting a number of horns into a basket, went about crying, " new
fruit in the winter season." A gentleman hearing him, (whose wife by the way,
is not accounted a Dian) asked to see some of his fruit. On its being shown
him, he exclaimed, " You rascal! who, do you think, wants to buy horns?" "O
sir, replied the wit, "though you are provided, I may meet with some who are
not."

254. When doctor Samuel Johnson made the tour of Scotland, in 1773, he was
admitted, speciali gratia, into the fraternity of sages, known at Edinburgh by
the title of the Physico-Theological Society. The conversation, as usual,
turned upon a very abstruse point of metaphysics, viz. Whether a man would
accept of existence by choice, or whether the Deity, to carry on the present
system of things, must not compel him to existence by necessity? After many
hours speech in the most subtle and acute refinements of logic, the whole
company turned their eyes on the doctor, and requested to hear his sentiments.
His answer was couched in his usual cynical strain. "For my part, I think the
solution of the question ultimately depends on the single circumstance, of
considering under what denomination of country the supposed subject for
existence was to be discriminated. If he was to be an Englishman, he would
exist by choice; if a Scotchman, by necessity.

255. Doctor Johnson, and mr. Boswell, dining one day at lady Macleod's, the
former was helped to some green peace, which were esteemed a rarity for the
season; having eaten what was first laid on his plate, lady Macleod offered to
help him a second time. "Pshaw, madam, (says the doctor) surely they are only
food for hogs" -- "It is for that very reason, sir, that I help you," replied
her ladyship.

256. Dr. Johnson coming up Fleet Street, at about two o'clock in the morning,
was alarmed by a person seemingly in great distress. He followed the voice for
some time, when, by the glimmer of an expiring lamp, he perceived an unhappy
female, almost naked, and perishing on a truss of straw, who had just strength
enough to tell him, "she was turned out by an inhuman landlord in that
condition, and to beg his charitable assistance not to let her die in the
street." The doctor, melted at this story, desired her to place her confidence
in God, for that under him he would be her protector. He accordingly looked out
for a coach to put her into; but there was none to be had: his charity however,
was too strong to be cooled by such an accident. He kneeled down by her side,
raised her in his arms, wrapped his great coat about her, placed her on his
back, and in this condition carried her home to his house.

Next day her disorder appearing to be venereal, he was advised to abandon her;
but he replied, "that may be as much her misfortune as her fault; I am
determined to give her the chance of a reformation;" he accordingly kept her in
his house above thirteen weeks, where she was regularly attended by a
physician, who recovered her.

The doctor, during this time learned more of her story, and finding her to be
one of those unhappy women, who are impelled to this miserable life more from
necessity than inclination, he set on foot a subscription, and established her
in a milliner's shop in the country, where she was living some years ago in
very considerable repute.

257. A lady, not remarkable for the purity of her conduct in the matrimonial
line, was extremely diverted one day by the manner in which a girl accosted her
-- "I have something, madam, (said she) that will take a deep stain out of any
thing, and make such change, you would hardly believe your own eyes."

"Indeed, (says the lady with a sarcastical smile) if that is the case child,
you will soon get a fortune in more than one place, I assure you. If you can
get stains out of characters as well as out of clothes, you will rise higher in
fame than a balloon. Here and there, it is true, we may meet with a stained
coat, or gown, but stained characters swarm in all parts."

"With your leave, then, madam, (said the girl, making a low courtsey) I will
begin with yours."

258. It is recorded of Julius Caesar, that long before the conspiracy against
him, of which Cassius and Brutus were the ringleaders, he had warning given him
of his death, by many evident presages, but particularly by a certain
astrologer, who by the planetary configurations had foreseen some imminent
danger to threaten him on the day of the Ides of March, ( i. e. the 15th of
that month.) Caesar was himself an astronomer, as appears by his correcting the
calendar, which till his time was very erroneous; but he seems to have
entertained the utmost contempt of the art of divination; for on that day,
Caesar meeting the astrologer as he was going to the senate house, merrily
rallied him on his ides of March. They are come, it is true, said the venerable
old father, but they are not yet past. -- In a few hours after, he was stabbed
with twenty three wounds, and giving only one groan, expired.

259. The reverend Basil Kennet was once chaplain in a ship of war, and as his
place was to mess with his brother officers, he found they were so addicted to
the impious and nonsensical vice of swearing, that he thought it not becoming
his character to continue any longer among them, unless he could prevail upon
them to leave it off; but conceiving at the same time that any grave
remonstrance would have but little effect, he bethought himself of a stratagem
which might answer his purpose. One of the company having entertained the rest
with a story agreeable enough in itself, but so interrupted and perplexed with
damme! blood and wounds! and such like shocking expletives as made it extremely
ridiculous; -- Mr. Kennet then began a story himself, which he made very
entertaining and instructive, but interlarded it with the words, bottle, pot
and glass, at every sentence. The gentleman who was the most given to the silly
vice, fell a laughing at mr. Kennet with an air of great contempt. Why, said
he, G -- d d -- me doctor, us to your story it is well enough; but what the d
-- l have we to do with your d -- d bottle pot, and glass? Mr. Kennet very
calmly replied, sir, I find you can observe what is ridiculous in me, which you
cannot discover in yourself; and therefore you ought not to be offended at my
expletives in discourse, any more than your own. -- Oh! oh! d -- me parson, I
smoke you, you shall not hear me swear another oath, whilst I am in your
company -- nor did he.

260. Mr. Savage, the poet, was once desired by sir Richard Steel, with an air
of the utmost importance, to come very early to his house the next morning; mr.
Savage came as he had promised, found the chariot at the door, and sir Richard
waiting ready to go into it. What was intended, and whither they were to go,
Savage could not conjecture, and was not willing to enquire, but immediately
seated himself with sir Richard; the coachman was ordered to drive, and they
hurried with the utmost expedition to Hyde-Park-Corner, where they stopped at a
petty tavern, and retired to a private room. Sir Richard then informed him,
that he intended to publish a pamphlet, and that he had desired him to come
hither, that he might write for him. They soon sat down to the work: sir
Richard dictated, and Savage wrote, till the dinner that had been ordered was
put upon the table. Savage was surprised at the meanness of the entertainment;
and, after some hesitation, ventured to ask for some wine, which sir Richard,
not without reluctance, ordered to be brought. They then finished their dinner,
and proceeded in their pamphlet, which they concluded in the afternoon. Mr.
Savage then imagined his task over, and expected that sir Richard would call
for the reckoning, and return home: but his expectations deceived him; for sir
Richard told him that he was without money, and that the pamphlet must be sold,
before the dinner could be paid for; and Savage was therefore obliged to go and
offer their new production for sale for two guineas, which with some difficulty
he obtained. Sir Richard then returned home, having retired that day, only to
avoid his creditors, and composed the pamphlet, only to discharge his reckoning.

261. During the protectorship of Oliver Cromwell, a design was formed for
re-establishing the Jews, with full liberty to carry on trade, and exercise
their religion; but though this affair met with violent opposition from the
heads of the different sectaries, yet Oliver so far carried his point, as to
encourage a small body of them to settle in their old quarter, under the
direction of Mannasseh Ben-Israel, a great rabbi, who soon built a synagogue
and publicly performed divine worship. The intelligence which the protector
received, from time to time, by means of the extensive correspondence and close
amity every where maintained throughout the universe among the scattered
remains of the Jewish nation, contributed not a little to the success of his
enterprises abroad, and particularly to that of his naval expeditions; an
instance of which is somewhere upon record, and thus related: As the earl of
Orrery was once walking with Cromwell in one of the galleries at Whitehall, a
man almost in rags appeared in view; upon which Cromwell immediately left the
earl, and took that person with him into his closet, who told him of a great
sum of money that the Spaniards were sending over in a Dutch man of war, to pay
their army in Flanders; and also the very part of the ship where the money was
deposited. The protector then immediately sent an express to Smith (afterward
sir Jeremy Smith) who lay in the Downs, informing him that, within a day or
two, such a Dutch ship would pass the channel, which he must search for the
Spanish money. Accordingly, when the ship passed by Dover, Smith sent, and
demanded leave to search her. The Dutch captain replied, That none but his
masters should search him. Upon which Smith sent him word again, that he had
set up an hour glass, and if he did not submit to the search before it was run
out, he would sink him. The Dutchman seeing it was in vain to contend with
superior force, submitted in time; and so all the money was found. The next
time Cromwell saw lord Orrery, he told him, he had his intelligence from that
seemingly forlorn Jew, he saw him go to some days before.

262. Sir Richard Steel having one day invited to his house a great number of
persons of the first quality, they were surprised at the number of liveries
which surrounded the table; and after dinner when wine and mirth had set them
free from the observation of rigid ceremony, one of them enquired of sir
Richard, how such an expensive train of domestics could be consistent with his
fortune? Sir Richard very frankly confessed that they were fellows, of whom he
would very willingly be rid; and being then asked, why he did not discharge
them? he declared that they were bailiffs, who had introduced themselves with
an execution; and whom, since he could not send them away, he had thought it
convenient to embellish with liveries, that they might do him credit while they
staid. His friends were diverted with the expedient, and by paying the debt,
discharged their attendance; having obliged sir Richard to promise that they
should never again find him graced with a retinue of the same kind.

263. When the Essay on Man was first published, it came out in parts, and
without a name. A little after the appearance of the first, mr. Morris, who
attempted some things in the poetical way, particularly a piece for music,
which was performed in private before some of the royal family, accidentally
paid a visit to mr. Pope, who, after the first civilities were over, enquired
of him what news there was in the learned world; and what new pieces were
brought to light? Morris replied, that there was little or nothing; or at least
little or nothing worth notice: that there was indeed a thing come out called
an Essay on Man, the first epistle, threatening more, for he had read it, and
it was a most abominable piece of stuff, shocking poetry, unsufferable
philosophy, no coherence, no connection at all. If I had thought (continued he)
that you had not seen it, I would have brought it with me. Upon this mr. Pope
frankly told him, that he had seen it before it went to press, for it was his
own writing, a work of years, and the poetry such as he thought proper for the
expression of the subject; on which side he did not imagine it would ever have
been attacked, especially by any man pretending to knowledge in the harmony of
numbers This was like a clap of thunder to the mistaken bard: he reached his
hat, and with a blush and a bow, took his leave of mr. Pope, and never more
ventured to show his unlucky face there again.

264. When the army of Lewis XIV. of France was encamped in Flanders during his
war with the confederates, the king used sometimes to reside at the
headquarters himself. It happened, that a very fine horse, which he had lately
purchased, was exercised before his tent, and among others who had gathered
round to see him, was a corporal, who having been that afternoon too free with
aqua vitae, was become as great a man as his majesty. He had strolled up to the
spot, and getting within the circle, put himself into an attitude of
consequence, and after having some time made his observations with the air of a
profound connoisseur, he thrusts a quid of tobacco into his mouth, and swore it
was as fine a creature as ever he saw, and as well broke; then tottering up to
the groom who had been riding it, and was just dismounted, asked him who was
the owner: at this moment the king came out from his tent, and overhearing the
corporal's question, with whom he had already been diverted, told him
courteously, that the horse was his: the corporal made his majesty a slight
compliment by moving his hat, and then setting his arms akimbo, told him, that
his reason for asking was, that he had taken a liking to the horse and was
inclined to buy him. The king said, he had no intention to sell him, but if it
would oblige him he would treat with him on the same spot the next morning. The
corporal, thrusting out his hand, cried, a match; to which the king consented,
and rode off, giving private orders that no punishment should be inflicted upon
the corporal, but that he should be brought before him the next morning. In the
morning, when the poor fellow was told what had passed, and conducted to the
king's tent, he was seized by a dreadful panic, lest his insolence and
drunkenness might cost him his life. Into the presence, however, he was
carried; and the king, who intended only some sport, asked him, if he was the
man that would last night have bought his horse? No, an't please your majesty,
says the fellow, that man went away at three o'clock this morning. Did he so?
said the king (who understood that at three o'clock, sleep had substituted a
sober man for one that was drunk) I am very glad that I have got so sensible
and decent a person as you are in his stead, and I hope he will never come
back; for if I see him, I shall certainly resent his behavior. So the corporal
was dismissed without further reprehension.

265. It is recorded, to the honor of the famous duke of Orleans, who was
regent of France during the minority of the late king, that when a man was
hired to murder him, and he by his spies procured intelligence of it, instead
of endeavoring to defeat the design, he gave orders that the man should be
admitted to him. Accordingly he was suffered to pass into the duke's bed
chamber one morning early, on pretense of business from the queen. As soon as
the duke cast his eyes on him, he spoke thus: I know thy business, friend, thou
art sent to take away my life. What hurt have I done thee? It is now in my
power, with a word, to have thee cut to pieces before my face. But I pardon
thee, go thy way and see my face no more. The gentleman, stung with his own
guilt, and astonished at the excellent nature of this prince, fell on his
knees, confessed his design, and who employed him; but fearing to tarry in
France, he immediately departed the kingdom, and entered himself into the
service of the king of Spain.

266. Killigrew, was a man of very great humor and frequently diverted king
Charles II. by his lively spirit of mirth and drollery. He was frequently at
court, and had often access to king Charles, when admission was denied to the
first peers in the realm. Amongst many other merry stories, the following is
related of Killigrew. Charles II. who hated business as much as he loved
pleasure, would often disappoint the council by withdrawing his royal presence
when they were met, by which their business was necessarily delayed, and many
of the council much offended at the disrespect shown to them. It happened one
day when the council were met, and had sat some time in expectation of his
majesty, that the duke of Lauderdale, who was a furious ungovernable man,
quitted the room in a passion, and accidentally met with Killigrew, to whom he
expressed himself irreverently of the king: Killigrew bid his grace be calm,
for he would lay a wager of a hundred pounds, that he would make his majesty
come to council in less than half an hour. Lauderdale being a little heated,
and under the influence of surprise, took him at his word; Killigrew went to
the king, and without ceremony told him what had happened; and added, I know
your majesty hates Lauderdale, though the necessity of your affairs, obliges
you to behave civilly to him; now if you would get rid of a man you hate, come
to the council, for Lauderdale is a man so boundlessly avaricious, that rather
than pay the hundred pounds lost in this wager, he will hang himself, and never
plague you any more. The king was pleased with the archness of this
observation, and answered, then Killigrew, I Will positively go; which he did.

267. The bishop of Soissons in France, who valued himself on the politeness of
his address, and was remarkable for never having uttered a rude expression, was
once, by an indiscretion, guilty of a piece of rudeness, sufficient to make his
good breeding be called in question: and which shows the precaution that is
necessary to be used in speaking to strangers. This prelate was at court, where
observing a lady, who was extremely corpulent, talking to the queen, and at the
other end of the room a very genteel youth of a very promising appearance, both
of whom were utter strangers to him, he addressed himself to the young
gentleman, and with a soft insinuating air, after some compliments, asked him
if he knew who that Fat Sow was, who was in discourse with her majesty? Yes, my
lord, replied the youth, with great modesty; that Sow is the ambassadress of
Sweden, and mother to the little pig who has the honor to speak to your
lordship. At this answer the bishop was struck with confusion, and humbly
begged pardon, adding, that he could not help feeling the greatest esteem for a
person, who had with such mildness rebuked him for his brutality.

268. Sir Charles Wager, was seized with a fever while he was out upon a
cruize; and the surgeon without much difficulty prevailed upon him to lose a
little blood, and suffer a blister to be laid on his back; by-and-by it was
thought necessary to lay on another blister and repeat the bleeding, to which
sir Charles also consented; the symptoms then abated, and the surgeon told him,
that he must now swallow a few bolusses and take a draught: No doctor, says sir
Charles, you shall batter my bulk as long as you will, but, d -- n me! you
shall not board me.

269. The emperor Charles V. having one day lost his way a hunting in a forest,
and being pretty far distant from his company, found himself, after wandering
about some time, near an inn, which he entered to refresh himself Being seated,
he saw four men, whose appearance boded him no good; however, he took no
notice, but called for what he wanted. These men at first were lying down and
pretended to sleep. But one soon rose up, and approaching the emperor, told
him, that he had dreamt he ought to take away his hat, and in saying so
snatched it from him. A second then came to him, saying he had dreamt that his
sourtout would fit him very well, and took that from him. A third cast his eye
upon his buff jacket, and stripped him of it. The fourth dreamt likewise in his
turn, and tells the prince not to take it amiss, if he gave himself the trouble
to search him, and seeing a gold chain about his neck, to which hung a
flagelet, he went to take it from him: slay, my friend, said the emperor to
him, before you rob me of this dear little toy, suffer me to show you the
properties of it, and at the same time he began to whistle. His attendants who
h^^ sought for him throughout the forest, happily arrived near the inn, and on
hearing the sound, went in, and were much surprised to see him in that
condition. "Because," said the emperor, on seeing them, "this set of people --
have dreamt just what they pleased, I too am disposed to dream in my turn; and
having dosed a little, he said to his attendants, I have dreamt that those
gentlemen, the dreamers, all four deserve the gallows; and it is my will that
it be fulfilled immediately." They accordingly hanged them all four directly
opposite the inn.

270. The late prince of Wales having a mind to divert himself incog, went to
see a bull-baiting near Hockley in the hole. The bull (being good game) gave a
great deal of sport, and foiled every dog that attacked him. -- At last, old
Towzer, whose owner (a butcher) stood close to the prince, fairly pinned the
bull -- at which the butcher in the joy of his heart, gave his royal highness a
swinging clap on the back, saying at the same time, G -- d d -- n your blood,
mr. Prince, if that is not my dog.

END OF THE FIRST PART.

