THE Merry Fellow's Companion; BEING THE SECOND PART OF THE AMERICAN JEST BOOK.

CONTAINING A CHOICE SELECTION OF ANECDOTES, BON MOTS, JESTS, REPARTEES,
STORIES, etc. etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR M. CAREY, AND W. SPOTSWOOD.

M.DCC.LXXXIX.

THE MERRY FELLOW'S COMPANION.

PART II.

THE MERRY FELLOW's COMPANION.
THE brave, but eccentric general Lee had so little regard to the rules of
politeness and civility, that he always spoke his opinions unreservedly,
without regarding the offense or pain they might excite. Being one night at
Albany, drinking with an old Scotch officer, when he began to mellow with the
wine, he told his companion that he had one fault, which he begged him to
overlook, which was to abuse the Scotch when he was in liquor. In troth,
replied the officer, I shall readily forgive your fault, if you will overlook
mine; it is, when I hear any person impertinently abusing Scotland or
Scotchmen, when I am drunk or sober, I cannot refrain from laying my cane
soundly over his shoulders. Now I will readily pardon your fault, if you will
pardon mine. This seasonable hint made the general very polite the remainder of
the night.

2. During the late war, there lived in New Jersey, a remarkable dwarf. Though
upwards of twenty years old. he was not more than three feet high, and every
way small in proportion. This curiosity drew great crowds of people to see him,
and amongst the rest, general Washington. The ^ero conversed some time with
Tommy Thumb; asked several questions; and generally received pertinent answers.
The general wished to know his political sentiments, and asked whether he was
whig or tory? I cannot say, sir, said this man of might: I have not yet taken
an active part.

3. Soon after the Massachusetts insurgents retreated from their attack on
general Shepard, at Ordnance-hill, and when it was hourly expected they would
renew it, Shays sent a flag to general Shepard, requesting to have delivered to
him the bodies of the killed, amounting to five. The officer, who had been sent
by general Shepard, to receive the flag, on the request being made for five
slain, with the utmost sang froid imaginable replied, Present general Shepard's
compliments to captain Shays: and inform him, that he cannot furnish him with
five dead, he having no more than four: but that if captain Shays will please
to attack him again, he will then furnish him with another, and as many more as
he shall desire.

4. Dr. Franklin, as agent for the province of Pennsylvania, being in England
at the time the parliament passed the stamp act for America, was frequently
applied to by the ministry for his opinion respecting the operation of the
same, and assured them that the people of America would never submit to it. The
act was nevertheless passed, and the event showed he had been right. After the
news of the destruction of the stamped paper had arrived in England, the
ministry again sent for the doctor, to consult with him, and concluded with
this proposition, that if the Americans would engage to pay for the damage done
in the destruction of the stamped paper, etc. the parliament would then repeal
the act. To this the doctor answered, that it put him in mind of a Frenchman,
who having heated a poker red hot, ran into the street, and addressing an
Englishman he met there, "hah, monsieur, voulez vous give me de plaisir et de
satisfaction, and let me runi dis poker only one foot up your backside?"
"What!" says the Englishman: -- "Only to let me runi dis poker one foot up
your back side." "Damn your soul," replies the Englishman. "Well, den, only so
far," says the Frenchman, pointing to about six inches of the poker. -- "No,
no," replies the Englishman -- "damn your soul; what do you mean?" "Well, den,"
says the Frenchman, will you have de justice to pay me for de trouble and
expense of heating de poker?" -- "damn me, if I do," answered the Englishman,
and walked off.

5. A member of the general court of Massachusetts, who, from accustoming
himself to take a nap after dinner, when at home, could not dispense with the
custom, when attending to give laws to a mighty people, not long since
occasioned much sport in the house, by the following incident. A day was
assigned for the second reading of a lumber-act: as this interested our
sleeper, he requested a friend, who sat next him, to awaken him, if the
discussion of the bill should be introduced, while he was asleep This his
friend promised him: but, happening to go out for a few minutes, the bill was
called for; and, after a short debate, was committed. Immediately after, the
bill for preventing fornication, was brought on. This occasioned some debate,
during which the sleeper's friend returned. Finding the lumber-bill was
dismissed, he thought he might indulge his friend in his nap. However, as
ill-luck would have it, he trod upon the toe of this votary to Morpheus, who
supposed it a signal for his waking: immediately rousing himself, he rubbed his
eyes, and looking about, perceived a pause in the debate -- on which he arose
and addressed the speaker as follows: Sir, I wish to speak a few words on the
bill now in question. It affects, mr. Speaker, my constituents very much: for
above half our town get their living by it.

6. Some time ago, at a yearly commencement in one of the eastern states, the
auditors were entertained part of the forenoon with a Hebrew oration. Being
quite weary of the discourse, a person whispered his companion, who was a
New England sea captain, that he wished the young man, instead of facing the
audience, would address himself to those that understood the Hebrew. -- "Do you
so?" said the tar: then, by nowns, brother Jonathan, there would not be a
single point of the compass that would suit him.

7. At the commencement of the late revolution, when the French nation appeared
inclined to take part in the contest in favor of America, sir Joseph York,
the ambassador from England to the United Netherlands, meeting the French
ambassador at the Hague, censured his court for interfering in the dispute, and
taking so ungenerous a part: "You have been guilty of a dishonorable act (said
he) that is unpardonable -- to less than that of debauching our daughter." "I
am sorry (replied the French Ambassador) that your excellency should put such a
severe construction, upon the matter: She made the first advances, and
absolutely threw herself into our arms; but, rather than forfeit your
friendship, if matrimony will make any atonement, we are ready to act
honorably, and marry her."

8. Not long since a person visited the city of New York, under the style of
nobility. For several months his manner of living accorded with his assumed
character. His lodgings, his attendants and his equipage, corresponded only
with rank and opulence. Fashion received from him its laws, and taste appealed
to him as its genuine standard. Balls, assemblies, and entertainments, welcomed
him as their principal ornament: while senators and ambassadors were pleased to
be enrolled as his companions. -- In this career of glory, he addressed a young
lady, highly respectable for her character and connections: but, at the very
(...) of marriage, by the fresh appearance of the ink, which he had used in
forging certain deels, designed as proof of great family property, and by a
dispute with a person about the price of the parchment or which one of them was
written, he was discovered to be a miserable vagabond, whom infamy would have
blushed to have acknowledged as her offspring.

9. When George Whitfield first came to Charleston in South Carolina, the rev.
Alexander Garden was episcopal minister of that place. Not liking Whitfield's
principles, he took occasion to preach a sermon against him from the following
text, -- "Behold, those that have turned the world upside down, are come hither
also." -- In the afternoon of the same day, Whitfield, in his turn, retorted
upon his antagonist to a very crowded audience, and with all the wit and satire
for which he was so remarkable, from these words of St. Paul, "Alexander the
coppersmith has done me much evil, the Lord reward him according to his
works." -- Soon after, Garden, not to be outdone, took occasion to declaim with
some heat, against the light and trifling tunes used in Whitfield's church, as
being too theatrical and gay for holy worship, and such as had been long
appropriated to profane songs and airs -- "Very true, doctor, said Whitfield
in his next lecture: but pray, sir, can you assign any good reason why the
devil should always be in possession of the best tunes?"

10. Some officers of the army who had served during the American war, walking
in Hyde-Park, dressed in their regimentals, met a man deformed by a haunch on
his back, when one of them jocularly clapping his hand thereon, exclaimed,
"What have you got here, my friend!" To which the other, with a countenance
expressive of the insult, replied, "Bunkers hill -- damn your red coat."

11. At the opening of one of the courts of law in Massachusetts, lately, a
clergyman was sent for to address the Deity -- a gentleman present observed,
that although this was ever the laudable practice, at the supreme judicial
court, these courts had never, in his memory, opened with prayer. A sailor, who
heard the last remark, observed to his mess-mate, "If so, Jack, I believe as
how the ship is really in distress, since they pipe all hands, and now call the
parson to his quarters."

12. One Indian happened to kill another. The brother of the deceased called
upon the murderer, and seeing a woman and children in his hut, asked whose they
were? The murderer declared them to be his family. The other then said, though
his brother's blood called for revenge, yet as the children were young, and not
able to provide for their mother and themselves, he would remain, deaf to these
calls for a while; and so left them. Belonging to the same tribe, they
continued to live sociably together until the eldest son of the murderer killed
a deer in hunting. So soon as the brother of the deceased was informed of this,
he again called on the murderer, and told him, that his brother's blood called
so loud, that it must be obeyed, especially as his son, having killed a deer,
could support the family. The murderer said he was ready to die, and thanked
the other for so long a delay: on which the wife and children broke into tears.
The murderer reproved them for their weakness, and particularly his son --
saying to him, did you shed tears when you killed the deer? and if you saw him
die with dry eyes, why do you weep for me, who am willing to suffer what the
custom of our nation renders necessary? With an undaunted countenance he then
called on the brother of the deceased, to strike; and died without a groan!

13. General Morgan, with eight hundred men, of whom one half were militia,
completely beat, at the battle of the Cowpens, colonel Tarleton, who attacked
him with one thousand regular troops. -- Two hundred dragoons of that colonel,
were put to flight, and briskly pursued by sixty Americans, under colonel
Washington. Some months afterward, Tarleton, being in the house of a farmer,
spoke with much vanity of himself, and lightly of colonel Washington, saying
"he wished much to see his face." "It is a pity then," replied a girl in the
house, "that colonel Tarleton did not take the pains to turn his head at
Cowpens."

14. About four years before the Shawano Indians were forced to remove from the
late Savannah town, they took a Muskohge warrior known by the name of old
Scrany -- They bastinadoed him in the usual manner, and condemned him to the
fiery torture. He underwent a great deal, without showing any concern: his
countenance and behavior were as if he suffered not the least pain, and was
formed beyond the common laws of nature. He told them, with a bold voice, that
he was a very noted warrior, and gained most of his martial preferment at the
expense of their nation, and was desirous of showing them in the act of dying,
that he was still as much superior to them as when he headed his gallant
countrymen against them. That although he had fallen into their power, in
forfeiting the protection of the divine being, by some impurity or other, when
carrying the holy ark of war against his devoted enemies; yet he had still so
much remaining virtue, as would enable him to punish himself more exquisitely
than all their despicable ignorant crowd could do, if they gave him liberty by
untying him, and would hand to him one of the red hot gun barrels out of the
fire. The proposal, and his method of address, appeared so exceedingly bold and
uncommon, that his request was granted. Then he suddenly seized one of the red
hot barrels, and brandishing it from side to side, he forced his way through
the armed and surprised multitude, and leaped down a prodigious steep and high
bank into a branch of the river, dived through it, ran over a small island, and
passed another branch, amidst a shower of bullets, from the commanding ground
where fort More, or New Windsor garrison, stood, and though numbers of his
eager enemies were in close pursuit of him, he got to a brambly swamp, and in
his naked, mangled condition, reached his own country. He proved a sharp thorn
in their side aftewards till the day of his death.

15. In the western expedition of 1758, general Forbes, who commanded it, was,
by his infirmities, reduced so low as to be taken up in a litter. -- The
Indians, who saw him, were astonished that a warrior could not walk: -- this so
disgusted them at their commander, that they remonstrated against him. Their
old friend, colonel Weiser, to appease them, made this sagacious reply: "This
man is so terrible in war, that we are obliged to confine him, and let him
write his orders; for if he was let loose on the world, he would deluge it with
blood."

16. A certain Dutch justice of the peace, in New York (when an English
province) having issued a summons, returnable on the Sabbath Day, the constable
into whose hand it was put to be served, being a fellow of some humor, returns
the summons agreeably to date; the justice expecting it to be of some other
nature, perused it, and finding what it was, said in a great passion, vat de
deval you brings dis do day vor? Why, replied the constable, see whether it is
not returnable this day, and should I neglect my duty, you would, no doubt,
report to the grand jury, and in all probability have me severely fined; upon
which the justice with a loud voice proclaimed, I adjourns dis courts till next
wendsday, and calls to his son, saying, Hauns, look off de almanac, and see, as
dat vil be on de Sunbaths day?

17. A negro servant being asked what color he believed the devil was? Why,
replied the African, the white men paint him black, we say he is white; but
from his great age, and being called Old Nick, I should suppose him gray.

18. A negro had so cruel a master, that he dreaded the very sight of him.
After exercising a variety of tyrannical acts among his slaves, the tyrant at
last died, and left his son heir to his estates. Some time after his death a
gentleman meeting the negro, asked him how his master behaved; I suppose, says
he, he is a chip of the old block. No, no, says the negro, Massa be all block
himself.

19. When the British and American armies were near each other in the
neighborhood of German-Town, five Hessian soldiers, who had straggled into the
woods, and lost their way, were met by an Irishman, who was a private in
general Washington's army: he immediately presented his piece, and desired them
to surrender; they supposing that he was supported by a party, did as he
directed, and threw down their arms. He then marched them before him to the
American lines, and brought them to head quarters, general Washington wondered
at the spirit and achievement of the fellow, and asked him, how he, a single
man, could capture five? Why, says the Irishman, please your excellency, by
Jasus I surrounded them! -- The General laughed heartily, gave him a sum of
money, and promoted him to a halbert.

20. Upon the flight of the British from Lexington, a major in their army
received a wound in the cheek with a goose shot. General Robertson told him the
Yankees must have certainly mistaken him for a goose, or they would not have
used him so ill.

21. The stage wagon that ran between Richmond and Hampton in Virginia, was
driven some time since by a surly, rude fellow. A gentleman, who had taken a
place in it, being engaged writing a letter, at the usual time of setting out,
requested a few minutes delay, but in vain. Mr. Whip was inexorable: he
insisted on setting off, adding, by way of reproach, he was sure no gentleman
would ask him to stay a moment. So the gentleman was obliged to leave his
letter unfinished, and the driver set off at full speed. When they had run
about half a mile, the waggoner's hat falling off, he stooped, to pick it up.
The gentleman seized the reins, and drove away, leaving mr. Surlyboots behind,
who humbly requested the new waggoner to stop. This was refused with a sneer,
and a remark, that no gentlemen would ask him to stay a moment. Brother Whip
was then without remedy, and obliged to trudge on foot to Hampton, a
comfortable walk of nearly twelve miles.

22. Some time since, a person on his travels through Coventry, in the state of
Connecticut, stopped at the house of the rev. Joseph Huntington, D. D. and
acquainted the doctor, that he had been preaching at Susquehannah for a
considerable time, but was so unfortunate as to be driven from his possessions
by the Indians, who had destroyed his property. He added that he was on his way
to Massachusetts, where he had some friends, and asked charity of the doctor.
The latter was liberal and hospitable to the stranger, and told him as it was
Saturday, and it would be improper for him to travel on the Sabbath, he might
refresh himself at his house both days. The offer was accepted; and dr.
Huntington invited his guest to assist him next day in the duties of his
function; but he declined, alleging as a reason, that his clothes were not
sufficiently decent to appear in the pulpit. To obviate this difficulty, the
doctor offered him a suit of clothes almost new. The objection being removed,
the pretended clergyman agreed to assist his brother, and, in order to prepare
himself, desired to be left alone that evening, to study his discourse. A fire
was accordingly made in his bedchamber, whither he repaired with his new garb,
at the same time acquainting the doctor that he must study till late at night,
and hoped no noise he might make would disturb the repose of the family. Sunday
morning came, and the preacher being sent for to breakfast, was not to be
found. He had decamped in the night, a la sourdine, and carried off the
clothes, so well suited to his newly-assumed clerical dignity, leaving behind
him the following apposite text, written at the top of the paper, intended for
his discourse, " Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me, and where I am,
thither ye cannot come." John vii. 34.

23. A madman having broke from confinement, was parading through the streets
of Boston, with a loaded musket, which he had seized, and swearing he would
kill the first man that attempted to stop him. Governor Leveret advancing
toward him, accosted him thus, "Ho, brother soldier, have you learned your
exercise?" -- He answered, "Yes," "Then stand to your arms, while I give the
word of command." The man seemed pleased, and stood bolt upright, with his gun
shouldered. The governor then began -- "Poise your firelock -- rest your
firelock -- order your firelock -- ground your firelock." The man obeyed. "Face
to the right about -- march." -- As soon as he began to step, the governor
advanced, took up his gun, and beckoning to the bystanders, they instantly
seized him, -- and carried him to the place of confinement.

24. An extravagant young fellow, being accused by one of his friends, of
mismanaging his estate, who said I am sorry to see you carry yourself so; for I
see, you have all the properties of a prodigal: Nay, says the other, pr'ythee
don't say so, for I never yet fed with swine: true, said he, but the reason
was, because nobody would trust you with their swine.

25. A tailor having pressed a certain gentleman in his neighborhood for the
payment of a very long bill, day after day to no purpose, told him plainly at
last, that he would take a new measure, and work him to Westminister-hall. The
gentleman was a man of too much honor to discharge debts of justice, and
therefore mr. Buckram cut out a suit for him in the court, though he is
determined not to make it up till his debt is discharged.

26. A traveller, relating some of his adventures, told the company, that he
and his servant made fifty wild Arabians run; which startling them, he
observed, that there was no such great matter in it; for, says he, we ran, and
they ran after us.

27. One, who was reading a chapter in the bible, came to these words, 'and he
was clothed with wickedness as with a garment.' He said he thought it was very
oddly expressed, for how could a man be clothed with wickedness? to which
another replied, I suppose he had a bad habit of whoring and drinking.

28. Two persons in company laid a wager which of them could reach the highest;
a third, who was remarkable for tricking and taking in the unwary in the way of
business, got up and proposed a bet of two bottles to one, that he could reach
higher than any of them. One of them replied, with a sneer, Yes, sir, we all
know perfectly well that you can overreach any of us.

29. A methodist was giving a neighbor of his a lecture against swearing;
assuring him that if he disregarded his admonition, and persisted in that
wicked practice, he would certainly go to hell when he died. If I do I Will be
damned, replied the other.

30. A person was lamenting that he was frequently afflicted with a violent
bleeding at the nose; one present said, The best thing you can do will be to
lose a little blood.

31. A man called out of a three pair of stairs window, to a friend of his whom
he saw in the street, and desired him to come up stairs; the other excused
himself, and said he could not possibly spare time. What, said the other,
because I have had misfortunes, and am low in the world, you are above coming
up to see me. When I was in affluence, and lived upon a ground floor, you
condescended to visit me; but now my indigent circumstances oblige me to live
up in a garret, you look down upon me.

32. A young gentleman having spent all his money, made a visit to a certain
bookseller, with a poem, which he had composed, in (...) and The bibliopolist,
knowing the value of money better than the poet did, offered him a small sum,
but a sum not at all inadequate to the intrinsic merit of the piece presented
to him. The poet pocketed the five shillings, but being determined to keep up
the dignity of the gentleman at the same time, said, This is a trifle, sir, but
I write merely for my amusement -- were I to live by writing, I find I should
starve.

33. A citizen's wife, who was apt to tipple a little sometimes, was one summer
evening walking out with her husband to take an airing. They had not gone far,
before the sky appeared very cloudy, and a shower was expected. It rains, my
dear, said the wife. Not yet, my dear, replied the husband; but I fancy it will
not be long first. Indeed my Johnny, the wife replied, it rains now, for I have
just this minute held up my face, and a drop fell in my eye. You may imagine
so, said the husband, but, give me leave to tell you, that you had a drop in
your eye before you came from home.

34. A person who took a bad guinea, went to an assayer to know the real value
of it: After it was assayed, it appeared to be worth thirty shillings;
whereupon the assayer said, it was a very good bad guinea.

53. The epithets and figures, that some people make use of in telling a story,
are truly ridiculous and laughable. A person once related what had happened to
him in the following words: I was crossing a large field, and when I came
pretty near the middle, a bull followed me, and roared like thunder; I flew
like lightning to keep out of his clutches; and being in such a tedious hurry
in geting over the style, I tore my breeches, as if heaven and earth were
coming together.

36. The same person speaking of an acquaintance of his, said, he was a
prodigious little man, could walk a mortal great pace, that he had a brave
appetite, and he believed he would live a deadly long time.

37. A person, speaking of another, said, he was a bloody good natured fellow,
that he was damnation honest, a hellish good husband, and devilish charitable
to the poor.

38. One said he was very fond of women in general; but that an African girl
with whom he got acquainted upon the Gold Coast, pleased him better than all
the rest of the fair sex put together.

39. A person in company said to another, you are a d -- d scoundrel. The other
replied, Gentlemen, you must not regard what that man says, he is only talking
to himself.

40. In admiral Hawke's last engagement with the French, a sailor on board one
of the ships had a leg shot off, whereupon one of his mess-mates took him down
to the surgeon. He took his leg off the deck and put it under his arm; he was
no sooner brought down, but another of his mess-mates shook his head, and told
him he was very sorry he had lost his leg. That is an arrant lie, you
son-of-a-bitch, replied he, for I have got it under my arm.

41. As dean Swift was crossing over a ferry at Dublin, turning himself from
the passengers in the stern of the boat, he addressed a poor man near him.
Well, friend, what profession are you of? I am a tailor, sir, answered the
other, not knowing the dean. Are you married? said Swift. Yes, sir, replied the
tailor. And who wears the breeches? said the dean. My a -- se, answered the
other.

42. A sailor falling out of the main-top of a man of war, by great good luck,
fell plump on his breech unhurt, and looking about him, seemingly unconcerned,
as if nothing had happened, cried, blast my eyes, what a move that was.

43. A poor man going to be transported, was asked in derision, by a very ugly
fellow, where he was going? Going, said poor Pilgarlick, why I am going to
America, among the baboons and monkeys, your relations, have you any message to
send them?

44. There being a great disturbance one night at Drury Lane playhouse, mr.
Quick came upon the stage to say something to pacify the audience, and an
orange was thrown full at him, which when he had taken up, making a low bow,
with the orange in his hand, This is no civil orange, I think, said he.

45. A poor man, who had a termagant wife, after a long dispute, in which she
was resolved to have the last word, told her, if she spoke one crooked word
more, he would beat her brains out. Why then, rams'- horns, you rogue, said she, if
I die for it.

46. A man, who had made a very handsome fortune, from a very mean beginning,
happening to have some words with a person who had known him for some time, was
asked by the other, how he could have the impudence to give himself so many
airs to him, when he knew very well, that he remembered him seven years before,
when he had hardly a rag to his a --. You lie, sirrah, replied he, for seven
years ago I had nothing but rags to my a --.

47. Although the infirmities of nature are not proper subjects to be made a
jest of; yet when people take a great deal of pains to conceal what every body
sees, there is nothing more ridiculous: Of this sort was old Smith the player,
who being very deaf, did not care any body should know it. Honest Joe Miller,
going with a friend one day along Fleet Street, and seeing old Smith on the
other side of the way, told his acquaintance he should see some sport; so
beckoning to Smith with his finger, and stretching open his mouth as wide as
ever he could, as if he halloed to him, though he said nothing, the old fellow
came puffing from the other side of the way. What a pox, said he, do you make
such a noise for? Do you think one cannot hear you?

48. A gentleman remarked one day at a coffee-house, when it rained exceedingly
hard, that it put him in mind of the general deluge. Zoons, sir, said an old
campaigner, who stood by, Who is that? I have heard of all the generals in
Europe but him.

49. A very modest young gentleman, having attempted many ways in vain to
acquire the affections of a lady of great fortune, at last was resolved to try
what could be done by the help of music, and therefore entertained her with a
serenade under her window at midnight; but she ordered her servants to drive
him from thence by throwing stones at him: Oh! my friend, said one of his
companions, your music is as powerful as that of Orpheus, for it draws the very
stones about you.

50. A gentleman having lent a guinea for two or three days to a person whose
premises he had not much faith in, was very much surprised to find, that he
very punctually kept his word with him; the same person some time after was
desirous of borrowing a larger sum, No, said the other, you have deceived me
once, and I am resolved you shall not do it a second time.

51. A very tall man going one day to enquire for a countryman a little way out
of town, when he came to the house, he looked in at a little window over the
door, and asked the woman, who sat by the fire, if her husband was at home? No,
sir, said she, but if you please to alight, and come in, I will go and call him.

52. Dr. Tadloe, who was a man of an enormous size, happening to go thump,
thump, with his great legs through a street in Oxford, where the paviours were
at work, in the middle of July, the fellows immediately laid down their
rammers. Ah! God bless you, master, cries one of them, it is very kind of you
to come this way; it saves us a great deal of trouble, this let weather.

53. A vessel being in great danger at sea, every body was observed to be upon
their knees but one man, who being called upon to come with the rest to
prayers: Not I, said he, it is your business to take care of the ship, I am but
a passenger.

54. A beggar, asking alms under the name of a poor scholar, a gentleman to
whom he applied himself, asked him a question in Latin. The fellow shaking his
head, said, he did not understand him: Why, said the gentleman, did not you say
you were a poor scholar? Yes, replied the other, a poor one indeed, sir, for I
do not understand one word of Latin.

55. A lady's age happening to be questioned, she affirmed she was but forty,
and called upon a gentleman, who was in company, for his opinion: Cousin, said
she, don't you believe I am in the right, when I say I am but forty? I am sure,
madam, replied he, I ought not to dispute it; for I have constantly heard you
say so for above these ten years.

56. The emperor Augustus being shown a young Grecian, who very much resembled
him, asked the young man if his mother had not been at Rome? No, sir, answered
the Grecian, but my father has.

57. Monsieur Vaugelas having obtained a pension from the French king, by the
interest of cardinal Richlieu, the cardinal told him he hoped he would not
forget the word pension in his dictionary. No, my lord, said Vaugelas, nor the
word gratitude.

58. A melting sermon being preached in a country church, all fell a weeping
but one man, who being asked why he did not weep with the rest? Oh! said he, I
belong to another parish.

59. A young fellow riding down a steep hill, and doubting the foot of it was
boggish, called out to a clown that was ditching, and asked him if it was hard
at the bottom. Ay, answered the countryman, it is hard enough at the bottom, I
warrant you: But in half a dozen steps the horse sunk up to the saddle skirts,
which made the young gallant whip, spur, curse, and swear. Why, you whore son
rascal, said he to the ditcher, did you not tell me it was hard at the bottom?
Ay, replied the other, but you are not half way to the bottom yet.

60. A gentleman speaking of his servant, said, I believe I command more than
any man, for before my servant will obey me in any thing. I must command him
ten times.

61. Two very honest gentlemen, who dealt in brooms, meeting one day in the
street, one asked the other, How the devil he could afford to undersell him
every where as he did, when he stole the stuff, and made the brooms himself?
Why, you silly dog, answered the other, I steal them ready made.

62. A lady who had generally pretty many intrigues upon her hands, not liking
her brother's extravagant passion for play, asked him when he designed to leave
off gaming? When you cease loving, said he. Then, replied the lady, you are
like to continue a gamester as long as you live.

63. A soldier was bragging before Julius Caesar, of the wounds he had received
in his face. Caesar, knowing him to be a coward, told him, he had best take
heed the next time he ran away, ho^ he looked back.

64. A profligate young nobleman, being in company with some sober people,
desired leave to toast the devil. The gentleman, who sat next to him, said, he
had no objection to any of his lordship's friends.

65. A Westminster justice, taking coach in the city, and being set down at
Young Man's coffee-house, Charing Cross, the driver demanded eighteen pence for
his fare. The justice asked him, if he would swear that the ground came to the
money? The man said he would take his oath of it. The justice replied, Friend,
I am a magistrate; and pulling the book out of his pocket, administered the
oath, and then gave the fellow sixpence, saying, He must reserve the shilling
to himself for the affidavit.

66. A countryman passing along the Strand, saw a coach overturned, and asking
what the matter was, he was told, that three or four members of parliament were
overturned in a coach. Oh, said he, there let them be, my father always advised
me not to meddle with state affairs.

67. A drunken fellow carrying his wife's bible to pawn for a quartern of gin
to the alehouse, the man of the house refused to take it. What a pox, said the
fellow, will neither my own word, nor the word of God pass with you.

68. A certain justice of the peace, that was not far from Clerkenwell, in the
first year of king George I. when the fellow, whom he hired to officiate as his
clerk, was reading a mittimus to him, coming to Anno Domini, 1714, How now,
said he, with some warmth, and why not Georgio Domini? sure you forget yourself
strangely.

69. The famous sir George Rooke, when he was a captain of marines, was
quartered at a village where he buried pretty many of his men; at length the
parson refused to perform the ceremony of their interment any more, unless he
was paid for it; which being told captain Rooke, he ordered six men of his
company to carry the corpse of the soldier then dead, and lay him upon the
parson's hall table. This so embarrassed the priest, that he sent the captain
word, if he would fetch the man away, he would bury him and all his company for
nothing.

70. A reverend and charitable divine, for the benefit of the country where he
resided, caused a large causeway to be begun: and as he was one day overlooking
the work, a certain nobleman came by: Well, doctor, said he, for all your great
pains and charity, I do not take this to be the highway to heaven. Very true,
my lord, replied the doctor, for if it had, I should have wondered to have met
your lordship here.

71. A Welshman and an Englishman vapouring one day about the fruitfulness of
their countries, the Englishman said, There was a close near the town where he
was born, which was so very fertile, that if a kiboo was thrown in over night,
it would be so covered with grass, that it would be difficult to find it the
next day. Splut, says the Welshman, what is that? there is a close where hur was
born, where you may put your horse in over night, and not be able to find him
next morning.

72. Two brothers coming once to be executed for some enormous crime, the
eldest was turned off first, without speaking one word: the other mounting the
ladder, began to harangue the crowd, whose ears were attentively open to hear
him, expecting some confession from him. Good people, says he, my brother hangs
before my face, and you see what a lamentable spectacle he makes; in a few
moments I shall be turned off too, and then you will see a pair of spectacles.

73. A fellow once standing in a pillory, it occasioned a stop, so that a
carman with a load of cheeses had much ado to pass; and driving just up to the
pillory, he asked, what that was that was wrote over the person's head? they
told him it was a paper to signify his crime, that he stood there for forgery.
Ay, said he, what is forgery? They answered him, that forgery was
counterfeiting another's hand, with intent to cheat people. To which the carman
replied, looking up at the offender, Oh, pox, that comes of your writing and
reading, you silly dog.

74. Apelles, the famous painter, having drawn the picture of Alexander the
Great on horseback, brought it and presented it to the prince; but he not
bestowing that praise on it which so excellent a piece deserved, Apelles
desired a living horse might be brought; who, moved by nature, fell a prancing
and neighing, as though it had been actually a living creature of the same
species; whereupon Apelles told Alexander, That his horse understood painting
better than himself.

75. An honest bluff country farmer, meeting the parson of the parish in a
bye-lane, and not giving him the way so readily as he expected, the parson,
with an erect chest, told him he was better fed than taught. Very true, indeed,
sir, replied the farmer, for you teach me, and I feed myself.

76. One telling another that he had once so excellent a gun that it went off
immediately upon a thief's coming into the house, although it was not charged.
How the devil can that be? said the other. Because, said the first, the thief
carried it off; and what was worse, before I had time to charge him with it.

77. Lord chief justice Mansfield had a cause before him between a Jew that was
plaintiff, and a Christian defendant. The latter pleaded, though the debt was
very just, that the Jew had no right, by the laws of England, to bring an
action. Well, says my lord, have you no other plea? No, my lord, says he, I
insist on this plea. Do you? says my lord, then let me tell you, you are the
greater Jew of the two.

78. A butcher that lay on his deathbed, said to his wife, My dear, I am not a
man for this world, therefore I advise you to marry our man John, he is a lusty
strong fellow, fit for your business. Oh, dear husband, said she, if that is
all, never let it trouble you, for John and I have agreed upon that matter
already.

79. A gentleman calling for small beer at another gentleman's table, finding
it very hard, gave it to the servant again without drinking. What, said the
master of the house, do not you like the beer? It is not to be found fault
with, answered the other, for one should never speak ill of the dead.

80. A venerable clergyman in a neighboring state, grieved to see the doctrine
of universal salvation prevailing in his parish, was desirous of preventing its
progress by convincing Mr. M --, the preacher of the doctrine, that his system
was unscriptural, and dangerous to society. For this purpose he requested the
company of Mr. M. -- one evening, and being too old to manage the argument with
dexterity himself, he desired a young clergyman of his acquaintance to attend
and assist him. The aged gentleman opened the conversation of the evening by
informing his younger brother in the ministry, that he had requested the
company of Mr. M --, and himself, in order to have the doctrine of universal
salvation fairly discussed, in his presence, for he thought Mr. M --, might be
convinced of his error; but he was too old to manage the debate -- he therefore
desired the young clergyman to enter upon the argument with Mr. M -- "Why,
sir," replied the gentleman, with (...) usual address, "Jesus Christ says, he
that believes, shall be saved, and he that believes not, shall be damned; the
dispute, therefore, is wholly between Jesus Christ and Mr. M --, and I wish to
be excused from an interference."

81. General Lee being one day surrounded, according to custom, by a numerous
levee of his canine favorites, was asked by a lady, if he was fond of dogs?
With his usual politeness, he instantly replied, "Yes madam; I love dogs: but I
detest bitches."

82. A white man meeting an Indian, asked him, "whose Indian are you?" To which
the copper-faced genius replied, "I am God Almighty's Indian, whose Indian are
you?"

83. An old gentleman at the point of death, called a faithful negro to him,
telling him he would do him an honor before he died. The fellow thanked him,
and hoped massa would live long. I intend, Cato, said the master, to allow you
to be buried in the family vault. Ah massa, returns Cato, me no like dat, ten
pounds would be better to Cato, he no care were he be buried; besides, massa,
suppose we be buried togeder, and de devil come looking for massa in de dark,
he might take away poor negar man in mistake.

84. "It is a very dark night," says Cato to one of his brethren of color, as
they were both staggering home from a frolic, on a thanksgiving eve --
staggering, did I say -- they were not drunk, not were they sober -- they were
at that happy medium, when the bondsman feels himself as happy as the monarch.

"It is a very dark night, Caesar, take care," says Cato. The caution was a
good one -- but, like many others, was given too late -- For Caesar, striking
his foot against the small remains of a post, which time had long been hacking
to pieces, measured his length upon the ground, before the friendly caution of
Cato had met his car. "I wonder," says Caesar, rising, and rubbing the mud,
etc. from off his holiday suit, " why de dibil de sun no shine in deese dark
nights, Cato, and not always keep shining in de day time, when dere's no need
of him."

85. Soon after Sir William Johnson had been appointed superintendant of Indian
affairs in America, he wrote to England for some suits of clothes, richly
laced. When they arrived, HENDRICK, king of the Mohawk nation, was present, and
particularly admired them. In a few succeeding days, Hendrick called on Sir
William, and acquainted him that he had had a dream. On Sir William's enquiring
what it was, he told him that he had dreamed that he had given him one of those
fine suits he had lately received. Sir William took the hint, and immediately
presented him with one of the richest suits. The Indian chief, highly pleased
with the generosity of Sir William, retired. Some time after this, Sir William,
happening to be in company with Hendrick, told him, that he had also had a
dream. Hendrick being very solicitous to know what it was, Sir William informed
him, that he had dreamed that he (Hendrick) had made him a present of a
particular tract of land (the most valuable on the Mohawk river) of about 5000
acres. Hendrick presented him with the land immediately, but not without making
this shrewd remark: "Now, Sir William, I will never dream with you again, you
dream too hard for me."

86. If we mistake not, the following anecdote, respecting the present emperor
of Germany, has hitherto been little mentioned: -- Having entered on foot, the
inn of a town, where his equipage was every moment expected, the landlady
desired to know whether he was one of his majesty's followers? -- He asked,
with a smile, how that could happen, when he arrived before him? The woman
passing by a second time, whilst he was engaged in taking off his beard, could
not resist the violence of her curiosity, and said, "Pray, sir, have you any
employment about the emperor's person?" "Yes, he replied, I sometimes shave
him."

87. Amongst the many singular anecdotes which lord Mansfield has been
accustomed to relate of himself, he used to speak of the following with the
most unaffected good humor: -- A St. Giles's bird appeared as an evidence
before him, in some trial concerning a quarrel in the street; and so confounded
his lordship with slang, that he was obliged to dismiss him without getting any
thing from him. He was desired to give an account of all he knew. "My lord,"
says he, "as I was coming by the corner of the street, I stagged the man."
"Pray," said lord Mansfield, "What is stagging the man." " Stagging, my lord;
why you see, I was down upon him." "Well, but I don't understand down upon him
any more than stagging -- do speak to be understood." "Why, an't please your
lordship, I speak as well as I can -- I was up, you see, to all he knew." "To
all he knew! -- I am as much in the dark as ever." "Well then, my lord, I Will
tell you how it was." "Do so." "Why, my lord, seeing as how he was a rum kid, I
was one upon his tibby." The fellow was at length sent out of court, and was
heard in the hall to say to one of his companions, that he had gloriously
queered old Full Bottom.

88. A brave tar, with a wooden leg, having the misfortune to have the other
shot off, in a sea fight last war, as his comrades were conveying him to the
surgeon, notwithstanding the piognancy of his agonies (being a man of humor)
he could not suppress his joke, saying, "It was high time for him to leave off
play, when his last pin was bowled down."

89. A country fellow, who was just come to London, gaping about in every shop
he came to, at last looked into a lottery-office, where seeing only one man
sitting at a desk, he could not imagine what commodity was sold there; but
calling to the clerk, Pray sir, said he, what do you sell here? Loggerheads!
cried the other; Do you? answered the countryman: Egad then you have a special
trade, for I see you have but one lest.

90. Two gentlemen having a dispute about religion, one said to the other, I
wonder, sir, you should talk of religion, when I Will hold you ten guineas you
cannot say the Lord's Prayer. Done, said the other. The money was deposited, and
the gentleman began with, I believe in God, and so went cleverly through the
creed: Well, said the other, I own I have lost; I did not think he could have
done it.

91. A traveller coming into the kitchen of an inn, in a very cold night, stood
so close to the fire that he burnt his boots. An arch rogue, who sat in the
chimney-corner, cried out to him, Sir, sir, you will burn your spurs presently.
My boots, you mean, I suppose, said the gentleman. No, Sir, replied the other,
they are burnt already.

92. A certain senator, who is not, it may be supposed, the wisest man in the
house, has a frequent custom of shaking his head, when another speaks; which
giving offense to a particular person, he complained of the indignity shown to
him; but one who had been acquainted with the first gentleman from a child, as
he told the house, assured them, that it was only a bad habit he had got. For
though he would shake his head, there was nothing in it.

93. A country clergyman meeting a neighbor, who never came to church,
although an old fellow of above sixty, he gave him some reproof on that
account, and asked if he never read at home? No, replied the clown, I cannot
read. I dare say, said the parson, you don't know who made you? Not I, in
troth, cried the countryman. A little boy coming by at the same time, "who made
you, child?" said the parson. "God, sir," answered the boy. "Why look you
there," quoth the honest clergyman, "are not you ashamed to hear a child of
five or six years old tell me who made him, when you, that are so old a man,
cannot?" " Ah," said the countryman, " it is no wonder that he should remember;
he was made but the other day; it is a great while, measter, sin I was made."

94. A certain Italian having written a book upon the art of making gold,
dedicated it to pope Leo X. in hopes of a good reward. His holiness finding the
man constantly following him, at length gave him a large empty purse, saying, "
Sir, since you know how to make gold, you can have no need of any thing but a
purse to put it in."

95. Two city ladies meeting on a visit, one a grocer's wife, and the other a
cheesemonger's (who perhaps stood upon their punctilio of precedence more than
some of their betters would have done) when they had risen and taken their
leave, the cheesemonger's wife was going out of the room first, upon which the
grocer's lady pulling her back by the tail of her gown, and stepping before
her, No madam, said she, nothing comes after cheese.

96. A handsome young woman, who was a witness in a trial of crim. con. before
lord Mansfield, was interrogated by counselor Dunning, who, thinking to
confuse the woman, made her take off her bonnet, that he might have a view of
her countenance, and see (for all counselors are complete judges of
physiognomy) whether the truth came from her lips. After he had put many
ridiculous questions to her, he asked her whether her mistress had ever
communicated the important secret to her? 'No, sir,' said the woman, 'she never
did.' And how can you swear to her infidelity? 'Because I saw another gentleman
besides my master in bed with her.' Indeed! said the counselor. 'Yes, indeed,
sir.' 'And pray, my good woman,' said the modest counselor, thinking to
silence her at once; 'did your master, (for I see you are very handsome) in
return for his wife's infidelity, go to bed to you? 'That trial' (says the
spirited woman) ' does not come on today, mr. Slabberchops.' -- Lord Mansfield
was tickled to the soul; he thrust his hand into the waist band of his
breeches, (his custom when highly delighted) and asked Dunning if he had any
more interrogatories to put? 'No, my lord, I have done,' said the chopfallen
orator, settling his wig, and sitting down.

97. A cornuto one day seeing his footman with an old greasy hat, slouching
over his shoulders, Sirrah, says he, who gave you that cuckold's hat? "Indeed,
sir," says John, it was my mistress gave it me, and told me it was one of yours.

98. A young sprig of nobility, who imagined that wit and peerage were
synonimous, said once to a poor clergyman, who happened to sit next a goose,
'Doctor, with all your learning, can you tell me, why the goose is always
placed next to the parson?' 'Indeed, my lord,' replied he, 'I cannot; but
whenever I see a goose again, I shall certainly think of your lordship.'

99. Dean Swift, hearing two of his servants disputing which of them was to
carry his boots, to a place where he was to take horse, called them in, and
asked them what they were quarreling about? Both answered, 'Nothing.' 'Very
well,' said the dean, 'then go and fetch me my boots.' The boots being brought
accordingly, he gave to each of them one, saying, 'Do you take this boot, and
do you take that; and do you go on this side the way, and do you go on the other;
and wait for me where the horse is. -- I knew you were quarreling about
nothing.'

100. A gentleman, who had been a great traveller, would oftentimes talk so
extravagantly of the wonderful things that he had seen abroad, that a friend of
his took notice to him of his exposing himself as he did to all companies, and
asked him the meaning of it? "Why," says the traveller, "I have got such a
habit of lying, since I have been abroad, that I really hardly know when I lie,
and when I speak truth; and should be very much obliged to you, if you would
tread upon my toe at any time, when I am likely to give myself too much liberty
that way," His friend promised that he would; and accordingly not long after,
being at a tavern with him and other company, when the traveller was, amongst
other strange things, giving an account of a church he had seen in Italy, that
was above two miles long, he trod on his toe, just as one of the company had
asked, How broad that same church might be? Oh, said he, not above two feet.
Upon which, the company bursting into a loud laugh: " Zounds," said he, " if
you had not trod upon my toe, I should have made it as broad as it was long."

101. Dr Sheridan, the celebrated friend of Swift, had a custom of ringing his
scholars to prayers in his school-room, at a certain hour every day. The boys
were one day very devoutly at prayers, except one, who was stifling a laugh as
well as he could, which arose from seeing a rat descending from the bell-rope
into the room. The poor boy could hold out no longer, but burst into an
immoderate fit of laughter, which set the others a-going when he pointed to the
cause. Sheridan was so provoked, that he declared he would whip them all if the
principal culprit was not pointed out to him; which was immediately done. The
poor pupil of Momus was immediately hoisted, and his posteriors laid bare to
the rod, when the witty schoolmaster told him, if he said any thing tolerable
on the occasion, as he looked on him as the greatest dunce in his school, he
would forgive him. The trembling culprit, with very little hesitation,
addressed his master with the following beautiful distich: There was a rat --
for want of stairs,
Came down a rope -- to go to prayers.
Sheridan instantly dropped the rod, and instead of a whipping, gave him half a
crown.

102. A bailiff clapped a man on the shoulder, and said, I arrest you, sir, for a
horse (meaning for the money he owed for a horse). 'Why, replied the defendant,
thou coxcomb, thou art not certainly such a fool as thou make thyself? Pray
look upon me again, why do you take me for a horse?' -- Then tripping up his
heels, said, However, I Will show you a horse trick; and after giving him two or
three kicks, left him in the kennel, and so ran off.

103. No man had a greater aversion to excess or ridiculous compliments than
dean Swift; an instance of which we shall here relate. A lady had given him an
invitation to dinner, and as she had heard he was not easily pleased, had taken
a month to provide for it. When the time came, every delicacy which could be
purchased, the lady had prepared, even to profusion, (which Swift hated.)
However, he was scarcely seated, when she began to make a ceremonious harangue;
in which she told him, she was sincerely sorry she had not a more tolerable
dinner, since she was apprehensive there was not any thing there fit for him to
eat; in short, that it was a bad dinner. -- "Pox take you" (said the dean) "why
did you not get a better? Sure you had time enough! but since you say it is so
bad, I Will go home, and eat a herring." Accordingly he departed, and left her
justly confused at her folly, which had spoiled all the pains and expense she
had been at.

104. Pope having been lighted home by a link boy, offered to give him
something less than he expected; upon which he demanded more; Pope protested he
had no more half pence left; repeating a term familiar to him, when a little
vexed, 'God mend me!' The boy finding, that nothing was to be got, went away
muttering loud enough to be overheard, 'God mend me! God mend me! quotha! Five
hundred such as I might be made, before one such crooked son of a bitch as you
could be mended!' Pope called him back, and gave him half a crown as a reward
for his wit.

105. A quaker lodging at an inn, the house being full, a damning blade came up
into his room, and would have hectored him out; but he told him 'twas his room,
and by yea and nay, he should not come there. The hector then began to thunder
out his oaths, and to strike him: but the quaker, being a stout fellow,
returned his blows double and treble, and at last kicked him down stairs. With
that, the master of the house sending the tapster to know the occasion of the
noise, he told him, 'twas nothing, but that Yea and Nay had kicked G -- d damme
down stairs.

106. A rattling young fellow from London, putting up at a country inn, seeing
a plain rough-hewn farmer there; says he, you shall see me dumb-found that
countryman; so going up to him, he gives his hat a twirl round, saying,
'There's half a crown for you, countryman.' The farmer, after recovering a
little from his surprise, reared his oaken towel, and surveying him very
gravely, gave him two very handsome drubs on the shoulders, saying, I thank you
for your kindness, friend, there are two shillings of your money again.

107. A gentleman amusing himself in the gallery of the Palais, in Paris,
observed, while he was carelessly looking over some pamphlets at a booksellers
there, a suspicious fellow standing too near him; the gentleman was dressed,
according to the fashion of those times, in a coat with a prodigious number of
tags and tassels, which the thief, for such he was, began to have a design
upon; and the gentleman, not willing to disappoint him, turned his head another
way, on purpose to give him an opportunity; the thief immediately set to work,
and in a thrice twisted off seven or eight of the silver tags; the gentleman
immediately perceived it, and slily drawing out of his pocket a penknife, which
cut like a razor, catched the fellow by the ear, and cut it off close from his
head. 'Murder! murder!' (cries the thief) 'Robbery! robbery!' (cries the
gentleman) upon this the thief, in a passion, throwing them at the gentleman,
cried, ' There are your tags and buttons.' 'Very well, (says the gentleman,
throwing it back in the like manner) There is your ear.'

108. An old lady beholding herself in a looking-glass, and spying the wrinkles
in her face, threw down the glass in a rage; saying, it was strange to see the
difference of glasses: for, says she, I have not looked in a true one these
seventeen years.

109. A tinker was crying for work; one asked him why he did not stop the two
holes in the pillory? Says the tinker, "if you will lend me your head and ears,
I^ll lend you hammer and nails, and give you the work into the bargain."

110. One praying in a church, his hat was stolen from him; of which when he
complained to the standers-by; you should, said one, have watched as well as
prayed.

111. A person in company railed against a gentleman lately deceased; one of
them to vindicate him, said, he thought him not so very bad as he had been
represented; adding, to my knowledge, sir, he was very charitable; and charity,
you know, covers a multitude of sins. Faith, sir, so it ought, said the first,
for he had a multitude to cover.

112. One being asked his opinion of the poets; he answered, that he thought
them the best writers, next to those that wrote prose.

113. A lieutenant colonel in one of the Irish regiments in the French service,
dispatched by the duke of Berwick, from fort Kebl, to the king of France, with
a complaint relating to some irregularities that had happened in the regiment;
his majesty with some emotion of mind, told him, that the Irish troops gave him
more uneasiness than all his forces besides. "Sire," says the officer, "all
your majesty's enemies make the same complaint."

114. A fellow walking in the street in a winter night, and seeing a handsome
lantern hung out with a candle in it, thought to secure it for himself, but
having climbed up, and going to take it, one of the servants seeing him, asked
him, why he meddled with the lantern! I crave mercy, says he, I was only going
to snuff the candle, that I might see to go along.

115. A lady told a simple gentleman, that his wit was pretty; Why so, says he?
Because, says she, you have so little, and all that is little, is pretty.

116. The marquis of Grance being just returned from the army, went to wait
upon the king at the Louvre in his-riding-dress, all dusty: two marshals of
France meeting him in the ante chamber, in that dirty condition, What a pickle
you are in, said they to him, smiling; why, you are like a groom. Right,
gentlemen, answered the marquis, just ready to curry you both very handsomely.

117. It was said of one, who remembered every thing he lent, and nothing he
borrowed, that he had lost half his memory.

118. A drunken rake, that made it his constant practice to lie in bed every
Sunday, was sharply reproved for it by a clergyman; the beau answered, that he
was sorry a person of the sacred function understood the scriptures no better,
when the sabbath was appointed for a day of rest.

119. What a fine book could one make out of what you are wholly ignorant of!
said a bantering spark one day to his friend; right, answered his friend, and
what a paltry one could be made out of what you know?

120. A married man having got a wench with child, was told by the justice,
that he thought such a man as he, would not have defiled his bed so. You
mistake, sir, said he, there was no defiling of the bed in the matter, for it
was done in the field.

121. A chandler having had some candles stole, one bid him be of good cheer;
for in a short time, says he, I am confident they will all come to light.

122. A country fellow being admitted to a gentleman's table, fell upon the
artichokes at the lower end; but not knowing what of them should be eaten, and
what not, took a mouthful of the burs, which almost choked him: one who sat
next him, said, Friend, that dish is reserved for the last. Truly, answered he
(as well as he could) I am of your mind; for I think it will be my last.

123. One seeing a great heap of stones, said to his friend, I wish I had some
of these stones at home, Why, what would you do with them? said the other,
"Why," said he, I would build a brick wall round my yard with them

124. One asked another, how such a person lived these hard times? to which the
other answered, By his wits. I wonder, says the first, how he can live upon so
small a stock?

125. A witty knave bargained with a seller of lace in London for so much fine
lace as would reach from one of his ears to the other. When they had agreed, he
told her that he believed she had not quite enough to perform the covenant, for
one of his ears was nailed to the pillory of Bristol.

126. A gentleman had a blind harper playing before him while it was pretty
late; at last he commands his man to light the harper down stairs: to whom the
servant replied, sir, the harper is blind; Why, you ignorant loggerhead, says
his master, has not he the more need of light?

127. A lady, having had the misfortune to bury several of her family in a
little time, the sexton brought her a bill; which she thinking unreasonable,
demanded some abatement, and tendered him five shilling less than he had
charged. The sexton eyed the money, and at length took it up, saying, as you
have been a good chap, madam, and I expect more of your custom, I Will take it
this time, but I really cannot afford it.

128. One having an extreme bad cough, said, if one cough be so troublesome,
what would a man do, if he had twenty?

129. A lawyer told his client, his adversary had removed his suit out of one
court into another. Let him remove it to the devil, quoth the other, I am sure
my attorney, for money, will follow him.

130. A lady was saying she had overthrown her adversary; at which one of her
servants said, Ay, he took a wrong sow by the ear, when he meddled with your
ladyship.

131. A clownish gentleman, who had courted a young lady, and agreed upon the
marriage, espied a pretty mare a grazing, which he would have into the bargain.
The father being unwilling to part with his mare, the match was broke off. A
twelvemonth after, the wooer meets the lady at a fair, and would fain have
renewed his old acquaintance; but she pretended ignorance at first, and said,
she did not know him! No, said he, do not you know me? Why I was once suitor to
you. "I cry you mercy, sir," said she, now I remember you, you came a wooing to
my father's mare, and she is not married yet.

132. A sea captain's opinion being asked about a future state, he answered
that he never troubled himself about state affairs.

133. One desired a kindness of a covetous rich miser: yes, says he, you shall
have it, if you can persuade me to it. Why, faith, said he, if I were to
persuade you to any thing, it should be to hang yourself.

134. One parting persons engaged in a fray, was cut into the skull; says the
surgeon, sir, one may see your brains: nay, then I Will be hanged, said he, if I
had any brains, I had never come there.

135. A gentleman meeting his godson, asked him whither he was going? To
school, replies the boy. That Is well done, said he, there is six pence for you,
follow your learning apace; I may live to hear you preach my funeral sermon.

136. One held a paradox, that wise men were great liars; for, said he, the old
proverb tells us, children and fools tell truth.

137. One night, a drunken fellow jostled against a post; but the fellow
thought some body had jostled him, and fell a beating the post till his fingers
were broken. Says one to him, fie, what makes you fight with a post? says he,
why did he not blow his horn then?

138. A country fellow (who was an apprentice) being to be catechized, the
parson asked him, what is your name? John, says the fellow. Who gave you that
name? says the parson. My godfathers and godmothers, etc. says the fellow. Well
said, says the parson; and what did your godfathers and godmothers then for
you? Says John, sir, they have done nothing for me yet, but they promise to do
something for me when I come out of my time.

139. One telling his friend of the death of one whom he loved entirely, says
the other, it is impossible, for if he had been dead, he would have sent me word,
I Am sure on it.

140. In a storm at sea, all went to prayers but one, and he fed heartily on
salt meat; being asked the reason, he said, He should drink more that day than
ever he did in his life.

141. One, when the hangman came to put the halter about his neck, desired him
not to bring the rope too near his throat; "For I am," says he, so ticklish
about that place, I shall hurt myself so with over-laughing, that it will go
near to throttle me.

142. A cobler's wife, speaking of a street wherein she lived before, her
apprentice, mumbling, said, "There were none but whores and bawds lived there."
What Is that you said, sirrah? said she. "I said," replied he, "there is honester
women than yourself live there."

143. A great eater, having a large piece of roast-beef set before him, he eat
sometimes at one end, and then at the other, his host, desired him to cut it
handsomely, and in one place: says he, it is no matter where I begin, for I
intend to make an end of it all before I go.

144. One borrowed a sum of money, and failed to pay it at the time; his
creditor meeting him, began to chide him for not keeping his day. O sir, says
he, excuse me, I am not a strict observer of set days.

145. One coming into a friend's house, he saw the four seasons of the year
hanging; said he, These are pretty; but if you had bought the whole dozen of
them, they would have set off the room very handsomely.

146. A merry cobbler commending a cup of nut-brown ale, said, let old Joan my
wife chase and chide me ever so much, if she should cut my throat, I would
drink strong ale still.

147. One seeing his son doing mischief, cried out, did you ever see me do so
when I was a boy?

148. A gentleman came to a widow's house, and she presented him with a cup of
small beer; coming a week afterward, saluted him with another cup of the same
beer, sir, I dare not commend the beer to you, for indeed it is dead; to which
he replied, that may very well be, for it was very weak when I was here last.

149. A deaf fellow coming to town to sell a turkey, had occasion to untruss a
point; a gentleman passing by, intending to put a joke upon him; countryman,
said he, there is a t -- under you. The man, thinking he asked the price of his
turkey, said 4 s. master. I say, there is a t -- under you, said the other. It
is as good as ever you eat in your life, said the fellow, either baked or
roasted. You rascal, said he, I could find in my heart to kick you soundly:
choose, said the fellow, if you will not, another will.

150. A woman being at the point of death, her husband asked her who he should
marry? Are you in such haste, says she, why then, marry the devil's dam. No,
says he, I don't care to commit incest, for I have matched with the daughter
already.

151. A poor fellow, who had grown rich on a sudden, from a very mean and
beggarly condition, and took great state upon him, was met one day by one of
his acquaintance, who accosted him in a very humble manner, but having no
notice taken of him, cried out, Nay, it is no great wonder you should not know
me, when you have forgot yourself.

152. A tailor sent his bill to a lawyer for money: the lawyer bid the boy tell
his master, that he was not running away, but very busy at that time. The boy
comes again, and tells him, he must needs have the money. Did you tell your
master, said the lawyer, that I was not running away? Yes, sir, answered the
boy, but he bade me tell you that he was.

153. A gentleman having sent for his carpenter's servant to drive a nail or
two in his study, the fellow after he had done, scratched his ears, and said,
He hoped the gentleman would give him something to make him drink? "Make you
drink?" says the gentleman, there is a pickled herring for you, and if that
will not make you drink, I will give you another.

154. A young gentleman having got his neighbor's maid with child, the master,
a grave man, came to expostulate with him about it. I wonder, said he, how you
could do so? Prithee where is the wonder? said the other, if she had got me
with child, you might have wondered indeed.

155. A sharper of the town, seeing a country gentleman sit alone at an inn,
and thinking something might be made of him, he went and sat near him, and took
the liberty to drink to him. Having thus introduced himself, he called for a
paper of tobacco, and said, do you smoke, sir? Yes, says the gentleman, very
gravely, any one that has a design upon me.

156. A Scotch bag-piper traveling to Ireland, opened his wallet by a wood
side, and sat down to dinner; no sooner had he said grace, but three wolves
came about him. To one he threw bread, to another meat, till his provender was
all gone -- At length he took up his pipes, and began to play, at which the
wolves ran away. The deel ^aw me, said Sawney, an I had ken'd you la'd music sa
weel, you should have ^aen it before dinner.

157. A sea-officer, who, for his courage in a former engagement, where he had
lost his leg, had been preferred to the command of a good ship; in the heat of
the next engagement, a cannon ball took off his wooden deputy, so that he fell
upon the deck; a seaman, thinking he had been fresh wounded, called out for a
surgeon. No, no, said the captain, the carpenter will do.

158. A drunken fellow, having sold all his goods to maintain himself at his
pot, except his feather bed, at last made away with that too: when being
reproved for it by some of his friends; why, said he, I am very well, thank
God, and why should I keep my bed?

159. When recruits were raising for the late wars, a sergeant told his
captain, that he had got him a very extraordinary man: Ay, says, the captain,
prithee what is he? "A batcher, sir," replies the sergeant, and your honor
will have double service for him, for we had two sheep-stealers in the company
before.

160. A lady who had a mind, she told another, to quarrel with an impertinent
teazing young fellow she did not like, said she could not tell how to provoke
him, he was so very assiduous and submissive. 'Slife, said her friend, I Would spit
in his face. Alas! replied she, that will not do, when men are fawning like
lap-dogs, they will take that for a favor.

161. A plain countryman bringing his daughter to town, said, though she was
brought up altogether in the country, she was a girl of sense. Yes, says a
pretty young female in company, country sense. Why faith, madam, says the man,
country sense is better sometimes than city impudence.

162. A plain country fellow, born in Essex, being in London, which place he
had never seen before, espied a rope hanging at a merchant's door, with a
handle to it, and wondering what it meant, he takes it in his hand, and played
with it to and fro; at length, pulling it hard, he heard a bell ring; the
merchant being near the door, went himself, and demanded what the fellow would
have. Nothing, sir, said he, I did but play with this pretty thing that hangs
at your door. What countryman are you? said the merchant. An Essex man, an't
please you, replied the other. I thought so, replied the merchant, for I have
often heard say, that if a man beats a bush in Essex, there presently comes
forth a calf. It may be so, replied the countryman, and I think a man can no
sooner ring a bell in London, but out pops a cuckold.

163. A simple bumkin, arriving in London, was very much taken at the sight of
a chair, or sedan, and bargained with the chairmen to carry him to a place he
named. The chairmen, observing the curiosity of the clown to be suitable to the
meanness of his habit, privately took out the bottom of the chair, and then put
him into it, which when they took up, the countryman's feet were upon the
ground, and as the chairmen advanced, so did he, and to make the better sport,
if any place was dirtier than the rest, that they chose to go through; the
countryman not knowing but others used to be carried, or rather driven, in the
same manner, coming to his lodgings, gave them their demand. Returning to the
country, he related what rare things he had seen in London, and withal, that he
had been carried in a sedan: Sedan! quoth one, what is that? Why, said he, like
our watch house, only it is covered with leather; but were it not for the name
of a sedan, a man might as well walk on foot.

164. A brave Dutch captain being commanded by his colonel to go on a dangerous
exploit against the French, with forces that were unlikely to achieve the
enterprise, the captain advised the colonel to send but half so many men. Why
so, said the colonel, to send but half so many men? Because, replied the
captain, they are enough to be killed.

165. A bishop of Cervi^, in Italy, came in great haste to the pope, and told
him, that it was generally reported his holiness had done him the honor to
make him governor of Rome. How, said the pope, do not you know that Fame
spreads a great many false reports? and I dare say you will find this is one of
them.

166. Several scholars went to steal rabbits, and on the way they warned a
novice among them to make no noise, for fear of scaring the rabbits away. At
last, he espying some, said aloud in Latin, (...) cuniculi multi! and with that
the rabbits ran into their burrows: wherewith his fellows were offended, and
chiding him for it, he said, Who the devil would have thought that rabbits
understood Latin?

167. Dr. Linegar, titular archbishop of Dublin, about thirty years since, was
a man of lively parts, and very communicative: he happened in a large mixed
company to be introduced to mr. Swan, a gentleman of a cynical turn, whose
practice it was to attempt to raise a laugh at the expense of some one in the
company; they sat near each other at table, where the doctor engaged attention
by his sprightly manner; mr. Swan, to silence him, addressed him, mr. -- I
forget your name. Linegar, sir, replied the doctor. I ask your pardon; I have
the misfortune scarce ever to recollect names; you will not be offended, if, in
the course of conversation, I should name you doctor Vinegar; O, not at all,
sir, replied the doctor; I have the same defect, and it is probable, though I
now name you Swan, I may by-and-by think you a goose. The laugh was effectually
turned against the cynic, who never attempted a second sarcasm that evening,
and went away as soon as he decently could.

168. Two fellows meeting, one asked the other, why he looked so sad? I have
very good reason for it, answered the other, poor Jack Such-a-one, the greatest
croney and best friend I had in the world, was hanged but two days ago. What
had he done? said the first. Alas, replied the other, he did no more than you
or I should have done on the like occasion; he found a bridle in the road, and
took it up. What, answered the other, hang a man for finding a bridle? that is
hard indeed. To tell the truth of the matter, said the other, there was a horse
at the other end of it.

169. A dyer, in a court of justice, being ordered to hold up his hand, that
was all black: take off your glove, friend, said the judge to him, put on your
spectacles, your honor, answered the dyer.

170. An arch boy having taken notice of his schoolmaster's often reading a
chapter in the Corinthians, wherein is this sentence, We shall all be changed
in the twinkling of an eye; privately erased the letter c, in the word changed.
The next time, his master read it, We shall all be hanged in the twinkling of
an eye.

171. Some gentlemen being at a tavern together, for want of better diversion,
one proposed play, but, said another in the company, I have fourteen good
reasons against gaming. What are those? said another. In the first place,
answered he, I have no money: Oh! said the first, if you had four hundred
reasons, you need not name another.

172. A man going one day along the street, an impudent fellow came swaggering
up to him, and thrust between him and the wall. I don't use to give the wall,
said he, to every jackanapes. But I do, said the other, and so made way for him.

173. A late archbishop had promised one of his chaplains, who was a favorite,
the first good living in his gift, that he should like, and think worthy his
acceptance. Soon after, hearing of the death of an old rector, whose parsonage
was worth about two hundred pounds a year, he sent his chaplain to the place
too see how he liked it; the doctor, when he came back again, thanked his grace
for the offer he had made him; but said, he had met with such an account of the
country, and the neighborhood, as was not at all agreeable to him; and
therefore should be glad, if his grace pleased, to wait till something else
fell. Another vacancy not long after happening, the archbishop sent him to view
that; but he returned as before, not satisfied with it, which did not much
please his grace. A third living, much better than either of the others,
becoming vacant, as he was told, the chaplain was again sent to take a view of
that; and when he came back, Well, now, said the archbishop, how do you like
this living? What objection can you have to this? I like the country very well,
answered he, and the house, the income, and the neighborhood, but, -- But!
replied the archbishop, what but can there be then? But, said he, the old
incumbent is not dead. I found him smoking his pipe at the door of his house.

174. An old lady being at table, and mumbling a piece of brawn, that was very
horney, for a long time, at length, by its elasticity, it jumped out of her
mouth, upon the plate of a young gentleman, who sat upon the opposite side of
the table; but he, not seeing from whence it came, quickly eat it up. Good
lord, said the old lady, what a fine thing it is to be young, and have one's
teeth! I have been mumbling and tumbling that piece of brawn in my mouth this
half hour to no purpose, and that young gentleman has chewed and swallowed it
in a moment.

175. A very great boaster and bully having been once kicked by a gentleman for
his impertinence, turning round, ventured to ask his chastiser, whether he was
in earnest? Yes, in very good earnest, replied the gentleman, half drawing his
sword. The other, not having courage to answer him in that way, contented
himself with saying, I am glad I know your mind; for I Will be d -- if I like
such jests.

176. A gentleman, happening to have high words with a butcher, was at last so
provoked that he raised his cane, and threatened to give him a good dressing.
No, master, says his antagonist, it shall only be lent; and I will take care it
shall be repaid with interest.

177. A prisoner in the fleet lately sent to his creditor, to let him know that
he had a proposal to make, which he believed would be for their mutual benefit.
Accordingly, the creditor calling on him to hear it: "I have been thinking,
said he, that it is a very idle thing for me to lie here, and put you to the
expense of seven groats a week. My being so chargeable to you has given me
great uneasiness; for God knows what it may cost you in the end. Therefore,
what I would propose is this; you shall let me out of prison, and, instead of
seven groats, you shall allow me only eighteen pence a week, and the other ten
pence shall go toward the discharge of the debt.

178. "How many cuckolds, without including thee, said a citizen's wife to her
husband, do thou reckon in our street?" How do you mean, replied he, angrily,
without including me? -- "Well, dear, replied the wife, if that does not please
thee, how many do thou think there are, including thee?"

179. As the late mr. Rich, whose abilities as a harlequin are universally
known, was one evening returning home from the playhouse in a hackney coach,
he ordered the coachman to drive him to the Sun, then a famous tavern in
Clare-market. Just as the coach passed one of the windows of the tavern, Rich,
who perceived it to be open, dexterously threw himself out of the coach window
into the room. The coachman, who saw nothing of this transaction, drew up,
descended from his box, opened the coach door, and let down the step; then,
taking off his hat, he waited for some time, expecting his fare to alight; but,
at length, looking into the coach, and seeing it empty, he bestowed a few
hearty curses on the rascal who had bilked him, remounted his box, turned
about, and was returning to the stand; when Rich, who had watched his
opportunity, threw himself into the coach, looked out, asked the fellow where
the devil he was driving, and desired him to turn about. The coachman almost
petrified with fear, instantly obeyed, and once more drew up to the door of the
tavern. Rich now got out; and, after reproaching the fellow with stupidity,
tendered him his money. -- No, God bless your honor, said the coachman, my
master has ordered me to take no money to night -- Pshaw! said Rich, your
master's a fool; here is a shilling for yourself! "No, no," said the coachman,
who by that time had remounted his box, that will not do; I know you too well,
for all your shoes -- and so, mr. Devil, I think your are outwitted.

180. As a press-gang, during the late war, were patroling round Smithfield,
they laid hold of a man tolerably well dressed: who pleaded that, being a
gentleman, he was not liable to be impressed. "Haul him away, says one of the
tars, he is the very man we want; we press a damned number of black guards, and
are cursedly at a loss for a gentleman to teach them good manners."

181. A short time previous to the late war, a magistrate, who had served the
office of lord mayor, read in the papers that the French had taken umbrage;
upon which he ran to his stock broker to order him to sell out -- The French
have commenced hostilities, said the magistrate, they have taken Umbrage from
us. The stock-broker applied to his gazetteer -- No such place was to be found.
He flew to 'Change-alley, and there, after some difficulty, the point was
cleared up.

182. Macklin and doctor Johnson, disputing on a literary subject, Johnson
quoted Greek. I do not understand Greek, said Macklin. -- A man who argues,
should understand every language, replied Johnson -- Very well, answered
Macklin, and gave him a quotation in Irish.

183. An eminent tradesman at the west end of London, remarkable for the blunt
sincerity of his dealing, had delivered a bill for a debt of 20l. to a noble
lord, not remarkable for the promptitude of his payment; the debt had been due
for a dozen years, and the tradesman had called so often in vain that he was
exasperated. But one morning, by the blunder of a new servant, he was admitted
to his lordship's presence. He was a man of a large and extensive trade, and
having realized a fortune of 30,000l. did not pay much reverence to a lord,
when that lord was long-winded in his payment. He therefore insisted, in very
positive terms, on his money, and hinted something about the hardship of that
law which gave protection to insolvent peers. -- Fortunately, he enraged his
noble debtor so much, as to urge him to take the uncommon resolution of paying
the bill that instant. He accordingly pulled out his purse, and having thrown
the money on the table, he declared that he never in his life saw so insolent a
fellow, and he swore that he would punish him for his rudeness, by prevailing
on every friend of his to discharge him from their employment. Old Vinegar
taking up, and pocketing the money with all the composure in the world, said in
answer to this, As to you, my lord, I Will take care you shall never employ me --
and if you will give me a list of your friends, I Will give you my word they
shall not neither.

184. A certain preacher having changed his religion for a good benefice, was
much blamed by some of his friends for deserting them. To excuse himself, he
assured them he should not have done it, but for seven reasons. Being asked
what they were? he answered, "a wife and six children."

185. A merry fellow went to the celebrated dr. Graham, and finding him within,
begged to speak with him in the most private manner; the doctor accordingly
took him into a room, secluded almost from light, and then begged him to
explain his case; the fellow urged on the doctor the utmost secrecy, saying if
it should come by any means to his friends' ears, he should be ruined, etc. The
doctor assured him of his taciturnity. Well, says the fellow, I believe,
doctor, you are the only man that can cure me; the doctor replied, he had no
doubt but, let his case be ever so desperate, he could effect a perfect cure.
The fellow then begged to describe his disorder, which he did in the following
manner: I have been a sad raking dog, and so -- Oh, says the doctor, I
understand you; I have made that disorder my constant study, and can remove it
in the most obstinate cases. -- Well, goes on the fellow, as I was coming up
Fleet Street -- You picked up a lady, I suppose, says the doctor -- No, says
the fellow, but seeing one of your men giving bills away, I took one, and
having occasion a little after to evacuate, I used one of your bills, which
proved so small that I befouled my fingers, therefore all I beg is, that you
would print them on larger paper, to prevent like accidents in future."

186. A wit being once very low in pocket, and meeting with a lord who was
walking in the court, thought to wheedle him out of a broad piece, and coming
up to him, said, my lord, I had a strange dream last night, and now half of it
is out; for I dreamed that I met you here, and that you gave me a broad piece.
Well, says his lordship, then I will make out the other part, and so gave it
him. But stay, now I think on it, give me that again, for it is a piece my
mistress gave me to keep for herself. Scroggin readily returned it, in hopes of
a better gratuity. Now, said my lord, I Will tell you my dream, that it may be
out likewise. I dreamt that I gave a fool money, and he had not the wit to keep
it; and so passed on, leaving Scroggin to scratch his ears, and fretting to be
so outwitted.

187. When Swift was a young man, and by no means known in the literary world,
he happened to be standing in a careless manner, with his back to the fire, at
a coffee-house; a gentleman just opposite to him, who was superscribing a
letter, seeing a raw-boned awkward fellow rather engross the fire, calls out,
Pray young man have you got any sand about you? No, friend, says Swift, but I
have got some gravel, and if you will give me your letter, I will piss upon it
directly.

188. Two musical pretenders, having a wager about which of them sung the best,
they agreed to refer it to a master of music, who undertook to be arbitrator on
this occasion. -- A day was accordingly fixed on, and both the parties executed
to the best of their abilities before him. As soon as they had finished, the
judge proceeded to decide in the following manner: As for you, sir, addressing
himself to the first, you are by much the worst singer I ever heard in my life.
Ah said the other, exulting, I knew I should win my wager. Stop, sir, says the
judge, I have a word to say to you before you go, which is this, that as for
you, sir, you cannot sing at all.

189. During lord Townshend's residence in Dublin, as viceroy, he often went in
disguise through the city. He had heard much of the wit of a shoeblack, known
by the name of blind Peter, and having found him out, he stopped to get his
boots cleaned, which was no sooner done, than his lordship asked Peter to give
him change for half a guinea. Half a guinea! your honor, said the ragged wit,
change for half a guinea from me! -- by G -- sir, you may as well ask a
Highlander for a knee-buckle -- His lordship was so well pleased, that he left
him the bit of gold, and walked off.

190. A poor fellow having lent one of his comrades a small matter, spoke to
him about it one night. By G -- Tom, those two guineas I lent you, ought to be
paid me; you know I am in great distress. Do not talk to me about it, said the
other, by heavens, within this week, I will take care to pay you in some shape
or other. You will oblige me, replied the creditor, and pray let it be as much
in the shape of two guineas as possible.

191. An extravagant young fellow, who was very forward in spending his money,
though he could but ill afford it, being one evening in company in a public
house where it was proposed to spend sixpence a piece; the young spendthrift,
not contented with this reasonable expense, insisted that it should be a
shilling; saying, he knew no difference between a shilling and six pence. To
which a sly old economist replied, but you will, young gentleman, when you come
to be worth eighteen-pence.

192. Pope, who, whatever his other good qualities might be, certainly was not
much troubled with good nature, was one evening at a coffee-house, where he and
a set of literati had got poring over a manuscript of the Greek comic poet
Aristophanes, in which they found a passage they could not comprehend. As they
talked pretty loud, a young officer, who stood by the fire, heard their
conference, and begged that he might be permitted to look at the passage. --
"Oh!" (says Pope, sarcastically) by all means, pray let the young gentleman
look at it: upon which the officer took up the book, and considering a while,
said, that there only wanted a note of interrogation to make the whole
intelligible: which was really the case. And pray master, says Pope (piqued
perhaps, at being outdone by a red coat) what is a note of interrogation? -- A
note of interrogation, (replied the youth, with a look of the utmost contempt)
is a little crooked thing that asks questions! It Is said, however, that Pope
was so delighted with the wit, that he forgave the sarcasm on his person.

193. A great crowd being gathered about a poor cobbler, who had just died in
the street, a man asked a wit present what was to be seen? Only a cobler's end,
replied he.

194. The empress of Germany asked a French officer if the princess royal of
France was, as the world reported her, the most beautiful princess in Europe? I
thought her so yesterday, answered the polite Frenchman.

195. A celebrated chief justice being on the midland circuit, a mr. Shirley,
of the county of Leicester, was brought before him, charged with having
committed a rape on one of his tenant's daughters; the judge was remarkable for
possessing an uncommon share of delicacy, and therefore, on the day preceding
that of the intended trial, ordered the crier of the court to give notice that
it would come on the next morning at seven o'clock; thereby trusting that the
female sex would absent themselves on such an occasion. Instead of which the
ladies came pouring in numbers into the court by six o'clock: at length the
judge having heard all that the witnesses had to say in support of the charge,
desired the prisoner would enter upon his defense. Mr. Shirley therefore
informed the court, that as he was one evening walking over his ground, he
espied his prosecutrix carry away a bundle of faggots from a pile that belonged
to him, and observing that she was a handsome girl, he jocosely told her, if
ever he caught her repeating the transgression, he would assuredly repay
himself in a way most agreeable to his wishes. Business calling him the next
day to town, he was absent about a fortnight; and on his return home, one of
his servants desired to know whether he had given permission to a young woman
to carry away faggots from such a pile, for that she had done it every evening
since his departure; it immediately occurred to him that it must be the girl he
had seen before; and about the same hour, he repaired to the old spot, where he
had not waited long before she made her appearance: to be brief, he jocularly
desired the girl to make personal restitution, which, without hesitation or
reluctance, she complied with. Mr. Shirley, in short, was honorably acquitted;
but before he departed the court, the judge desired to give him one piece of
advice; "if," says his lordship, you should ever find a woman stealing your
faggots again, do not threaten her with such a punishment, for if you do,
believe me that the ladies in the gallery will not leave you a stick in your
hedge.

196. The late duke of Ancaster passing over Tower Hill on a very wet day,
stopped for the purpose of getting his boots cleaned; when the operation was
over, on searching his pockets, he found he had not less than half a guinea,
which the boy said he could get changed in an instant, if his honor would be
so kind in the mean time to take care of his stool and blacking instruments.
His grace being therefore deputed to this important charge, the boy went in
quest of the change; his intention was to return, but meeting a companion less
honest than himself, and telling him his errand, the other advised him to make
off. Ay, but, says the first, what shall I do for my brushes and tools? Oh,
never mind that; leave the business to me, and you may depend upon having them
at our rendezvous in less than ten minutes. The fellow accordingly walked up
with an impudent air to the spot where the duke was guarding the tools, and
began to pack them up in a violent burry; what are you about, you rascal? said
his grace; those things are not yours; yes, but they are, says the fellow; the
rascal that cleaned your boots, and left you as sentinel, was a debtor of mine,
he is now a bankrupt, and by -- I Will seize both stock and block.

197. A lady hearing that a man in a high post, where he had an opportunity of
fingering a great deal of money, had married his kept mistress; dear me, said
she, that fellow is always robbing the public.

198. A company of gossips, at a good woman's labor, when the business was
over, began to discourse about the walking of spirits, which some affirmed to
have seen, while others doubted of their appearance. But at last the midwife,
whose judgment bore a great sway, delivered her judgment thus: For my part, I
have gone up and down all hours in the night, and yet, heaven be praised, I
never saw any thing worse than myself; though on my conscience, I believe I saw
the devil once.

199. An impudent fellow dined so often at a gentleman's house, that he grew
quite weary of him: and seeing him there one day, desired dinner to be put
back. The fellow after waiting some time, enquired when dinner would come up?
"Truly, sir," says the servant, not till you are gone, so it is but a folly for
you to stay.

200. A gentleman having bespoke a supper at an inn, desired the landlord to
sup with him. The host came up, and thinking to pay a greater compliment than
usual to his guest, pretended to find fault with the table cloth, and took the
knives and forks, and threw them down stairs. The gentleman, resolving not to
baulk his humor, threw the bottles and glasses down also; at which the host
being surprised, enquired the reason. "Nothing," replied the gentleman, but
that I thought you had a mind to sup below.

201. A notorious thief being to be tried for his life, confessed the robbery
he was charged with. The judge hereupon directed the jury to find him guilty,
upon his own confession. The jury having laid their heads together, brought him
in not guilty. The judge bid them consider of it again; but still they brought
in their verdict, not guilty. The judge asked them the reason? the foreman
replied, there is reason enough: for we all know him to be one of the greatest
liars in the world.

202. A countryman that lived in London three years, when he went home, a
friend asked him, if he saw Whitehall? No, says he. Nor the tower? says the
other. No, says he. Strange, replied the other what could be the reason of it?"
"Why, truly," says he, Squire Akerman, the keeper of Newgate, was so cross a
fellow, he would not let me out to see any thing.

203. An Indian chief being asked his opinion of a cask of Madeira wine
presented to him by an officer, said, he thought it a juice extracted from
women's tongues and lion's hearts; for after he had drank a bottle of it, he
said, he could talk for ever, and fight the devil.

204. When dr. Swift was dean of St. Patrick's, he was informed by one of the
chapters, that the beadle of the cathedral was a poet. The doctor sent for him,
and asked him some questions relating to his poetical talents, which he
modestly disclaimed, asserting that he only wrote for his bell. It being
winter, the doctor insisted he should compose some verses on the fifth of
November, and repeat them under his window, which accordingly he did; and the
dean was so pleased, that he rewarded the composer with a guinea, declaring at
the same time, that he was a better composer than Ambrose Philips. The
following were the lines repeated under the dean's window: To-night's the day,
I speak it to my sorrow,
That we were all to have been blown up tomorrow;
Therefore take care of coals and candle light,
It Is a cold frosty morning, and so good night.


205. A young fellow, who had more fortune than wit, being at dinner, at the
house of a gentleman of distinction, a young lady that was there was taken with
a fainting fit, and while every body was hastening to her assistance, some with
smelling bottles, and some with other helps, proper on such an occasion; says
the spark, with a sneer, there is no great danger, I suppose it only a breeding
qualm; Sir, says a gentleman that sat near him, with a severe tone of voice,
the lady is a sister of mine, and has been a widow these two years. Pardon me,
replied the spark, who did not extremely like his looks, and was willing to
palliate the offense, she looks so young and innocent, that I took her for a
maid.

206. Some gentlemen coming out of a tavern pretty merry, a link boy cried,
have a light, gentlemen? Light yourself to the devil, you dog, says one of the
company. Bless you, master, replied the boy, I can find the way in the dark;
shall I light your honor there?

207. As a thief was going to the gallows, many boys ran before to see the
execution; which he observing, called to them, saying, boys, you need not make
so much haste, for there will be no sport till I come.

208. A bricklayer working on the top of a house, happened to fall down through
the rafters. O! says a stander-by, I like such a fellow mightily; for he is a
man that goes through his work.

209. One seeing a painter write false English on a tombstone in a country
church yard, told him of it. Poh, said he, I know what I do well enough; for
the people here are so penurious that they will not go to the charge of good
English.

210. Two girls disputed about precedence, one the daughter of a gentleman of
small fortune, the other of a brewer. You are to consider, miss, said the
brewer's daughter, that my papa keeps a coach. Very true, madam, said the
other, and you are to consider that he likewise keeps a dray.

211. A humorous fellow, a carpenter, being subpoenaed as a witness, on a trial
for an assault, one of the counsel who was very apt to brow beat the witnesses,
asked what distance he was from the parties when the assault happened? The
carpenter answered, just four feet, five inches, and a half. How came you to be
so very exact? said the counselor. Because I expected some such fool would ask
me, answered the witness, and so I measured it.

212. One sent his man to a lawyer for advice, without a fee, but was slighted;
then his master went and gave him his fee: O, now, says the lawyer, I
understand you. When he came home, he chid his man for not telling the business
right: O, sir, says he, I had not my instructions in my pocket.

213. A king was riding a hunting, and coming to a gate which he must go
through, seeing a country clown at it, said, prithee, fellow, open the gate:
The fellow knowing who he was, said, no, and please your grace, I am not worthy
of that office, but I will run and tell mr. Holt, who is justice of the peace,
two miles off, and he shall come and open it for your grace. So he ran away,
and left the king to open the gate himself.

214. A great zealot advised one to leave off all wickedness, especially that
of the flesh, and live altogether by the spirit, as he did, Yes, says the
other, I do believe you do; for sure 'twas some spirit that moved you to get
your maid with child.

215. A lady ordered her footman to a staymaker, to fetch home a new pair of
stays, withal strictly charging him, if it rained, to take a hackney coach. A
violent shower of rain falling, the fellow returned with the stays drooping
wet; and being severely reprimanded for not obeying the commands of his lady,
replied, that in truth he did take a coach, but came all the way behind as
became his station.

216. A man, complaining to his friends, that his wife's drunkenness and ill
conduct had almost ruined him, concluded, as the vulgar usually do, and for
goodness sake, what is to be said for it? Nothing that I know, says his friend,
can be said for it, but much against it.

217. A young woman came to a lady to be hired, and the lady told her, she was
no maid. Yes, indeed, madam, says she, but I am. How can that be, replied the
lady, when to my knowledge you have had a child? Well, madam, says she, it was
but a very little one, and do you make such a matter of that?

218. A quaker, that was a barber, being sued by the parson for tithes; Yea and
Nay went to him, and said, he had never any dealings with him in his whole
life: why, says the parson, it is for tithes! says the quaker, I prithee
friend, upon what account? why says the parson, for preaching in the church.
Alas! then, replied the quaker, I have nothing to do with paying thee; for I
come not there. Oh! but you might, says the parson, for the doors are always
open at convenient times. And thereupon told him, he would be paid, seeing it
was his due. Yea and Nay hereupon shak'd his ears, and making several wry
faces, departed, and immediately entered his action (it being a corporation
town) against the parson for forty shillings: the parson upon notice of this,
came to him, and very hotly demanded why he put such a disgrace upon him: and
for what did he owe him the money? Truly, friend, replied the quaker, for
trimming. For trimming, said the parson; why I never was trimmed by you in my
life; O! but thou might have come and been trimmed, if thou had been
pleased, for my doors are always open at convenient times as well as thine.

219. One that had the looking after a chapel, gave a charge to the rest to let
in none of the crowd before the great persons were come and seated; thereupon
going to the vestry, and looking into the chapel, he espied a great many
people; at which, being angry, he told one of the vergers, I am afraid you will
be turned out of your place, for you have filled the chapel full of people
before any body comes in.

220. One walking abroad in a clear moonshine night, said, it was as fine a
night as a man should see in a summer's day.

221. A puritan coming to a cheesemonger's shop to buy cheese, when he gave him
a taste, he put his hat before his eyes to say grace. Nay, says he, instead of
tasting, you intend to make a meal of it.

222. A citizen having new built his house, he was praising the convenience of
it, and how light it was, for, says he, the morning sun lies all day upon it.

223. A gentleman being in a crowd, a thief picked his pocket; his man being
behind him (and hur was a Welchman) drew out hur knife, and cut the thief's ear
off, and cried, give hur master hur purse, and hur will give hur hur ear again.

224. One seeing a friend going before him in the street, called hollo. A
haughty fellow passing by at that time, asked what business he had to cry
hollo, while he passed by. D.-n you, says the other, what business had you to
pass by, while I was calling hollo?

225. A little gentleman going to a friend's house, found himself too short to
reach the knocker; at last seeing a tall fellow coming by, begged him to do it
for him; which (though very unwilling) he did, at the same time muttering, Damn
it, what are little fellows like you made for? The other replied, to be waited
on by tall ones like you.

226. Three citizens walking in the fields, one said, we should have a great
year of black-berries; for, said he, the last week I plucked a handful of the
fairest red black-berries that ever I saw. A second person laughed at him,
saying, red black-berries is a bull. But the third person, with much gravity,
justified what the former had said, and very sagely asked, are not
black-berries always red when they are green?

227. A gentleman having a little study, and having some company in his
chamber, who desired to see it; he told them, in faith, gentlemen, if you all
go in, it will not hold you.

228. A dog lying under a table, the maid went to kick him out, and he did not
stir; "if a body would kill this dog," says she, "I believe he would not stir
from this place."

229. A man owing money, his creditor clapped him into prison, of which he made
great complaint, saying, that he had trouble enough to borrow it, and did not
need be troubled to pay it again.

230. A woman burying her fifth husband, a man was counting with his fingers
how many she had had, and said, she had made a hand of them all.

231. A man at Christmas drinking March beer, which was very mellow, complained
of the newness of it, and said, surely this March beer cannot be above six
weeks old.

232. One seeing a very fat man pass by, said, He never saw a larger man of his
bigness in his life.

233. At Hamstead assembly, some years since, an Irish gentleman, who danced
with great spirit, though not perhaps with all the grace of a Vestris, was
observed by a macaroni, in the same country dance, who immediately began
mimicking him in the most extravagant manner. The Irishman took no notice for
some time, but seeing himself the general object of laughter, he came very
deliberately up to the mimic, and asked, Why he presumed to take him off? Me,
Sir, says the other, you mistake the matter; it is my natural way of dancing.
Is it, said the Hibernian, seemingly accepting the excuse, well, to be sure,
nobody can help what is natural; but hark ye, my friend, be sure you continue
in that natural step all night; for by G --, if you once attempt to make it
artificial, I will break every bone in your skin -- The poor macaroni was
obliged to subscribe to the sentence, to the no small amusement, as well as
satisfaction of the whole company.

234. The emperor of Germany some time since traveling before his retinue, as
is his usual way, attended only by a single aid de-camp, arrived very late at
the house of an Englishman, who kept a public house some where in the Austrian
Netherlands. The man having his house pretty full, it being fair time, and not
knowing who his guests were, appointed them to sleep in an out-house, which was
very readily complied with, after drinking a bottle of indifferent wine, and
eating a few slices of ham and biscuit. In the morning, they paid their bill,
which amounted to three shillings and six pence English, and rode off. A few
hours after, several of his suit came to enquire after him, when the publican
understanding whom he had for his guest, seemed very uneasy. Psha! man, never
mind this affair, said one of his attendants, Joseph is used to such
adventures; he will think no more on it. Aye, that may be, replied the
landlord, but by G -- I shall never forget the circumstance of having an
emperor in my house, and letting him off for three and six pence.

235. A new ninety gun ship, the Atlas, that was some time launched at Chatham,
had at her head the figure of Atlas supporting the globe. By an error of the
builder, the globe was placed so high, that part of it was obliged to be cut
away before the boltsprit could be fitted in- This part happened to be no other
than all North America; and what was more remarkable, the person who was
ordered to take the hatchet and slice it off, was an American.

236. A gentleman on his travels, called his servant to the side of the
post-chaise. Tom, says he, here is a guinea which is too light, and I can get
nobody to take it, do you see and part with it some how or other on the road.
-- Yes, sir, says the footman, I will endeavor -- When they came to their inn
at night, the gentleman called to his servant to know if he had passed off the
guinea? Yes, sir, says the man, I did slily. -- Aye! Tom, says the master, I
fancy thou art a sly sort of a fellow; but tell me how? Why, sir, says the
footman, the people refused it at breakfast, and so they did where your honor
dined; but as I had a groat to pay at the turnpike, I whipped him in between
the half pence, and the man put it in his pocket, and never saw it.

237. A gentleman having some company to dinner, one of them cried out, Lord
bless me, I have forgot my laced waistcoat! The master of the house told him
there was no need of any apology, for he was very well dressed -- You mistake
me, replied the guest, I do not mean a gold laced waistcoat, but my waistcoat
with a lace behind.

238. A person who had rendered himself obnoxious in trade, was told of some of
his tricks by a merchant on 'Change; and being a little nettled at his
reproaches, said, What, sir, do you call me a rogue? No, I do not call you a
rogue, said the merchant, but I will give you ten guineas, if you find any one
here, who will say you are an honest man.

239. Some gentlemen at a tavern, were conversing on the increasing neglect in
writers of that necessary part of composition, punctuation. It was remarked,
that the omission began with the long robe, who never use any stops in their
writings. -- A third person added, that he would not say anything to their
using commas, semicolons, or colons; but he had sufficient authority to say,
there was no period to their works.

240. A sailor one evening was stopped by a footpad, who demanded his money,
when a scuffle ensued, and the tar took the robber: meeting some people, they
persuaded him to bear away with his prize to a justice of the peace, which the
tar did; and when the magistrate came to examine into the assault, he said he
must take his oath, that he put him in bodily fear, otherwise he could not
commit the man: the sailor looking steadfastly at the justice, answered, He,
damn him, he put me in bodily fear! No, nor any fellow that ever lived;
therefore, if that is the case, you may let him go -- for damn me if I swear to
any such lie.

241. A student sent to one of his comrades to borrow a certain book. I never
lend my books out, said the latter, but if the gentleman chooses to come to my
chambers, he may make use of it as long as he pleases. A few days after, he
that had refused the book, sent to the other to borrow a pair of bellows. I
never lend my bellows out, says this other, but if the gentleman chooses to come
to my chambers, he may make use of them as long as he pleases.

242. William Penn, once waiting upon king Charles II. kept on his hat. The
king, as a gentle rebuke, put off his own. Friend Charles, said Penn, Why do
thou not keep thy hat on? -- Friend Penn, replied the king, it is the custom of
this place for no more than one person ever to be covered at a time.

243. George Buchanan being in Cornwall about some business, where he chanced
to run short of money, and not knowing what to do, being acquainted with none
in that country, and knowing his landlord to be loyal to the government, and a
great favorite to the king his master; takes a piece of brick, brays it to
small powder, mixes it with a little chalk, so that it might be like arsenick,
then put it in papers, with this direction on one, The stronger poison for the
king; and on the other paper. The flower poison for the queen. Out he goes on
purpose, leaving the papers lying on a table, where he knew they would see
them: The landlord perceived the direction; so in comes George in great haste
and calls out, O landlord, did you see two small bundles I have lost? I know
not what I shall do, for it was my main business to take them to London. -- O!
you murdering rogue! cries the landlord, I Will have you hanged for what you
intend. George, at this made off, and was going to fly for it, but the landlord
called for assistance; so he was apprehended, and made prisoner of state, and
carried to London by a troop of horse; when the people there began to know him,
and tell what he was, his guard slipped away shamefully, and left him; so George
thanked them for their good company and safe convoy.

244. George one day easing himself at the corner of a hedge, was seen by an
English 'squire, who began to mock him, asking him, Why he did not keckle like
the hens? But George, whose wit was always ready, told him, he was afraid to
keckle, left he should come and snatch up the egg. Which rebuff made the
'squire walk off as mute as a fish.

245. As George was on the road traveling to London, the weather being very
rainy and cold, he alighted at an inn to refresh and warm himself, but the
fireside was so surrounded with people, he could scarcely see the fire: George
finding this to be the case, calls to the hostler, and orders him to give his
horse, at the door, half a peck of oysters: You mean oats, sir, says the
hostler: No, no, says George, it is oysters, and base is that horse that will
not eat oysters. The people at the fire hearing this, all started up and ran to
the door, to see the horse eating oysters: the moment they left their seats,
George took an opportunity to plant himself before the fire, with a table and a
cloth behind him. In a little time they came back again, one by one, saying,
This horse will eat no oysters: Well, well, says George, he is either too full,
or too saucy; so you may bring them in, and I will eat them myself.

246. A rich farmer's son, who had been bred at the university, coming home to
visit his father and mother, they being one night at supper on a couple of
fowls, he told them, that by logic and arithmetic, he could prove these two
fowls to be three. Well, let us hear, said the old man. Why this, cried the
scholar, is one, and this, continued he, is two, two and one, you know make
three. Since you have made it out so well, answered the old man, your mother
shall have the first fowl, I will have the second, and the third you may keep
to yourself for your great learning.

247. A gentleman's butler in preparing the cloth for a choice festival, was
unlucky enough to break a dozen of china plates, of a rare and beautiful
pattern. 'You blockhead,' cries the master, meeting him presently after, with
another dozen in his hand, 'How did you do it?' 'Upon my soul, sir, they
happened to fall just so,' replied the fellow, and instantly dashed them also
on the marble hearth, into a thousand pieces.

248. Dean Swift standing one winter's day at the deanery window, saw a very
poor and ancient woman sitting on the steps, shivering with cold. His footman
happened to come to the door: when the poor creature besought him, in a piteous
tone, to deliver a petition, which she held in her hand, to his reverence. The
servant read it, and with infinite scorn, said his master had something else to
mind than her petition. What Is that you say, fellow? (said the dean, looking
out the window) come up here. The man trembling, obeyed him: He also desired
the poor woman to come before him, made her sit down, and ordered her some
bread and wine; after which he turned to the man and said, At what time, sir,
did I order you to open a paper directed to me; or to refuse a letter from any
one? Hark ye, sirrah, you have been admonished by me for drunkenness, idling,
and other faults; but since I have discovered your inhuman disposition, I must
dismiss you from my service. -- So pull off my clothes -- take your wages, and
let me hear no more from you. -- The fellow did so, and having vainly solicited
a written discharge, was compelled to go to sea, where he continued five years;
at the end of which time, finding that life far different from the ease and
luxury of his former occupation, he returned, and humbly confessing, in a
petition to the dean, his former transgressions, and assuring him of his entire
reformation, which the dangers he had undergone at sea had happily wrought, he
begged the dean would give him some sort of a discharge. -- Accordingly the
doctor called for a pen and ink, and gave him the following dismission, with
which he set out for London:

"Whereas the bearer -- served me the space of one year, during which time he
was an idler and a^ drunkard; I then discharged him as such; but how far his
having been five years at sea may have mended his manners, I leave to the
penetration of those who may hereafter choose to employ him.

J. SWIFT."
Deanery House, Oct. 9, 1739.

249. A gentleman traveling with a large sum about him, just after lord Mohun
had been killed in a duel with duke Hamilton, was stopped by a couple of
highwaymen. "For heaven's sake, gentlemen, don't stop me!" said the traveller;
"I am riding for my life." The highwaymen demanded what he meant? "My name,"
answered he, "is Maccartney Maccartney was thought guilty of foul play in the
above duel, and a large reward was offered for apprehending him.
, I was concerned in the murder of lord Mohun, and I need not inform you what a
price is set on my head." The rogues upon this information, altered their plan,
and conveyed the gentleman to the next justice, in hopes of the reward. But,
the magistrate being made sensible he was not Maccartney, and the reason why he
had called himself so, being explained, the gentleman was set at liberty, and
his apprehenders were detained in safe custody.

250. A French nobleman had been smartly satirized by Voltaire, and, meeting
the poet one night soon after, he gave him a pretty severe caning. The poet
immediately flew to the duke of Orleans, told him how he had been used by the
nobleman, and begged him to do him justice. "Sir," replied the duke, with a
significant smile, " you have had it done you already."

251. A lady, who once paid a visit to mr. Quin, at his house at Kingston, near
London, expressed great satisfaction on viewing the garden, and its environs;
and was remarkably well pleased with a fine piece of water, as she called it,
at the bottom of the garden; though in fact it was little more than a ditch.
"Pray, mr. Quin," says the lady, "how do you get this canal supplied with
water?" -- "Madam," replied Quin, "my maids empty their chamber-pots in it
every morning.'

252. One that was troubled with a damnable shrew, would often wish her in
heaven; she in a great rage replied, she had rather see him hanged first.

253. Some were saying, in such a town, the women were all counted whores. A
mad fellow hearing them say so, presently swore he believed it; for his mother
and both his sisters were born there.

254. King Charles the Second, and the duke of Ormond, discoursing of the
prettiest women of several countries, says the king to the duke, my lord you
have pretty women in Ireland, but they have got (...) legs. O, that is nothing,
please you, my liege, we lay them aside.

255. A man, very rich, but very silly, was recommended to a gentleman as a
good match for his daughter. No no, said he, I would rather have a man without
money, than money without a man.

256. As Ben Johnson (who was a bricklayer before he turned poet) was one
morning going early to his work, with his tools in his hand, he was spied by a
young lady, who was up sooner than ordinary, breathing the fresh air out of her
chamber window. She was of a gay disposition, and thinking to be merry with our
bricklayer, called to him and said -- By line and rule, works many a fool: good
morrow, mr. Bricklayer. Ben no sooner turned his head and saw her, but he
answered, In silk and scarlet, walks many a harlot: good morrow, madam.

257. A scoffing blade meeting a gentlewoman with a long nose, says, madam, I
would gladly kiss your mouth, if I knew how to come at it for your nose. Nay,
sir* ^^ys she, if my nose be so big that you cannot come at my mouth, you may
kiss me where there is no nose to give you offense.

258. A gentleman coming into a choir, where there was none of the best music
in the world, hearing them singing, have mercy upon us miserable sinners: Ay,
says he, they might very well have said, have mercy upon us miserable singers.

259. Sir Thomas More, the day he was beheaded, had a barber sent him, because
his hair was long, which it was thought, would make him more commiserated by
the people. The barber asked him whether he would be trimmed? In good faith,
honest fellow, said sir Thomas, the king and I have a suit for my head; and
till the title be cleared, I will bestow no cost upon it.

260. A gentleman being under the hands of a political barber, who, while
shaving his head, was entertaining him with an account of the wars in Italy,
and giving him a description of the place, till growing verbose and tedious in
his operation, the gentleman said, sir, I hope you're not drawing a map of the
country upon my head with your razor.

261. One of a great family, and no wealth, married a very rich widow; says
one, This is like a black pudding; the one brought blood, and the other brought
salt and oatmeal.

262. One seeing his friend wear a threadbare cloak, asked him, if it was not
sleepy? Why do you ask? said the other: because, said he, I think it has not
had a nap these seven years.

263. Some gentlemen riding over a common by a turf cutter, enquired their way;
when he had directed them right, they asked what time o'day it was? The man
looking up to the sun, told them it was ten. But one of the gentleman taking
out his watch, said it was not ten yet. Then, says the fellow, you may ride
till it is, and be pox'd to you, if you will: if you knew better than me, why
did you ask the question, and be d -- d to you?

264. A young fellow, who fancied himself a good player, resolved to take to
the stage, and having offered his service to the proprietor of Covent Garden
house, was desired to speak some lines of tragedy, by way of probation, before
the great mr. Quin: while he was tearing away his tragedy speech, a dog who
belonged to some of the company, set up a howling, which drowned the voice of
the actor; hereupon mr. Quin asked, whose dog it was? and being answered, He Is
a dog of judgment, by Jove, says he; and then turned away on his heel.

265. A gallant setting himself out before his mistress, upon a day, asked her,
whom she thought the prettiest man in the world? Nay, says she, that is a
puzzling question; but however, I think that man, that is most unlike you, may
be, for aught I know.

266. A merry fellow told an old bachelor of a strange dream he had of him the
night before, for, says he, I thought you were dead; and I thought I saw you
behind hell-door leading of a great ape, and that Lucifer coming in, and seeing
you, asked, what that old fellow did there? to whom the devil that attended
you, told him, you were an old bachelor, and had never lost your maidenhead; to
whom Beelzebub said, turn him out again, thou do him wrong; do thou not see
his son in his hand there, that is so like, that any one may know who was the
father of him?

267. One said, he had rid so hard that his horse had never a dry thread about
him.

268. An ignorant lawyer, pleading in an action of battery, told the judge, in
aggravation of the defendant's crime; that he had beat the plaintiff with a
certain wooden instrument, called an iron pestle.

269. A dignified clergyman, going down to his living to spend the summer, met
near his house a comical old chimney-sweeper, with whom he used to chat: So,
John, says the doctor, from whence came you? From your house, sir, says mr.
Soot; for this morning I swept all your chimneys. How many were there? says the
doctor. No less than twenty, quoth John. Well, and how much a chimney have you?
Only a shilling a piece, sir. Why then, quoth the doctor, you have earned a
great deal of money in a little time. Yes, yes, sir, says John, throwing his
bag of soot over his shoulder, We black coats get our money easy enough.

270. Judge Jefferies, taking a dislike to an evidence who had a long beard,
told him, that if his conscience was as large as his beard, he had a swinging
one. To which the countryman replied, my lord, if you measure consciences by
beards, you have none at all.

271. A fellow wanting a pair of boots, goes into a shoemaker's shop, and asked
for a pair of boots, which were brought him. They fitted him, he walked up and
down the shop, to settle them to his feet; but spying an opportunity, he ran
out of the shop, and the shoemaker followed him, crying, stop thief! The fellow
said, no gentlemen, it is for a wager; I am to run in boots and he in his shoes
and stockings. Then said the mob, well run boots, for shoes will never overtake
thee.

272. Philip II. walking alone one day in one of the cloisters belonging to the
convent of the Escurial, a tradesman seeing the door open, went in. Transported
with admiration of the fine paintings with which the house is adorned, he
addressed himself to the king, whom he took for one of the servants of the
convent, and desired him to show the paintings, and describe the subjects of
them. Philip with all the humility and condescension of a lay-brother,
conducted him through all the apartments, and gave him every satisfaction he
could desire. At parting the stranger took him by the hand, and squeezing it
very affectionately, said, 'I am much obliged to you friend, I live at St.
Martin's, and my name is Michael Bambis, if you should come my way and call on
me, you will find a glass of good wine at your service;' 'And my name (said the
pretended servant) is Philip the Second, and if you will call on me at Madrid,
I will give you a glass of as good.'

273. In the reign of Queen Anne, when it was said the lord Oxford had got a
great number of peers made at once to serve a particular turn, being met the
next day by my lord Wharton; 'So, Robin (said he) I find what you lost by
tricks, you gained by honors.'

274. A country gentleman riding down Cornhill in London, his horse stumbled,
and threw him at a shop door, the mistress whereof being a pleasant woman, and
seeing there was no hurt done, asked him, Whether his horse used to serve him
so? Yes, said he, whenever he comes to the door of a cuckold: Lord, sir, said
she, I would advise you to go back again, for you will have a hundred falls
else before you get to Cheapside.

275. A lady seeing a tolerable pretty fellow, who by the help of a tailor and
sempstress had transformed himself into a beau, said, What pity it is to see
one whom nature has made no fool, so industrious to pass for an ass: Rather,
says another, one should pity those whom nature abuses, than those who abuse
nature; besides the town would be robbed of one half of its diversion, if it
should be a crime to laugh at a fool.

276. An English gentleman traveling to France, had made choice of an abbot as
wicked as himself, for the companion of his pleasures: One of his countrymen
told him, that though the abbot and he differed about the way to heaven, they
were in a fair way of going to the devil together.

277. A gentleman being arrested for a large sum of money, sent to an
acquaintance, who had often professed a great friendship for him, to beg he
would bail him; the other told him he had promised never to be bail for any
body; but with much kindness said, I will tell you what you may do, you may get
somebody else if you can.

278. One being at his wife's funeral, and the bearers going pretty quick
along, he cried out to them, Do not go so fast, what need we make a toil of a
pleasure?

279. An honest Welsh carpenter, coming out of Cardiganshire, got work in
Bristol, where in a few months, he had saved, besides his expenses, about
twelve shillings, and with this prodigious sum of money, returning into his own
country, when he came upon Mile Hill, he looked back on the town: Ah, poor
Pristow, said he, if one or two of hur countrymen was to give hur such another
snake as hur has done, it wo^ld be poor Pristow indeed.

280. Mr. Prior, when ambassador, being at one of the French operas at Paris,
and seated in a box with a nobleman he was free with, who, as is usual in
France, sung louder than the performer, burst into bitter invectives against
the last: upon which his lordship gave over to enquire the reason, adding that
the person he exclaimed against so fiercely, was one of the finest voices they
had. Yes, replied his excellency, but he makes such a horrible noise, that I
cannot have the pleasure to hear your lordship.

281. One observing a crocked fellow in close argument with another, who would
have dissuaded him from some inconsiderate resolution, said to his friend,
Prithee let him alone, and say no more to him, you see he is bent upon it.

282. A gentleman going into a meeting house, and stumbling over one of the
forms that were set there, cried out in a passion, Who the devil would have
expected set forms in a meeting house?

283. Madam Simon a rich young widow of Montpelier in France, entertained so
strong an affection for her old spouse deceased, that she caused his image to
be cut out as large as the life in wood, which she placed every night by her
side in b^d. The singular conjugal affection of the young lady for old Simon,
and the tears and caresses which she lavished on the wooden image of her
husband, were for a long time the topic of conversation at Montpelier. A
handsome young man of the neighborhood, who had long solicited in vain the
good graces of the widow, had recourse to the friendly offices of her fille de
chamber, on whom he prevailed, by dint of presents, to substitute him one night
instead of the block. On the morning succeeding the happy night, the Abigail
came into her mistress's chamber to enquire what she would have for dinner. A
shoulder of mutton, replied the lady, and a couple of capons, with oyster
sauce. Lord, ma'am, returned the fille de chamber, there is not enough of wood
in the house to get ready so many things. -- Pray, leave me in peace, replied
the widow, and if you have not enough of wood, there is old Simon in the
antechamber.

284. Two countrymen who had never seen a play in their lives, nor had any
notion of it went to a theater, where they placed themselves snug in the corner
of the gallery; the first music played, which they liked well enough; then the
second and third, to their great satisfaction: at length the curtain drew up,
and three or four actors entered to begin the play; upon which one of the
countrymen cried to the other, come, Hodge, let us be going, mayhap the
gentlemen are talking about business.

285. A farmer who had a very great name in the country for his dexterity in
manly exercises, such as wrestling, throwing the bar, and the like, drew upon
himself many occasions to try his skill, with such as came far and near to
challenge him: among the rest, a conceited fellow rode a great way to visit
this champion: and being told that he was on his ground behind the house, he
alighted, and walked with his horse in his hand, till he came where he found
him at work; so hanging his horse upon the pails, he accosted him thus: that
having heard much of his same, he was come forty miles to try a fall with him.
The champion without more words, came up to him, and closing with him, took him
on such an advantageous lock, that he pitched him clear over the pails; and
with a great deal of unconcern, took up his spade and fell to work again: the
fellow getting upon his legs again, as nimble as he could, called to speak to
him. Well, says the champion, have you any more to say to me? No, no, replied
the fellow, only to desire you would be so kind as to throw my horse after me.

286. A lawyer and a physician having a dispute about precedence, referred it
to Diogenes, who gave it in favor of the lawyer, in these terms: Let the thief
go before, and the executioner follow.

287. A citizen dying greatly in debt, it coming to his creditors' ears,
farewell, said one, there is so much of mine gone with him: and he carried so
much of mine, said another: One hearing them make their several complaints,
said, Well, I see now, that though a man can carry nothing of his own out of
the world, yet he may carry a great deal of other men's.

288. When the lord Jefferies, before he was a judge, was pleading at the bar
once, a country fellow giving evidence against his client, pushed the matter
very home on the side he swore of. Jefferies, after his usual way, called out
to the fellow, hark you, you fellow, in the leather doublet, what have you for
swearing? To which the countryman smartly replied, faith, sir, if you had no
more for lying, than I have for swearing, you might even wear a leather doublet
too.

289. A gentleman coming to an inn, and seeing the ostler an expert and
tractable fellow about the horses, asked how long he had lived there, and what
countryman he was. I'se Yorkshire, said the fellow, an ha^ lived sixteen years
here. I wonder, replied the gentleman, that in so long time, so clever a fellow
as you seem to be, have not come to be master of the inn yourself. Ay, answered
the ostler, but maister's York too.

290. A young lady who had been married but a short time, seeing her hushand
going to rise pretty early in the morning, said, what, my dear, are you getting
up already? Pray lie a little longer and rest yourself. No, my dear, replied
the husband, I Will get up and rest myself.

291. One told another, who was not used to be clothed very often, that his new
coat was too short for him; that is true, answered his friend; but it will be
long enough before I get another.

292. A man having lost fifty guineas one night at a gaming table, some friends
condoling with him upon his ill luck; Faith, said he, I am very well pleased at
what I have done; for I have bit them, by G --, there is not one guinea that
don't want six pence of weight.

293. A countryman sowing his ground, two smart fellows riding that way, one of
them called to him with an insolent air; Well, honest fellow, said he, it is
your business to sow, but we reap the fruits of your labor. To which the
countryman replied, it is very likely you may, for I am sowing hemp.

294. A pragmatical young fellow, sitting at table over against the learned
John Scot, asked him, what difference there was between Scot and sot? Just the
breadth of the table, answered the other.

295. After the fire of London, there was an act of parliament to regulate the
buildings of the city; every house was to be three stories high, and there were
to be no balconies backwards: A man of humor, just after this act passed,
going along the street, and seeing a little crooked gentlewoman on the other
side of the way, he runs over to her in great haste: Lord, madam, said he, how
dare you walk thus publicly in the streets? Walk publicly in the streets! and
why not, pray sir? answered the little woman. Because, said he, you are built
directly contrary to act of parliament; you are but two stories high, and your
balcony hangs over your house of office.

296. A man standing one day at his gate, a beggar coming up to him, cried, he
begged his worship would give him a mug of his small beer. Why, how now, says
he, what times are these, when beggars must be chusers? I say, bring this
fellow a mug of strong beer.

297. A young Italian gentleman being led by curiosity into Holland, where
having lived some time conversing with the most ingenious, he was one day set
upon by a protestant minister, who would needs engage him in a controversy
about religion. The young gentleman knowing himself too weak for the encounter,
begged to be excused, and endeavored to wave the discourse; but the more he
avoided it, the more warmly he was pressed by the minister; whereupon the young
Italian, in a very great passion, conjured him by all that was good, to let him
alone in peace with his religion. For, said he, I cannot embrace yours, and if
you make me lose my own, I will never make choice of any other.

298. A person coming into a church to the place where several of his ancestors
were buried, after he had said much in their commendation, and praised them for
worthy men; Well, said he, I am resolved if I live, to be buried as near them
as possible.

299. A young lady being sick, a physician was sent for to feel her pulse; she
being very coy, and loath he should touch her naked skin, pulled her smock
sleeve over her hand; the doctor observing it, took a corner of his coat and
laid it upon her smock sleeve; at which a lady that stood by wondered; O madam,
said he, a linen pulse must always have a woolen physician.

300. One of king James the first's chaplains preaching before the court at
Whitehall, made a set of the following quibbles in his discourse. Speaking of
the depravity of the age, he said, that almost all houses were made ale houses;
that men made matrimony, a matter of money; and placed their paradise in a pair
of dice; was it so in the days of Noah? ah no!

301. King Charles the second coming from New Market through Shoreditch to
London observing a wall or bank lately made there of (...); as is common in
that road, bid Rochester, who was in the coach with him, tak^^ notice of it;
Ay, sir, said he, the citizens seemed have been laying their heads together, to
mend the (...) against your majesty came by.

302. A certain person having by his extravagance run himself over head and
ears in debt, and seeming very little concerned about it, one of his friends
told him one day, that he wondered how he could sleep quietly in his bed whilst
he was so much in debt. For my part, said he, I sleep very well; but I wonder
how my creditors can.

303. An impudent ridiculous fellow, being laughed at by all who came in his
company, told some of his acquaintance, that he had a happy quality of laughing
at all who laughed at him. Then, said one of them, you lead the merriest life
of any one in Christendom.

304. An ordinary country fellow being called as an evidence in a court of
judicature, in a cause where the terms of mortgager and mortgagee were
frequently used, the judge asked the countryman if he knew the difference
between the mortgager and morgagee: Yes, said he, it is the same as between the
nodder and noddee. How is that? replied the judge. Why, you sit there, said the
clown, and I nod at you; then I am the nodder, and you the noddee.

305. A sober good woman, who was treating with a maidservant about work and
wages, asked her among other questions, what religion she was of? A-lack-a day,
madam, said the poor innocent girl, I never trouble my head about that; for
religion I thought was only for gentlefolks.

306. One who had formerly been rich, but had squandered away his estate, and
left himself no furniture in the house but a sorry bed, a little table, a few
broken chairs, and some other old things, seeing a parcel of thieves, who knew
not his condition, breaking into his house in the night, he cried out. Are not
you a damned pack o^ fools, to think to find any thing in the dark, (...) I can
find nothing by day light.

307. A countryman seeing a lady in the street in a very odd dress, as he
thought, begged her to be pleased to tell him what she called it? The lady, a
little surprised at the question, called him an impudent fellow. Nay, I hope no
offense, madam, cried Hodge. I am a poor countryman, just going out of town,
and my wife always expects I should bring her an account of the newest fashion,
which occasioned my enquiring what you call this that you wear: It is a sack,
said she, in a great pet. I have heard, replied the countryman, heartily
nettled at her behavior, of a pig in a poke, but never saw a sow in a sack
before.

308. A proud parson, and his man, riding over a common, saw a shepherd tending
his flock, and having a new coat on, the parson asked him in a haughty tone,
who gave him that coat? the same, said the shepherd, that clothed you, the
parish. The parson, nettled at this, rode on murmuring, a little way, and then
bade his man go back, and ask the shepherd if he would come and live with him,
for he wanted a fool. The man going accordingly to the shepherd, delivered his
master's message, and concluded as he was ordered, that his master wanted a
fool. Why are you going away then? said the shepherd. No, answered the other.
Then you may tell your master, replied the shepherd, that his living cannot
maintain three of us.

309. A schoolmaster, asking one of his boys, in a sharp wintry morning, what
was Latin for cold, the boy hesitated a little: What, sirrah, said he, cannot
you tell? Yes, yes, replied the boy. I have it at my fingers' ends.

310. A certain poetaster, whose head was full of a play of his own writing,
was explaining the plot and design of it to a friend. The scene of it, said he,
is in Cappadocia; and to judge rightly of the play, a man must transport
himself into the country and get acquainted with the genius of the people. You
say right, answered the friend, and I think it would be best to have it acted
there.

311. A certain couple going to Dunmow in Essex, to claim the flitch of bacon,
which is to be given to every married pair, who can swear they have had no
dispute, nor once repented their bargain in a year and a day, the steward,
ready to deliver it, asked where they would put it? the husband produced a bag,
and told him in that. That, answered the steward, is not big enough to hold it:
So I told my wife, replied the good man; and I believe we have had a hundred
words about it. Ay, said the steward, but they were not such as will butter any
cabbage to eat with this bacon; and so hangs the flitch up again.

312. A scholar of dr. Busby's coming into a parlour where the doctor had laid
a fine bunch of grapes for his own eating, takes it up, and says aloud, 'I
publish the banns between these grapes and my mouth; if any one knows any just
cause or impediment why these two should not be joined together, let him
declare it.'

The doctor being in the next room, overheard all that was said, and coming
into the school, he ordered the boy who had eaten the grapes to be taken up,
or, as they called it, horsed on another boy's back, but before he proceeded to
the usual discipline, he cried out aloud, as the delinquent had done; 'I
publish the banns between my rod and this boy's breech; if any one knows any
just cause or impediment why these two should not be joined together, let him
declare it?' I forbid the banns, cried the boy. Why so? said the doctor.
Because the parties are not agreed, replied the boy. Which answer so pleased
the doctor, who loved to find any readiness of wit in his scholars, that he
ordered the boy to be set down.

313. A young fellow, not quite so wise as Solomon, eating some cheese full of
mites, one night at a tavern; Now, said he, have I done as much as Sampson, for
I have slain my thousands and my ten thousands. Yes, answered one of the
company, and with the same weapon too, the jaw bone of an ass.

314. A certain poor unfortunate gentleman was so often pulled by the sleeve by
the bailiffs, that he was in continual apprehension of them, and going one day
through the street, his coat sleeve, as he was swinging it along in a hurry,
happened to hitch upon the iron spike of one of the rails at a gentleman's
door, whereupon he immediately turned about in a great surprise, and cried out,
At whose suit, sir? at whose suit!

315. A gentle sprinkle of rain happening, a plough-boy left his work, and went
home; but his master seeing him there, told him that he should not have left
off his work for so trifling an affair, and desired for the future he would
stay till it rained downright. A day or two afterward proving a very rainy
day, the boy stayed till dusk, and being almost drowned, his master asked him
why he did not come before? Why I should, says the boy, but you zed I shou'dn't
come hoam vore it rained downright; and it has not rained downright yet, for it
was aslaunt all day long.

316. A young fellow was extolling a lady's beauty very highly, and one of his
companions allowed she had beauty, except that she had a bad set of teeth. Very
true, said the first, but she is a fine woman in spite of her teeth.

317. A miser having lost a hundred pounds, promised ten pounds reward to any
one who should bring it to him -- An honest poor man, who found it, brought it
to the old gentleman, demanding the ten pounds. But the miser, to baffle him,
alleged there were an hundred and ten pounds in the bag when lost. The poor
man, however, was advised to sue for the money, and when the cause came on to
be tried, it appearing that the seal had not been broken, nor the bag ripped,
the judge said to the defendant's counsel. The bag you lost had a hundred and
ten pounds in it, you say? Yes, my lord, says he. Then, replied the judge,
according to the evidence given in court, this cannot be your money, for here
were only a hundred pounds; therefore the plaintiff must keep it till the true
owner appears.

318. An old parson was called out of bed on a cold winter's morning by the
clerk, to marry a couple, who were then waiting for him. The doctor hurried up,
and went shivering to church; but seeing only an old man of seventy, with a
woman about the same age, and the clerk, he asked the latter, in a pet, where
the bridegroom and bride were, and what that man and woman wanted. -- The old
man replied, that they came there to be married; the doctor looked sternly at
him, and exclaimed, married! Yes, married! said the old man hastily, better
marry than do worse -- Go, get you home, you silly old fools! said the doctor,
get home and do your worst. And then hobbled out of the church, in a great
passion with his clerk for calling him out of his bed on such a ridiculous
errand.

319. On a trial for shooting a seaman, a counsel asked one of the witnesses
which he was for, plaintiff or defendant? Plaintiff or defendant! says the
sailor, scratching his head, why I don't know what you mean by plaintiff or
defendant. I come to speak for that man there, pointing at the prisoner. -- You
are a pretty fellow for a witness, says the counsel, not to know what plaintiff
or defendant means! -- Some time after, being asked by the same counsel, what
part of the ship he was in at the time, Abaft the binocle, said the sailor.
Abaft the binocle! replied the barrister, What part of the ship is that? Ha!
ha! ha! chuckled the sailor, are not you a pretty fellow for a counselor,
pointing archly at him with his finger, not to know what place abaft the
binocle is!

320. A gentleman being at dinner at a friend's house, the first thing that
came upon the table was a dish of whitings, and one being put on his plate, he
found it stink so much that he could not touch it; and then took up the plate
and put it to his ear. The gentleman, at whose table he was seated, enquiring
into the meaning of this extraordinary behavior, he told him that he had lost
a brother at sea about a fortnight ago, and was asking that fish if he knew any
thing of him? Well, said the gentleman pleasantly, and what answer did he make
you? -- Why, replied the other, very gravely, he told me that he could not
possibly give me any account of my deceased brother, as he had not been at sea
these three weeks.

321. A gentleman, whose father had been robbed of a considerable quantity of
plate, dined with the son of a wealthy man supposed to have been a receiver. A
large silver tureen was brought to the table without a cover. I am admiring
your tureen, said the guest to the host, not so much for its fashion or value,
but from a very extraordinary circumstance, which is, that a cover I have got
at home would exactly fit it.

322. An honest peasant settled in a small village, where, in a short time, he
gained the good will of all his neighbors. He had, however, the misfortune to
lose one of his best milch cows in the first year, which grieved him
exceedingly; while his wife, who was an excellent manager, took it to heart so
much, that she absolutely fell sick and died. The good man lamented the loss of
his helpmate with the most unaffected sorrow, and remained for some months
quite inconsolable. His neighbors now thought it their duty to reason him into
resignation. My friend, said one of them, the wife you have lost, was really an
excellent woman, but still you have a good remedy; you are a young and an
honest man, and you will find no difficulty in procuring another. For my part,
continued he, I have three daughters, and shall be happy to call you
son-in-law. Another, on this, offered him his sister; and a third, his niece.
Good God, says the mourner, what a strange place this is, since a man who lives
here, had better lose his wife than his cow! My wife is dead, and behold! you
tell me, I may pick and choose, to supply her place: but when my poor cow died,
nobody ever thought of offering me another.

323. A gentleman was one day at a public entertainment, where one of the
company sat several hours without speaking a syllable; and as from the
character of the person, there was great reason to suspect that his silence was
owing to a supercilious contempt of the company, he determined to show his
resentment the first opportunity that offered. -- Accordingly, when supper was
brought in, he was remarkably assiduous in helping the silent man to the best
on the table, and taking care to supply his plate when he saw it nearly empty:
upon this one of the company desired to know his reason for this extraordinary
attention to the silent person? To which he replied, I assure you, it is from
the tenderness of my disposition, for I cannot bear to see a dumb creature
want. This smart stroke had the desired effect.

324. When his British majesty paid a visit to admiral Parker's fleet at the
Nore, it was impossible that every sailor on board could have an opportunity of
beholding his sovereign. In consequence of this disappointment, the officers
granted liberty to as many as possibly could be spared ashore, to go and see
the royal visitors at Sheerness and Chatham. -- When the king entered the lines
at Chatham, the crowd was extremely great, and pressing very hard to see him; a
sailor's curiosity led him so far as to push, just as his majesty and the
prince were passing in front of a sergeant of the 65th regiment, who was
obliged to knock the butt end of his musket on Jack's toes, to keep him back,
which made him grumble very much; the king overhearing the dispute, turned
round to the sergeant, and desired him to hurt no person; if he could do his
duty by gentle means, do it, if not, let the people satisfy their curiosity.
The enraged seaman on hearing this, exclaimed, God bless your majesty! I have
leave from my officers; and d -- n my eyes if ever a lobster in England shall
hinder me from seeing your royal kingship! This had such an effect on the king
and the prince, that they were observed to laugh very heartily.

325. A gentleman telling the husband of a lady remarkably beautiful, that he
could never look at his wife without breaking the tenth commandment; You are
welcome, replied the other, to break the tenth commandment as much as you
please, provided you do not break the seventh.

326. A judge, suspected of bribery, checked his clerk, for having a dirty
face. I plead guilty, my lord, said the clerk, but my hands are clean.

327. A little gentleman of the long robe having a dispute with a remarkable
bulky barrister, the big man threatened to put him into his pocket: If you do
so, said Dapper, you will have more law in your pocket, than ever you had in
your head.

328. Quick, the comedian, was traveling in a stage in which there was only an
old gentleman and himself, which was stopped on an unfrequented road, by a
single highwayman. The old gentleman, in order to save his own money, pretended
to be asleep; but Quick resolved to be even with him. Accordingly, when the
highwayman presented his pistol, and commanded Quick to deliver his money
instantly, or he was a dead man -- Money! returned he with an idiotic shrug,
and a countenance inexpressibly vacant -- O Lud, sir, they never trusts me with
any; for nuncle here always pays for me, twinpikes and all, your honor! --
Upon which the highwayman gave him a few hearty curses for his stupidity, --
complimented the old gentleman with a smart slap on the face to awaken him, and
robbed him of every shilling he had in his pocket; while Quick, who did not
lose a single farthing, with great satisfaction and merriment pursued his
journey, laughing heartily at his fellow traveller.

329. A dwarfish man espoused such a gigantic woman, that he was obliged to
climb upon a table if he wanted to kiss her. This woman, when her husband was
vexed, or out of humor, would look down as if from a two pair of stairs
window, and ask, who it was that kept grumbling there below?

330. A tattling fellow came and told a person of whom he had very little
knowledge, a secret of the utmost consequence to himself, begging for God's
sake that the other would not tell it again. Never sear, said the person, I
shall be at least as discreet as yourself.

331. An astrologer advised a prince to settle his affairs, because within
three days he was to die a violent death; the prince asked him, whether he had
foreseen what kind of death he himself should die? And he assuring him that he
was to die of a violent fever, the prince told him, that, to let him see the
vanity of his art, he should be hanged that very hour. The astrologer being
immediately seized in order to be led to the place of execution, he said to the
prince: Pray see, my lord, whether my prediction be not true; feel my pulse,
and you will be sensible that I am in a fever: which subtle answer saved his life.

332. An impertinent poet, having begun to read to a certain person a poem of
his own making, asked him, which of his verses were the best? those, answered
he, thou have not yet read, for they have not made my head ache.

333. A prince jeered one of his courtiers, who had served him in several
embassies, and told him, he looked like an ass: I know not what I look like,
answered the courtier, but this I know, that I have had the honor to represent
your highness upon several occasions.

334. Certain young ladies, walking in the fields, met a shepherd in their way,
who was carrying a kid to the market; one among them coming up to it, stroked
it, and said to her companions, look how pretty it is, it is horns are not yet
budded. The shepherd upon hearing that, replied, It Is because he is not yet
married.

335. The duke of Ossuna, viceroy of Naples, passing by Barcelona, and having a
right to release some slaves, he went on board the admiral galley, and passing
through the crew of slaves, he asked several of them what their crimes were.
Every one excused himself upon different pretenses; one saying that he had been
sent thither by the malice of his enemies; another by the corruption of his
judge; but all of them unjustly. Among the rest, there was a little sturdy
black fellow, and the duke asking him what he had been sent thither for: my
lord, said he, I cannot deny but I am justly sent hither, for finding I wanted
money, I carried off a purse not far from Tarragona, in order to keep me from
starving. The duke, with a little staff he had in his hand, gave him two or
three taps on the shoulder, saying, You rogue, what do you here, among so many
honest innocent men? Get out of their company. Accordingly he was set free, and
the rest were left to tug at the oar.

336. An excise man walking by a river's side, spied a boy fishing, who knew
him to be of (...) honorable profession. My pretty lad, says (...) are you
fishing for? I fish for the devil, (...) boy, but I want the right bait to
catch (...) bait is that? says the other. Indeed (...) boy, I have been told,
there is no better bait in the world than an exciseman.

337. A gentleman intending to ride into the country next morning, commanded
his servant to wake him at six o'clock; the servant rose at five, and went to
his master and waked him, telling him that he must make haste, for he had but
an hour more to sleep. Another time his master bid him wake him at four
o'clock; the boy, for fear of missing the hour, did not go to bed all that
night; and hearing two o'clock strike, he went to his master and waked him, who
presently asked him what o'clock it was; the servant answered, don't trouble
yourself, sleep on securely. I am only come to tell you, that you have still
two full hours to sleep.

338. A little boy asking his father to help him to something at table, his
father told him 'twas not civil to ask, but that he must wait till somebody
served him. The poor boy observing that every one was eating, and that nothing
was given him, said to the father, Pray father, give me a little salt. What
will thou do with it? says the father. It Is, says the son, to eat with the meat
you will give me. Upon which his father, perceiving he had nothing upon his
plate, gave him meat without his asking for it.

339. A certain scholar attempting to swim, he had like to have been drowned;
and thereupon swore he would never go into the water again, 'till he had
learned to swim.

340. A scholar had a great mind to catch a mouse that was wont to gnaw his
books, and therefore sat eating a little victuals in the dark in the closet to
watch her.

341. A scholar having newly bought a house, (...) out at a window upon those
that passed by, (...) whether his house became him or not?

342. (...) scholar, who had heard that a crow may (...) two hundred years, to
experiment the (...) ^ought a crow and kept it.

343. A braggadocio swore that he met with two great enemies at one time, and
he tossed one so high in the air, that if he had had a baker's basket full of
bread, he would have starved in the fall; and the other he struck so deep into
the earth, that he left nothing to be seen but his hand and one arm, to pull
his hat off to thank him.

344. A good judge of painting, was shown a picture, done by a very indifferent
hand, but much commended, and asked his opinion of it. Why, truly, said he, the
painter is a very good painter, and observes the Lord's commandments. What do
you mean by that? said one who stood by. Why, I think, answered he, that he
has not made to himself the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters under the earth.

345. A philosopher being blamed by a stander by, for defending an argument
weakly against the emperor Adrian, replied, What, would you have me contend
with a man that commands thirty legions of soldiers?

346. A gentleman standing at the window of his house with his wise, whom he
had married a few days before, and seeing a beautiful young woman pass along,
he said to his wife, My dear soul, I will make you laugh; you must know that I
had to do several times with that girl before she married, but she was so silly
as to go and tell her mother of it. His wife replied, Oh! the silly brainless
wretch, I in like manner have had do to an hundred times with our coachman and
footman, and never said a word of it to my mother.

347. Lord Chatham making one of a party at whist, one of the gamesters, with a
bitter oath declared, he had the worst hand in the company; a considerable bet
was proposed and agreed to by his lordship, that he had a worse. He pulled off
his glove, and showed his gouty hand, when the company unanimously pronounced
in his lordship's favor.

348. Two gentlemen having words at a tavern, at length fell to sighting with
their canes. A stander-by observing one of them striking his antagonist over
the head, while the other only belabored his sides and shoulders; after the
affray was over, asked the latter why he did not strike upon the head also; Oh,
sir, said he, if I had hit him over the head, I should have broke my cane.

349. Sirrah, says a justice to one brought before him, You are an arrant
knave. Says the prisoner, Just as your worship spoke, the clock struck two.

350. It is a custom with some of the surgeons who beg the bodies of condemned
malefactors, to go to the jail, and bargain for the carcass with the criminal
himself. An honest fellow did so lately in London, and was admitted to the
condemned men on the morning whereon they were to die. The surgeon communicated
his business, and fell into discourse with a little fellow, who refused twelve
shillings, and insisted upon fifteen for his body. A fellow, who had killed the
officer of Newgate, very forwardly, and like a man who was willing to deal,
told him, Look you, mr. Surgeon, that little dry fellow, who had been half
starved all his life, and is now half dead with fear, cannot answer your
purpose. I have ever lived highly and freely, my veins are full, I have not
pined in imprisonment; you see my crest swells to your knife, and after Jack
Catch has done, upon my honor, you will find me as found as ever a bullock in
any of the markets. Come, for twenty shillings I am your man. -- Says the
surgeon, Done, there is a guinea. -- The rogue took the money, and as soon as
he had it in his fist, cries, -- a bite, a bite, I am to be hanged in chains.

351. The duchess of Kingston was always remarkable for having a very high
sense of her own dignity: Being one day detained in her carriage by a cart of
coals, that was unloading in a very narrow street, she leaned with both her
arms upon the door, and asked the fellow, How dare you, sirrah, to stop a woman
of quality in the street? Woman of quality, replied the man; Yes, fellow,
rejoined her grace, don't you see my arms upon my carriage. Yes, I do indeed,
and a pair of damned coarse arms they are.

352. An Englishman and Dutchman disputing about the goodness of their
different countries; says the Dutchman your country thinks of nothing but
guttling, and even the names of your places have a reference to it, you have
your Portsmouths, your Plymouths, your Yarmouths, your Falmouths, your
Dartmouths, your Exmouths; and you are all mouths together. Ay, replies the
Englishman, and you have your Amster-dams and your Rotter-dams -- and G -- d --
n you all together, say I.

353. A scrivener's man reading a bill of sale to his master, said, I do
demise, grant, and to farm let, all my lands, etc. -- but on a sudden a cough
took him; at which, quoth his master, read on, with a pox to you, your heirs,
and their heirs for ever.

354. A scholar blowing the fire, the nose of the bellows dropped off; says he, I
see its cold weather, for the nose of the bellows drops.

355. A sea captain had got a circle round him, whom he was entertaining with
some wonderful phenomenon which he had seen at sea; when, looking round, and
perceiving a gentleman laugh, he grew angry, and said, he did not believe him.
Why, said the gentleman, did you see it? Yes, I did, answered the captain.
Well, if you saw it, said the gentleman, I will believe it; but I would not
believe it if I had seen it myself.

356. A person describing a snuff box he had seen, which was an Egyptian pebble
set in pinchbeck, said it was a gypsey's nipple set in pinch-gut.

357. A scholar once dreamed that he had trod upon a nail, and conceiting his
foot to be hurt with it, he swathed it about. One of his companions, as wise as
himself, understanding his case, Ay, says he, no wonder, this comes of going to
bed without one's shoes on.

358. A queer Jack declared, that, for his part, he thought it no sin to tell a
lie to get a penny in an honest way.

359. Two gentlemen being in a boat guided by a pair of oars, one of them was
affronted by the waterman: Sirrah! says he, hold your prating, or I Will knock
your head and the wall together.

360. A gentleman being on horseback, his servant who was on foot, in stroking
the horse's buttocks, received a kick: he then aimed a stone at the horse, and
hit his master on the back, which made him turn about and ask his man what was
the matter? Your horse, sir, says he, holding one of his legs, has lamed me.
Ay, said his master, he is very unruly, for he has kicked me on the back, and
it is well he missed my head.

361. A lord mayor waiting upon king Charles the second, who happened to be at
that time in the park, feeding the ducks, with his hat in his hand; the
recorder desired he might not speak, till his majesty was covered. Poo, poo,
says the king, you may go on very safely, it is to the ducks I full my ^at off.

362. A gentleman, going to take water at Whitehall stairs, cried out, as he
came near the place, Who can swim? I, master, said forty bawling mouths, when
the gentleman observing one slinking away, called after him; but the fellow
turning about, said, sir, I cannot swim. Then you are my man, said the
gentleman, for you will at have take care of me for your own sake.

363. A scholar declaiming in a college-hall, having a bad memory, was at a
stand, and, in a low voice, desired one who stood close by him, to help him
out: No, says the other, you are out enough already.

364. A young student, showing the Museum at Oxon, to a set of gentlemen and
ladies, among other things produced a rusty sword. This, says he, gentlemen, is
the sword with which Balaam was going to kill his ass. Upon which one of the
company replied, that he thought Balaam had no sword, but only wished for one.
You are right, says the student, and this is the very sword he wished for.

365. A very fat gentleman riding through a town, some of the ruder sort of the
inhabitants fell a jeering him, and told him he carried his portmanteau before,
when it should be behind. Oh, says the gentleman, I always carry it before me,
but especially when I ride through a town where there are none but whores,
rogues, and pickpockets.

366. The standers by, to comfort a poor man who lay on his death bed, told
him, he should be carried to church by four lusty proper fellows. I thank you,
said he, but I had much rather go myself.

367. Some gentlemen seeing a fellow stand still when it rained very fast, they
asked him why he stood still in the rain. Why, said he, you do not think me
such a fool as to ride in the rain as you do.

368. A countryman walking soberly along the flagged passage on a wet day,
happened to lay his flat pretty solidly on a loose flag, which miserably
bespattered a spruce young fellow, who was just then passing by him, and put
him into a violent passion; the poor man endeavored to apologize for the
accident, and assured the smart that it was not he, but the loose flag, that
had done the mischief; to which the gentleman replied, But, damn ye! it was at
your instigation.

NEW ANECDOTES of the late KING of PRUSSIA.
369. When Frederic was building the palace of Sans-Souci, there was a mill,
which disconcerted him greatly in the execution of his palace, and he sent to
enquire of the miller what he would take for it. The miller answered, that for
a long series of years his family had possessed the mill from father to son,
and he would not sell it. The king was very pressing to gain his point, and
even offered to build another mill for him in a better situation, exclusive of
the sum that he might demand of him. The obstinate miller persisted in keeping
the inheritance of his ancestors. The king, irritated, sent for the man, and
sternly said to him, why will you not sell me your mill, notwithstanding the
advantageous offers I have made you? The miller repeated all his reasons.
"Don't you know," said the king, that I could take it without giving you one
penny? "Yes," answered the miller, if there were no chamber of justice at
Berlin. The king, who had himself instituted this court for the more speedy
relief of the injured, was extremely pleased with this answer, which intimated
that he was thought incapable of an act of injustice. He suffered the man to
enjoy his mill, and altered the plan of his gardens.

370. A reduced officer who had served with great bravery as lieutenant colonel
during the war of seven years, repaired every day to the king's ante-chamber to
solicit a pension. The king had often said to him, have patience, I cannot at
present do any thing for you. The officer was not repulsed, and wherever he
found the king, did not fail to importune him. The king, tired with his
perseverance, ordered that he should be admitted no more. In the mean time a
violent satire appeared against Frederic, who, contrary to his usual custom,
promised a reward of fifty louis for the discovery of the author. The next day,
the lieutenant colonel repaired to the palace and was refused admittance. He
persisted, however, adding that he had something of importance to communicate
to his majesty. He is announced, and enters. "Have I not told you," said
Frederic, that I can do nothing for you at present? "I require nothing,"
answered the officer, but what your majesty has promised. I am the author of
the pamphlet that has just appeared against your majesty. Punish me, if you
please, but pay the fifty louis to my wife, that she may buy bread for my
wretched children. -- The d -- l confound you, said the king, you shall go to
the Spandau. [This is a fortress where military and state prisoners are either
confined or obliged to work on the fortifications.] "Sire," said the officer, I
submit to whatever your majesty orders with respect to myself; but pray do not
forget the money. "In an hour's time," replied the king, "your wife shall have
it." The king then sat down, wrote a letter, and gave it to the officer,
saying, you will deliver this to the commandant of Spandau, and tell him that I
forbid him to open it till he has dined. He then ordered the officer to be
conducted to Spandau. He arrives there, and presents the letter to the
commandant, with the verbal orders. The commandant dines. The officer remains
in cruel suspense; the letter is at last opened, and read as follows:

The bearer of this letter is appointed commandant of the fortress of Spandau,
his wife and children will be there soon with fifty louis. The former
commandant will repair to Potzdam, where a better place awaits him.

FREDERIC.


371. Frederic rung his bell one day and nobody answered. He opened the door,
and found the page asleep on a sofa. He was going to wake him when he perceived
the end of a billet sticking out of his pocket. He had the curiosity to know
the contents; he took and read it. It was a letter from his mother, who thanked
him for having sent her a part of his wages, to assist her in distress; and
besought God to bless him for his filial goodness. The king returned to his
room, took a roller of ducats, and slid them with the letter into the page's
pocket. Returning to his apartment, he rang so violently that the page awaked
and entered. You have slept well, said the king. The page made an apology, and
in his embarrassment, happened to put his hand into his pocket, and felt with
astonishment the paper of money. He drew it out, turned pale, and looking at
the king, burst into tears without being able to speak a word. "What is the
matter?" said the king, "What ails you?" "Ah! fire," said the young man,
throwing himself at his feet, some body would wish to ruin me. I know not how
this money came into my pocket. My friend, said the king, God often sends us
good in our sleep. Give it to thy mother. Salute her in my name, and tell her
that I will take care of her and you.

372. One day while Frederic was looking out at the window of his apartment, he
observed one of the pages take a pinch of snuff from his box, which was lying
on the table. The king did not interrupt him, but turning round from the window
a little while after, he asked the page, if he liked that snuff box? The page,
quite ashamed, made no answer. The king repeated the question, and the page
having at length said that he thought it very pretty -- "Well," replied his
majesty, pray take it -- it is too small for us both.

END OF THE SECOND PART.

