ELA: OR THE DELUSIONS OF THE HEART.

Just published, BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD, Philadelphia, THE LIFE OF THE BARON
FREDERIC TRENCK,
Containing his adventures; his cruel sufferings during ten years imprisonment
at the Fortress of Magdeburg, by command of the late king of Prussia. Also
Anecdotes, historical, political and personal.

Translated from the German by Thomas Holcroft.

THE man of feeling, and the friend of freedom, will read the life of Baron
Trenck with sensations perhaps too strong: it will remain an eternal monument
of the detestable, the diabolical effects of despotism.

The historian will acquire from him essential information concerning the
characters of persons, courts, and kingdoms, highly illustrative of the annals
of the present century.

The philosopher will meditate on the manners of the people of Germany; will
wonder, while reading, to recollect that there, as in states more improved,
such numbers should remain so, almost miraculously, ignorant, superstitious,
and credulous, while knowledge and science appear to be so far advanced; will
sigh, to be so repeatedly told of military courts, and judges condemned to
sweep the streets, after effecting the ruin of thousands; will incessantly
reflect, with amazement, at the strange jargon, and confusion, that still are
so universal over the globe, as he reads the words, king, liberty, vassal,
military sentence, property, just claim, and an infinity of other heterogeneous
and incompatible phrases; continually will he exclaim -- How many ages yet, oh
world, must thou exist, ere thy sons shall indeed learn wisdom!

The book is, what it would be, the perfect resemblance of its author; an
original, bold, and interesting picture, Like him, it has its defects* but they
are forgotten in the admiration of its inherent and masculine beauties.

ELA: OR THE DELUSIONS OF THE HEART. A TALE, FOUNDED ON FACTS.

"Thou have rashly ventured in a stormy Sea,
Where Life, Fame, Virtue, all were wrecked and lost;
But sure thou have borne thy Part in all the Anguish,
And smarted with the Pain: then rest in Peace;
Let Silence and Oblivion hide thy Name,
And save thee from the Malice of Posterity."
ROW. TO WHICH IS ADDED, HENRY AND EMMA: A POEM.

BY MATTHEW PRIOR, ESQUIRE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

ELA; OR THE DELUSIONS OF THE HEART.
LETTER I. MORTIMER TO CAROLINE.
YOUR affectionate solicitude, my amiable Caroline, merits every return that
grateful tenderness and fraternal love can make; and the heart of Mortimer
offers you its warmest acknowledgments.

The long absence of which you so pathetically complain, arises from no common
event, but all your conjectures are ill-founded. -- It is no misplaced
attachment that makes me thus long a stranger to my native spot: it is no
destructive infatuation which I am so reluctant to avow; it is -- and why
should the heart of virtue blush to confess it? -- the impulse of generous
sensibility.

You smile, my penetrating sister; modern sensibility has been the frequent
subject of my satyric powers; but it has been that superficial impostor, the
offspring of pride and artifice, cherished by the undistinguishing applause of
vulgarity, that I have derided; the genuine effusions of a sensible and
benevolent spirit I have always revered. With me the plaintive voice of
unaffected sorrow has ever been sacred: and the errors of humanity have never
failed to find an indulgent advocate in my bosom.

This honest confession, my dear Caroline, is but the prelude to a tale of woe,
which may, I think, convey a lesson of useful instruction, guard you against
the delusions of the heart, and, by the irresistible power of truth, teach you
to vanquish immorality, should it eve^ dare to approach you.

As soon as I had transacted the business that brought me hither, I had adieu
to the family of our worthy friend, and hired apartments in a neighboring
seaport town, resolved to see every thing worthy the attention of a curious
traveller in this part of the world. In this pursuit I spent some time very
agreeably, when, returning one evening from a pleasurable excursion, I found,
in addition to the society I had left on going out, a young handsome military
officer, and a most attractive elegant lady, who were, I was informed, united
in the most sacred of all bands, and purposed to fix their residence in that
place during the summer season. The engaging emanations of exalted modesty,
good sense, ^eep sensibility, and plaintive softness, in the tout-ensemble of
the lady, soon interested me in her favor: and I wished to know if the form
and manners, so calculated to charm, were faithful emblems of as lovely a mind.
To this end I assiduously cultivated the acquaintance of the captain; he seemed
flattered by my attentions, and a short time produced an excess of sociability.
I laughed, drank, sung, smoaked, and boasted of gallantry with him; and
sometimes talked sentimentally with his fair partner, the enchanting Ela. I
resolved to spare no pains to discover the native qualities of her soul, and
soon found it was too perfect to need any disguise. Her language was that of
virtue, adorned by the graces: every sentiment she uttered seemed the
spontaneous effusions of an enlightened and elevated mind, and was worthy of
being immortalised; yet, in the midst of apparent happiness, a sudden cloud of
tender melancholy would arise, which in vain I endeavored to penetrate. It
often crossed her features without any apparent cause, but generally vanished
in some benevolent or affectionate effusion. In love as in every other gentle
and generous sensation of the heart, I discovered her to be a perfect
enthusiast. A stranger to every lukewarm impulse, her expressive eyes beamed
unutterable tenderness on the object of her choice, and frequently regarded him
with a kind of soft anxiety for which all my penetration was unable fully to
account; but I thought I traced indifference, and sometimes more ungentle
dispositions in his aspect and behavior. How often, when observing the
impassioned attachment that evinced itself in all her looks, words, and
actions, directed to him, have I appealed to the searcher of hearts, whether
there was in existence a being capable of injuring so much excellence? But I
did not long wait for a discovery that brought the fullest conviction.

Having been absent near a fortnight on a visit to a gentleman in the
neighborhood, who, finding in me a taste and sentiment congenial with his own,
had given me repeated invitations to his house, I returned to my former
habitation, designing to bid adieu to my newly acquired friends, and turn my
thoughts and wishes toward home. But how was I amazed and shocked on entering
the house, where I had so lately left them in apparent happiness, to find the
amiable Ela alone, deserted, exposed among unfeeling strangers, to all the
horrors of poverty, and the most poignant anguish of heart! Pale and dejected
she arose at my entrance, fixed her swimming eyes on my face, and reading the
language of my heart, burst into a passionate effusion of woe, and was retiring.
I could not speak -- but seizing her hand, as she was about to leave me, she
looked at me with an expression that will be forever engraved on my
remembrance, and, sinking into a chair by my side, endeavored to suppress her
emotions. -- Mine, I believe, were little less violent -- Pity entirely
possessed my soul; and shall I own it, my Caroline? -- the unmanly tear bedewed
the hand of the lovely sufferer.

Again, she raised her eyes, beaming with gratitude through the deepest gloom
of sorrow, and pressing my hand to her agitated heart -- "Noble stranger!" she
exclaimed -- "Do you weep for my sufferings? -- A^as! you know not how little I
merit such generous sympathy, such exalted goodness!"

"I know," replied I, "that you are unhappy -- and is not that enough?"
"Enough!" -- repeated she, with emotion -- "Yes," I added, "and I likewise
believe you are truly amiable."

"Then you are mistaken," interrupted she, with extreme energy -- "I am not --
Indeed I am not! -- I do not merit your friendship -- nor can I dare to deceive
you -- Oh! I am lost! lost for ever!" -- she clasped her hands in agony. "But
your unexampled greatness of soul," added she, "merits more than I can say: and
truth and sincerity is the only acknowledgment in my power. -- Yes sir," --
said she, again rising, "you shall know who she is whose sorrows you thus
condescend to regard; -- and for your sake, I will yet believe, that virtue
resides among the sons of men."

With those words she darted out of the room, leaving me in a state of mind to
which no language can do justice.

My steps turned involuntarily after her, when the appearance of the mistress
of the house convinced me of an error, and I accompanied her back into the
parlour.

"Ah! sir," said she, as we entered, "here has been sad doings since you left
us -- Well -- who could think that such a handsome gentleman and such a fine
lady would turn out so! -- Why the captain is a downright rogue, sir -- and his
wife, as he called her, is no better" -- "Oh!" -- interrupted I, -- "you should
not so readily believe injurious reports. -- I dare say it is no more than some
little temporary derangement which has been greatly exaggerated: or, perhaps,
entirely misrepresented."

"No, no Sir," replied the woman, "'it is too true -- Why the lady exposed
herself -- Trouble, like children, generally speaks truth. -- Not but I pity
the poor thing; and yet I Am looser enough by them already; so if she cannot pay
what is due, I must stop all I can, and she must not think of staying here to
sponge upon an honest woman."

"But you surely would not turn her out into the street!" exclaimed I. --

"It is nothing to me, sir, where she goes," -- returned she -- "but I know she
shall not take up my house-room and eat my victuals any longer, and so I am going
to tell her."

"Stop!" -- cried I, as she opened the door to put her cruel threats in
execution -- "Would you distress the wretched?"

"No;" -- she replied -- "nor they shall not distress me."

"Hear me then," added I, -- "I will be answerable for every expense of this
unfortunate lady."

"Well to be sure, you're a generous gentleman," -- said the woman with a
malignant sneer, "and the loss of one is often the gain of two."

I paid no regard to her insolence, but depositing a bill of twenty pounds in
her hand to prove the sincerity of my words, earnestly desired that her amiable
charge might be treated with all possible respect and attention: and again
assuring her of an ample reward, begged she would take to herself all the merit
she might fancy there was in this conduct; -- nor ever let the secret pass her
lips, as she expected the performance of my promise.

With this injunction she readily acquiesced: and I left her, soothed by the
magic power of gold into the most engaging benignity.

Consoled by the sweet assurance of having gratified a laudable impulse, I
retired to my apartment, and was buried in a labyrinth of conjecture relative
to the unhappy Ela -- when the woman of the house tapped at my door, and
requested to speak with me.

"The lady," said she, in a tone of alarm -- "has fastened her door, and
obstinately refuses to answer me."

A dreadful fear crossed my mind, and, without making any reply, I hastily
followed her with trembling steps.

After trying every gentle means to procure admission without success, I
acquiesced in the expedience of using forcible measures, and the door was broke
open.

Impressed with terrible apprehensions I entered the room, and beheld the cause
of my disquietude stretched on the carpet with death marked on her features.
Unmindful of vulgar censure I threw myself beside her, and mourned her lot,
fully assured that her soul had taken its irrevocable flight. But I was soon
most joyfully undeceived. The people around me declared she was only in a fit,
and a few minutes confirmed the truth of their assertion.

The recollection of her misery rushed like a torrent on her mind; and fixing
her eloquent eyes on my face, she enquired, why I had suffered them to bring
her back? --

"That we may all unite our endeavors to render you happy," I replied, --
"Happy!" echoed she, with a gloomy smile -- "You know but little of the heart
of Ela." As she uttered these words her eyes met those of the mistress of the
mansion -- and, starting wildly from me, she exclaimed, "What, and is that
woman too come to render me happy! O, righteous Heaven, why am I reduced to be
the sport of abject cruelty! -- But think not, worthy stranger," added she --
"that I ungratefully class you among the unfeeling herd; O, no, the wretched
Ela can yet distinguish such as you -- your goodness is written here," --
pointing to her bosom -- "in indelible characters. -- Yes, and it is written
likewise on a table that corruption cannot destroy; where I, perhaps, may
contemplate it when this poor form is mouldered into dust: and where," -- added
she, with an air of mild, yet most commanding dignity, -- "I may forget too how
that woman" (again fixing her eye on the abashed offender) "has dared to insult
me."

"Me insult you!" cried the woman, whlie anger and shame spread their sanguine
emblems, over her features -- How can you say, Miss, as how I ever insulted you
-- I Am sure your're very spiteful, and" --

I found she was about to enlarge -- and therefore exerting all my
authoritative powers to awe her into silence, they happily produced such an
effect, that muttering some unintelligible jargon, she quitted the room.

"I refused to admit that woman into my apartment, Sir," (said the gentle
mourner, addressing me) -- "because she has used an insolence of language to
which no misfortune shall ever make me base enough to submit; -- but when I
heard your friendly voice at the door, gratitude burst on my oppressed soul,
and unequal to the conflict, I sunk into insensibility."

I entreated her ardently to endeavor to forget all that could disturb her
repose, and ventured to palliate the misconduct of the landlady: who was, I
sincerely assured her, fully sensible and ashamed of her behavior: and would
not, I was convinced, in a cooler moment, scruple to own she had erred.

"I neither wish, nor am entitled to such a concession, Sir," she calmly
replied. "Perhaps I am more unjust in resenting than she is in giving offense:
so let it be remembered no more."

She laid her head on the pillow, saying, that sorrow weighed down her eyelids,
and sleep would, in her present state, be an inestimable blessing. Considering
this as an intimation that she wished to be alone, I beckoned the servants to
withdraw, and retired wishing that every gentle influence might descend to give
her comfort, and effectually soften the anguish of her heart.

The mistress of the house met me as I descended the stairs. Anger still
sparkled in her eye, and she began an harangue about the lady's unforgiving
temper, and her own wrongs and eminent virtues: -- i^^eighing most bitterly
against the captain, and honoring him, I believe very justly, with every
opprobrious epithet that invention could suggest; but I found means to allay
the bitterness of her resentment, and make her accompany me amicably to the
parlour, where she related all that she knew respecting the unfortunate Ela.
That the captain disappeared the day after I quitted them on the excursion
before mentioned, and all their efforts had proved insufficient to discover his
retreat; that the lady in the anguish of her heart, occasioned by this
desertion, had avowed herself the victim of enthusiastic love -- and proved
that the destructive flame still lived in her heart, by execrating her own
folly rather than his baseness.

These unguarded expressions it was that gave rise to the treatment she had
experienced, and struck so forcibly on her heart. -- But we are well convinced,
by observation, that a generous indulgence to the imperfections of mortality
must not be expected from grovelling minds. -- True sympathy is the spontaneous
growth of elevated souls -- and not to be met with in common walks of life.

The conduct of the landlady was consistent with her character, and strictly
natural. -- It therefore, my dear sister, contains this useful lesson, that it
is in general certainly a point of wisdom to conceal our sorrows; as by
exposing them, we only expose ourselves to the contempt and derision of the
bulk of mankind. -- Sometimes, indeed, we meet with a distinguishing and
generous spirit; -- but let us not too easily believe the soft persuasive
voice, the gently-soothing accent, or even the tear-fraught eye. -- All these,
experience teaches us, are easily, and, I fear, very frequently assumed to gild
the serpent's heart; and, by throwing us off our guard, precipitate us the more
readily into the snares of the designing. Let discretion then always mark the
bounds of confidence. -- Let us remember one of the best approved maxims of the
wisest of men, and, by keeping a bridle on our tongue, guard ourselves against
the dangers of credulity.

You will laugh in the gaiety of your heart, and call this preaching. -- Be it
so -- The sermon flowed unstudied from my pen, and why should I suppress a
thought that may eventually contribute in the smallest degree to the welfare
and happiness of my Caroline?

But your amiable impatience to know more of the injured Ela, I am well
assured, far outstrips the pen of the readiest writer. Hence then digression.
Your curiosity is the offspring of the virtues, and merits every gratification
and indulgence.

The immediate consequence of Ela's exquisite sufferings was a dangerous fever.
-- Her life was despaired of, and I was the constant attendant of her couch.
Death seemed the blessing to which all her wishes aspired; -- but her prayers
were rejected. The cup of her sorrows was not full. She was reserved, no doubt,
for some wise purpose; and youth triumphed over the consuming fires of a
^readful disease.

During its progress I watched each movement of her soul, and was confirmed in
my first belief, that it was governed by the love of virtue: and in the
practice of that alone could it hope for happiness.

The ejaculatory effusion of wounded peace dwelt for ever on her lips -- and
she prayed incessantly to be delivered from a world where poignant misery must
inevitably await her steps, and poison every offered delight -- But still the
lamp of life was unextinguished; a few weeks revolved in doubtful sadness, when
health again began to relume her eye, and irradiate her cheek. -- But corroding
anguish still possessed her mind, and the gentle voice of consolation spoke in
vain.

Unmerited tenderness likewise still dwelt in the inmost recess of her devoted
heart, and consecrated a temple for the worship of an idol whose destructive
image, she ought, from every consideration, to expel.

Thus deluded, she languished for the soothing but dangerous indulgence of
retirement; and avoided even my society with the most visible solicitude. But
guided by the impulse of humanity, I refused to act in conformity to her wish,
and obtruded my unwelcome society perpetually upon her; regardless of the truly
painful tribute her ardent gratitude constantly imposed, until the following
letter put an end to my friendly intrusions.

LETTER II. ELA TO MORTIMER.
WHY will the most exalted of mankind still continue to participate in the
sorrows of a wretched girl?

You have been a ministering angel appointed to redeem me from the power of
death, and whisper peace to the bosom of despair: and let that suffice; no
longer persecute your generous heart by attempting what is impracticable. The
sorrows of Ela are not to be conquered by argument. -- Leave me then, I humbly
beseech you. -- I am unworthy of your attention; let me add, incapable of
receiving from it any benefit. You would persuade me to forget him whom I have
vowed to love for ever. -- And shall I? -- O, never, never! -- Let me be
convinced of his perfidy, and then I will despair indeed; but even then memory
will obtrude his image on my distracted heart -- till oblivion draws its
thickest veil between us. In the first moments of his mysterious absence,
madness seized my soul, and my betraying tongue pronounced him assuredly false.
But cooler reason now tells me I have wronged him. Some direful misfortune has
certainly overwhelmed him, which, his fond attachment will not permit me to
share; and, while I have been accusing him of perfidy, his soul has been
totally engrossed by the contemplation of his Ela, and torn by the severest
conflicts.

No longer, then, worthy Sir, persist in applying the balm of consolation to
her whose case admits of but one cure. -- In my agitated bosom hope still
exists -- and, should that fail me, the light of Heaven within, aided by
reflection and solitude, will be my best restoratives; and you only shall be
made acquainted with the event, be it what it may.

I would say much more. -- I would endeavor to describe the impression your
philanthropy has made on my mind, but language is much unequal to the task, --
and your own heart will best delineate the grateful sensations of mine.

Thus, Sir, I have acquitted myself of a wish that has long lain heavy upon me:
-- and with the deepest sense of your exalted worth, I request, in addition to
your past favors, that you will send me an address, by which I may be enabled
to transmit a faithful narrative of the fate that awaits me; and suffer me
again to add an ardent entreaty, that you will no longer make yourself a
voluntary prisoner to the unhappy,

but ever grateful, ELA.

MORTIMER TO CAROLINE. [In continuation.]
AFTER deeply revolving on the contents of Ela's affecting letter, I concluded
her request, of being left to the quiet enjoyment of unmolested solitude, too
just and reasonable to be rejected; -- and dispatching an answer, where, in
addition to many adieus, was some well-meant council; I ventured to enclose an
inconsiderable proof of my friendship, that might, in case of unforeseen
exigencies, enable her to bid defiance to absolute penury. I then discharged
every obligation to her courteous hostess, and my wishes sprang forward to the
dear haunt of our nativity, and my still dearer Caroline; from whose loved
society I have been so long estranged. But the first place at which I stopped
for refreshment, taking up a newspaper that accidentally lay on the table, I
read the following paragraph:

"SOUTHAMPTON.
"It is confidently asserted here, that the celebrated widow Barrymore is on
the point of sacrificing her innumerable captives on the altar of Hymen; and
that the cause of this wonderful conversion from the deluding path of
gallantry, is a young and elegant Hibernian; who, in addition to the charms of
a fine person, an insinuating tongue, and military graces, is descended from a
race, whose heroic deeds are immortalised in the annals of his country both in
peace and war; and who will, we doubt not, find ample compensation for the
trammels of matrimony in the trebled jointure of the elegant widow."

It instantly occurred to me, on perusing this curious piece of intelligence,
that this fortunate Hibernian was the lover of Ela. Fully impressed with this
belief, I resolved to visit Southampton, and, putting wings to my speed,
reached it in a few days. -- In the first house of public resort that I
entered, I beheld my old acquaintance fluttering among the gay ones of the age;
with all the assurance of triumphant villainy.

My spirit rose indignant at the sight -- his eyes glanced toward me, a guilty
flush marked his extreme confusion -- and he looked around him, as if from a
vain wish to shrink from an observer he could not but dread. The loud laugh was
converted into an unmeaning grin, and the studied repartee died away on his
quivering lips. -- He rivetted his eyes on the floor -- when approaching him
with my usual ease and freedom. -- "I little expected, captain," said I, with
all the sang-froid I could assume, "the honor of finding you here."

He stood aghast, and replacing the sparkling glass that he was about to convey
to his lips, on the table, rose from his seat, and declared, with some
perturbation, that he really had not the honor of knowing me.

"Then, Sir," said I, approaching nearer, and looking firmly in his face,
"either you have a very treacherous memory, or I have very treacherous eyes."

"Faith, very likely, Sir!" he exclaimed, resuming his native effrontery, --
"my memory is sometimes treacherous: for 'pon my soul" (taking out an opera
glass, and pointing it impudently at my face) "I cannot recollect, Sir, I ever
had the pleasure of contemplating your features before; and yet," added he,
with an air of non-chalance, "I possibly may; for immaterial occurrences, and
transient acquaintance, make but a very slight impression on my mind." As he
uttered these words he threw himself carelessly into a chair and yawned.

My patience was nearly exhausted by this insolence; but determined not to
hazard my victory by losing my temper, I resolved to be-calm, and assuming a
composure, very foreign to my heart, I lamented the defect in his memory, and
enquired if he had likewise forgotten that his name was Temple, and that I
lodged in the same house with his lady and himself at Plymouth.

"Totally, my good Sir!" he replied, again, laughing immoderately. -- "Pray
you, my well remembered -- friends," addressing his companions, with a
triumphant sneer at me -- "can any of you recollect that my name is Temple, or
that I ever had a lady at Plymouth?" They all vociferated a negative* and the
impostor had the assurance to add, that, in his opinion, I had better try the
efficacy of a glass of their burgundy to settle the derangement in my brain;
and filling a bumper, he toasted the widow Barrymore, and daringly called on me
to honor it.

Roused by this insolent defiance, I paused for a moment, then looking
disdainfully at him, "Think not," said I, "that all your subtersuges will
shield you from justice. Whatever names you may have assumed to spread
devastations around you, you know me well; and when I tell you, that since.
your scandalous flight I have again been an inhabitant of the house where first
I saw you and your amiable injured wife, you must likewise be convinced that I
know you, to your confusion and eternal shame."

As I concluded these words, the ruffian seized a bottle that stood before him,
and fiercely menaced it at me; but one of his companions restraining his arm,
firmly declared he would not suffer any violence to be used, as it appeared to
him it was altogether a mistake. "For my friend's name," said he, addressing
me, "is not Temple, but Dormer."

"It is not unlikely, Sir" I replied. "I may know the gentleman by a fictitious
name; but be assured I am fully convinced of the identity of his person: -- and
let me add, his very rage on the occasion proves that he deems it highly
inconvenient, and particularly malapropos, to know me at this juncture."

"Villain, slave, madman!" echoed the enraged monster, struggling to elude the
hold of his friend. -- "My sword shall prove thy scandalous assertions fa^se."

"No," said I, "keep your sword for some future occasion. I come here in behalf
of suffering innocence; not to put my life in competition with that of an
unprincipled desperado; -- and, but from an impulse of humanity, should never
have obtruded my unwelcome presence on your festivity; or have disturbed your
conquests. For your threats, I scorn them equally with yourself; and have only
to say, let those that trust you -- Beware."

With these words I hastily quitted the house in extreme agitation, and
returned to the place where I left my servant, quite undetermined respecting my
future conduct in this affair. But judge of my amazement, as I was sitting in
the window of my apartment, ruminating on the past scene, and deeply absorbed
in contemplating the grief that must inevi^ably await Ela, to behold her pass
the house in a post-chaise. The carriage passed with extreme rapidity -- the
view I had of my fair friend was barely momentary, but I well knew it to be
her; and throwing up the sash, I beheld her alight only a few doors from where
I was. Guessing that her motive for visiting Southampton was similar to mine, I
hastened to receive the confirmation from her own lips, and gave her every
assistance in my power.

Surprise and joy animated her dejected form -- as I approached, her, "My best,
my only friend!" she exclaimed in an impassioned tone, "has the Supreme Being
again graciously directed you to her, whose afflictions are I hope nearly
complete?" Her eyes swam in tears, I felt myself unable to make her any reply.
An interval of silence ensued, when drawing from her pocket a letter, she put
it into my hand, saying, "That is what has brought me here." Its contents were
as follow:

HONORED MADAM,
AS you are such a sweet, good lady, and I know, loves my master better than he
deserves, my conscience will not let me rest, without acquainting you that he
is going to be married to a fine rich widow, unless you make haste to stop the
match. -- We are living away here as well as ever, and my master goes by his
own name again, and don't like to hear you mentioned; but my mind has never had
a moment's peace since we left you, and that is truth; for I know you must be
sadly often; and, if you will accept the money I have saved out of my aunt's
legacy, you shall be very welcome. Pray, good lady, excuse my boldness, and
come here as soon as possible to prevent mischief.

Yours, to command, WILLIAM BARLOW.
Southampton.

MORTIMER TO CAROLINE. [In continuation.]
MY heart applauded the conduct of this honest fellow whose respectful
attention to Ela I had often remarked: and it served to confirm this opinion,
that true greatness of soul is not consined to any situation; but as often
resides in the bosom of the mendicant as that of the monarch. I then returned
the letter to Ela, and she requested my advice in what manner to proceed. I
paused some moments; then after a little preparatory conversation, I related my
interview with the perfidious man, on whom her soul still doated. She reclined
her head on her hand, and sat the silent picture of unutterable woe. Not one
tear fell, but a fearful wildness glared in her eyes, which were steadfastly
rivetted to one point. I trembled for the consequences of this desperate
sorrow, and spared no pains to melt her into softness: my endeavors were
happily crowned with success, and a friendly shower of tears* in some measure
alleviated the exquisite anguish of her mind. But her silence still continued,
and when I pressed to know in what manner she designed to act, she only waved
her hand and left me. I considered her sorrow as sacred, and well assured that
any intrusion would, at such a juncture, be unwelcome, was quitting the house,
when a servant followed me to the door, put into my hand these lines, rendered,
by the tears and agitation of the writer, scarcely intelligible.

"The unhappy Ela is incapable either of thinking or acting, until that
merciful Being* who views her deep affliction, shall graciously vouchsafe to
comfort her; then will she again see, thank, and supplicate the aid of her
generous friend; but at this distressful moment her poignant distress admits of
no alleviation, and the eye, even of sympathetic observation, would only add to
her sufferings."

Fully convinced of the truth of her assertion, I hastened to my lodgings and
penned a long letter, which might, I hoped contribute to infuse resignation and
fortitude into her mind; nor did it fail of producing, in some degree, the
desired effect. Some tedious hours elapsed in anxious expectation, when I
received a card from the gentle mourner requesting to see me; and instantly
following the messenger, found her calm and collected beyond my most sanguine
hope. A tear indeed shone in her eye, but it seemed rather the tear of meek
submission, than excruciating remorse or severe regret; and with all that
prevailing eloquence, with which nature has most liberally endowed her, she,
ardently besought me to conduct her to the most ungrat^ful, yet still tenderly
beloved of mankind, that she might at least hear her sentence from his own
lips, ere she resigned her soul to despair In vain I endeavored to dissuade
her from so rash an undertaking, and entreated her to have recourse to her pen;
but all my rhetoric was soft. "What!" she replied, "warn him again to avoid my
dreadful presence! No^ let me once again behold him, I ask no more."

Seeing therefore that all argument was insufficient to change her settled
purpose, we had recourse to the address in the postscript of the worthy
Barlow's letter, and I accompanied her on this arduous expedition.

Barlow received us it the door of their habitation, and seeing his late loved
mistress all pale and trembling, only prevented by my sustaining arm from
sinking to the earth; his ^lorid complexion was instantly supplanted by a
deathlik^ hue, and he continued holding the door in his hand, and gazing at us
in an attitude of sorrow and amazement.

"William," said the sweet sufferer, extending her arm toward him. "good,
faithful William!" --

These affecting words, and the still more affecting manner in which they were
uttered, gave a turn to the emotions of this truly excellent man, and springing
forward, he faltered out, "Dear, injured, best of ladies;" -- but, unable to
add more, turned aside to conceal his agitation, and wiped off a pitying tear
with the sleeve of his coat.

Ela held his hand in her own, and looked up to Heaven -- Such a scene must
surely have penetrated the most unfeeling heart, and could not fail to
immortalize the pencil of the most renowned artist, if he copied from nature
and truth. I felt a sigh burst from my heart, and was about to remonstrate
against the impropriety of our situation, thus exposed to the observation of
the passing of s^ectators, when the sound or a carriage made me turn round, and
I beheld the cause of our distress glowing with triumphant villainy, and a^o^d
with all the powers of outward attraction, that a fine person, assisted by
every advantage of fashion and taste, can bestow, seated in a splendid chariot,
the golden stripes of which mingled with all the vivid colors of the rainbow,
and glittered in the sunbeams. Ela's eyes followed mine, and Barlow exclaimed,
"It is my master!" The wretch regarded us with a furious look, and pulling the
string, ordered the driver to go on. But Ela, eluding our hold, clasped the
chariot wheel in her arms, saying, "O merciful Heaven! I will be heard, or in
this posture perish!"

"Drive on, drive on!" exclaimed the monster; but the servant, in whose breast
a principle of humanity dwelt, seeing the situation of Ela, refused to comply
-- "The lady, Sir!" said he. "The devil," replied his brutal commander, leaping
from the chariot. Ela caught hold of his arm as he descended. -- "My Henry,"
she cried, falling on the ground, "will you not know your wife, your own Ela?
-- "Know thee, woman!" exclaimed he, throwing her from him, "away! thou art
some wretched maniac, whom that villain!" glancing his eyes at me, "has hired
to insult me!" She uttered a piercing shriek, and the wretch darted from us. I
slew to her assistance. She looked p^teously in my face -- I saw that
affliction had nearly finished its work. Barlow conducted us into the house,
and she fainted in my arms. One sit was quickly succeeded by another, and in
the intervals of reason, the principles of life faded in her eyes, and the
universal conqueror seemed making his awful approach. In this state she
continued some hours without the smallest appearance of a favorable change,
and I requested Barlow to procure a coach to convey her back to her la^e abode;
but a loud rapping at the street door prevented his immediate acquiescen^e, and
announced the return of his master.

"Slave!" -- cried the enraged vi^l^in, the instant he beheld Barlow -- "thou
have entered into a league with those wretches that came to abuse and ruin me!"
Barlow, made no reply, but turning from him with an indignant and pity-marked
countenance, hastened to the room that contained us. Dormer followed, uttering
most tremendous threatenings; but on beholding me, with the lifeless form of
Ela in my arms, he stood some moments apparently rooted to the spot -- and the
uplifted came dropped from his hand. -- A transient emanation of remorse
crossed his features; but his native depravity quickly triumphed over every
milder sensation; and, approaching me with desperation and inconceivable fury,
-- "Now!" he wildly exclaimed, "base insolent liar, give me instant
satisfaction."

Satisfaction! -- said I, pointing to the corpse-like Ela -- "Look here."
"Yes," replied he, in a voice nearly choked, "I do, I do. -- She is gone, and
I will send thy busy meddling soul to attend her." -- He paused -- then
suddenly drawing his sword -- "Defend, Defend yourself," he cried, brandishing
the weapon with fierceness, "I thirst for your life -- No subterfuge shall now
avail you. "With these words, regardless of my situation, and without giving me
a moment's time ^o do as he desired -- he made a furious thrust at me; and
Barlow, throwing himself between us, received it in his arm. The sight of his
generous blood, spilt in my defense, called forth every fiery particle with
which nature has inspired me, and seeing the villain about to repeat his
attack, I instantly quitted the happily-insensible Ela; and enraged beyond all
bounds of moderation, met him with fury equal to his own. But yet my presence
of mind proved superior. His wild desperation put him entirely in my power;
and, eluding his pass, I easily wrenched the sword from his slackened arm,
saying. -- "Thy life is mine; but take it and make expiation for thy guilt." --
The humbled tyrant hid his face and was silent. -- I offered up an ejaculation
to that power who had thus graciously preserved me from murder; and hoping that
the provocation would procure me a pardon for engaging in a practice I justly
abhorred, carelessly threw his sword on the carpet, and turned to my fair
charge and her faithful guardian. Barlow; whose garments were all ensanguined
from the wound in his arm. But the base Dormer, seeing me thus unguarded,
snatched up his sword and again dared me to the combat, adding, that his
haughty unsubmitting spirit scorned to accept the life that I could give; and
death should end the contest. In vain I expostulated, and warned him to avoid
my awakened vengeance. He was deaf to all I said; -- and I most reluctantly
acquiesced with his impetuous madness. -- But victory again awaited me; I
disarmed him with equal facility as before; but his sword wounded my wrist in
the scuffle, and the blood gushed out like a fountain. -- The pain of the
wound, and the sight of the stream that flowed from it, added to the ungrateful
return my former lenity had met, determined me to ensure the present conquest
by force, and inflict a corporal punishment on the aggressor; and taking up the
cane that had been lifted against the unoffending Barlow, I expended my
strength on the sides of the degraded, but still menacing coward; for such in
reality he was, and forcing him into an adjacent room, I bolted the door,
effectually to prevent his further intrusion.

During this encounter, a ray of animation revisited the death-like Ela; but
she was still totally insensible to all that passed. Resuming my station by her
side, Barlow hastened to procure a coach at my request; and calling at a
surgeon's in our way to Ela's lodgings, our wounds were examined and dressed;
when, with the consoling assurance of their being unattended by danger, we
proceeded with our greatly recovered charge. Then dispatching Barlow to release
his worthless master, I earnestly recommended Ela to the care of the mistress
of the house, who seemed a much more humanized being than her with whom we had
resided at Plymouth; and after prevailing on us to take some cordial
refreshment. Ela, who had never uttered a syllable since our return, suffered
me to lead her to a sopha; and, in a few moments, an apparently balmy slumber
seemed to suspend every embittering remembrance. But anxiety still pervaded my
heart, and I waited impatiently for the return of our honest confederate. A
considerable time elapsed without his appearance; and Ela awoke from the deep
stupor which I had mistaken for sleep. She fixed her eyes mournfully on mine,
but her senses were still absorbed in forgetfulness; at least the sufferings
she had so recently experienced only floated on the surface of her mind, like
the shadowy remembrance of an unpleasing dream; and all my endeavors proved
insufficient to break her silence. I spoke to her repeatedly on the subject
that I well knew could not fall deeply to affect her heart, but without gaining
any other reply than a heavy sigh, or a gloomy smile. At length the long
absence of Barlow greatly alarmed me, and fully assured that it must originate
from some disastrous circumstance, I resolved to go in quest of him, and left
Ela in charge with the woman of the house; with whose obliging attention I was
quite satisfied.

An ill-looking fellow opened Dormer's door; when, on my enquiring if Barlow
was there, he replied in the affirmative. Pretending to call him, he returned
with three others, of similar exterior with himself, and seizing me declared
they would soon conduct me to Barlow, whose fellow assassin they knew me to be,
and we should receive the reward of our crimes. I was accordingly hurried into
the presence of an old ignorant unprincipled wretch, dignified by the
appellation of a justice; where, after some senseless interrogations, all that
I could say in my defense was treated with contempt, and turned into ridicule;
and after the usual forms I was committed to the prison that held my fellow
sufferer, the truly estimable Barlow. Here we mingled our painful emotions
together, not for our own misfortunes, but those of Ela; thus deprived of every
earthly aid, and exposed to every evil from the malice and revenge of the
wretch who had thus reduced her.

Happy was it for you, my dear and amiable Caroline, that no officious tongue
dared to whisper the unmerited ignominy and sufferings which at that period
awaited your brother. Condemned to the society of the most hardened ruffians,
and loaded with heavy irons, like the most attrocious violator of my country's
laws; yet, conscious integrity supported my spirit, and the dignity and
cheerfulness of my mind was unimpaired. My anxiety, nevertheless, was extreme
for the uncertain fate of my lovely but unfortunate friend, for whom I was more
than ever interested by the imperfect sketches of her numerous virtues, but too
adventurous love, which our faithful Barlow communicated to me during the early
hours of our imprisonment. In the midst of his unconnected, yet most affecting
narrative, the form of her, whose sorrows we were contemplating, stood before
us, led by the same group of wretches that had been our conductors. Lost to
every sensation but the pleasure of again beholding her in existence, I sprang
toward her, but the clanking of my setters struck her with inexpressible
horror, and clasping her hands fearfully together, she attempted to fly from
me. Her ungentle attendants, however, effectually prevented her; when one of
them daring to use very insolent language, and treating her very roughly, I
seized an earthen mug that stood on one of the windows, and aimed it at his
head; but he, luckily for me, avoided the blow; and I was from that moment
deemed a most desperate villain by all my fellow prisoners: and all my looks
and actions created suspicions of some diabolical intent.

But shocked, as Ela was at our fate, she submitted with the most perfect
resignation to her own. -- Not one murmur escaped her lips -- but a silent and
corroding melancholy was rooted in her heart! She evidently avoided even our
converse; and it was not without infinite labor that we prevailed on her to
relate the particulars of what had befallen her after our separation.

The first thing that awakened her from the lethargic state in which I had left
her when I went in quest of Barlow, was enquiry from the landlady, whether she
did not expect my return that evening? This question seemed to bring back the
power of reflection, and filled her with alarming conjectures respecting our
mysterious absence. After some hours of anxious expectation she dispatched in
search of us a messenger, who returned with the party that apprehended me, and
were placed as sentinels at her betrayer's door, to seize any that should
enquire for Barlow or myself. They took her into custody as an accomplice with
as in assaulting and robbing this monster of depravity.

"And now," added the uncomplaining victim of unbounded love, looking pensively
at us -- "the measure of my woes is nearly full; and but for the cruel return
your goodness has experienced, pain could never more touch my heart. Be you
restored to liberty and happiness, and a prison or a palace is equal to the
undone Ela." I omitted no argument that could possibly afford her comfort, nor
was the honest Barlow less assiduous. We treated our misfortune as a foolish
adventure, and dubbing ourselves knights-errant of the first order, told her
that our present sufferings would only prove a subject for our future boast.
But all our efforts were insufficient, even for a moment to dissipate the
settled gloom that enveloped her mind. A grateful, yet melancholy smile would
often cross her features as she listened to our flattering predictions of
seeing happy days; but, like the transient refulgence of a winter's sun, it was
quickly succeeded by clouds and darkness.

Thus passed several tedious days, when we were called to our trial, and the
audacious destroyer of innocence had even the daring wickedness to appear
against us. Ela fainted the instant she beheld him, and continued insensible
during the whole time of our examination; but without producing any visible
effect on her cruel destroyer.

Of the pretended robbery, no proof appeared, and we were therefore acquitted;
but the driver of the chariot being suborned to swear to the identity of our
persons. and Ela's endeavors to detain Dormer against his inclination, being
corroborated by his own oath, and the bruises I had so liberally bestowed on
him, we were convicted of the assault, and sentenced to pay two hundred pounds
damages, and to suffer with Barlow, who was deemed our assistant and
accomplice, three months imprisonment.

All remonstrance was useless here, and a patient endurance of our heavy wrongs
seemed the only alternative.

This melancholy conclusion to our sad adventures, hastened an event which I
before saw was inevitable. The deadly stroke was given to the gentle heart of
Ela; and it was not in the power of mortal aid to suspend the fatal
consequence. I resolved to sooth, if possible, her fleeting days, and my
attention to her sufferings entirely absorbed my own. Sometimes, indeed, I felt
an ardent wish that my situation might escape the tongue of rumor, and never
wound the heart of my amiable Caroline. This was the constant prayer of my soul
when reflection darted on my mind, and the event has proved that it was
accepted.

Unknown to Ela. I penned a faithful narrative of her case, to that lady whom
the perfidious Dorm r^marked for his future prey; but, charmed by his false
deluding arts, she returned my letter unopened, with a message that plainly
evinced her heart obstinately shut against conviction.

My whole attention, and that of the excellent Barlow, was now devoted in
endeavoring to alleviate the silent but exquisite sufferings of our fair
fellow prisoner. Vain hope, that can ever expect to surmount a grief like hers.
I beheld her decline daily like some sweet and modest flower, bending beneath
the pressure of an inclement season. -- In vain I intruded myself, from the
best of motives, perpetually on her solitude; no efforts could banish the deep
rooted sadness that possessed her mind. During our imprisonment she penned the
enclosed letters -- and, when we were again restored to freedom, I still panted
for vengeance on the base Dormer; but the gentle injured angel besought me so
eloquently to desist, that it must have been a heart as callous as his that
could refuse its acquiescence. She begged me to conduct her back to Plymouth,
where she left the greatest part of her clothes, and papers that she highly
valued.

And here, my beloved Caroline, the motions of my heart, on recollecting the
scene that awaited as, forcibly suspends the progress of my tale. I must
therefore defer the sequel to some more tranquil moments, fully assured that
while you peruse the following testimonies of unsuspecting tenderness and
detested treachery, like me you will execrate the wretch capable of destroying
so much native excellence, and drop a sympathetic tear to the sorrows of the
unfortunate Ela.

Adieu, my much-loved sister, expect soon to receive the conclusion of my
narrative, and let the remembrance of every past distress give place to this
consoling assurance, that the blessings of liberty again await,

Yours, MORTIMER.

LETTERS from ELA to MORTIMER, enclosed in the foregoing.
LETTER I.
THE fabric of misguided enthusiasm at length sinks into oblivion.

The delusions of a fatelly believing heart vanish before the most unequivocal
conviction; and the only refuge my miseries can hope, is through the awful
regions of death. Thither all my wishes aspire. Shame and affliction for ever
await me here; but there is one who judges not by the rigid dictates of erring
mortals. To him I dare submit my cause, and his blessed assurances of peace and
pardon bids each tumultuous passion rest for ever.

Thus, assured, the busy clamours of unmerited tentenderness no longer disturb
my repose: but truth erects her standard in my soul, and long estranged reason
reassumes her sway. -- By their aid I clearly discern the folly of my past
life, and while the tears of penitence burst from my heart, piety and charity
bid me forgive, and hope offers the best consolations and never failing rewards.

No, longer then, my inestimable friend, my more than brother, continue to
grieve for those sorrows that cease to exist. -- They are gone to prepare the
asylum to which I am hastening: -- and all that remains for me is to ensure a
happy reception and pour the effusions of a grateful heart into your benevolent
bosom.

In the first moments of thankfulness for the generous part you took in my
sorrows, I said you should know who she was for whom you were thus interested;
but while false hope, and the most torturing anxiety kept my mind in a constant
state of dreary suspense, I was unequal to the performance of that promise; --
now each corroding passion seems at rest, and tranquillity wooes me to what was
before insupportable.

Born in the lap of luxury, the only darling of parental fondness, care was a
stranger to my heart 'till it approached me in the alluring garb of love.

On the sultry plains of Indostan I received my existence. The God of Day
surely pr^sided at my birth, and inspired me with all his ardors. I was early
distinguished by a soul of fire, and often emphatically declared to be a
daughter of the Sun. -- Fatal distinction! It is this native fervor of soul
that led to all my sorrows; incapable of guile myself, I never suspected it in
others; -- nor once thought it possible for cruelty to lie concealed under the
most solemn professions of love, honor, and fidelity; but the dreadful
assurance now stands unveiled before me, and I fall in the early bloom of life,
the martyr of my own deluded heart.

My father, at the remembrance of whose indulgent goodness suspended anguish
rushes like a torrent on my mind, was a man of eminence in that quarter of the
globe. My mother I never knew; the moment that gave me being, consigned her to
the grave; and I believe contributed to endear me to the heart of my remaining
parent, by whom she was so tenderly beloved, that the mention of her name,
after a very considerable lapse of time, never failed to call forth emotions
too powerful to be suppressed. The unconquerable regret her loss occasioned,
undermined by slow degrees his health, and certainly hastened his death.

Oh, best of men! How does that awful scene crowd, with every affecting
circumstance, on my awakened feellings? How does it recall sensations I could
wish to cancel from the book of memory! His dying words never broke through my
perjured soul. -- I behold the most wronged and amiable of mankind, the all
accomplished and excellent Granville Clifford, whispering sweetest consolation
to my sorrow, while in vain he endeavors to suppress his own.

The parents of Granville Clifford were English adventurers, whose numerous
virtues and amiable manners ensured them the friendship and esteem of my
father. -- But they both met an early grave soon after their arrival in India;
and with their latest breath committed their helpless orphans, and their humble
fortune, to the protection of their only friend; who soothed their anxious
hearts with the most solemn and generous assurances, of which his actions have
proved the sincerity.

Granville Clifford was at that period, a beautiful boy of five years old;
myself only six months. My father soon felt a particular attachment to him, and
he shared with me his tenderest affection. Thus we grew up together, and a
sentiment of filial love took deep root in my infant mind, and strengthened
with increasing years. The extreme loveliness of his person, the remarkable
endowments of his mind, and the winning graces of his manners, daily increased
the affection to which his defenseless infancy gave birth in my father's
generous bosom, and he approved himself worthy of the charge with which he was
entrusted. -- He always gave him the endearing appellation of son, and
determined to hallow both on him and me every advantage that could be desired
from the most finished education. But his affairs rendering it impossible for
him to quit India, his extreme tenderness, and the delight he experienced in
our innocent endearments would not suffer him to part with us; he therefore
procured the best masters for us from England, France, and Italy, and
inspecting our studies himself, spared neither expense nor trouble to
accomplish us in every useful and polite science: and render us a blessing to
himself and society. How far his endeavors have been crowned with success in
me, is now, alas! too evident to need any further demonstration.

The culture of our expanding minds was the sole employment of my father's
leisure hours He strove to impress us with the principles of morality; and his
own example powerfully enforced the truths he taught.

The amiable Clifford imbibed instruction as fast as it could be offered him.
He made a rapid progress in every valuable attainment: and the improving
beauties of his mind and person made him universally caressed. -- I was the
da^ling object of his fond regard: to me his early preference was directed, and
he aspired to render me as perfect as himself. -- To inspire me with the same
love of beauty, harmony, and order, was his constant aim; and to him I am
indebted for every virtue or accomplishment that I possess.

Ah! hal^y^n days of blissful innocence how does your remembrance recall
embittered anguish to my heart! When I think with what ^tive fondness the
lovely youth endeavou^ed to infuse the lessons of wisdom into my opening mind*
the teacher seems not less divine than his doctrine but madness seizes me as I
turn to the reverse of the picture and contemplate the delusions of the human
heart. -- I seek the records of truth; I trace, in idea, the fables of romance;
but amidst all the ruins of unimpassioned tendernes^ I cannot discover one
instance similar to mine. Eloisa suffered -- greatly suffered; but her honor
was a voluntary sacrifice -- and the ardor of her lover knew no dimin^tion --
He was the occasion of her fall; but he was likewise the partaker of her
repentance, and the kind consoler of her sorrows. -- His endearing accents
soothed her latest pangs, and she breathed out her soul in the blessed
assurance of being reunited to him in a state where all imperfection is done
away. -- Even Julia, the self-devoted Julia Etange, was supported by the
unalterable attachment of her beloved St. Pr^ux, under parental severity, and
the conflicts of a heart full of sensibility, and capable of the most exalted
affection. -- But for me no friendly haven appears, where my ruined bark can
safely fly to shield herself from the headlong storm. The boundless ocean of
eternity seems my only refuge; and there all my hopes are centered.

The uncertain prosp^cts of futurity fleet before me -- the sad recollection of
the past presses for audience. -- I feel myself unequal to the task assigned;
but will resume it when tranquillity again vouchsafes to attend

Your grateful ELA.

LETTER II. ELA TO MORTIMER.
CONVINCED that my few sad days will soon be numbered, I hasten to conclude my
narrative ere the inevi^able stroke arrests my trembling hand, and consigns my
name to the mercy of slanderous injustice.

Blessed with every felicity that the approving smiles of the best of fathers,
the fond attention of the amiable Clifford* and the endearments of all around
me could bestow: ^al gratitude and exalted friendship possessed my soul, and
every ^ational pleasure, every refined delight that affection can administer,
or sensibility receive, gilded my days, until I attained my fifteenth year.
Fatal period! from whence I may date the commencement of all my sorrows.

The anniversary of my birth was always devoted to mirth and festivity. My
friends and companions crowded to offer their congratulations: the day was
spent in every refined and innocent delight, and usually concluded with a ball
and supper in the highest style of elegant simplicity. The heart of my
indulgent father seemed always dilated with unusual gladness on that occasion;
and the expressive features of Granville Clifford beamed unutterable things.

It was in the midst of such a scene as this, while in a pavilion fitted up for
the night, every heart beat responsive to the power of harmony, and every age
sparkled with pleasure, that the arrival of Henry Dormer was announced. He came
with warm recommendations to my father, and was welcomed with heartfelt
cordiality into our blissful abode. That evening, that fatal evening, the sad
delusion began.

I was dancing a minuet with Granville Clifford, when my father entered with
the charming stranger. His eyes instantly paid me the most flattering
distinction A crimson glow full used my cheek, and a sensation alto^ether n^w
invaded my heart. I actually trembled as Granville led me to my seat. My father
approached us and introduced the stranger. Granville welcomed him to India,
with all the winning grace by which he was most happily distinguished; I
fal^ered out an attempt to do the same, but acquitted myself most wretchedly,
and felt both conscious and chag^ned at the defect. I ^vetted my eyes on the
floor; and again raised them to the most pleasing object they had ever before
contemplated. He was -- but why ^eed I describe him to you! you know the manly
beauty, the elegant symmetry by which nature had distinguished him; but you can
never know by what indes^^ibable, irresistible attractions that beauty was then
adorned. (He was altered, strang^ly altered ere you beheld him, in every
opinion but mine; my deluded heart had received the infatuation too deeply, to
discover any change.) In him I thought every mortal perfection centered, and
his eloquent eyes were fixed on me with equal approbation. My father requested
him to join us in the dance, and as a stranger, he was complimented with my
hand for the remainder of the evening. No longer I beh^ld any object but him --
no longer could I attend to any melody, but that of his enchanting accents. --
My unsuspecting heart greedily snatched at the delicious poison that fell from
his tongue, and I was irre^rievably lost ere I saw the smallest danger. -- He
whispered a language new and delightful; the solicitude which Granville
Clifford constantly evinced for my improvement, declared that he thought me
deficient in excellence; and while it spoke the sincerity of his regard, it
humbled my vanity; but Henry Dormer uttered a language very different, he told
me that I was all perfect, -- and I believed him. -- The fascination gained
daily strength. -- From that evening the persidious Henry spared no pains to
ensure his conquest; -- but while his tender assiduities were pointed at me, he
was equally attentive to secure the favor of my father and Granville, who,
strangers to guile, never once suspected the emotions he had excited in my
bosom, but encouraged my evident wish of appearing agreeable in his eyes; --
and while my worthy parent assured him of his perfect friendship, and zealous
services, the gentle Clifford showed him the most marked attention and omitted
nothing that seemed likely to promote his welfare and happiness. -- But I was
no longer the same -- No more did I listen with enraptured ear to the
instructions of the best of parents -- nor did my charmed soul attend to the
language of Granville Clifford's heart. No longer was I foremost at our morning
studies -- our noonday haunts, were now neglected, and the grotto, where I had
so often delighted to accompany the warbling flute with my voice, was totally
deserted. -- The murmuring water-fall no longer wooed me to its deep recess;
nor the wild musicians of the groves invited me to join their song of
gratitude. The stranger, engrossed all my thoughts. To him all my wishes
aspired, to him my every thought, word, and action were addressed, and all the
rest of the creation was forgotten. For him I dressed, s^ng, touched the
trembling string, or displayed my skill in the ma^y dance; possessed of his
approbation I wished for nothing more, and every other affection of my soul
seemed absorbed by this ardent passion. -- I certainly continued to love my
excellent father with the utmost tenderness, but at that time I seldom thought
of him; I likewise still esteemed Granville Clifford, in the same degree, as I
should have done an amiable and affectionate brother; but I carefully avoided
his so^iety, and shrunk like the sens^tive plant* from his tender assiduity. --
These deep recesses, these delightful labyrinths, through whose enchanting
m^anders, Granville Clifford had often led me, with a heart where sportive
innocence loved to reside, now bore witness to the secret vows of Henry Dormer.
-- In these sweet haunts, sacred to every noble and elegant sentiment that can
exalt the human heart, Henry Dorm^r charmed me with the first avowal of his
profane passion. -- Love it was not, love it could never be; but I believed it
so -- and in artless strains confessed the impressions he had made on my heart.
-- He heard me with rapture, he sealed his extacy on my lips a thousand times,
but hinted some fears about my father; -- but I assured him they were
ill-founded -- "My father," said I, "is more than I can speak him. It is
impossible you should yet know half his worth, nor can I describe it. He has
enough to render his Ela happy, nor will he withhold it. Already he esteems and
admires you. Go then! pour out your heart before him, assured of success."

Thus encouraged, he clasped me again in his arms, promised forever to obey me
-- called me his best, his only treasure; bestowed on me every endearing
appellation that the most endearing tenderness could possibly suggest -- and
after numerous repetitions of his ardent vows, I hastened our return to the
house that he might put his determination in practice; but turning down an
unfrequented path, which we had before made choice of to avoid interruption, I
beh^ld a tiger cou^hing just before us. -- Terrified for the danger of my
adored Henry, unmindful of myself, I uttered a piercing shriek, and bid him
fly: he instantly obeyed, and was out of sight in a moment. My destruction
seemed now it evitable. The tiger panted at my heels, and offering up my ardent
prayer, I r^signed myself to my apparent fate; when the generous Clifford
sprang from an a^joining enclosure, and threw himself before the ravenou^
animal. I uttered a shriek, wild as before, and threw my arms involuntarily
around him: but he flung me from him, and drawing his sword with the quickness
of lightning, he plunged it into the heart of the f^aming monster, and conveyed
me fainting to the house. Gratitude was the first impulse that engrossed my
returning senses. -- The assurance of Dormer's safety dwel^ strongly on my
mind; but again throwing my arms affectionately round the dear brother of my
soul. I ardently blessed Heaven for his almost miraculous escape, and wept in
his bosom. Then, raising my eyes -- "You have saved me," -- said I, -- "dear
generous Granville, you have saved the life of Ela." -- He made no reply, but
printing a gentle kiss on my forehead he joined his cheek, wet with tears, to
mine, and pressed me still closer to his heart. My father witnessed the scene
with silent transport* and after my first emotions had subsided, my eyes
involuntarily turned toward their still more favored object. But deep
confusion dyed his cheek, and his eyes carefully avoided mine. Ah! little did
he then know the heart of the devoted Ela, -- little did he then suspect that
the wound was given, which neither time nor chance can ever cure. Distressed by
his embarrassment, every thing else was forgotten; but when the affectionate
enquiries of my father brought back the scene of danger to my remembrance, a
variety of tender palliatives arose at the same instant to entirely exculpate
my beloved Henry. His desertion I attributed wholly to surprise, and believed
him, when he swore by every sacred power, that his own death would, in the cool
hour of reflection, be far less dreadful then, than losing me. Thus I neglected
the warning hand of mercy, and giving myself wholly up to the guidance of my
infatuated heart, I regarded the conduct of my preserver as an act of common
humanity -- and continued to cherish the viper in my bosom, who after having
deprived me of all that renders life valuable, now throws aside every disguise,
and robs me of that likewise.

My wearied spirits now se^k the balmy-blessing of sleep -- the only cessation
that my sorrows can ever taste, until the final, the ardently wished-for
summons comes that brings an eternal release.

ELA.

LETTER III. ELA TO MORTIMER.
AGAIN I am enabled to resume my sad narration. The hours of darkness passed
heavily along; but returning light seems to have brought a new supply of
resignation; and although it sometimes costs my heart a p^^g, I return to my
self-imposed duty, ^er to pay your goodness the only tribute of gratitude in my
power.

The adventure related in my last, trivial as was the impression it made on my
mind, caused a considerable alteration in our society. A very perceptible gloom
hovered around the so lately gay and gallant Dormer. My father seemed laboring
with some concealed emotion -- and more than common happiness was visible in
Granville Clifford. I was perplexed by each of them, -- but the behavior of
Dormer appeared the most inexplicable, and dwelt strongly on my mind. He seemed
to avoid my converse, and no longer sought to charm me with the music of his
tongue. Then it was that anguish first seized my heart. Two days passed in a
state of inconceivable wretchedness. In vain I endeavored to account for the
silent dejection of Dormer; the extreme vivacity of Clifford; or the mysterious
air of my father: anxiety preyed deeply on my heart, and sleep was a stranger
to my couch. -- In this state I was, when the second night after the escape
from the jaws of the tiger, the splendor of the heavenly luminaries, the sweet
serenity of the air, and the melancholy murmur of a distant wood-dove, added to
the melody of a nightingale, close to my chamber window, tempted me to indulge
my contemplations in a small piazza, with which it was united. The moon shone
with unclouded radiance on a fine sheet of water that fronted the house; I
walked some time, buried in reflection, when the sound of a gentle noise behind
me made me turn round, and I beheld a beautiful little spaniel that belonged to
Dormer running toward me I eagerly caught the pretty animal in my arms, and
loaded it with caress^s. "Phaon," said I, "sweet little Phaon, where is your
master?" The creature strug^led for his liberty to give me the desired
information, bu^ it was unnecessary. Dormer ascended a flight of steps that led
from an avenue at the end of the piazza, and approached me with a pensive air.
The impropriety of my dress occurred, and I was retiring; but springing
suddenly forward he effectually prevented me. "Lovely Ela," he exclaimed,
seizing my hands -- "will you indeed leave me to despair?" I was incapable of
making any reply. "Will you," added he -- "angelic maid, scorn the most ardent
passion that ever informed the heart of man? Can such unequalled goodness
condemn her adoring Henry to madness and death?"

"Oh! never, never!" I exclaimed -- "Why do you talk thus?" "Because," he
replied, "looking firmly in my face, "your father has given you to Granville
Clifford." "My father!" exclaimed I, sinking on a bench beside us. "Yes," he
rep^ated wildly, "I heard the bargain sealed -- I heard it and distraction
seized me. -- But I will never live to see it ratified." "It never can, indeed,
it never shall," -- said I, looking tenderly at him. "Oh! but I fear, I fear it
is inevitable," -- he replied -- "unless my adored Ela; -- but what was I about
to say? -- Your father's heart is set on the accomplishment of this
long-destined union: -- they fondly think you love this Clifford, and it is
certain he doats on you. But, what do I say? (added he, after a pause) it is
certain he shall never have you, for have you not generously declared your
heart is mine? -- Oh! that accursed tiger! -- It was that which confirmed the
destiny of your father. Clifford is exalted to a hero; but for me, what
remains?" -- "Love and happiness," I replied; "then envy not this really
amiable young man the acquisition of a little empty honor" -- "No," he
exclaimed, "I cannot envy him any thing, but your affections." -- "Tomorrow,"
added he, "I go to enter on an employment, which the interest of your ^ather
has procured me; but alas! it will remove me far from all my soul holds dear.
-- This propitious night has led me thus happily to your feet, and let us not
lose the precious moments. -- I have been buried in the shades of yonder grove
since the silent hour of midnight -- and your sweet image burst like a heavenly
vision on my eyes as I ascended the steps to return to my apartment. Swear,
then, charming maid, ere I consent to part with you* that you will be mine:
swear, in the awful face of Heaven, that no allurements shall ever shake your
faith." I was about to comply with his request, when the soft sound of an
approaching footstep struck our ears. We started from each other, Dormer
disappeared in an instant; returning day broke through the distant clouds, and
my father stood before me. I could gladly have sunk into the earth to avoid his
presence: till that moment I never felt the stings of self-accusation. He
approached me with his usual benignity, and seating himself beside me --
"What," said he, kissing my check, has thus early disturbed the slumbers of my
sweet girl!" I threw my arms around him. I hid my face in his bosom, but could
not speak. "Ela," said he, in a more solemn tone, "you are unhappy. I have seen
you so for many days; and the painful discovery has wounded the breast of your
father." -- "Oh! wretched girl" exclaimed I, raising my streaming eyes, "to
make my excellent parent unhappy likewise." "Explain then, my child," -- said
he, still holding me in his arms, "what is it that preys upon your heart? --
and let your fond parent banish it." "Yet," added he, after a long "pause, why
should I ask a confession that may give you pain, when I already know all that
you can tell me? -- My Ela is incapable of disguise." -- "Yes, dear sir," said
I, clasping his hands between my own, "indeed I am not, I will not, cannot
attempt to conceal my heart from you." "Nor give it away without my
acqui^scence, I hope," replied he with quickness. -- I felt my face glow, and
averted my eyes from his penetrating regard -- "Yet," added he, "the little
flatterer has been strongly tempted; but beware, my lovely girl, how you listen
to the delusions of an inexperienced heart. Happiness as perfect as mortality
can taste, courts you in the form of the accomplished, the elegant, the truly
estimable Granville Clifford. -- You know his bright endowments -- his uncommon
excellencies. -- His grateful, let me add, generous soul, knows no ambition
equal to that of being your protector, your gentle friend and counselor,
through all the thorny paths of life; to lead you, from step to step, up to the
fountain head of all perfection, and accompany you into those mansions of
eternal peace and love, where I trust your virtues will gain you admittance.
This, my dear Ela, is no tumultuous, sordid passion, that vanishes ere it is
well understood; but real love, whose sole aim it is to promote the happiness
of its object; which will always increase with time, and soar far above all the
misfortunes or cruelty of the world. Such is the attachment of Granville
Clifford. -- I ^ead the secret monuments of his ingenuous mind, and ^ well
assured, that had he empires to bestow, you would be equally his choice as now.
A heart, like his is a jewel that is seldom found -- an inestimable gem,
indeed, which all the treasures of the world can never purchase. This heart my
child now waits your acceptance, and I have too firm a reliance on your innate
excellence to entertain a doubt of your being thoroughly sensible of its value.
-- Gratitude will bring back the scene where his life was endang^red to rescue
yours -- and point out the return which that conduct merits: -- justice will
likewise draw comparisons on that occasion which cannot but be obvious, and you
will learn to subdue every foolish or troublesome enemy that may have disturbed
your repose! -- fully convinced, that your happiness is the first wish of your
fond father's heart, and that my zeal in the cause of Granville Clifford, can
arise from no other motive. -- Experience, my dear girl, enables me to view
objects through a juster medium than can possibly be expected from your early
years, and unchequered mode of life. You are as much a stranger to the
bye-paths and indirect, crooked ways of the world as if your days had passed in
the vale of Abyssisinia; but I am fully assured you will not shut your ears,
and obstinately contemn the voice of instruction, which now warns you to avoid
all those who would, under any form whatever, seek to allure you from the paths
of duty and strict rectitude; for those that dare to do so, whatever name they
may assume, can only have their own gratification, not your happiness in view.
I see, with a mixture of pain and pleasure, the native fervor, the exquisite
sensibility of your mind; -- yes, I have long seen it; and while I cannot but
approve, I likewise tremble. Convinced therefore, -- (you weep, my dear Ela,
but medicine however nauseous, is sometimes necessary) that this emaciated form
will very soon be united to its kindred dust, I wish, ardently wish, to see you
as securely sheltered from the storms of life as the uncertain^y of human
events, and the falla^iousness of human foresight can admit. I know but one
worthy of the charge. The one I have appointed my substitute, my representative
-- your guardian; -- nay, more, your husband -- Together you have grown up, and
attained a blooming and promising maturity; your kindred virtues were early
visible -- an overuling power designs you for each other: let no ividious hand
then interpose between you. The happiness of my few remaining days -- the
happiness of the amiable Clifford, and your own happiness, be assured, depends
on the accomplishment of this event, which lies heavy at my heart. Mistake not
then, I conjure you, the glow of a transient approbation, raised on the airy
basis of a fine person, adorned by the charms of novelty, and insinuating
manners, for a serious attachment of the heart. Granville Clifford I am well
convinced, is the real possessor of your affections; and however, an ignis
fatuus may delude you for a short time, they will soon return to their proper
object, and own him the worthy arbitrator of your future fate."

I was drowned in tears. He arose with mild dignity, and pressing me tenderly
in his arms --

"Retire, my beloved Ela," said he, "the morning air is penetrating, and you
are too carelessly guarded against it; -- go then to your chamber, and reflect
on what parental anxiety, and a tenderness that cannot be exceeded, has
prompted me to say." I obeyed, deeply affected, as I now am, by the
recollection of a scene that can never be effaced from the heart of

ELA.

LETTER IV. ELA TO MORTIMER.
THE final stroke seemed now given to all my blissful hopes, floods of tears
fell from my eyes, and sighs of anguish burst from my heart. Unthankful for the
numerous blessings by which I was surrounded, I execrated my very being, and
impiously besought Heaven to recall the gift that was now become insupportable.
Ah! Mistaken, wretched Ela! how easily did thou suffer thyself to be carried
away by the tide of passion! Forgetful of what I owed the best of fathers, and
most generous of friends -- every valuable affection of my soul was lost in
this intoxicating stream, and no consideration could prevail on me to forego
its fatal draught. I revolved, deeply revolved what my father had said. It
penetrated the inmost recesses of my heart; but when the image of my loved
Henry recurred, apparently struggling with all the pangs of love, every thing
else was forgotten, and, and I mourned only from the dreadful fear of losing
him forever. -- The amiable form of Granville Clifford then stole upon my mind.
I reproached him with cruelty, I called him friend and brother, but bade him
never hope for more. Ten thousand times I accused him mentally as the cause of
all my distress, and felt myself, at that distracted moment, inclined even to
hate him. In this agitated state the hours were spent, until a servant summoned
me to breakfast; but the traces of sorrow, visible in my face, rendered me an
object really unfit to be seen, and I pleaded indisposition as an excuse for
keeping my chamber. The fear of a visit from my father struck me as I delivered
this message to the servant; I called her back, and bade her say I was asleep.
-- My heart smote me as I thus assumed the despicable veil of hypocrisy to
conceal my real emotions. I seemed degraded in my own opinion -- I wished to
recall the message, but it was too late. "Gracious Heaven," said I, "what have
I done that should need the mask of falsehood, that should prompt me in any
shape to deceive the best of fathers? I have condescended to a meanness that
must sink me even in the estimation of my servant; but there is no resource. I
would not, methinks, for worlds offend or distress this good parent; and at
this juncture I fear I could neither suppress my emotions nor bear his
presence. But his tenderness, claims every return in my power, and I will
sacrifice each wish of my own to promote his happiness. -- Yes, I will try to
conquer the struggles of this inbred rebel; endeavor* oh severe task! even to
forget the dear enchanting Dormer, and yield implicit obedience to my father's
will; -- but then he loves me, alas! I could with fortitude bear any suffering
of my own in silence; -- but how shall I support those of my Henry? -- The bare
idea of his being wretched is torture. Oh! fatal, fatal attachment! it has, I
fear, forever banished peace from my bosom; and, perhaps, involved the most
charming of men in misery."

In reflections like these I was buried until the hour of dinner approached,
and I began to dress for that occasion; but before I had risen from the toilet,
my father sent to enquire if I was well enough to attend him in the music-room;
I replied in the affirmative, and in a few minutes followed the messenger. --
Granville Clifford was with him; I trembled and felt a sanguine glow mount into
my cheeks as I approached them; but the sweet complacency of my dear father's
features, reassured me. -- His eyes delicately avoided to scrutinize my altered
looks; but giving me an open letter -- "Here is a sweet companion for you, my
dear Ela," said he, just arrived from England." -- I glanced my eyes over the
letter: it was from a much esteemed friend of my father's, warmly recommending
a young orphan lady (who destitute of any portion but an uncommon share of
personal and mental graces, had evinced a desire to visit India) to his
protection.

"This amiable lady," said my father, as I returned him the letter, "if she
answers the description here given, will, I hope, in some measure, compensate
to our little society, for the loss of our agreeable Dormer, who quitted us
early this morning." I felt the color desert my cheeks as he pronounced these
words My heart seemed to die within me, and I was very near sinking to the
ground; but summoning all my strength. I seated myself in a chair by his side,
and assuming an air of indifference, very foreign to my heart, expressed my
surprise at the suddenness of Dormer's departure; then, to prevent any more
being said on the subject, I took up an Italian composition that lay beside me,
and flying to a harpsi^hord, played on it, while Granville Clifford hung over
the back of my chair, and heaved repeated sighs. My father, whose soul was
harmony itself, was lavish in his encomiums on my musical powers; and reminding
Clifford of the fair stranger, the carriage was ordered, and they both went to
conduct her from the ship. Never was a poor wretch, whose hard fate had long
estranged him from the chearing beams of the sun and the joys of liberty, more
rejoiced at being again restored to light and freedom, than I was at being left
to the unmo^ested indulgence of my feelings. -- Again I retired to my chamber,
and dropped the tear of bitter regret for the loss I feared I had sustained, in
being for ever separated from the savoured obj^ct of my tender choice. Yet, I
still resolved that fillal piety should triumph over every other impulse, when
an Indian, who h^d occasionally attended Dormer during his stay with us,
hastily entered, and delivered me a paper, containing the following words:

"In a state of mind, which no language can paint, I tear myself from the most
lovely of her sex; but let no consideration tempt the charming Ela to forget
the man who lives but for her."

I pressed the insensible paper to my bosom. I ^athed it with my tears; and,
like Juliet, I madly sought to know, "Why Heaven delighted to practice
stratagems upon so soft a subject as myself?" when the sound of the returning
carriage struck my ear; and as soon as I had composed my features I hastened to
receive our new guest. All the pictures my imagination had eve^ formed of the
Goddess of Beauty and Love, now seemed realized in this fair stranger. -- Her
form was exquisitely proportioned; her eyes bright, yet languishing, looked
like heavenly intelligencers of the most melting sensibility: every other
feature was equally expressive, of all that can delight the eye, and fascinate
the heart; her complexion was a charming assemblage of delicacy and health, and
a pro^u^ion of bright hair played with graceful negligence around her finely
turned forehead, and added beauty to the dazzling whiteness of her neck -- I
addressed her with a blushing consciousness of inferiority -- I was at that
moment reconciled to the absence of Dormer -- I was even weak enough to
congratulate myself, that he was removed far from the power of such dangerous
charms; I likewise formed a hope, that they might eventually lead to the
accomplishment of all my wishes, by attaching the heart of Granville Clifford,
who regarded her with marked attention, and withdrawing his preference from me.

But if I was struck with admiration, by the beauties of the fair stranger's
person, how greatly was that admiration increased by the graces of her mind and
manners. She appeared some years old^r than myself; her understanding naturally
good, had been most happily cultivated, her wit was sparkling, tempered by a
modesty that enhanced its worth; she excelled in every bright accomplishment,
and her every look, word, and movement, was attended by a grace I never yet saw
equalled; her ten^ was mild and amiable, and the qualifications of her he^
(...), I believe, fully equal in excellence to tho^ ^er form. Every new day
showed some, before undiscovered, charm in her: My esteem for her increased in
proportion to her merits; and I soon conceived a very tender affection for her,
which seemed to meet an abundant return. -- We were never asunder: we formed a
variety of amusive schemes; and Granville Clifford spared no pains to render
them delightful. My native vivacity was unbounded, and I endeavored to exert
it all in compliment to our lovely guest. By appearing gay I was believed to be
happy; while the image of Henry Dormer still possessed my whole soul, and
melancholy never failed to draw her secret sombre shade across the brightest
scenes. -- My father smiled serenely on our innocent pleasures: ^e fancied that
all that disturbed my repose was forgotten; he was infinitely delighted with
the beautiful St. Clare, and showed her every possible mark of friendship and
distinction. -- Festivity reigned around us. Splendid entertainments, balls,
masks, etc. were given in honor of our charming favorite, which effectually
introduced her to our Indostan neighbors, and she was soon distinguished as
the fair Sultana of the day. Adorers flocked in crowds around her: she had soon
some very splendid offers, but those that made them were not happy enough to
obtain her favor: covered with blushes, in the gentlest accents, she
acknowledged the great honor done her by their generous proposals; but frankly
owned that her heart forbade her acceptance of them. -- My father silently
wondered at this conduct: others censured it as some of the gentlemen were, in
the general eye, unexceptionable; but guided by my own experience, I read some
tender secret in the fair Augusta's eyes, and believed her heart, like my own
consumed by a hopeless yet devouring flame: yet why then come to India? Why
subject herself to (suffer me to say) the censure of indelicacy by commencing
an adventurer, if unable to support that character, and taste its proffered
fruits? -- This was an enigma which I was unable clearly to solve; -- yet, a
perhaps, sometimes crossed my mind, that the amiable Clifford was the barrier
to her golden prospects. I saw the soft blush frequently suffuse her cheek when
he addressed her -- I frequently observed her fine eyes rivetted on his face
when she believed herself unnoticed; but I was fully assured, that if she had
unhappily fixed her affections there, it was without the smallest probability
of ever meeting a return; for he only paid her the cold tribute of common
politeness -- His unhappy unmerited attachment to me, seemed w^ven with the
thread of his existence, and he beheld Augusta's wondrous charms unmoved. Thus
several months revolved.

My father heard frequently from Dormer, who met with great success in his new
employment. -- Clifford repeatedly avowed his ardent and pure attachment; I
som^times wept, but endeavored to submit to what appeared inevitable, and
consider him the arbitrator of my future sat. I wrote a letter to Dormer,
declaring this to be my final resolution, and preparations were making for our
nuptials, when my honored father, who had long been in a declining state of
health, was suddenly confined to his bed, and death made its awful approach.
Every heart around him mourned on that sad occasion, and every countenance bore
the ensigns of sorrow. A few hours before he expired, he summoned me to his
bedside. -- "Ela," said he, "I am snatched from you ere the first wish of my
soul is accomplished; but I leave you with the firmest reliance on your duty,
your fidelity, and your judgment." He raised his eyes, and beheld Granville
Clifford enter the room. -- "Yes," continued he. "I cheerfully commit my
dearest treasure to this most excellent young man." -- The eyes of Granville
streamed their grateful testimonies; the dying saint raised himself in the bed;
and I was totally absorbed in unutterable woe. He took each of our hands, and
joining them together, "Be blessed," -- said he, "be happy, and mourn not for
me. -- I am about to be released from all my pains -- immortal glory already
beams upon my soul. -- Adieu -- my children!"

He sunk on his pillow as these words broke faintly from his lips. -- And here,
my estimable friend, bitter reflection suspends my yet unfinished tale, and
forces me to grant a respite, to myself and you.

ELA.

LETTER V. ELA TO MORTIMER.
IN vain should I attempt to describe the poignancy of my sorrow, on the ever
regreted occasion, with the account of which my last letter concluded; but a
heart like yours full of sensibility, and awake to all the tender claims of
nature, will easily conceive them; why then should I labor to recall a scene,
the remembrance of which fills my soul with inexpressible torture, and greatly
augments my present sufferings!

Insensible to all the gentle arguments of love and friendship, my mind dwelt
deeply on the irreparable loss I had sustained, and the voice of consolation
was unheard. -- The loved idea of my ever honored parent engrossed every
house: even Henry Dormer was unthought of at that distressful period. I avoided
as much as possible the salutary counsel and tender assiduity of the distressed
but ever anxiously attentive Clifford, and even the presence of the amiable
Augusta St. Clare was unwelcome. I wished for the unrestrained indulgence of my
woe I secluded myself whole days within my chamber, absorbed in gloomy solitude;
and was not without great reluctance, prevailed on to join their society. --
Never child mourned more truly for a parent's loss; never one had greater
reason; but the precepts of virtue delivered in the softest accents of
empassioned tenderness* at length pierced the deep gloom of affliction by which
my mind was enveloped; I listened to the eloquent entreaties of my more than
brother, enforced by the mild persuasions of my charming friend, and
resignation diffused its blessings around me.

My father had made no disposition of his effects, every thing therefore
devolved to me. This was a conduct I did not expect, nor was I at all gratified
by it, as I wished and always believed, he would certainly ensure Granville
Clifford an independency; but at the same time it determined me to make him
every compensation in my power for this apparent neglect. It was certainly this
belief from whence this extraordinary step of my father's originated. -- He
judged of my heart by his own: but, alas! the conclusion was most fatally
deceptive. -- He did not reflect that the human heart is not to be relied on;
and a heart inclined like mine still less so than any other. He believed me
just, generous and sincere; the event proved me false, cruel, and treacherous.
-- in the first moment of reflection on my future conduct, justice and
discretion marked out that plan I ought to pursue; and I formed solemn
resolutions of acting in exact conformity with what was universally known to be
the long avowed design, and dying wish of my worthy father; but how soon were
those resolves destroyed by the force of a bl^nd enthusiastic passion! --
unworthy, I now, when too late, discover; totally unworthy the appellation by
which it came recommended. Granville Clifford indeed truly loved; but impressed
with a painful sense of his situation, his generous soul strove to suppress its
emotion, and bore its pangs in silence. No longer his ardent vows assailed my
reluctant ear -- but sadness marked his elegant features, and a pensive habit
took possession of his soul. -- His fond attachment now looked up to me as a
prize to which he durst not aspire -- and he determined no more to persecute me
with, as he termed it, his unworthy love, but to mourn the deprivation of all
his hopes in secret, and gladly sacrifice his own happiness to my interest.
Often had he marked the reluctance with which I attended to the language of his
heart; but, unsuspicious of my preference for Dormer, he hoped every thing from
time, and the encouragement and interest of my father: but now he had lost
that, he resolved to withdraw his claims, and (to use his own words) leave me
to some brighter fate. What then was his joy, his unspeakable amazement, while
tortured by contending passions, to hear me in compliance with the impulse of
rectitude, and the laudable resolution I had formed pronounce, unsolicited, the
most solemn assurances of being only his? -- A flood of rapture burst on his
dejected mind -- he threw himself passionately at my feet. -- his emotions were
too powerful for utterance -- but the eloquence of his eyes rendered all other
language needless. I was deeply affected. Penetrated to the soul by the tender
and respectful ardour of his attachment, and the fullest conviction of his
exalted merits, I sincerely partook of his felicity; and a consciousness of
having acted right, triumphed over every sensation that had warred against my
peace; when the door of the room suddenly opened, and, quite unsuspicious of
intrusion, Augusta St. Clare entered, followed by Henry Dormer. -- They both
started back -- Clifford changed color, and I fainted in his arms. On my
recovery, the first object that presented itself was Dormer kneeling by my
side: tenderness and keen reproach marked his features, he ventured to embrace
me with ardour; he pressed his lips to my cheek; I reclined involuntarily on
his bosom; and burst into tears. But remembrance soon awakened me from the fond
delirium. I disengaged myself from him, and raising my eyes, beheld Granville
Clifford witnessing the scene, while an expression of deep melancholy
overspread his lately animated countenance. The impropriety of my behavior
rushed upon my mind. Dormer still held one of my hands between his, but
presenting the other to Clifford, I bade him no longer be anxious on my
account, for I was quite recovered. He seemed totally insensible of my
condescension, he still hung over the back of the chair, and gazed at me in
gloomy silence; then suddenly withdrawing his penetrating eyes, he struck his
hands on his forehead, and darted out of the room. I was deeply affected by his
manner: memory brought back the just departed scene; and the solemn vows I had
so lately uttered filled me with the most sensible regret. The dying words of
my revered father arose upon my mind, and conspired to rack me. The beauteous
Augusta regarded me with gentlest sympathy, and Dormer sat between us absorbed
in thought. The appearance of dinner proved a welcome relief: a servant was
dispatched to inform Clifford we waited for him; but he returned for answer,
that a sudden but violent illness rendered him incapable of attending. I was
inexpressibly alarmed at this account -- embarrassment hovered around Dormer,
and a tender sadness was visible in Augusta: our meal was cheerless, the
unsocial gloom was only disturbed by a few tender enquiries relative to my
health from the amiable Augusta, and some broken unintelligible sentences from
the agitated Dormer. -- An insufferable load of conflicting passions
overwhelmed my heart: and as soon as dinner was removed I pleaded an excuse for
retiring, and hastened to the chamber of Clifford. He was reclining on a couch
when I entered, the picture of death; -- but, all pale and trembling, he
started up at my approach, and I seated my in silence by his side. "Are you
ill?" said I, leaning tenderly toward him. -- "Oh, yes," he replied, averting
his face, I am, indeed, ill; but, let, me not disturb your happiness." --
"Happiness!" I repeated with emotion, "Can I be happy and see my dearest friend
thus?" -- "Am I that friend?" said he, raising himself and fixing his eyes
ardently on my face. -- "Is it possible that I can be blessed with such an
appellation, and does my long adored Ela drop these precious tears for my
sufferings?^ -- "Can Granville doubt it," said I, "after the avowal I have
made?" -- "Oh! pardon me, most loved maid," exclaimed he, "but, indeed, I am
that infidel; -- yet, what do I say? No, I do not doubt your pity; -- but your
love, charming Ela -- your love -- Oh! where am I? -- You must be happy, indeed
you must, and think no more of the wretched Clifford." -- His tears fell on my
hand; I was incapable of making any reply; -- he started wildly from me and
traversed the room -- Fever glowed on his cheek, and distraction glared in his
eye -- he clapped his hands on his forehead, looked mournfully at me, and again
declared he was very ill. I was little better; my agitation could not possibly
be exceeded -- he observed it, although so greatly oppressed himself, and his
looks sufficiently declared that he was deeply sensible of the obligation he
thought my compassion confer^ed. I hid my face with my handkerchief, and
quitted the room to procure him assistance.

But my wearied spirits now compel me to break off, and de^e^ the conclusion of
my sad narrative to another oppor^ity.

ELA.

LETTER VI. ELA TO MORTIMER.
THE illness of Clifford increased with such rapidity, that in a very few hours
the faculty pronounced him in imminent danger. -- My grief was sincere, his
innumerable virtues dwelt forcibly on my mind, and for several days and nights
no persuasions could prevail on me to quit his side. The name of Ela dwelt for
^ver on his lips, sometimes accompanied with that of my father; but much oftener
by that of Henry Dormer. I administered his medicines with my own hands, and,
kneeling, fervently besought that Heaven would endow them with the power of
restoration. The lovely Augusta lent her friendly aid, and shared my anxiety,
Dormer sometimes ventured to intrude, and never failed to remind me of the
injury my health must inevitably sustain from the deprivation of rest; but no
entreaties could prevail on me to quit this scene, until mental and bodily
fatigue, added to my having neglected the necessary refreshment of food and
sleep totally over powered me, and the third night of my watching I was
conveyed in a state of insensibility to my chamber.

This fatal weakness was the inlet to all my succeeding misfortunes; Dormer had
now every opportunity to display his feigned attachment, nor did he neglect to
avail himself of it. Too well assured of my unhappy predilection, he called
forth all his arts to render it subservient to his cruel purpose. He
incessantly assailed me with letters, whose melting language was formed to
captivate the coldest heart. I pleaded my solemn engagements with Granville
Clifford, added to the gratitude he so justly merited, and my duty to the best
of fathers; but all I could urge was insufficient to dissuade him from the
pursuit. -- His gentle reproaches, earnest entreaties, and passionate
complaints, pierced my yielding soul; he tenderly accused me with breach of
faith, and swore he could not, would not live without me. Charmed with the
language of his treacherous heart* and lulled into a forgetfulness of all that
is just and honorable, by the still more dangerous delusions of my own^ I
consented to a midnight interview in that spot where the foot-step of my father
had before surprised us. -- There I no longer remembered what was due to the
memory of that most excellent man, to Clifford, or myself: -- no longer my
heart retained any impression but those of love and Dormer.

Infatuation wrapped me in her thickest mantle, and fond delirium soothed each
accusing remembrancer with its Lethe and draught. "Let us, my adored Ela," said
the perfidious Henry -- "nobly resolve to sacrifice every meaner consideration
on the altar of mutual attachment. Love is imperfect unless tried by
difficulties. -- These are the obstacles that evince its sincerity, and prove a
thorny way to ages of happiness. -- Let us then think only of each other -- Let
us fly from every intruder, and on the happy plains of my dear native isle,
consecrate our lives to bliss."

My ears greedily drank in these delusive words, and my fond heart became their
easy convert*

"This*" added the too charming betrayer, folding me with rapture in his arms,
"this, lovely maid, is the golden opportunity to escape from all that can
molest* the white moment which the gentle deity* who has united our hearts, now
offers to ensure his future favor, may, perhaps, never return. Will it not
then be impious to neglect the proffered blessing? But the souls of Ela and
Henry are incapable of such a profanation. Come then my dear selected bride,
banish all fears; a vessel now waits to wast us to the favored land of
liberty."

I know not whether I made any reply, but incapable of opposition, I followed
him to the steps that descended from the p^azza, where I beheld several Indians
waiting with a carriage. On a nearer approach I discovered them to be my own
attendants. Breathless and almost fainting, I suffered Dormer to lift me into
the carriage. "Say," my dearest love," said he, as soon as we were seated,
"where these faithful creatures may find such necessary clothes as will suffice
for the voyage." -- I marked out some trunks well stocked with linen, several
riding dresses, and all my jewels; and, under the covert of the night, we
arrived in a few hours on the seashore; the Indians following with our
baggage. The very winds seemed bribed to promote the wishes of the base Henry,
and hasten my destruction; they filled the fluttering sails, and conveyed us
with rapidity from the Indostan shores. But the morning light seemed to bring
back suspended reflection. A variety of bitter accusers ^rouded round my heart.
My eyes eagerly sought the dear haunts of my nativity -- these scenes of
innocence and artless joys forcibly recurred to my distracted mind -- the image
of Granville Clifford arose with them: I beheld him languishing on the bed of
sickness; -- methought I heard him once more request to see his long-loved Ela,
and bless her ere he died. -- Unequal to the conflict, remorse and poignant
anguish seized me, and I wept passionately in the bosom of the soft seducer.
But he soon found means to sooth my troubled soul, and banish every image but
his own. He prevailed on me to sign a writing, empowering a person, in whom he
dared confide, to turn all my effects into money, and transmit their value to
England by the first opportunity. This end accomplished. Dormer devoted all his
time to alleviate the anxiety that sometimes preyed upon my peace. But the
righteous vengeance of Heaven pursued my cruel perfidy. A dreadful storm arose
just as we gained fight of England; and, after perils almost incredible, we
were wrecked on a dangerous coast in the western part of the island. There
deprived of all means of subsistence, but from the charitable aid of some
neighboring gentry; the weak state in which I quitted India, added to the
recent struggles of my mind, the bodily sufferings I had just encountered,
brought on an illness that threatened my life; but youth, added to the humane
attentions of a worthy pair, who welcomed us with hospitable cordiality into
their peaceful abode, averted the final blow, and I was again restored to
health and reason.

The first thing that struck my observation was, that Henry had imposed me on
those excellent people for his wife; and, guided by the sophistry of his
baleful arguments, I believed myself in fact such. Here, fain would I draw a
veil over my own conduct, but justice forces me to submit to the humiliating
confession, and own, while deep repentance wrings my heart and tears stream
from my eyes, that, in obedience to his will, I meanly dared to join in the
guilty deception.

Methinks I see your upright soul turn with horror from the picture I have
drawn of myself; but soft-eyed pity is the child of goodness, and the fullest
conviction assures me that she is the native inmate of your exalted mind. This
blessed assurance, although I dare no longer expect your esteem, bids me still
hope for the continuance of your generous sympathy; and while you drop a tear
over the errors of enthusiastic love, you will, perhaps, rather lament than
condemn its victim.

Having thus sacrificed the rank, I am encouraged to believe I have hitherto
held in your opinion, to the dictates of truth, my trembling hand disqualifies
me to attempt the sequel of my story at present, and compels me to resign the
pen with the deepest and most grateful sense of the innumerable obligations you
have conferred on

ELA.

LETTER VII. ELA TO MORTIMER.
IN the peaceful solitude where genuine philanthropy sheltered us from the
raging element, and added its most powerful exertions effectually to preserve
the being it had snatched from impending destruction; near twelve months
elapsed in all the habits of conjugal endearment; and conscious of possessing
all the affection and fidelity that could possibly inform the heart of the
tenderest wife, I certainly forgot that I was not so in reality, nor once
reflected that religion, morality, and the laws of our country, required a
solemn and public avowal of our choice. The fondness of my Henry filled my
whole soul; every valuable precept impressed on my mind by education and
example was lulled asleep by his deluding tongue; and so entirely did I dote
upon the dear betrayer, that I seemed incapable of distinguishing between right
and wrong, but as he pronounced them. His sentiments, his wishes were sure to
be mine, and I could not figure to myself any higher gratification than that of
seeing him happy, and being for ever blessed with his tender approbation.

Our kind entertainers believing us such as we appeared, soon evinced the most
flattering partiality for us, and impressed with sincere compassion for the
misfortunes that led us to their hospitable roof, hearing Dormer mention our
expected remittances from India, earnestly besought us to remain with them
until they arrived. We were easily prevailed on by their friendly importunity;
and when the fleet, by which we hoped to receive the produce of my effects was
announced, sadness again enveloped my mind; but Dormer testified the most
impatient anxiety, and wrote to his correspondent in London by every post, to
give us the earliest intelligence. Several weeks elapsed in a state of the most
tedious uncertainty, when Dormer received an account from his friend in India
which sufficiently awaked me from my dream of happiness, by presenting to my
mind the most terrifying views. It informed us that Hyd^r-Ali had entirely
ravaged that part of the country where my possessions stood, and carried all
that were not immediately sacrificed to his brutal cruelty into captivity. --
This dreadful intelligence filled me with distraction. My tortured imagination
painted the good, the amiable Clifford, and the beauteous Augusta St. Clare,
butchered by the hands of merciless barbarians; or, at the best, borne away
into a no less dreadful slavery. Their pathetic complaints penetrated my soul;
and, "Oh!" I exclaimed, raising my streaming eyes to Dormer, "some horrible
punishment will assuredly overtake me, since excellence like their's is thus
permitted to suffer! -- I am, oh! bitter truth, treacherous and most forsworn!
I have merited the chastisement of Heaven; but for these spotless victims, why
should they bleed?" A deep gloom overspread Dormer's countenance, and he stood
gazing at me in mournful silence, while the letter fell from his trembling hand
to the floor, "Hark," said I, "do you not hear the generous injured Clifford
praying for me, faithless and cruel as I am, even in the agonies of death? --
Do you not see the lovely Augusta imploring mercy for him, rather than herself?
Oh! my Henry, justice must force you to allow his worth, and participate in my
distress." "I do, I do," said he, turning from me with emotion, "God knows I
feel it powerfully."

"And does not this loss seem the award of righteous equity?" said I. -- "Was I
not most cruel and ungrateful to leave that excellent young man a beggar? Oh!
severe addition, and at such a time too, languishing under sufferings which his
unhappy attachment to me had occasioned; it surely was a baseness unprecedented
-- and I can never cease to lament it."

"But be pleased likewise to remember, madam" said Dormer sternly, "that you
are now yourself little better than a beggar, and let that suffice you to
lament about. If you preferred this boasted Clifford to me, why not evince it
sooner? I have sacrificed every thing to my fatal fondness for you?"

Amazement seized me at this unexpected, and surely most unfeeling reproach;
and nearly choked by emotions, I could only murmur out -- "Unjust Henry --
what have I not sacrificed?" -- when the appearance of the lady of the house
prevented his reply. She enquired the cause of my tears, sincerely
compassionated our loss, and called forth every argument that humanity could
suggest to alleviate our distress. Dormer listened to her in sullen silence;
and a servant entering* delivered to him another letter, which came by a
private ship, from his Indian correspondent, informing him that he had disposed
of my desolated lands for their utmost value* and transmitted their produce in
investments to a Dutch house in Amsterdam. This news seemed in some measure to
dispel the cloud that overhung the brow of Dormer; at least so well he feigned
returning tenderness, and deep regret for what he termed a sudden gust of
passion, solely arising from his extreme anxiety on my account, that I could
not retain the smallest doubt of his sincerity, and his late unkindness was
instantly forgotten in the transport of again beholding the soft seducing smile
adorn his cheek, suffu^ed by the consciousness of having erred; -- and while a
tender apology escaped his lips, I suffered him to press me to his bosom; and
bade him to remember the late unpleasing scene no more.

Thus we were again restored to apparent tranquillity, and Dormer proposed his
immediate departure for London, there to wait the remittances from Holland; but
advised my remaining with our hospitable friends until their arrival. "when,"
said he, again folding me in his arms, "I will hasten on the wings of love to
conduct my Ela to the fair metropolis of England, and there confirm our sacred
vows unobserved by the eye of censure; to avoid which we have ventured to
impose. I think, a pardonable falsehood on these honest rustics, whose rigid
opinions might, perhaps, have inclined them to judge severely of my charming
girl for trusting herself, unsanctioned, to the protection of her adoring
Henry."

Sooth^d by his false blandishments I readily acc^ded to this proposal, and he
left me the following morning, with assurances of writing by every post* and
returning with all possible expedition. -- I was inexpressibly affected. I bade
the hours fly swiftly to bring him again in health and safety to my arms. I
invoked each right^ous power to guide his steps, and may justly say, with
faithful I mogen, "To weep 'twixt clock and clock* if s^eep charged nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him,
And cry myself awake" --
was each night's task. -- My kind entertainers exerted all their endeavors to
render me cheerful and content; and, from a grateful s^nse of their benevolent
attentions, I strove to appear so, while anxiety hovered around my heart Henry
was punctual to his promise of frequent writing; every post came fraught with
the most impassioned repetitions of inviolable love; when one evening, after
waiting many hours for the arrival of the messenger, who constantly brought my
letters from the neighboring marke^ town, I received the heartfelt
intelligence of the Dutch house having failed soon after the receipt of my
property from India, and Dormer's being arrested for debts contracted
previously to his embarkation for the East. All language is much unequal to
delineate my feelings at that juncture: deaf to the entreaties of all around
me, I procured a post-chaise with all possible expedition, in which I sat off
for London, about the hour of midnight; and, without granting a moment's
respite to the claims of hunger and watching, I traveled with such unceasing
rapidity, that, on the third evening after my departure from our hospitable
western friends, I arrived at the dreary mansions which contained all that my
soul held dear. I found him in a wretched apartment, surrounded with, (as it
appeared to me, unaccustomed to such scenes) every species of misery. -- Deep
despair marked his countenance; he started when I entered, but instead of
flying to embrace or console me, kept his seat and hid his face with a
handkerchief. -- I threw my arms passionately around him, and shed floods of
tears for his distresses, totally regardless of those that must inevitably
await myself: I then endeavored to whisper consolation, by directing his mind
to hopes that had no existence in my own; but he seemed quite insensible to all
my tenderness, and without making any reply, put me gloomily from him: then
starting from his seat, he traversed the room in extreme agitation. I earnestly
conjured him not to indulge such violent emotions -- when looking at me, with a
kind of fury, he exclaimed, -- "Oh! you have undone me! My bane, my curse, my
ruin* you have destroyed me! -- And now, smiling mischief, what do you wish for
more?" -- The stroke of death would, I am fully assured, have inflicted much
less pain than these cruel words. -- My heart seemed to die within me, and
sinking to the ground I continued, I believe, many hours in a state of
insensibility. -- Happy would it have been for me had I then been released from
misery -- for the recollection of Dormer's unkindness was the first object that
returning reason presented to my distracted mind -- and -- "Oh! dear cruel
Henry," sell involuntarily from my lips. But Henry was not present, either to
hear my complaints, or pity my distress; he had left me in that deplorable
state to the care of those unfeeling beings by whom he was surrounded; and it
was not till many minutes after my recovery, when my spirits were nearly
reduced to their former state, by repeated entreaties to see him, that he
entered the room with sullen aspect and averted eyes. A stranger to every
species of disguise, I could not suppress the feelings his behavior had
excited -- adding, "it is surely most unkind to add unmerited reproach to
anguish which is already insupportable; for what would I not do to alleviate
the distress of my Henry?" "And what would you do." -- said he, in the same
harsh strain as before -- "What can you do?" "Sooth you with unfeigned,
unalterable tenderness," I eagerly replied -- "and by sharing every pain that
can invade your heart, render it* perhaps, less acute." He threw himself
carelessly into a chair by my side, as I pronounced these words. I arose, and
taking from my arms a very rich pair of bracelets that had been my mother's,
and were set with brilliants, with a ^ing that had likewise been here is, and the
picture of my father, which hung at my bosom, and was superbly ornamented with
rose diamonds, I threw them on a table, saying, "Yes, I will do more, I will
sacrifice even these dear tributes of parental fondness to the far more
eloquent claims of unbounded love.^ The countenance of Dormer assumed a milder
expression. -- "But let them," I added pointing to the precious emblems -- "let
them, my Henry, be our last resource -- for a variety of tender, penetrating
recollections, recu^ to endear them to my heart. -- This, then, shall be the
first victim." drawing from my pocket a most elegant gold watch, embossed with
an infinite variety of precious stones, "which we offer up on the altar of
necessity."

"Generous, charming girl." exclaimed the re-animated Henry -- "But can you
withold the rest, and suffer me to languish in this detested place?" -- "Oh,
no!" I replied, "I cannot withold any thing that will contribute to restore
you to liberty and smiling peace: for what are these poor hau^les; indeed what
is all that the universe can afford me, compared with the heartfelt delight of
seeing you happy?" -- He poured out a rhapsody of tender protestations, and
again attributed his late behavior to an excess of love; and the readiness
with which I admitted his apologies, and pronounced his pardon, fully verified
the justness of the adage, that, "What we wish, we easily believe." I then
enquired, if all I was possessed of would procure cash enough to extricate him
from his present difficulties; to which, after a long pause he replied in the
affirmative; and I was all impatience to put my design in execution. -- Dormer
overwhelmed me with his fond effusions, and wrote a letter to a friend of his,
who had, he informed me, been one of his pleasant companions, and had
dissipated a very large fortune by living freely; but was still a most worthy,
generous, good-natured fellow, and would gladly undertake this business, for
which my inexperience rendered me unfit, and might be depended on to dispose of
my jewels to the best advantage. A hackney coach was then procured for me, and,
unattended, I instantly went in pursuit of this gentleman, guided only by a
written direction from Dormer; and, after a long search through a variety of
obscure places, attended by innumerable difficulties, I found him in a really
deplorable habitation, situated in a narrow dirty lane, near one of the Inns of
Court. His tall emaciated figure was rendered disgusting by the paltry
gaudiness of his apparel; his coat had once been scarlet, but had acquired a
kind of dull purple from long service; he had a blue satin waistcoat loaded
with tarnished embroidery, and spangles; a pair of enormous buckles, where the
copper peeped through their once glittering vest, kissed the ground as he
tottered toward me; an immense bag hung suspended by his few gray hairs, and a
rusty military hat, adorned with a large cockade of the same complexion, lay on
an old sopha, from which he arose at my entrance. He appeared to be about fifty
years of age; his face long, lean, and sallow, was ornamented with a large pair
of dark greenish eyes, which glanced at the same instant to every point of the
compass; and the entire loss of his teeth brought his nose and chin in a
constant state of salutation. -- He had a large black patch on his forehead,
and another on one of his cheeks; I started back on beholding him, and would
gladly have withdrawn from an object that looked like a burlesque on the human
form: but advancing with a grin of ineffable delight, rendered infinitely
striking by the glare of his extended eyes, he made me the most profound bow I
had ever before witnessed, and eagerly enquired to what blessed chance he was
indebted for the honor of my presence. I was quite incapable of making him any
reply, but by a low curt^sey, and the delivery of Dormer's letter. He seemed
quite transported at the perusal of it, and enquired how long his friend and
favorite Harry had been in England. I answered him very concisely, and seating
himself beside me on the sopha; which, with an old worm-eaten table, and a
large chest, prevented from falling to pieces by some cords tied round it,
formed the entire furniture of his attic abode: he pathetically lamented our
misfortunes, poured out an mundation of friendly professions, and offered to
accompany me back to the prison. I readily acceded to this proposal, and the
coach that brought me there waited to conduct us. Dormer was extremely
embarrassed when we approached. -- He arose with perturbation, and deep
confusion marked in his air and features: -- my escort saluted him with the
same easy gaiety as if he had found him surrounded by every species of
happiness; and with his native grin of self-complacency, welcomed him to
England. Dormer made him no reply, but turning hastily to me, whispered a
request that I would retire for a few moments, with which I instantly complied,
and the keeper of the prison sent his wife to attend me. In a short time I
received a message from Dormer, desiring my return to his apartment. His
visitor was gone, and my father's picture, with the bracelets and ring that had
been my mother's, lay on the table. "I have sent all but these, my love," said
he, pointing to the dear memento's -- "Your watch and all your jewels, which my
friend assures me will bring near three hundred pounds, and my debt is but a
hundred and fifty, so that the rest may support us till I can do something
better." -- "Thank God!" I exclaimed, "who has made me the blessed instrument of
your enfranchisement!" -- "And thank you, my charming girl!" -- he cried,
pressing my hand passionately to his lips. My tears dropped one by one on the
bosom of my riding shirt, which was fastened in the middle with a pin that
Granville Clifford had given me. It contained a knot of his bright ches^ ^hair,
set in gold, and surrounded with pearls. He had (...) England for it, and
begged my acceptance of it as a faint tribute of his early love. -- My eyes
were on it. I considered it as something sacred. -- It was, indeed, the gift of
a saint; and no pious mussulman ever contemplated the relics of his ^phet with
more sincere veneration. "I am glad," said I, with my eyes still fixed upon it,
"that I have not lost you. -- No, I will never part with you, never fear it. --
"You shall not my Ela," cried Dormer, imagining these words were addressed to
him. "Be assured we will never part." -- "I hope not," said I, not daring to*
undeceive him. -- His tenderness penetrated every avenue of my soul, the image
of Clifford disappeared; and I repeated with emotion, "No, no, we will never
part. What should I be without my Henry! Nothing! nothing! Oh! worse, a mass of
indescribable wretchedness! -- Horrible picture! I cannot bear it; but it will
never be realized; -- it never can." -- Henry echoed my last words. I threw my
arms around him, and wept passionately in his bosom.

But the time is now come! The picture is realized! -- Oh! my passionate
friend, my senses are quite overpowered. -- Adieu for the present -- I can add
no more.

ELA.

LETTER VIII. ELA TO MORTIMER.
WITH a heart full of impatience I waited the return of Dormer's deputy. -- Two
days elapsed in a state of fruitless and painful expectation, and we both
expressed our surprise at the delay and silence of our supposed friend, in whom
Dormer still professed to repose the most entire confidence. The third morning
passed without our wished-for visitor appearing. Dormer seemed uneasy, but said
little. I was extremely alarmed. I proposed paying a second visit to the
habitation of his boasted friend, and with apparent reluctance he acquiesced.
On my arrival at the house, I was informed by the people belonging to it, that
their lodger had quitted them the evening of that day on which Dormer had
entrusted him with my jewels, telling them, that he was engaged to accompany a
young nobleman in his travels through Europe -- This intelligence almost
distracted me. I could not conceal my emotions, but quitted the house in
silence I burst into tears as soon as I was re-seated in the coach, and wept
passionately as it conveyed me back to the prison. -- Dormer flew to receive
me, with a look of eager enquiry; but the traces of sorrow on my countenance
rendered all other information needless. "Are we ruined, cheated, robbed?" --
said he. -- Then after a pause, he added, "Oh! yes, I know, I feel we are! --
And what remains?" -- "What indeed?" said I, endeavoring to suppress my tears.
Dormer echoed my words, in an empassioned tone, and slung himself in an
apparent agony into a chair. I said every thing that love like mine could
suggest to give him comfort and palliate the severity of this blow; but the
loss of liberty dwelt forcibly on his mind, and he was insensible to all I
could say. Near two years revolved in this state of wretchedness. The dear
memento's of my revered parents, which Dormer had providentially reserved from
the sangs of that plausible devouring harpy, who had so cruelly deceived us,
were now appropriated to obtain the necessary means of existence; and I added
something to the little stip^nd by my labors. The jail-keeper's wife was a
humane being: she gently soothed my sorrows, and dissipated by her mild
persuasions many a gloomy thought. To her I was indebted for reaping both
profit and amusement from the exertion of my unworthy talents. She procured
painting, drawing, embroidery, and various kinds of needlework for me. I
accquitted myself so as to give general satisfaction, and was liberally
rewarded. Dormer wrote to all his relations, and many of those that had
professed themselves his friends; but not one of them condescended to take the
smallest notice of his applications. These ^peated disappointments sunk deeply
on his mind, a^ had a very unpleasant effect on his temper. I sometimes
experienced the consequences of it; but my devoted heart never failed to offer
a multitude of apologies in his behalf, "His passions are ardent." -- I often
mentally said -- "His sensibility is extreme, and his tender fears on my
account renders it more tremblingly alive to the slightest touch. He would not
feel thus for himself only. Shall I then reproach him for a fault arising from
an excess of tenderness for me? Shall I not rather forgive a caprice which
flows from so delightful a source, and endeavor to soften the wounds I have
undesignedly inflicted? For me, the natural sweetness of his temper is injured;
and shall I cruelly dare, even in thought, to condemn him for what originates
solely with myself? Oh, no; let me endeavor to sooth his perturbed spirits,
and gently lead him insensibly back to his native serenity."

These were the reflections that supported me during the heavy hours of my
Henry's confinement; at length the joyful hope of his enfranchisement darted
its gladsome ray across my mind. After many tedious delays, we received the
little wreck of my once large possessions from Holland. Its amount was barely
eleven hundred pounds.

I poured out ardent acknowledgments to Heaven, I invoked benedictions on the
head of my Henry, as I delivered into his hands the welcome sum. I know not the
half I said, but I do not think that a moment of more sincere delight and
lively gratitude ever visited my heart. Henry seemed touched by my enthusiasm,
and the day concluded with a felicity from which I had long been estranged.

"Tomorrow," said Henry, "tomorrow, my dearest love, I shall again taste the
sweets of liberty."

Heaven knows with what sincerity I shared his raptures, and eagerly
anticipated the promised blessing. Henry, tomorrow, and liberty filled my
whole soul. The blissful words seemed to fleet before my eyes in dazzling
characters, and sunk, with deep impression, on the tablets of my heart.

I arose early the next morning to hail the welcome day and facilitate Dormer's
enlargement. His debts were soon discharged, and after some necessary forms, we
quitted our dreary abode. The jail-keeper's wife shed tears at our departure --
she was a worthy creature, and had formed a real attachment to me. I was
inexpressibly affected at her effusions of artless good will, and after
prevailing on her to accept a trifling acknowledgment of her kind attentions, I
left her with sensible regret.

We hired elegant apartments in a polite quarter of the metropolis, and Dormer
laid out the most considerable part of what money remained from the payment of
his debts, in purchasing that commission which he now holds. The private
solemnization of our nuptials was again proposed; but some unlucky circumstance
always started up to delay its performance. Again Dormer applied repeatedly to
his numerous relations, but was equally unsuccessful as before. It was at that
period that the worthy Barlow was engaged in our service. He one evening
rescued Dormer from a band of merciless street-robbers. My heart overflowed
with gratitude: the honest creature told a tale of artless woe: I prevailed on
Dormer to retain him in quality of a domestic, and amply were we rewarded by
his fidelity, and marked attachment. Twice afterward he saved his master's
life and mine, in the short course of a fortnight; once from a daring party of
house-breakers, whose weapons trembled at our throats when Barlow entered with
the officers of justice, and seized every one of them: and a few days after, by
saving us, at the imminent danger of his own existence, from the fury of a
raging fire, which had consumed all the under part of the house ere we awaked;
and our apartment was sinking in ruins when Barlow appeared at the window with
a ladder of ropes, and conveyed me in his arms, to an adjoining house. Thus
calamity awaited us which ever way we turned. Our loss was considerable from
the last misfortune. A trunk, containing a part of our clothes and papers,
snatched from the devouring flames by Barlow's vigilance, was all that escaped
destruction. The extreme shock that my spirits received, brought on a severe
and dangerous illness, during which time the unwearied attentions of Barlow far
exceeded my highest praise. After a confinement of some weeks, I began again to
recover. I experienced a chilling coldness and cruel neglect on the part of
Dormer: the humane William often witnessed it with tearful eyes. Whole days and
nights would his master be absent, while I was confined to the bed of sickness;
but I can with truth declare that a murmur never passed my lips. Dormer, I have
now every reason to believe, at that time engaged in a new and not most
eligible set of acquaintance, and perhaps by their baleful influence formed the
cruel design of deserting me His nightly revels generally concluded with riot
and intoxication. His noisy associates often occasioned shameful confusion at
the door of our habitation: but he never introduced one of them to my presence;
and I now suppose, if ever I was mentioned among them, it was, as being one of
those wretched females who live the slaves of ^nfamy and lawless man.

Poverty soon stared us in the face with all its horrors. Barlow was dismissed
unpaid. Clamorous demands for money perpetually assailed us. We had run up a
considerable bill with the people of the house, and all the terrors of a prison
recurred to Dormer's mind, and filled him with distraction. Often, in his
frequent fits of fury and impatience, did I tremble lest some act of
desperation would ensue. The produce of his commission was, to a man of his
turn, too inconsiderable to be mentioned. It was barely sufficient, he always
declared, to pay his hair-dresser. In this dilemma he mentioned the necessity
of leaving our lodgings clandestinely, and proposed borrowing a trifling sum on
his commission, and imploring the protection of our worthy friend in Cornwall,
until the present storm was overblown, and time unfolded brighter prospects to
our view. I highly approved the latter part of his scheme, but revolted at the
thought of deliberate injustice. My soul started at the idea of wronging those
who had provided us the means of existence, and tenderly administered every
comfort in their power to me, when agonizing on the bed of sickness; but the
appearance of Barlow relieved my struggles. He entered the room without waitin^
for permission. A big tear stood on his cheek. A variety of emotions labored
for utterance. He threw himself on his knees between us, and drawing from his
pocket a parcel, he laid it softly at my feet, saying, in a low and interrupted
voice, "Here, here, best of ladies, Heaven sent it me for you," and rising, he
hid his face with the skirt of his coat, and darted out of the room. I stooped
down and took up the parcel, which contained bank notes to the amount of two
hundred pounds. Dormer stood motionless with amazement, and a servant entered
and gave him a pan^ con^aining these words:

"If your honor will please to accept my humble service, the satisfaction of
attending you and your good lady, is all the reward expected by

Your most obedient, W. BARLOW.


P. S. I will presume to wait upon your honor tomorrow. I hope you will
consider of the favor I have asked by that time, and not make me miserable by
refusing it; nor say any thing about my boldness when I saw you last; for I am
sadly afraid my lady and you was very angry; but hope your goodness will excuse
me."

"Excuse him!" I exclaimed* glancing my eye over this transcript of humble
wor^h -- "Excuse him! gracious God, what a noble* disinterested, generous
spirit! But we must not take any advantage of it, we must not accept his gold."

"We must, we must," cried Dormer hastily, "indeed we must: to hesitate at such
a time as this would be the h^ight of madness." "But where," said I, "could he
get it?" "That*" replied Dormer, "there is no doubt of his accounting for very
sufficiently; and we shall, I hope, be enabled to repay him." "How" I enquired.
A cloud of passion arose on Dormer's brow He started from his seat, travers^d
the room, muttered something, wherein I distinctly heard the words,
"scrupulous, absurd, fool, troublesome, mad-woman" -- and putting the notes in
his pocket, he left me.

I saw him no more until daybreak the next morning, when sitting in my room,
ruminating on the times that were past, he entered with haggard looks and wild
disordered air, and, clasping me frantickly in his arms, exclaimed, "It is all
over, Ela, it is all over!" -- and striking his forehead furiously against the
arm of my chair, he fell senseless on the carpet. I gave a piercing shri^k, and
our guardian angel, Barlow, rushed into the room. He raised Dormer from the
floor. I know not what I said, but casting on me a pitying look, he cried,
"Tell me nothing, dear lady, I know all." "And what," said I, "do you know
William?" "Know!" he exclaimed, "know that" -- he paused -- "know enough," he
added -- "Oh! madam -- but my master must not stay here -- we must get him away
instantly." "Away,' said I, as my tears fell in torrents on Dormer's pallid
face, "where would you take him away? William, William* he is gone already!"
"No!" he exclaimed, "but he must be gone, or" -- "What?" he repeated -- "I will
tell you another time -- but we must all go." -- "Go!" I cried, "William,
explain this mystery. -- Where can we go now?" "Any where, Madam*" he replied,
"for safety. Indeed we must go without delay."

Dormer began to recover. He had wounded his forehead against the chair; and I,
not till then, observed his clothes stained with blood in many places. Barlow
prevailed on him to drink a glass of wine and water; and whispering me that he
would soon return* quitted the room. "I must fly!" said Dormer, suddenly
star^ing from me, "or veng^ance will find me." "Vengeance!" I echoed, following
him* -- "Vengeance! -- Oh! my ever dear Henry, what means all this?" -- He
lea^ed his head on his clasped hands, looked fearfully in my face, but made not
any reply. Barlow ent^red -- "A chair wai^s. Sir. -- and you had better retreat
ere day gets high" "Had I!" said Dormer, fixing his eyes on Barlow, with an
expression that seemed to demand how he knew the necessity of such a step --
"Had I, William?" he repeated -- "Surely, Sir," replied Barlow. "We are
convinced the time is dangerous -- and one minute's delay may be fatal." --
"And would you tear him from me?' I exclaimed* throwing my arms round him. "No,
Madam," replied Barlow* "you shall follow with me* and I will show the
expediency of this step. I have satisfied the people below, and will fetch your
things tomorrow;" with those words he left me to attend Dormer to the door;
and when he returned, I silently accompanied him out of the house.

An humble lodg^ng which Barlow had hired for himself when we dismissed him,
was now converted into our asylum; and during our melancholy wal^ to it, he
communicated, at my repeated and earnest importunity, the following dreadful
information. That, passing the door of a well known gaming-house the preceding
evening, he observed his master entering amidst a crowd of sharpers; and
desirous of witnessing his conduct, he disguised himself and followed him. On
his entrance he found him engaged in a warm contest: fortune was, as usual on
those occasions, very fluctuating; one moment she poured heaps of gold into his
lap, the next left him almost pennyless; till at length he was stripped of all
he had, and his lucky antagonist refused to play any more, although Dormer
borrowed a guinea from one of the bye-standers. -- Exasperated at this conduct,
and reduced by his ill-fortune to a state of desperation, Dormer struck him; a
scuffle ensued -- swords were drawn, murder was echoed through the house,
Dormer escaped, and Barlow was prevented from following immediately by his
fears of creating suspicion; he therefore mixed among the pursuers, found they
had no knowledge of our abode, and then hastened to give us every aid in his
power, not doubting but Dormer would, ere long, be traced to our late lodging.

Judge you, who are possessed of genuine sensibility* what my sufferings must
have been as I listened to this shocking relation. Murder and ruin resounded
through my terrified imagination, and all the gentle palliatives that Barlow
could invent were insufficient to sooth my fears. In a state of mind, little
short of insanity, I reached the place that held the wretched Henry. There we
spent some mournful days; when our before proposed journey to the West was
again mentioned as highly expedient, and Barlow highly approved it. "I hate
still," said he, a little reserve. There is another hundr^d -- my old aunt in
the North died and left me ^ou^" (putting a pocketbook into my lap). "What I
before ventured to lay at your feet, my dear lady, was a part of it, and" -- he
could add no more. -- I held the pocketbook toward him. I was deeply affected
-- "No," said I, "kind, good William, we must not make you a beggar." -- "You
will not, indeed you will not. -- I must share it with you -- I must always
attend you -- I ask no more," he replied, with interrupted voice. I could not
speak -- "Keep it, pray keep it, Madam," he added -- "I only beg to stay with
you." "You shall forever," cried Dormer, taking up the pocketbook that had
fallen from my hand. We will never part with you -- yo^ shall be henceforth our
friend, not servant; -- and, perhaps, we may be happy -- all happy." -- "God
send it," said Barlow -- My ^art repeated his prayer. The mistress of the house
entered, and informed Barlow, there had been two men below enquiring if Captain
Dormer lived there, but that she had replied in the negative. Dormer changed
countenance. Barlow thanked her caution, and put a guinea into her hand.

"We must not continue here," said Dormer, as soon as she was gone. Barlow
owned it to be unsafe. I was inexpressibly alarmed; and it was agreed that we
should instantly set off on our proposed expedition. Fully assured of a cordial
reception, I only penned a few lines to apprize our friends in the West of our
design, and we instantly departed. But when we arrived at the spot where we had
experienced such proofs of genuine friendship, we found the house, where we
hoped to have been welcomed by these generous villagers, uninhabited, and some
neighboring peasants informed us, that the lady had been many months in an ill
state of health, and they were gone to reside in the South of France. -- This
was a heartfelt disappointment; at such a juncture it came with accumulated
force. I believe we all felt it very sensibly; and the following day conveyed
us back to the place where we first saw you. -- And fearful of being traced by
his real name, Dormer assumed that of Temple. Barlow soon received unequivocal
assurances from London, that the person wounded by his master was entirely out
of danger. This intelligence restored Dormer's native levity; and the
recollection of former woes seemed no longer to hold a place in his memory; but
around my heart they still shed their baleful influence. Granville Clifford
haunted my dreams. Augusta St. Clare never failed to accompany him. The image
of my father seemed to hover perpetually over me -- and peace was a stranger to
my breast. -- Dormer proposed our continuing in that place, during the summer,
hinted a hope that our friends would* ere its expiration* return from France. I
have since thought, that it was his design to throw me on their charity. But if
that was his purpose it proved abortive. You are already acquainted with what
followed -- you know the artifice by which he prevailed on the generous,
unsuspecting Barlow to desert me likewise; why should I repeat it?

I have now fulfilled my arduous undertaking. It has recalled the sensibility,
which, when undertook it. I vainly hoped was vanquished. But it is just I
should suffer. -- I dare not repine these are, I humbly trust, some of my last
pangs. -- Oh! dear injured Clifford -- and you, my once doa^ing father* if your
pure spirits now witness the woes that rend my heart, de^gn, like Heaven, to
compassionate, and accept my sincere pen^tence. And you, my inestimable friend,
vouchsafe to pardon the ills I have occasioned you; in my heart they often
expel the memory of my own. How many worthy beings are involved in my ruin? --
Oh! rem^mber Barlow -- himself and Heaven will reward your goodness; but I hope
he has found an advocate in your own breast, and needs not any from me.

Fully conscious of my own errors, I could wish to warn others against the same
fatal delusions -- and showing them the ^ni^s that never fail to attend a
deviation from the paths of ^^^titude, inspire them with fortitude to subdue
every temptation to quit the sweet and peaceful paths of duty and innocence. Be
this your care -- I am every way incapable of directing your judgment.

The cold the rigid, and unfeeling, will loudly execrate my follies: perhaps
you alone will pity them. They will condemn my wilful blindness, my guilty
perseverance: and m^ heart acqui^s them of injustice; yet, while with a strong
sens;e of superiority they contemplate my fate, and exclaim with the
self-righteous Pharisee, "God, I thank thee, that I am not like one of these!"
-- may they imbibe a lesson from the fountain of every excellence, who was
graciously pleased to accept the prayer of the despised penitent, that
impressed with a poignant sense of his iniquities, smote his breast with deep
humility, and besought mercy.

Wish not, my ever valued friend, to detain a weary sufferer in this darksome
region. My soul is impatient to escape this wretched prison, and lay down her
sorrows at his foot stool, who weighs all things in the balance of Eternal
Truth. I have transgressed the laws of morality -- the world deems me a
castaway -- I stand condemned beyond all power of appeal; and am, like Cain, a
miserable wanderer on the earth. But shall I likewise wander comfortless
through the ages of eternity? Oh! no -- the Christian system darts its glorious
luster through my beclouded soul! Blessed effulgence of heavenly love! I feel
your all-powerful efficacy. The shadows of eternal night disappear. Pardon and
immortality open to my view, and peace dawns around me.

May the prayers of a broken spirit, which the Supreme has promised he will
never reject, shower the choicest benedictions of Heaven on all your paths: may
you be happy here, and may we meet hereafter, is the ardent, and will be the
last petition that hovers around the heart of

ELA.

LETTER III. MORTIMER TO CAROLINE.
AFTER a considerable lapse of time I again resume my pen to conclude the
woe-fraught narration, which has so greatly interested the gentle heart of my
Caroline; who, ever tremblingly alive to the claims of humanity, will, I am
assured, on that score, pardon my long silence, and exculpate her brother from
the charge of neglect.

My coward spirit shrinks from the deline^tion of scenes whose deep and
mournful impression can never be effaced from my memory until it ceases to
exist; but your eloquent entreaties triumph over all the pleadings of timidity,
and I submit to the painful recital, which, while it cannot fall to re^al
anguish to my heart, conveys also a striking lesson of morality, and inspires
me with courage to subdue every reluctance, and obey the powerful impulses of
justice and truth. Our journey to this place, in compliance with the earnest
wish of Ela, mentioned in my last, was such as you will easily conceive. The
truly excellent Barlow accompanied us, and sadness hovered around our little
party. Ela's increasing weakness, and deep oppression of mind, occasioned many
delays; when passing through a deep glen, as we drew near to our place of
destination, the piercing shriek of female distress assailed our ears, and a
voice exclaimed, with most affecting vehemence, "villain, monster, tell me what
is become of her!" Ela started wildly, and suddenly opening the door of the
carriage, was going to jump out, regardless of the consequences; but I
prevented the execution of this dangerous attempt, by catching her in my arms.
She struggled to elude my hold -- "Cruel, cruel tyrants," said she, "why will
you keep me from him? Will none of you have pity?" -- "And you too," -- added
she, looking at me with an expression of poignant anguish -- "will you detain
me from the dear, dear injured," -- she could no more. Barlow pulled the string
-- the carriage stopped -- the screams still continued. We lifted Ela out in
our arms; and beheld at a small distance a confused group, among whom was
Dormer leaning against the shattered trunk of an old tree, with his face
concealed between his hands, and the most perfect manly form that ever before
struck my eyes, encircled in the arms of a lady from whom the screams
proceeded, were most conspicuous. We could not discern either of their faces,
but their figures were equal in symmetry. Ela withdrew her hand from mine, and
darting from us, threw herself before them. They both clasped her alternately
in their arms, with silent transport, and they mingled their tears together. I
witnessed this scene with emotions that cannot be described. Poor Barlow fell
on his knees and prayed aloud, that there might not be any more mischief.
Another lady, tall and majesty, appeared leaning on the a^m of a servant to
support her trembling form. Her eyes wandered fearfully around her, but resting
on Dormer -- "What means this!" she repeatedly exclaimed -- "Who are these --
and why do they accuse you?" -- "Hush, hush, hush," he cried, furiously
snatching up a pistol that lay at the stranger's feet -- "This answers all!" As
he uttered these scarce articulate words, the bullet pierced his raging brain,
and he fell prostrate before his interrogator. But all description is unequal
to the scene that ensued. Heart-rending shrieks echoed through the air. Ela's
empassioned, unconquerable love, soared far above her wrongs: agonizing with
accumulated sufferings, she threw herself on the ensanguined earth, and folded
the expiring Henry in her affectionate embrace, with a kind of frantic
tenderness. His head rested on her bosom, his eyes were eagerly rivetted on her
face -- The words "own, and only wife," died on his lips, which still seemed to
beg forgiveness. She besought Heaven to pity the sad effects of a distracted
moment -- and graciously extend his unbounded mercy to a crime, which no excess
of wretchedness can justify, nor any argument excuse. In broken accents she
blessed his fleeting soul with welcome sounds of pardon; -- and what
presumptuous mortal shall dare to scan the unsearchable depths of futurity? The
self-devoted victim raised himself with a look of penetrating horror on
beholding Barlow and myself: -- we each extended our hands to him -- his spirit
departed with a deep sigh; the remembrance of his crimes was absorbed in
compassion for his fate, and every atom in my frame trembled in unison with the
emotions of my heart.

Ela continued holding the corpse in her arms; and with a look of fixed
despair, repeated, in a deeply mournful voice -- "it is over, oh, it is all
over!" The elegant young man, who had so greatly interested me, quitted his
fair companion, and kneeling beside Ela, hung over the woe-fraught scene, while
horror and heartfelt anguish convulsed the finest features, and most faultless
form that imagination can picture. The lady, who had demanded of the wretched
Dormer an explanition of the mystery before her, now lay stretched on the
earth, apparently as lifeless as himself: -- and the other beautiful unknown
still sat motionless on the grass, and concealed her face with her garments.
The big drops stole slowly over Barlow's cheek, and I was unable to interupt
the awful silence. My eyes were fixed on Ela, whose attitude and looks no art
can possibly delineate: the quick transition from all the wildness of horror to
deep despair, that marked her countenance, surpasses all the powers of
language, and sets description at defiance. Her fine expressive eyes, seemed
rooted in the firmament; then, with a sudden start, she clasped her hands
together, sunk on the bosom of the handsome stranger by her side, murmured out
-- "I go, I go, Clifford -- bless me" and fell into strong convulsions His
heart certainly complied with her request; but his tongue refused its
concurrence. He held her struggling in his arms, and his tears fell one by one
on her pallid face. My soul seemed to echo the name of Clifford -- I before
believed it to be him -- his amiable character was deeply engraved on my
memory, and I contemplated with him a mixture of admiration and lively esteem.
The beauteous form, in whose arms I first beheld him* approached us with
agitated air and trembling steps: the description of Augusta St. Clare stole
upon my mind -- never did I behold such delicacy, such animation, grace,
symmetry, and elegance. She stooped down, hung over the struggling Ela, then
raised her streaming eyes to Clifford and faintly exclaimed, "Here Is
desolation!" "Retire* my love," said Clifford -- "pray quit this scene; you are
already ill. "I am," she cried, leaning her head on her hand, "I am indeed ill;
but where can I go?" She grew paler and paler. I raised her in my arms*
assist^d by Barlow, placed her in one of the carriages, and left her to proceed
slowly onward to our destined place under his care. On my return, I found the
other lady recovering. She poured a torrent of tears on the body of Dormer;
then suffering me to lead her from the mournful scene, I saw her seated in her
own chariot, and committing her to the care of one of her attendants, they
followed the other carriage, and I returned to the spot that held our poor lost
Ela* and her guardian friend. In our arms we conducted her to a neighboring
cottage; there she continued near two days in a constant succession of those
dreadful fits. After the necessary forms, Dormer's remains were deposited in
the parish churchyard, and his death ascribed by the voice of the law, to
lunacy. Barlow brought us hourly intelligence of our fair fellow sufferers, who
were both ill, but he hoped not dangerously, and his services were extended to
us all. Ela was at length restored to the bitter recollection of the past. Her
emaciated form was barely animated by existence, and she now really seemed what
she before vainly supposed, incapable of feeling another pang. "The wounds of
injured sensibility," said she, as the last tear dropped from her eye, "are
closed forever. -- I think my sufferings are now over. -- This poor deluded
heart seems callous to all that can ensue" -- she paused, "yes, dear Clifford,"
she added, "you forgive me, promise likewise to bury my memory in oblivion, and
be happy; -- and the bitterness of death is past." "Rather say," replied
Clifford, tenderly supporting her drooping form, "that you will endeavor to
live and make us all happy." "Live!" she faintly exclaimed, "can my friend, my
brother, wish me to live? Can Granville Clifford desire I should continue to
groan under this heavy, heavy oppression? -- Oh, mistaken goodness! -- But no,
no, Ela Spencer must not, will not live." We were both too deeply affected to
add any more; but, under the guidance of Barlow, soon joined the rest of our
mournful party. The fair Augusta arose at our entrance, and after embracing Ela
with tenderness, while the compassionate tear bedewed her lovely face, Clifford
pressed her to his heart, and gazing alternately in each of their faces --
"Oh!" she eagerly exclaimed, "I have found a parent!" "And I," added her
companion, approaching us with the mildest dignity, "a long lost child; the often
lamented pledge of mutual attachment, the dear memento of my early, only love."
"Yes, generous Clifford," she added, after a pause, -- "blessed guardian of
defenseless innocence, if wealth and rank can gratify a mind like yours, they
both await you, and you alone are wo^^hy to possess them." -- Astonisment
marked the features of Ela and Clifford; and Augusta stood motionless beside
them "Know," continued her mother, "exalted son of philanthropy," pointing to
Augusta, "that when you took this unhoused wanderer to your arms, you wedded
not Augusta St. Clare* but Isabella Waldron, the last survivor of that noble
house, and the rightful heiress of its vast estates, which some mysterious
cause has hitherto estranged her from, and which after the death of her
grandfather, devolved to its present lately deceased possessor." -- "Welcome
sounds," exclaimed Ela, -- "has then Granville Clifford triumphed, nobly
triumphed over the delusions of his heart, and married the only woman that
could ever deserve him! My few remaining days will now glide gently by, and I
shall lay down my head in peace, blessed with the sweet assurance, that the
friends of my heart will be happy." A moment of silence ensued, when Clifford
tenderly embracing his lovely partner said, "Yes, this is my wife, my charming
much-loved wife, whom I value for herself alone -- Yet, madam," he added,
"think me not insensible to your generous goodness in thus readily adopting an
unworthy stranger. -- I do not, madam, nor ever can deserve such a distinction.
-- True, madam, I have taken happiness to my bosom under the semblance of
Augusta St. Clare; and if that is a sufficient claim to your favor, gratitude
may, in some degree* compensate for the deficiencies of merit." -- "But how,"
he continued, turning with still more affecting voice and air to Ela, "how
shall I sufficiently thank my charming friend?" "By forbearing," -- replied the
gentle mourner, "to distress her by acknowledgments of which she is unworthy."
Her spirits were quite exhausted. She expressed a wish to retire, the other two
ladies attended her; -- and Clifford related the uncommon vicissitudes that had
befallen himself and his lovely charge after the sudden and mysterious loss of
Ela; but I must defer the description of these particulars till leisure enables
me to resume the pen, for I am this moment summoned to the apartment of that
injured fair one.

Adieu! my Caroline, and believe me with unalterable affection,

Ever yours, MORTIMER.

LETTER IV. MORTIMER TO CAROLINE.
OUR tragedy draws to a conclusion, the sorrows of Ela will soon cease to
exist, and the universal conqueror assumes a milder form than usual to conduct
her to happier climes.

As soon as I had dispatched my last letter to you, accompanied by the truly
noble Clifford, I hastened to the chamber that held our fair friends. Ela was
seated between them; her pallid cheek reclined on the shoulder of one, and the
other supported her in her arms. Their eyes dwelt with soft compassion on her
face, and pensive sadness marked their inimitable features. It was a scene for
the heart, and I contemplated it some minutes without interruption. Clifford
leaned his arm on my shoulder, unconscious, and a deep sigh stole from him
unobserved by any but myself. F^^ gently raised her languid eyes; we both
approached her, and I can only judge of Clifford's emotions by my own. The
drooping mourner pressed each of our hands between here is, and looking at us
with a benignant and placid countenance, "Oh!" she exclaimed, "how does this
blessed union of according minds gratify every wish of my soul, and irradiate the
gloomy cavern into which I am entering Mourn not," she added, with a smile of
sweetest resignation, "the end of my suffering is near -- the blessed ^eprieve is
come; love and friendship unite to reward your virtues -- the sweetest
assurance of your being happy, extracts the barbed arrow from affliction -- and
seems to lead me through the flowery paths to those mansions -- where sin and
sorrow are forever excluded;" -- she paused, and then -- "One wish," she added,
"still lingers round my heart, and you will not, I think, refuse it. -- The
ransomed captive rejoices to regain his freedom his friends eroud to offer
their congratulations, and festivity crowns the scene -- and how much rather
should you, my only friends below, celebrate this glad occasion -- when the
weary prisoner is permitted to exchange her galling setters for an immortal
crown! Let not then the short hours I remain among you be spent in unavailing
sadness. -- Start not," she continued, "at what I am going to propose -- the
marriage of Clifford and my charming friend, is imperfect in the eye of the law
-- and what time more proper than the present to have it continued?" -- We were
all silent -- but our eyes revealed the eloquent language of our hearts --
Ela's alone were dry -- "Refuse not," she cried, looking alternately in the
faces of Clifford and his Isabella, this last and only request. -- "Refuse
you?" repeated Clifford in impassioned and interrupted accents, "Oh! who could
refuse you any thing?" She smiled serenely on him, pressed his hand gratefully
to her lips, and sunk exhausted on the bosom of the beauteous Isabella.

This last wish of Ela is now accomplished. A few hours since, the nuptials of
the loveliest pair that surely ever graced the Hymeneal temple, were again
solemnized -- and the God attended with his brightest torch to illume the house
of mourning. Never saw I, till now, a pair so matched in excellence, so equal
in perfection; and although my pen can never give you a true idea of the
impression, which the scene I have just quitted has left on my mind; I will
endeavor to trace some faint resemblance of it. The ceremony was performed in
the chamber of Ela. The native charms of Isabella were heightened by the
elegant simplicity of her dress. She wore a fine India muslin, trimmed with
narrow fringe, and lined with lilac, linen correspondent, and her fine auburn
tresses turned simply up under a large cap, which added delicacy to a set of
features, and complexion that scorns the power of imitation; -- and as, with a
graceful tenderness, she gave her hand to Clifford and pronounced the solemn
vow, I sent up a mental prayer that Heaven would bless me with such a bride; --
for, like the lovely Roman, she improves her charms, "With inward Greatness,
unaffected Wisdom,
And sanctity of Manners."
Her mother, who is that lady, to obtain whose gold, Dormer plunged into the
deep abyss of guilt, fate in pensive attitude by Ela's side, while her eyes
dwelt full of tenderness on her amiable children. Clifford led his blushing
bride toward her, and kneeling, pressed her extended hand to his lips; she
blessed them both, and my heart felt the scene too, too affecting. Clifford's
elegant features were marked by a sombre shade, which all his efforts were
insufficient to conceal; and while he pressed his Isabella in his arms, he
stole a pensive look toward the emaciated form of Ela, and a tear started from
his eye. Barlow stood behind us, Mrs. Barrymore arose; and giving him a paper,
"accept," said she, "this small acknowledgment of our esteem, your worth
exceeds reward." -- He eagerly opened the paper -- it contained bank notes,
which nearly doubled what he had bestowed on Ela. With much difficulty he was
prevailed on to acquiesce: -- and unable to express his gratitude, or conceal
his emotions, he silently quitted the room. -- A momentary luster shone in
Ela's eyes, and a mild suffusion of heartfelt joy crossed her features; but
the heralds of approaching dissolution soon resumed their seats* the living
principle faded fast away, and I snatch the present moment while a deep sleep
has overpowered her, to transmit these particulars to my beloved Caroline. As I
concluded the last word -- a servant brought a m^ssage from Mrs. Barrymore,
requesting my immediate presence. -- I attend her while sad presages hover
round my heart.

[In continuation.]

THE final blow is given, death throws a veil over the delusions of the heart,
and the spirit of Ela is released from all its woes.

When I laid aside my pen, I hastened to her apartment. -- She was breathing
out her last prayer in the arms of Clifford, beseeching Heaven to shower the
choicest benedictions on our heads; then earnestly conjuring us not to mourn
for her; she added, "lay me in the grave of Dormer;" and her soul departed with
a serene smile.

Adieu! I am too deeply affected to add another word, but to assure you, that I
shall as soon as possible conclude this narrative, and am always

Your affectionate MORTIMER.

LETTER V. MORTIMER TO CAROLINE.
THIS day I have shed the last tear over the lifeless Ela, and seen it
deposited beside the sad remains of him, whose penitence, though late and
momentary, was, I hope, sincere, and found acceptance.

Tomorrow we set off for the seat of Mrs. Barrymore, and shall soon hasten
again to embrace my Caroline, and in her society endeavor to conquer the
dejection that now preys upon my mind. -- I have just parted with my amiable
friends for the night; but sleep refuses its gentle influence to sooth my
perturbed spirits; and I will try to lose the painful sense of recent scenes,
by gratifying your amiable curiosity, so strongly awakened to know the
adventures of Clifford and Isabella.

The unwearied attention, and marked tenderness of that lovely woman, during a
long and dangerous illness, which commenced previously to the departure of
Henry and Ela, and was greatly augmented and prolonged by that event, convinced
him of what he had before suspected, that he had undesignedly attacked her
heart. -- The devastations of Hyder-Ali soon followed, and when he saw her
beauteous form rudely seized by the hands of savage tyrants, his heart loudly
proclaimed her interest there. He flew, regardless of his own life, to her aid;
but one of the barbarians soon stretched him, covered with wounds, at his feet,
and were carrying them into a dreadful captivity, when a party of troops met
them, and, after a long contest, obliged the savages to fly, and rescued all
the prisoners Isabella and Clifford were conducted to the house of the
commanding officer, where they resided some months, and perfect esteem and
tender admiration was ripened by gratitude into as lively a passion in the
bosom of Clifford as that by which Isabella was agitated. Heaven looked down
well pleased on the virtuous union of congenial souls. Clifford received a
summons from England; intimating that, from a series of remarkable events, a
noble estate had devolved to him, and that his presence was necessarily
required to take possession of it. -- The hope of yet again beholding his once
adored Ela, his lamented friend and sister, rendered this acquisition doubly
welcome. But his heart pronounced Augusta St. Clare arbitress of his future
happiness: without her participation he felt the strongest assurance that joy
must ever be a stranger to his heart; and the gifts of lavish fortune be
bestowed in vain. He flew to pour out the language of his generous soul at her
feet. A stranger to affection, or artifice, she owned the interest he had long
possessed in her heart; and superior to the scruples and assumed delicacy of
less exalted minds, permitted him the following day, to lead her blushing to
the altar; and they immediately embarked in the fleet that was ready to sail
for England. -- Here their fruitless researches after Ela alone interrupted
their felecity; when chance directed them to the spot where Dormer and she had
experienced such friendly aid after their escape from the fury of the waves,
and where they had been so long detained with the most cordial hospitality. But
here their hopes of tracing the fugitives were equally unsuccessful as before;
and they were hastening back to the metropolis, when they overtook Dormer, and
his destined bride, and the scene already pourtrayed instantly ensued. His
intended union with Mrs. Barrymore was prevented by a delay, which testifies an
overruling Providence, and for which she now looks up with heartfelt
gratitude. Deprived of her natural protectors, ere she could be sensible of the
loss, at a very early age, she engaged the affections of a most accomplished
youth, the only son of a wealthy family, to whom she was nearly allied; but
under whose roof her childhood passed in a state of dependence much worse than
servitude; a state which the delicate mind of my Caroline will readily
conceive, and a good heart never fail to compassionate. -- The attachment was
mutual, a private marriage took place, the birth of Isabella led to a
discovery, and wretchedness ensued. The tender wife was torn from the arms of
her distracted husband, hurried, with her lovely infant, on board a vessel, and
condemned to perpetual exile from the object of her fond attachment. There she
languished some years a stranger to joy, but what arose from contemplating the
softened features of her adored husband, visible in her beauteous child; when
the sudden account of his death seemed to complete the measure of her woes.
Long she stood trembling on the brink of eternity, wrapped in delirium; and the
first object her senses fought, was the sweet pledge of mutual love, the only
solace of her sorrowing widowhood. But the heart-rending intelligence, that
death had likewise robbed her of that blessing, excluded every ray of
consolation, and many years revolved in woe that would not admit of
alleviation. -- When, after repeated struggles with her own heart, gratitude
prevailed on her to reward the generous love of an amiable foreigner, and she
accompanied him to her native shores; she found that the o^durate parents of
her adored Edward had not long survived him, and the estate had devolved to a
distant part of the family. She endeavored to drown the remembrance of the
past in every species of fashionable dissipation. Again she became a widow;
again was prevailed on to accept the golden fruits that Hymen offered -- and
ere she attained her six and thirtieth year* found herself again at liberty*
with an income of eight-thousand a year. She then mentally resolved no more to
wear the hymeneal chain; -- but how weak are female resolutions? Here Is was not
proof against the arts of Dormer; when a summons from the person that succeeded
to the estates of her loved Edward, requesting instantly to see her at his
house in Wales, to impart to her ere he died, a secret which lay heavy at his
heart, delayed the promised nuptials: -- her lover murmured; -- but her
commands were absolute; and, with a very ill grace, be bowed submission, but
was permitted to attend her. The dying penitent informed her, that her daughter
was, by his hands, torn from her bosom to secure to himself the inheritance to
which he had long aspired. That, under the name of Augusta St. Clare, she was
educated in a convent in France; that from a fear that her uncommon beauty and
accomplishments had attached the heart of his only son, he had forced her to
India soon after her return; and that Heaven had punished his cruelty, by the
full conviction of having murdered his child, who survived her loss but a few
months, and declared, with his dying breath, the he died the victim of parental
rigor. The recital of this story seemed deeply to affect Dormer. The well known
name of Augusta, no doubt, brought bitter accusation to his heart. He mentioned
the performance of their vows; but Mrs. Barrymore firmly declared, that until
she folded her long lost child in her arms, joy must be a stranger to her bosom.

Despairing of ever accomplishing his wishes if she held that determination, he
called forth all his rhetoric to shake it, but in vain. They bade adieu to
Wales, and their journey was a scene of murmurings and altercation. When the
sound of Granville Clifford's voice resounded through his heart, he raised his
eyes, and beheld the dreaded interrogator, with the equally formidable Augusta
by his side. -- Desperation at that moment seized him, Clifford bade him
alight; -- he threw himself from the carriage -- and aimed his sword at his
breast; but their attendants interposed, and the sequel you are already
acquainted with.

Bereft of all her arts Vice stands exposed in her native deformity. The Wisdom
of Virtue is no less conspicuous. The finger of Truth points at the folly of
wickedness; and the inevitable misery, by which it never fails to be attended,
even in this world, is surely sufficient to deter every thinking mind from the
practice of it, without alluding to what must as certainly await it in a future
state.

Let us then, my dear sister, remember that wholesome medicine may be extracted
from the most poisonous plants; and while sympathy drops a tear over the grave
of Ela, and silence throws a veil over the memory of Dormer, let us profit by
their sad example, and apply the warning voice to our hearts; and we shall feel
the strongest conviction, that happiness can never reside with depravity; --
nor, however it may suffer for a time, will the bosom that rectitude inhabits
ever want a support. May these truths be indelibly engraven on the mind of my
Caroline, is the ardent wish of

Her affectionate MORTIMER.

FINIS.
BOOKS, Printed and sold by W. Spotswood, Philadelphia.
1. The Beauties of Stern; including all his pathetic tales, and most
distinguished observations on life. The tenth edition, with considerable
additions. 2. Enfield's Family Prayers, or Devout Christian's Daily Companion
-- Containing, one week's prayers -- general forms of prayers, and occasional
prayers and thanksgivings. 3. The Beauties of Johnson; consisting of maxims and
observations, moral, critical, and miscellaneous. By Dr. S. Johnson, accurately
extracted from his works and arranged in alphabetical order, after the manner
of the Duke de la Rochesoucault's maxims. To which is added, the Life of Dr.
Johnson. 4. Twenty two Fables; addressed to the Ladies, by Dr. Cozens. 5. The
Nightcap, 2 vols. by Mr. Mercier. 6. Collection of Voyages and Travels,
containing the voyage of Peter Kolben, A. M. to the Cape of Good Hope; a voyage
to China, by Lewis Le Compte; and Anecdotes of the Elephant, from Wolfe's
Travels. 7. Richardson's Essays on select passages of Shakespeare. 8. An
Account of the Siege of Gibraltar. -- By Captain Drinkwater.
HENRY and EMMA, A POEM. Upon the Model of the NUT-BROWN MAID.
BY MATTHEW PRIOR, Esquire.
TO CLOE.
THOU, to whose eyes I bend; at whose command,
(Though low my voice, though artless be my hand)
I take the sprightly reed, and sing, and play:
Careless of what the cens'ring world may say:
Bright Cloe, object of my constant vow,
Will thou a while unbend thy serious brow?
Will thou with pleasure hear thy lover's strains;
And with one heavenly smile o'erpay his pains?
No longer shall the Nut-brown Maid be old;
Though since her youth three hundred years have rolled.
At thy desire, she shall again be raised;
And her reviving charms in lasting verse be praised.
No longer man of woman shall complain,
That he may love, and not be loved again:
That we in vain the fickle sex pursue,
Who change the constant lover for the new.
Whatever has been writ, whatever said,
Of female passion feigned, or faith decayed;
Henceforth shall in my verse refuted stand,
Be said to winds, or writ upon the sand.
And while my notes to future times proclaim
Unconquered love and ever-during flame;
O fairest of the sex! be thou my muse:
Deign on my work thy influence to diffuse.
Let me partake the blessings I rehearse;
And grant me love, the just reward of verse.
As beauty's potent queen, with every grace
That once was Emma's, has adorned thy face:
And as her sun has to my bosom dealt
That constant flame, which faithful Henry felt:
O let the story with thy life agree:
Let men once more the bright example see;
What Emma was to him, be thou to me.
Nor send me by thy frown from her I love,
Distant and sad a banished man to rove.
But Oh! with pity long entreated crown
My pains and hopes; and when thou say that one
Of all mankind thou love, oh! think on me alone
WHERE beauteous His and her husband Tame
With mingled waves for ever flow the same:
In times of yore an ancient Baron lived;
Great gifts bestowed and great respect received.
When dreadful Edward with successful care,
Led his freed Britons to the Gallic war;
This lord had headed his appointed bands,
In firm allegiance to his king's commands;
And (all due honors faithfully discharged)
Had brought back his paternal coat, enlarged
With a new mark, the witness of his toil;
And no inglorious part of foreign spoil.
From the loud camp retired, and noisy court,
In honorable case and rural sport,
The remnant of his days he safely past;
Nor found they lagg'd too slow, nor flew too fast.
He made his wish with his estate comply;
Joyful to live, yet not afraid to die.
One child he had, a daughter chaste and fair;
His age's comfort, and his fortune's heir.
They called her Emma; for the beauteous dame
Who gave the virgin birth, had borne the name.
The name the indulgent father doubly loved;
For in the child the mother's charms improved.
Yet, as when little round his knee she played;
He called her often in sport, his Nut-brown Maid:
The friends and tenants took the fondling word;
(As still they please, who imitate their lord)
Usage confirmed what fancy had begun:
The mutual terms around the lands were known;
And Emma and the Nut-brown Maid were one.
As with her stature still her charms increased;
Through all the isle her beauty was confessed.
Oh! what perfections must that virgin share,
Who fairest is esteemed, where all are fair?
From distant shires repair the noble youth,
And find report for once had lessened truth.
By wonder first, and then by passion moved,
They came; they saw; they marvell'd; and they loved.
By public praises, and by secret sighs,
Each owned the general power of Emma's eyes.
In tilts and tournaments the valiant strove,
By glorious deeds to purchase Emma's love.
In gentle verse, the witty told their flame;
And graced their choicest songs with Emma's name.
In vain they combated, in vain they writ:
Useless their strength, and impotent their wit.
Great Venus only must direct the dart,
Which else will never reach the fair one's heart;
Spite of the attempts of force, and soft effects of art.
Great Venus must prefer the happy one:
In Henry's cause her favor must be shown;
And Emma of mankind must love but him alone.
While these in public, to the castle came,
And by their grandeur justified their flame:
More secret ways the careful Henry takes;
His 'squires, his arms, and equipage forsakes.
In borrowed name, and false attire arrayed,
Often he finds means to see the beauteous maid.
When Emma hunts, in huntsman's habit dressed,
Henry on foot pursues the bounding beast.
In his right hand his beachen pole he bears:
And graceful at his side his horn he wears.
Still to the glede, where she has bent her way,
With knowing skill he drives the future prey.
Bids her decline the hill, and shun the brake:
And shows the path her steed may safest take.
Directs her spear to fix the glorious wound;
Pleased, in his toils to have her triumph crowned:
And blows her praises in no common sound.
A falc'ner Henry is, when Emma hawks:
With her of tarsels, and of lures he talks.
Upon his wrist the towering merlin stands;
Practiced to rise, and stoop at her commands.
And when superior now the bird has flown,
And headlong brought the tumbling quarry down:
With humble reverence he accosts the fair;
And with the honored feather decks her hair.
Yet still, as from the sportive field she goes,
His down-cast eyes reveal his inward woes.
And by his look and sorrow is expressed,
A nobler game pursued, than bird or beast.
A shepherd now along the plain he roves:
And, with his jolly pipe, delights the groves.
The neighboring swains around the stranger throng,
Or to admire, or emulate his song:
While with soft sorrow he renews his lays,
Nor heedful of their envy, nor their praise.
But soon as Emma's eyes adorned the plain,
His notes he raises to a nobler strain;
With dutiful respect, and studious fear,
Lest any careless sound offend her ear.
A frantic gipsey now the house he haunts,
And in wild phrases speaks dissembled wants.
With the fond maids in palmistry he deals:
They tell the secret first, which he reveals:
Says who shall wed* and who shall be beguiled;
What groom shall get* and 'squire maintain the child.
But when bright Emma would her fortune know;
A softer look unbends his opening brow.
With trembling awe he gazes on her eye;
And in soft accents* forms the kind reply;
That she shall prove as fortunate as fair,
And Hymen's choicest gifts are all reserved for her.
Now often had Henry changed his fly disguise;
Unmarked by all* but beauteous Emma's eyes.
Often had found means alone to see the dame,
And at her feet to breathe his amorous flame:
And often the pangs of absence to remove,
By letters, soft interpreters of love:
Till time and industry, (the mighty two
That bring our wishes nearer to our view)
Made him perceive, that the inclining fair
Received his v^ws with no reluctant ear;
That Venus had confirmed her equal reign,
And dealt to Emma's heart a share of Henry's pain.
While Cupid smiled, by kind occasion blessed,
And with the secret kept, the love increased;
The amorous youth frequents the silent groves;
And much he meditates, for much he loves.
He loves: it is true; and is beloved again:
Great are his joys; but will they long remain?
Emma with smiles receives his present flame;
But smiling, will she ever be the same?
Beautiful looks are ruled by fickle minds:
And summer seas are turned by sudden winds.
Another love may gain her easy youth:
Time changes thought; and flattery conquers truth.
O impotent estate of human life!
Where hope and fear maintain eternal strife:
Where fleeting joy does lasting doubt inspire;
And most we question, what we most desire.
Amongst thy various gifts, great heaven* bestow
Our cup of love unmixed; forbear to throw
Bitter ingredients in; nor pall the draught
With nauseous grief: for our ill-judging thought
Hardly enjo^s the pleasurable taste;
Or deems it not sincere; or fears it cannot last.
With wishes raised, with jealousies oppressed,
(Alternate tyrants of the human breast)
By one great trial he resolves to prove
The faith of women, and the force of love.
If scanning Emma's virtues he may find
That beauteous frame enclose a steady mind;
He Will fix his hope of future joy secure;
And live a slave to Hymen's happy power.
But if the fair one, as he fears, is frail;
If pois^d aright in reason's equal seal,
Light fly her merits, and her faults prevail;
His mind he vows to free from amorous care;
The latent mischief from his heart to tear,
Resume his azure arms, and shine again in war.
South of the castle, in a verdant glade,
A spreading beach extends her friendly shade:
Here often the nymph his breathing vows had heard:
Here often her silence had her heart declared.
As active spring awaked her infant buds;
And genial life informed the verdant woods:
Henry, in knots involving Emma's name,
Had half expressed, and half concealed his flame
Upon this tree: and as the tender mark
Grew with the year, and widen'd with the bark:
Venus had heard the virgin's so^^ address,
That, as the wound, the passion might increase.
As potent nature shed her kindly showr's;
And decked the various mead with opening flowr's;
Upon this tree, the nymphs obliging care
Had left a frequent wreath for Henry's hair:
Which as with gay delight the lover found;
Pleased with his conquest* with her present crowned,
Glorious through all the plains he often had gone,
And to each swain the mystic honor shown:
The gift still praised, the giver still unknown.
His secret note the troubled Henry writes,
To the known tree the lovely maid invites:
Imperfect words and dubious terms express,
That unforeseen mischance disturbed his peace;
That he must something to her ear commend,
On which her conduct, and his life depend.
Soon as the fair one had the note received;
The remnant of the day alone she grieved:
For different this from every former note.
Which Venus dictated, and Henry wrote;
Which told her all his future hopes were laid
On the dear bosom of his Nut-brown Maid;
Which always blessed her eyes and owned her power;
And bid her often adieu, yet added more.
Now night advanced, the house in sleep were laid,
The nurse experienced, and the prying maid;
And last that spright, which does incessant haunt
The lover's steps, the ancient maiden aunt.
To her dear Henry, Emma wings her way,
With quickened p^re repairing forced delay.
For love, fantastic power, that is afraid
To stir abroad till watchfulness be laid;
Undaunted then, over cliffs and valleys strays;
And leads his vot'ries safe through pathless ways.
Not Argus with his hundred eyes shall find,
Where Cupid goes, (...) ^he poor guide is blind.
The maiden first arriving sent her eye
To ask if yet its chief delight were nigh:
With fear, and with desire, with joy and pain*
She sees, and runs to meet him on the plain.
But oh! his steps proclaim no lover's haste;
On the low ground his fixed regards are cast:
His artful bosom heaves dissembled sighs;
And tears suborned fall copious from his eyes.
With ease, alas! ^e credit what we love:
His painted grief does real sorrow move
In the afflicted fair: adown her cheek
Trickling the genuine tears their current break.
Attentive stood the mournful nymph: the man
Broke silence first: the tale alternate ran.
HENRY. SINCERE O tell me, have thou felt a pain,
Emma, beyond what women knows to feign?
Has thy uncertain bosom ever strove
With the first tumults of a real love?
Have thou now dreaded, and now blessed his sway;
By turns averse, and joyful to obey?
Thy virgin softness have thou ere bewailed,
As reason yielded, and as love prevailed?
And wept the potent God's resistless dart,
His killing pleasure, his extatick smart,
And heavenly poison thrilling through thy heart?
If so, with pity view my wretched state;
At least deplore, and then forget my fate:
To some more happy knight reserve thy charms,
By fortune favored, and successful arms:
And only, as the sun's revolving ray
Brings back each year this melancholy day:
Permit one sigh, and set apart one tear,
To an abandoned exile's endless care.
For me, alas! outcast of human race,
Love's anger only waits, and dire disgrace:
For lo! these hands in murder are imbrued;
These trembling feet by justice are pursued;
Fate calls aloud, and hastens me away;
A shameful death attends my longer stay;
And I this night must fly from thee and love,
Condemned in lonely woods a banished man to rove.

EMMA. WHAT is our bliss that changes with the moon?
And day of life, that darkens ever it is noon?
What is true passion, if unblessed it dies;
And where is Emma's joy, if Henry ^ies?
If love, alas! be pain; the pain I bear,
No thought can figure, and no tongue declare.
Never faithful woman felt, nor false one feigned
The flames, which long have in my bosom reigned:
The god of love himself inhabits there,
With all his rage, and dread, and grief, and care,
His complement of stores, and total war.
Oh! cease then coldly to suspect my love:
And let my deed at least my faith approve.
Alas! no youth shall my endearments share;
Nor day, nor night shall interrupt my care:
No future story shall with truth upbraid
The cold indiff'rence of the Nut-brown Maid:
Nor to hard banishment shall Henry run,
While careless Emma sleeps on beds of down.
View me resolved, wherever thou lead'st, to go,
Friend to thy pain, and partner of thy woe:
For I attest fair Venus, and her son,
That I, of all mankind, will love but thee alone.

HENRY. LET prudence yet obstruct thy venurous way;
And take good heed, what men will think and say?
That beauteous Emma vagrant courses took,
Her father's house and civil life forsook;
That full of youthful blood, and fond of man,
She to the wood-land with an exile ran.
Reflect, that lessened fame is never regained:
And virgin honor once, is always stained:
Timely advised, the coming evil shun:
Better not do the deed, than weep it done.
No penance can absolve our guilty fame!
Nor tears that wash out sin, can wash out shame.
Then fly the sad effects of desperate love;
And leave a banished man through lonely woods to rove.

EMMA. LET Emma's hapless case be falsely told
By the rash young, or the ill-natured old:
Let every tongue its various censures choose;
Absolve with coldness, or with spite accuse:
Fair truth, at last her radiant beams will raise;
And malice vanquished heightens virtue's praise.
Let then thy favor but indulge my flight;
O! let my presence make thy travels light;
And potent Venus shall exalt my name
Above the rumors of censorious fame:
Nor from that busy Demon's restless power
Will ever Emma other grace implore,
Than that this truth should to the world be known,
That I of all mankind, have loved but thee alone.

HENRY. BUT can thou wield the sword, and bend the bow^
With active force repel the sturdy foe?
When the loud tumult speaks the battle nigh,
And winged deaths in whistling arrows fly;
Will thou, though wounded, yet undaunted stay,
Perform thy part, and share the dangerous day?
Then, as thy strength decays, thy heart will fail;
Thy limbs all trembling and thy cheeks all pale:
With fruitless sorrow thou, inglorious maid,
Wilt weep thy safety by thy love betrayed:
Then to thy friend, by foes o'er-charg'd, deny,
Thy little useless aid, and coward fly:
Then will thou curse the chance that made thee love
A banished man, condemned in lonely woods to rove.

EMMA. WITH fatal certainty Thalestris knew,
To send the arrow from the twanging yew:
And great in arms, and foremost in the war,
Bonduca brandished high the British spear.
Could thirst of vengeance, and desire of fame
Excite the female breast with martial flame?
And shall not love's diviner power impire
More hardy virtue, and more generous fire?
NEAR thee, mistrust not, constant I Will abide,
And fall, or vanquish, fighting by thy side.
Though my inferior strength may not allow,
That I should bear, or draw the warrior bow;
With ready hand the shaft I will supply,
And joy to see thy victor arrows fly.
Touched in the battle by the hostile reed,
Should thou (but Heaven avert it!) should thou bleed
To stop thy wounds, my finest lawn I Would tear;
Wash them with tears, and wipe them with my hair;
Blessed, when my dangers and my toils have shown,
That I of all mankind, could love but thee alone.

HENRY. BUT can thou, tender maid, can thou sustain
Afflictive want, or hunger's pressing pain?
Those limbs, in lawn and softest silk arrayed,
From sunbeams guarded, and of winds afraid;
Can they bear angry Jove? can they resist
The parching dog star, and the bleak north-east?
When chilled by adverse snows, and beating rain,
We tread with weary steps, the longsome plain:
When with hard toil we seek our evening food,
Berries and acorns, from the neighboring wood:
And find among the cliffs no other house,
But the thin covert of some gathered boughs:
Will thou not then reluctant send thine eye
Around the dreary waste, and weeping try,
(Though then, alas! that trial be too late)
To find thy father's hospitable gate,
And seats, where case and plenty brooding sat?
Those seats, whence long excluded thou must mourn:
That gate for ever barred to thy return:
Will thou not then bewail ill-fated love,
And hate a banished man, condemned in woods to rove.

EMMA. THY rise of fortune did I only wed,
From its decline determined to recede?
Did I but purpose to embark with thee,
On the smooth surface of a summer^s sea;
While gentle zephyrs play in prosperous gales;
And fortune's favor fills the swelling sails:
But would forsake the ship, and make the shore,
When the winds whistle, and the tempests roar?
No, Henry, no: one sacred oath has tied
Our loves; one destiny our life shall guide
Nor wild, nor deep our common way divide.
WHEN from the cave thou risest with the day
To beat the woods, and rouse the bounding prey;
The cave with moss and branches I Will adorn,
And cheerful sit to wait my lord's return.
And when thou frequent bring'st the smitten deer;
(For seldom, archers say, thy arrows err)
I Will fetch quick fuel from the neighboring wood,
And strike the sparkling flint, and dress the food:
With humble duty and officious haste,
I Will cull the farthest mead for thy repast:
The choicest herbs I to thy board will bring;
And draw thy water from the freshest spring:
And when at night with weary toil oppressed,
Soft slumbers thou enjoy'st, and wholesome rest;
Watchful I Will guard thee, and with midnight prayer
Weary the gods to keep thee in their care;
And joyous ask at morn's returning ray,
If thou have health, and I may bless the day.
My thought shall fix, my latest with depend
On thee, guide, guardian, kinsman, father, friend:
By all these sacred names be Henry known
To Emma's heart; and grateful let him own,
That she of all mankind, could love but him alone.

HENRY. VAINLY thou tell me, what the woman's care
Shall in the wildness of the wood prepare:
Thou, ever thou go, unhappiest of thy kind,
Must leave the habit, and the sex behind.
No longer shall thy comely tresses break
In flowing ringlets on thy snowy neck;
Or sit behind thy head, an ample round,
In graceful braids with various ribband bound:
No longer shall the boddice aptly laced,
From thy full bosom to thy slender waist,
That air and harmony of shape express,
Fine by degrees, and beautifully less:
Nor shall thy lower garments artful pleat
From thy fair side dependent to thy feet,
Arm their chaste beauties with a modest pride,
And double every charm they seek to hide.
The ambrosial plenty of thy shining hair
Cropped off and lost, scarce lower than thy ear
Shall stand uncouth; a horseman's coat shall hide,
Thy taper shape, and comeliness of side;
The short trunk-hose shall show thy foot and knee
Licentious, and to common eyesight free;
And with a bolder stride, and looser air,
Mingled with men, a man thou must appear.
NOR solitude, nor gentle peace of mind
Mistaken maid, shall thou in forests find;
It Is long since Cynthia and her train were there;
Or guardian gods made innocence their care.
Vagrants and outlaws shall offend thy view;
(For such must be my friends;) a hideous crew,
By adverse fortune mixed in social ill;
Trained to assault, and disciplined to kill;
Their common loves, a lewd abandoned pack,
The beadle's lash still flagrant on their back;
By sloth corrupted, by disorder fed,
Made bold by want, and prostitute for bread.
With such must Emma hunt the tedious day,
Assist their violence, and divide their prey;
With such she must return a setting light;
Though not partaker, witness of their night.
Thy ear, inured to charitable sounds,
And pitying love, must feel the hateful wounds,
Of jests obscene, and vulgar ribaldry,
The ill-bred question, and the lewd reply;
Brought from long habitude of bad to worse,
Must hear the frequent oath, and direful curse,
That latest weapon of the wretches war;
And blasphemy, sad comrade of despair.
NOW, Emma, now, the last reflection make,
What thou would follow, what thou must forsake:
By our ill-omen'd stars, and adverse heaven,
No middle object to thy choice is given.
Or yield thy virtue to attain thy love;
Or leave a banished man, condemned in woods to rove.

EMMA. O GRIEF of heart! that our unhappy fates
Force thee to suffer what thy honor hates:
Mix thee amongst the bad, or make thee run
Too near the paths which virtue, bids thee shun.
Yet with her Henry still let Emma go;
With him abhor the vice, but share the woe:
And sure my little heart can never err
Amidst the worst, if Henry still be there.
OUR outward act is prompted from within;
And from the sinner's mind proceeds the sin:
By her own choice free virtue is approved,
Nor by the force of outward objects moved.
Who has assayed no danger, gains no praise,
In a small isle, amidst the widest seas.
Triumphant constancy has fixed her seat:
In vain the sirens sing, the tempests beat:
Their flattery she rejects, nor fears their threat.
FOR thee alone these little charms I dressed;
Condemned them, or absolved them by thy test.
In comely figure ranged my jewels shone;
Or negligently placed, for thee alone:
For thee again they shall be laid aside;
The woman, Henry, shall put off her pride
For thee: my clothes, my sex exchanged, for thee,
I Will mingle with the peoples wretched lee;
Oh! line extreme or human infamy!
Wanting the scissors with these hands I Will tear
(If that obstructs my flight) this load of hair.
Black soot, or yellow walnut shall disgrace
This little red and white of Emma's face.
These nails with scratches shall deform my breast,
Lest by my look or color be expressed
The mark of ought high born, or ever better dressed.
Yet in this commerce, under this disguise,
Let me be grateful still to Henry's eyes:
Lost to the world, let me to him be known:
My fate I can absolve, if he shall own,
That leaving all mankind, I love but him alone.

HENRY. O WILDEST thought of an abandoned mind,
Name, habit, parents, woman left behind,
Ev^n honor dubious thou prefer'st to go
Wild to the woods with me; said Emma so?
Or did I dream what Emma never said?
O guilty error! and oh wretched maid!
Whose roving fancy would resolve the same
With him, who next should tempt her easy fame;
And blow with empty words the susceptible flame.
Now why should doubtful terms thy mind perplex?
Confess thy frailty, and avow the sex:
No longer loose desire for constant love
Mistake; but say it is man, with whom thou long'st to rove,

EMMA. ARE there not poisons, racks, and flames, and swords;
That Emma thus must die by Henry's words?
Yet what could swords or poison, racks or flame.
But mangle and disjoint this brittle frame?
More fatal Henry's words, they murder Emma's fame.
AND fall these sayings from that gentle tongue,
Where civil speech and soft persuasion hung,
Whose artful sweetness and harmonious strain
Courting my grace, yet courting it in vain,
Called sighs, and tears, and wishes to it is aid:
And, whilst it Henry's glowing flame conveyed.
Still blamed the coldness of the Nut-brown Maid.
LET envious jealousy, and cankered spite
Produce my action to severest light,
And tax my open day, or secret night.
Did ever my tongue speak my unguarded heart
The least inclined to play the wanton's part?
Did ever my eye one inward thought reveal,
Which angels might not hear, and virgins tell?
And have thou, Henry, in my conduct known
One fault, but that which ^s must ^er own,
That I of all mankind, have (...) but thee alone?

HENRY. VAINLY thou talk of loving me alone:
Each man is man; and all our sex is one.
Fals^ are our words; and fickle is our mind:
Nor in love's ritual can we ever find
Vows made to last, or promises to bind.
BY nature prompted, and for empire made
Alike by strength or cunning we invade:
When armed with rage we march against the foe;
We list the battle-ax, and draw the bow:
When fired with passion we attack the fair;
Delusive sighs and brittle vows we bear:
Our f^lsehood and our arms have equal use;
As they our conquest or delight produce.
THE foolish heart thou gav'st, again receive;
The only boon departing love can give
To be less wretched, be no longer true:
What strives to fly thee, why should thou pursue?
Forget the present flame; indulge a new.
Single the lovliest of the amorous youth;
Ask for his vow, but hope not for his truth.
The next man (and the next thou will believe)
Will pawn his gods, intending to deceive;
Will kneel, implore, persist, overcome, and leave.
Hence let thy Cupid aim his arrows right;
Be wise, and false; shun trouble, seek delight,
Change thou the first; nor wait thy lover's flight.
Why should thou weep? let nature judge our case:
I saw thee young, and fair; pursued the chase
Of youth, and beauty: I another saw
Fairer, and younger: yielding to the law
Of our all-ruling mother, I pursued
More youth, more beauty: blessed vicissitude!
My active heart still keeps its pristine flame:
The object altered* the desire the same,
THIS younger fairer pleads her rightful charms:
With present power compels me to her arms.
And much I fear, from my subjected mind,
(If ^eauty's force to constant love can bind)
That years may roll, ever in her turn, the maid
Shall weep the fury of my love decayed:
And weeping follow me, as thou do now,
With idle clamours of a broken vow.
NOR can the wildness of thy wishes err
So wide, to hope that thou may h^e with her.
Love, well thou know, no partnership allows;
Cupid averse rejects divided vows.
Then from thy foolish heart* vain maid, remove
An useless sorrow, and an ill-star'd love:
And leave with the fair, at large in woods to rove.

EMMA. ARE we in life through one great error led?
Is each man perjured, and each nymph betrayed?
Of the superior sex art thou the worst?
Am I of mine the most completely cursed?
Yet let me go with thee; and going prove,
From what I will endure, how much I love.
THIS potent beauty, this triumphant fair,
This happy object of our different care,
Her let me follow, her let me attend,
A servant: (she may scorn the name of friend.)
What she demands, incessant I Will prepare,
I Will weave her garlands, and I Will pleat her hair:
My busy diligence shall deck her board:
(For there at least I may approach my lord)
And when her Henry's softer hours advise
His servant's absence* with dejected eyes
Far I Will recede, and sighs forbid to rise.
YET when increasing grief brings slow disease;
And ^bbing life, on terms severe as these,
Will have its little lamp no longer fed;
When Henry's mistress shows him Emma dead;
Rescue my poor remains from vile neglect,
With virgin honors let my hearse be decked,
And decent emblem; and at least persuade
This happy nymph, that Emma may be laid
Where thou, dear author of my death, where she
With frequent eye my sepulcher may see.
The nymph amidst her joys may happily breathe
One pious sigh, reflecting on my death,
And the sad fate which she may one day prove,
Who hopes from Henry's vows eternal love.
And thou forsworn, thou cruel, as thou art,
If Emma's image ever touched thy heart,
Thou sure must give one thought, and drop one tear
To her whom love abandoned to despair;
To her, who dying, on the wounded stone
Bid it in lasting characters be known,
That of mankind, she loved but thee alone.

HENRY. HEAR, solemn Jove; and conscious Venus, hear;
And thou, bright maid, believe, whilst I swear;
No time, no change, no future flame shall move
The well placed basis of my lasting love.
O powerful virtue! O victorious fair!
At least excuse a trial too severe:
Receive the triumph and forget the war.
NO banished man, condemned in woods to rove,
Entreats thy pardon, and implores thy love:
No perjured knight desires to quit thy arms,
Fairest collection of thy sexes charms,
Crown of my love, and honor of my youth:
Henry, thy Henry with eternal truth,
As thou may wish, shall all his life employ,
And found his glory in his Emma's joy.
IN me behold the potent Edgar's heir,
Illustrious earl, him terrible in war
Let Loyre confess, for she has felt his sword,
And trembling fled before the British lord.
Him great in peace and wealth fair Deva knows;
For she amidst his spacious meadows slows;
Inclines her urn upon his fatten'd lands;
And sees his numerous herd imprint her sands.
AND thou, my fair, my dove, shall raise thy thought
To greatness next to empire; shall be brought
With solemn pomp, to my paternal seat,
Where peace and plenty on thy word shall wait.
Music and song shall wake thy marriage day:
And while the priests accuse the bride's delay,
Myrtles and roses shall obstruct her way.
FRIENDSHIP shall still thy evening feasts adorn:
And blooming peace shall ever bless thy morn:
Succeeding years their happy race shall run;
And age unheeded by delight come on:
While yet superior love shall mock his power:
And when old time shall turn the fated hour,
Which only can our well-ty'd knot unfold,
What rests of both, one sepulcher shall hold.
HENCE then for ever from my Emma's breast
(That heaven of softness, and that seat of rest)
Ye doubts and fears, and all that know to move
Tormenting grief, and all that trouble love,
Scattered by winds recede, and wild in forests rove.

EMMA. O DAY, the fairest sure that ever rose!
Period and end of anxious Emma's woes!
Sire of her joy, and source of her delight;
O! winged with pleasure take thy happy flight,
And give each future morn a tincture of thy white.
Yet tell thy vot'ry, potent queen of love,
Henry, my Henry, will he never rove?
Will he be ever kind, and just, and good?
And is there yet no mistress in the wood?
None, none, there is: the thought was rash and vain;
A false idea, and a fancied pain.
Doubt shall for ever quit my strengthened heart;
And anxious jealousy's corroding smart;
Nor other inmate shall inhabit there,
But soft belief, young joy, and pleasing care.
HENCE let the tides of plenty ebb and flow,
And fortune's various gale unheeded blow.
If at my feet the suppliant goddess stands,
And sheds her treasure with unwearied hands;
Her present favor cautious I Will embrace,
And not unthankful use the proffered grace:
If she reclaims the temporary boon,
And tries her pinions fluttering to be gone;
Secure of mind I Will obviate her intent,
And unconcerned return the good she lent.
Nor happiness can I, nor misery feel,
From any turn of her fantastic wheel;
Friendship's great law, and love's superior powers,
Must mark the colors of my future hours.
From the events which thy commands create,
I must my blessings on my sorrows date:
And Henry's will must dictate Emma's fate.
YET while with close delight and inward pride
(Which from the world my careful soul shall hide)
I see thee, lord and end of my desire,
Exalted high as virtue can require;
With power invested, and with pleasure cheered;
Sought by the good, by the oppressor feared;
Loaded and blessed with all the affluent store,
Which human vows at smokeing shrines implore;
Grateful and humble grant me to employ
My life, subservient only to thy joy;
And at my death to bless thy kindness shown
To her, who of mankind, could love but thee alone.

WHILE thus the constant pair alternate said,
Joyful above them, and around them played
Angels and sportive loves, a numerous crowd;
Smiling they clapped their wings, and low they bowed.
They tumbled all their little quivers over,
To choose propitious shafts; a precious store:
That when their god should take his future darts,
To strike (however rarely) constant hearts,
His happy skill might proper arms employ,
All tipped with pleasure, and all winged with joy:
And those, they vowed whose lives should imitate
These lover's constancy, and share their fate.
THE queen of beauty stopped her bridled doves;
Approved the little labor of the loves;
Was proud and pleased the mutual vow to hear;
And to the triumph called the god of war:
Soon as she calls, the god is always near
NOW Mars, she said, let Fame exalt her voice;
Nor let thy conquests only be her choice:
But when she sings great Edward from the field
Returned the hostile spear and captive shield,
In Concord's temple hung, and Gallia taught to yield.
And when, as prudent Saturn shall complete
The years designed to perfect Britain's state;
The swift-wing'd power shall take her trump again,
To sing her favorite Anna's wondrous reign;
To recollect unwearied Malbro's toils,
Old Rufus shall unequal to his spoils;
The British soldier from his high command
Glorious, and Gaul thrice vanquished by his hand;
L^ her at least perform what I desire;
With second breath the vocal brass inspire;
And tell the nations in no vulgar strain,
What wars I manage, and what wreaths I gain.
AND when thy tumults and thy fights are past,
And when thy laurels at my feet are cast;
Faithful may thou like British Henry prove,
And Emma-like let me return thy love.
RENOWNED for truth let all thy sons appear;
And constant beauty shall reward their care.
MARS smiled, and bowed: the Cyprian deity
Turned to the glorious ruler of the sky:
And thou, she smiling said, great god of days
And verse, behold my deed, and sing my praise.
As on the British earth, my favorite isle,
Thy gentle rays and kindest influence smile,
Through all her laughing fields and verdant groves,
Proclaim with joy these memorable loves.
From every annual course let one great day,
To celebrated sports and floral play
Be set aside; and in the softest lays
Of thy poetic sons, be solemn praise.
And everlasting marks of honor paid.
To the true lover, and the Nut-brown Maid.
EDWIN AND ETHELINDE.
BY JOHN AIKIN.
"ONE parting kiss, my ETHELINDE!"
Young EDWIN fault ring cried,
"I hear thy father's hasty tread,
Nor longer must I hide.
Tomorrow eve, in yonder wood,
Beneath the well-known tree,
Say will thou meet thy own true love,
Whose only joy's in thee?"
She clasped the dear beloved youth,
And sighed and dropped a tear;
"Whatever betide, my only love
I Will surely meet thee there."
They kiss, they part; a listening page
To malice ever bent,
O'erheard their talk, and to his lord
Revealed their fond intent
The baron's brow grew dark with frowns,
And rage disdained his cheek,
"Heavens! shall a vassal shepherd dare
My daughter's love to seek.
But know, rash boy, thy bold attempt
Full sorely shall thou rue;
Nor ever again, ignoble maid,
Shall thou thy lover view."
The dews of evening fast did fall,
And darkness spread apace,
When ETHELINDE with beating breast
Flew to the appointed place.
With eager eye she looks around,
No EDWIN there was seen;
"He was not wont to break his faith,
What can his absence mean!"
Her heart beat thick at every noise,
Each rustling through the wood;
And now she traversed quick the ground.
And now she listening stood.
Enlivening hope and chilling fear
By turns her bosom share,
And now she calls upon his name,
Now weeps in sad despair.
Mean-time the day's last glimmering fled,
And blackening all the sky,
A hideous tempest dreadful rose,
And thunders rolled on high.
Poor ETHELINDE aghast, dismayed,
Beholds with wild affright
The threatening sky, the lonely wood,
And horrors of the night.
"Where art thou now my EDWIN dear!
Thy friendly aid I want;
Ah me; my boding heart foretells
That aid thou can not grant."
Thus racked with pangs, and beat with storms,
Confused and lost she roves;
Now looks to heaven with earnest prayer,
Now calls on him she loves.
At length a distant taper's ray
Struck beaming on her sight;
Through brakes she guides her fainting steps
Toward the welcome light,
An aged hermit peaceful dwelt
In this sequestered wild,
Calm goodness sat upon his brow,
His words were soft and mild.
He ope'd his hospitable door,
And much admiring viewed
The tender virgin's graceful form,
Dashed by the tempest rude.
"Welcome, fair maid, whoever thou art,
To this warm sheltered cell;
Here rest secure thy wearied feet,
Here peace and safety dwell."
He saw the heart-wrung starting tear,
And gently sought to know
With kindest pity's soothing looks,
The story of her woe.
Scarce had she told her mournful tale,
When struck with dread they hear
Voices confused with dying groans,
The cell approaching near.
"Help, father! help," they loudly cry,
"A wretch here bleeds to death,
Some cordial balsam quickly give
To stay his parting breath."
All deadly pale they lay him down,
And gash'd with many a wound;
When, woeful sight! 'twas EDWIN's self
Lay bleeding on the ground.
With frantic grief poor ETHELINDE
Beside his body falls;
"Lift up thine eyes, my EDWIN dear,
It Is ETHELINDE calls."
That much loved sound recalls his life,
He lifts his closing eyes,
Then feebly murmuring out her name
He gasps, he faints, he dies.
Stupid a while, in dumb despair
She gazed on EDWIN dead;
Dim grew her eyes, her lips turned pale,
And life's warm spirit fled.
A DIRGE.
BY THE SAME.
BOW the head thou lilly fair,
Bow thy head in mournful guise*
Sickly turn thy shining white,
Bend thy stalk and never rise.
Shed thy leaves thou lovely rose,
Shed thy leaves so sweet and gay;
Spread them wide on the cold earth,
Quickly let them fade away.
Fragrant woodbine all untwine,
All untwine from yonder bower;
Drag thy branches on the ground,
Stain with dust each tender flower.
For, woe is me! the gentle knot,
That did in willing durance bind
My EMMA and her happy swain,
By cruel death is now untwin'd.
Her head with dim half-closed eyes
Is bowed upon her breast of snow;
And cold and faded are those cheeks,
That wont with cheerful red to glow.
And mute is that harmonious voice,
That wont to breathe the sounds of love;
And lifeless are those beauteous limbs,
That with such ease and grace did move.
And I of all my bliss berest,
Lonely and sad must ever moan;
Dead to each joy the world can give,
Alive to memory alone.
THE Deserted Village. BY DR. GOLDSMITH.

THE DESERTED VILLAGE.
BY DR. GOLDSMITH.
SWEET AUBURN! loveliest village of the plain,
Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain,
Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed.
Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease,
Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,
How often have I loiter'd over thy green,
Where humble happiness endeared each scene!
How often have I paused on every charm,
The sheltered c^t, the cultivated farm,
The never-failing brook, the busy mill,
The decent church that ^opt the neighboring hill,
The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade,
For talking age and whispering lovers made!
How often have I blessed the coming day,
When toil remitting lent its turn to play,
And all the village train, from labor free,
Led up their sports beneath the spreading tree;
While many a pastime circled in the shade,
The young contending as the old surveyed;
And many a gambol frolic'd over the ground,
And slights of art and feats of strength went round.
And still as each repeated pleasure tired,
Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired;
The dancing pair that simply sought renown,
By holding out, to tire each other down;
The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,
While secret laughter titter'd round the place;
The bashful virgin's side-long looks of love,
The matron's glance that would those looks reprove.
These were thy charms, sweet village! sports like these,
With sweet succession, taught even toil to please;
These round thy bowers their cheerful influence shed,
These were thy charms -- but all these charms are fled.
Sweet smiling village, loveliest of the lawn,
Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn;
Amidst thy bowers the tyrant's hand is seen,
And desolation saddens all thy green:
One only master grasps the whole domain,
And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain;
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,
But, choked with sedges, works its weedy way;
Along thy glades, a solitary guest.
The hollow sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,
And tires their echoes with unvary'd cries.
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o'ertops the mouldering wall,
And trembling, shrinking from the spoiler's hand,
Far, far away the children leave the land.
Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay;
Princes and lords may flourish, or may fade;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made:
But a bold peasantry, their country's pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
A time there was, ere England's griefs began.
When every rood of ground maintained its man;
For him light labor spread her wholesome store,
Just gave what life required, but gave no more:
His best companions, innocence and health,
And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
But times are alter^d; trade's unfeeling train
Usurp the land and dispossess the swain;
Along the lawn* where scattered h^ rose,
Unwieldy wealth, and cumb'rous pomp repose;
And every want to luxury allied,
And every pang that folly pays to pride.
These gentle hours that plenty bade to bloom,
Those calm desires that asked but little room;
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene,
Lived in each look, and brightened all the green;
These, far departing, seek a kinder, shore,
And rural mirth and manners are no more.
Sweet AUBURN! parent of the blissful hour,
Thy glades forlorn confess the tyrant's power.
He^^, as I take my solitary rounds,
Amidst thy tang'ling walks, and ruined grounds,
And, many a year claps'd, return to view
Wh^re once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew,
Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Sw^ (...) my breast, and turns the past to pain.
I^ (...) wand'rings round this world of care,
In al^ my griefs -- and GOD has given my share --
I still had hopes my latest hours to crown,
Amidst these humble bowers to lay me down*
To ^b^nd out life's taper at the close,
And keep the flame from wasting by repose:
I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,
Amidst the swains to show my book-learn'd skill,
Around my fire an evening group to draw,
And tell of all I felt, and all I saw;
And, as an hare whom hounds and horns pursue,
Pants to the place from whence at first he flew,
I still had hopes, my long veaxtions past.
Here to return -- and die at home at last.
O blessed retirement, friend to life's decline,
Retreats from care, that never must be mine,
How blessed is he who crowns in shades like these,
A youth of labor with an age of ease;
Who quits a world where strong temptations try,
And* since it is hard to combat, learns to fly!
For him no wretches, born to work and weep,
Explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep;
No fur^y porter stands in guilty state,
To s^rn imploring famine from the gate;
But on ^e moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending Virtue's friend;
Sinks to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way;
And* all his prospects bright'ning to the last.
His Heaven commenc^s ere the world be past!
Sweet was the sound, when often at evening's close,
Up yonder hill the village murmur rose;
There, as I past with careless steps and slow,
The mingling notes came softened from below;
The swain responsive as the milk-maid sung,
The sober herd that lowed to meet their young;
The noisy geese that gabbled over the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school;
The watch-dog's voice that bay'd the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind;
These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.
For now the sounds of population fail,
No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale,
No busy steps the grass-grown foot-way tread,
But all the bloomy flush of life is fled.
All but you widowed, solitary thing,
That feebly bends beside the plashy spring;
She, wretched matron, forced, in age, for bread,
To strip the brook with mantling cresses spread,
To pick her wintry faggot from the thorn,
To seek her nightly shed, and weep till morn;
She only left of all the harmless train,
The sad historian of the pensive plain.
Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled,
And still where many a garden flower grows wild;
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher's modest mansion rose.
A man he was, to all the country dear,
And passing rich with forty pounds a year;
Remote from towns he ran his godly race,
Nor ere had changed, nor wished to change his place;
Unskilful he to fawn, or seek for power,
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More bent to raise the wretch'd than to rise.
His house was known to all the vagrant train,
He chid their wand'rings, but relieved their pain,
The long remembered beggar was his guest,
Whose beard descending swept his aged breast;
The ruined spend thrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay,
Sat by his fire* and talked the night away;
Wept over his wounds, or tales or sorrow done,
Shouldered his crutch and showed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe;
Careless their merits, or their faults to scan,
His pity gave ere charity began.
Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,
And even his failings leaned to Virtue's side;
But in his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt for all.
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries,
To tempt its new-fledg'd offspring to the skies;
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way.
Beside the bed where parting life was laid,
And sorrow, guilt, and pain, by turns dismayed,
The reverend champion stood. At his control,
Despair and anguish fled the struggling soul;
Comfort came down the trembling wretch to raise,
And his last fault'ring accents whispered praise.
At church, with meek and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools, who came to scoff remained to pray.
The service past, around the pious man,
With ready zeal* each honest rustic ran;
Even children followed with endearing wile,
And plucked his gown, to share the good man's smile.
His ready smile a parent's warmth expressed,
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distressed;
To them his heart, his love, his griefs were given,
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven.
As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm,
Though round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
Beside you straggling fence that skirts the way,
With blossomed furze unprofitably gay,
There, in his noisy mansion skilled to rule,
The village master taught his little school;
A man severe he was, and stern to view,
I knew him well, and every truant knew;
Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
The day's disasters in his morning face;
Full well they laughed with counterfeited glee
At all his jokes, for many a joke had he;
Full well the busy whisper circling round,
Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned;
Yet he was kind, or if severe in aught,
The love he bore to learning was in fault;
The village all declared how much he knew;
'Twas certain he could write, and cipher too;
Lands he could measure, terms and tides presage,
And even the story ran that he could guage:
In arguing too, the parson owned his skill,
For even though vanquished, he could argue still;
While words of learned length and thundering sound,
Amazed the gazing rustics ranged around,
And still they gazed and still the wonder grew,
That one small head could carry all he knew.
But past is all his fame. The very spot
Where many a time he triumphed is forgot.
Near yonder thorn that lifts its head on high,
Where once the sign-post caught the passing eye,
Low lies that house where nut-brown draughts inspired,
Where grey-beard mirth and smiling toil retired,
Where village statesmen talked with looks profound,
And news much older than their ale went round.
Imagination fondly stoops to trace
The parlour splendours of that festive place;
The white-wash'd wall, the nicely sanded floor,
The varnished clock that click'd behind the door;
The chest contrived a double debt to pay,
A bed by night, a chest of draw'rs by day;
The pictures placed for ornament and use,
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose;
The hearth, except when winter chilled the day,
With aspen boughs, and flowers and fennel gay,
While broken tea-cups, wisely kept for show,
Ranged over the chimney, glisten'd in a row.
Vain transitory splendour! could not all
Reprieve the tottering mansion from its fall!
Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impart
An hour's importance to the poor man's heart;
Thither no more the peasant shall repair,
To sweet oblivion of his daily care;
No more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,
No more the woodman's ballad shall prevail;
No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,
Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;
The host himself no longer shall be found
Careful to see the mantling bliss go round;
Nor the coy maid, half will^ng to be pressed,
Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest.
Yes! let the rich deride the proud disdain,
These simple blessings of the lowly train,
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art;
Spontaneous joys, where Nature has its play,
The soul adopts, and owns their firstborn sway;
Lightly they frolic over the vacant mind,
Unenvied* unmolested, unconfined.
But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
With all the freaks of wanton wealth arrayed,
In these* ere triflers half their wish obtain,
The toiling pleasure sickens into pain;
And, even while Fashion's brightest arts decoy,
The heart distrusting asks, if this be joy?
Ye friends to truth, ye statesmen who survey
The rich man's joys increase, the poor's decay,
It Is yours to judge, how wide the limits stand
Between a splendid and a happy land.
Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,
And shouting Folly hails them from her shore;
Hoards, even beyond the miser's wish abound,
And rich men flock from all the world around.
Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a name
That leaves our useful product still the same.
Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride,
Takes up a space that many poor supplied;
Space for his lake, his park's extended bounds,
Space for his horses, equipage and hounds;
The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth,
Has robbed the neighboring fields of half their growth,
His feat, where solitary sports are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green;
Around the world each needful product flies,
For all the luxuries the world supplies.
While thus the land adorned for pleasure all
In barren splendour feebly waits the fall.
As some fair female unadorned and plain,
Secure to please while youth confirms her reign,
Slights every borrowed charm that dress supplies,
Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes:
But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,
When time advances, and when lovers fail,
She then shines forth solicitous to bless,
In all the glaring impotence of dress.
Thus fares the land, by luxury betrayed,
In Nature's simplest charms at first arrayed,
But verging to decline, its splendors rise,
Its vistas strike, its palaces surprise;
While scourged by famine from the smiling land,
The mournful peasant leads his humble band;
And while he sinks, without one arm to save.
The country blooms -- a garden, and a grave.
Where then, ah, where shall poverty reside,
To 'scape the pressure of contiguous pride?
If to some common's fenceless limits strayed
He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade,
Those fenceless fields the sons of wealth divide,
And even the bare-worn common is denied.
If to the city sped -- What waits him there?
To see profusion that he must not share;
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined
To pamper luxury, and thin mankind;
To see each joy the sons of pleasure know,
Extorted from his fellow-creature's woe,
Here while the courtier glitters in brocade,
There the pale artist plies the sickly trade;
Here, while the proud their long-drawn pomps display,
There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.
The dome where Pleasure holds her midnight reign,
Here, richly dec^t, admits the gorgeous train;
Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,
The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.
Sure scenes like these no troubles ere annoy!
Sure these deno^e one universal joy!
Are these thy serious thoughts -- Ah, turn thine eyes
Where the poo^ houseless shivering female lies.
She once, perhaps, in village plenty blessed,
Has wept at ta^es of innocence distressed;
Her modest looks, the cottage might adorn,
Sweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn;
Now lost to all; her friends, her virtue fled,
Near her betrayer's door she lays her head,
And* pinched with cold, and shrinking from the shower,
With heavy heart deplores that luckless hour,
When idly first ambitious of the town,
She left her wheel and robes of country b^own.
Do thine, sweet ^UBURN, thine, the loveliest train,
Do thy fair tribes participate her pain?
Even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger led,
At proud men's doors they ask a little bread!
Ah, no. To distant climes, a dreary scene,
Where half the unequal world intrudes between,
Through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go,
Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe.
Far different there from all that charmed before,
The various terrors of that horrid shore;
Those blazing suns that dart a downward ray,
And fiercely shed intolerable day;
Those matted woods where birds forget to sing,
But silent bats in drowsy clusters cling;
Those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance crowned,
Where the dark scorpion gathers death around;
Where at each step the stranger fears to wake
The rattling terrors of the vengeful snake;
Where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey,
And savage men more murderous still than they;
While often in whirls the mad tornado flies,
Mingling the ravaged landscape with the skies.
Far different these from every former scene,
The cooling brook, the grassy vested green,
The breezy covert of the warbling grove,
That only sheltered thefts of harmless love.
Good Heaven! what sorrows gloom'd that parting day,
That called them from their native walks away;
When the poor exiles, every pleasure past.
Hung round the bowers, and fondly looked their last,
And took a long farewell, and wished in vain
For sea's like these beyond the western main;
And shudd'ring still to face the distant deep,
Returned and wept, and still returned to weep.
The good old sire, the first prepared to go
To newfound worlds, and wept for others woe;
But for himself, in conscious virtue brave,
He only wished for worlds beyond the grave;
His lovely daughter, lovelier in her tears,
The fond companion of his helpless years,
Silent went next, neglectful of her charms,
And left a lover's for a father's arms.
With louder plaints the mother spoke her woes,
And blessed the cot where every pleasure rose;
And kissed her thoughtless babes with many a tear,
And clap them close, in sorrow doubly dear;
Whilst her fond husband strove to lend relief
In all the silent manliness of grief.
O Luxury! thou cursed by Heaven's decree,
How ill exchanged are things like these for thee!
How do thy po^ions with insidious joy,
Diffuse their pleasures only to destroy!
Kingdoms by thee, to sickly greatness grown,
Boast of a florid vigor not their own.
At every draught more large and large they grow,
A bloated mass of rank unwieldy woe;
Till sapp'd their strength, and every part unsound,
Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.
Even now the devastation is begun,
And half the business of destruction done;
Even now, methinks, as pond'ring here I stand,
I see the rural Virtues leave the land.
Down where yon anch'ring vessel swells the sail
That idly waiting flaps with ev^ry gale,
Downward they move, a melancholy band,
Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.
Contented toil, and hospitable care,
And kind connubial tenderness, are there;
And piety with wishes placed above,
And steady loyalty, and faithful love.
And thou, sweet Poetry, thou loveliest maid,
Still first to fly where sensual joys invade;
Unfit in these degenerate times of shame,
To catch the heart, or strike for honest fame;
Dear charming nymph, neglected and decry'd,
My shame in clouds, my solitary pride.
Thou source of all my bliss, and all my woe,
That sound'st me poor at first, and keep'st me so;
Thou guide, by which the nobler arts excel,
Thou nurse of every virtue, fare thee well.
Farewell, and O! wherever thy voice be tried,
On Torno's cliffs, or Pambamarca's side,
Whether where equinoctial servours glow,
Or winter wraps the polar world in snow,
Still let thy voice, prevailing over time,
Redress the rigours of the inclement clime;
Aid slighted truth, with thy persuasive strain,
Teach erring man to spurn the rage of gain,
Teach him, that states of native strength possessed,
Though very poor, may still be very blessed;
That trade's proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As ocean sweeps the labored mole away:
While self-dependent power can time defy,
As rocks resist the billows and the sky.

