Mr. Barnard's ARTILLERY-ELECTION SERMON.

SERMON, PREACHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY
COMPANY, IN BOSTON, JUNE 1, 1789; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR ELECTION OF
OFFICERS.

BY THOMAS BARNARD, A. M. PASTOR OF THE NORTH CHURCH IN SALEM.

PRINTED IN BOSTON, BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, STATE-STREET. M,DCC,LXXXIX.

A SERMON, etc.
ISAIAH, xi. 13. THE ENVY ALSO OF EPHRAIM SHALL DEPART, AND THE ADVERSARIES OF
JUDAH SHALL BE CUT OFF: EPHRAIM SHALL NOT ENVY JUDAH, AND JUDAH SHALL NOT VEX
EPHRAIM. --
THE occasion of the present solemnity is evidently decent and pious. We cannot
behold these military gentlemen, incorporated for purposes valuable to society,
waiting upon God with humble supplication and thanksgiving on this day of their
Annual Election, without sensations of approbation, esteem, and pleasure. -- It
is owing to the blessing of the great and beneficent Being whom they are
assembled to worship, that, they have been sed, clothed, and refreshed during
the past year, and appear before him this day with the gaiety, elegance, and
activity of the soldier. And, whose patronage and favor should they more
earnestly desire than His, who can send forth his light and truth, and
influence them to whatever is great, honorable, and good? -- Never need ye be
ashamed to express yourselves in the language, and act in the spirit of a pious
and celebrated Chief -- " O come let us worship and bow down before the Lord
our Maker! For, the Lord God is a sun and shield; the Lord will give grace and
glory: No good thing will be withhold from those who walk uprightly. O Lord of
Hosts, blessed is the man who trusts in thee."

NOR does this solemnity only gain our approbation as a religious service, but
as a respectful memorial of the good sense, and piety of our Forefathers. Could
we now summons them from their graves, they would be pleased with our
attention, and with the warm feelings of parents and patriots would address us
-- "Shun our vices: Emulate our virtues. Let LEARNING, LIBERTY AND ARMS;
INDUSTRY, GOOD MORALS, AND RELIGION be established and encouraged amongst you
-- and GOD, the omnipotent patron of all good societies, will be your defense
and glory."

BUT, are there not those who will say -- How affrontive to worship the kind
and beneficent Governor of mankind clothed with the garments of war, and the
instruments of injury and death in our hands! This appeal immediately interests
the feelings, and commands the opinion of many, whom we cannot but love for
their meek and gentle disposition, against war in every form, and under every
condition. -- However speciously defended, it is, say they, abhorrent to God,
to the best feelings of human nature, and the amiable and charitable spirit of
the religion of Jesus Christ.

PEACE is a lovely object of contemplation to the human mind and imagination,
and her influences are most pleasant to our feelings. Under her benignant reign
security smiles in the countenances, and rejoices the hearts of mankind: The
Statesman quietly investigates the public interest, and gradually introduces
wise and beneficial regulations: Agriculture flourishes: Commerce prospers: The
Arts and Sciences improve: And, every cause almost conspires to propagate and
establish the principles and habits of public and private order, virtue and
happiness. -- Nor can it be dissembled that WAR is an evil most justly dreaded
by the thoughtful, just and humane in every society: -- In its mildest form it
greatly lessens enjoyment wherever it prevails, and subjects mankind to
distressing fears and sufferings: And, in its harshest, like the storm of
Heaven, spreads darkness over the most pleasant and cheerful prospects, and
marks its progress with ravage, destruction, and misery. Humanity weeps, and
refuses to be comforted, when she beholds this scourge of the world reigning
over any region of the earth. -- The inhabitants forsake the occupations of
peaceful life, and fly hither and thither, exposed to all the distresses of
insecurity and want: The fields cease to blossom like the rose, and become
barren and desolate: The sweet charities of life fail; vice and disorder reign
uncontrouled: And, wherever we look, scenes of ruin and misery astonish our
minds, and pain our hearts. -- From this comparative view, we may be
immediately convinced that Peace is more eligible than War; and much more
agreeable to the spirit of that gentle and beneficent religion which was
introduced into the world proclaiming " Peace on earth: Good will toward men."
But shall we hence say, The profession of the SOLDIER is an unjustifiable
profession? -- And WAR never innocently and laudably entered into, and
prosecuted by societies? -- Truth is seldom discerned through the medium of
feeling. In every important decision, wise and good men will place themselves
under the influence of feeling, only when guided and corrected by impartial
reason, and the infallible instructions of divine revelation. -- Perhaps, in
this situation, and under such light and instruction, we shall be convinced WAR
is our certain inheritance in the present condition of human nature, just as
many other of the evils of life are -- That the permission of War cannot upon
any scheme of religion be proved more inconsistent with the perfections of the
righteous and benevolent Governor of mankind, than the permission of other
natural and moral evils: -- Yea, like them, is much ameliorated by his
efficient hand, and rendered, contrary to its nature, productive of good
effects: -- And upon the whole that War, in certain situations, and under
certain conditions, is not fatal to the christian character, and our hope in
the glorious promises of the gospel.

BEFORE I proceed to enlarge upon these observations, I would mention that the
following truths are taken for granted -- that we are under the cognizance and
government of an almighty and perfect Being, who has made known his will to us,
not only by reason and experience, but by Jesus Christ, and expects we should
venerate and obey it; and that man is a rational and accountable creature, in
some proper sense master of his own actions, and amenable for his conduct at
his bar. -- If we are not under the government of God, and are not accountable,
then all actions and courses of action become indifferent, and it is mere
idleness to spend any time in speculation upon their nature and consequences.
But allowing these maxims to be just, such investigations we must conceive
immediately proper, for they may be of infinite consequence to our case of
mind, and our improvement and worth.

1. THE ULTIMATE SOURCE of War is those principles and passions which
experience, observation, and universal history prove actuate mankind when
formed into different societies, and opposed to each other by rivalship, and
injuries, arising from mutual endeavors for superiority and lucrative
advantages -- Those principles and passions which govern them when
fellow subjects of the same civil community, after they are divided into
parties, irritated by neglects and wrongs, or seduced by the slattering
promises of ambition and power to attempt preeminence. But the PROXIMATE SOURCE
of War is that separation of nations and individuals which opposes them, and
inspires them with hostile intentions. -- Until a division takes place between
them, leading them to such measures as are affrontive, and will in the general
opinion, either well grounded, or artificially raised, be ruinous to their
honor and interests, those fierce principles in human nature which rouse to
resistance and injury lie inactive, as the various springs and wheels of a
machine, until set in motion by the power which is to govern them. Were mankind
individually enlightened, or under the government of enlightened leaders --
were they humble, mild, equitable and benevolent, or under the supreme
direction of rulers governed by a just and beneficent temper, War would be no
more. The different societies on earth would form into one grand and peaceful
monarchy; or if they continued separate would live together like independent
families loving, and beloved -- Subjects of the same society, like affectionate
children of the same family, would sweetly unite together in every office of
justice and kindness. -- But this is not the present condition of mankind; nor
has it ever been their condition, if we may believe the historical registers of
the times before us. The great body of mankind, and those who control and
govern them, may, in the cool hours of retirement and reflection, judge the
situation of universal peace and love delightful: But when they enter the world
and begin to act, they are not influenced by such agreeable sentiments. Their
understandings persuade them very differently, when concerned with men and
things, than when engaged with speculative notions, and the pleasing pictures
of fancy and imagination. Mankind do not choose to live together under one
denomination, to be governed by the same laws, and have the same interests; but
to dwell separately, govern themselves by different civil constitutions, and
pursue different interests, though they cannot without mutual opposition and
injury. Members of the same community will divide into inveterate parties; and
will often pursue their opposite measures until they dye each others garments
in blood. Or, if we suppose their choice is not the cause of their division
into separate nations and parties, then we must affirm it owing to the
ordination of our great Creator, who will do all his pleasure throughout
universal nature. -- But whether mankind are in a separate state by their own
choice, or the will of their Creator, it is their division which awakes and
gives force to those principles and passions which have in every age of the
world, however ignorant and barbarous, civilized and well instructed, been a
source of wars and fightings. The history of the people mentioned in our text,
will exemplify the operation of human passions between different nations,
nearly enough situated to be politically connected; and the same nation divided
into two powerful parties. For, notwithstanding EPHRAIM and JUDAH were now
different nations, yet they had the feelings of parties in the same nation. --
They originally descended from the same stock, possessed a common territory,
and were fellow subjects of the same dominion, though they had separated upon
political dissensions; and supposed very naturally they had an equal claim to
superiority on the inheritance God had given them, if they could acquire it by
art or force. -- JUDAH enjoyed the most distinguished advantages in consequence
of their separation: -- They were more numerous, and possessed the largest, the
most pleasant and fruitful part of the land -- Moreover, they had amongst them
the only authorized worship of God, which was esteemed an invaluable blessing.
-- What was the effect upon EPHRAIM of their more desirable condition? -- They
beheld their more respectable and happy neighbors with a degree of envy which
soured their minds, irritated their passions, and disposed them to improve
every means which promised to abase them. What was the effect of their restless
disposition and injurious conduct upon JUDAH? -- They looked down upon their
feeble and impatient enemy with haughty and resentful airs, and exerted their
policy and power to vex and destroy them. In this general state of sentiment
and feeling, the great body of their people were easily inflamed with the rage
of war, whenever their influential men were led by their ambition, their
private interests and private enmities, their love of power and same, or indeed
the passions and humors of their near connections to wish they should be: And,
events were often taking place in consequence of their general situation, and
frequent commerce with each other, which gave them room under the cover of
patriotick declarations to excite a spirit of animosity satiated only with
injury and bloodshed. Hence their frequent inroads, and endeavors to perplex,
distress, and humble each other.

BUT ye will ask, how can this constitution of things be reconciled to the
supreme government of perfect rectitude, wisdom, and benevolence? How can so
powerful, righteous, and good a Being decree or permit human situations and
passions to have so baneful an influence upon human conduct and enjoyment? --
The fact is -- it has taken place by his supreme agency, or with his
permission. -- " He makes peace, and creates evil -- When he gives
quietness, who then can make trouble? And when be hides his face, who then can
behold him, whether it be done against a nation or against a man only? And, why
must we suppose this constitution militates with the excellence of his nature?
The most formidable reason we can urge against its introduction is, That it
places man lower upon the scale of virtue and enjoyment than he otherwise would
be. This is allowed: -- Were mankind governed by the principles of union, and
did the motives of piety, justice, and benevolence reign in them with an
influence destructive to every kind of injury and war, they would be much more
amiable, lovely, and virtuous than they now are; they would be free from many
inconveniences and miseries which they now feel, and enjoy a degree of
happiness which they now feebly imagine. But this is not their condition. They
have so large a share of the brutal united with the divine in their nature, as
to continue them hitherto in a far less respectable and happy state of being.
Still, this is only saying, man is less perfect, and less happy than God might
have made him. -- But, " Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus?" What arrogance and impiety? -- May not he who freely
gives unto his creatures capacities of worth and means of enjoyment, give them
in the proportion he pleases, provided existence is on the whole a blessing;
not a curse, but in consequence of our voluntary ill-behaviour? -- Must he give
in the highest degree he is able, or be chargeable with want of wisdom, with
injustice and cruelty? -- Consider whither this reasoning leads you -- If the
Deity had acted in the spirit of this principle, that immense variety of
creatures he has made, filling up in nice gradation the space between the
humblest insect, and the most exalted spirit, and displaying every possible
degree of activity, intelligence, virtue and happiness would have failed. There
would have been but one race of creatures, and that, " next to the throne of
God." Judge ye which scheme gives us the most lively exhibition of the almighty
power, and infinite wisdom of God; and admits the greatest sum of happiness and
display of benevolence?

IT is true, War is a source of very distressing evils. Countries exposed to
every kind of injury from a mad and lawless soldiery. -- Those once happy in
the tender connections of life, and easy in a sufficiency to supply their wants
and conveniences -- mourning with pathetick exclamations of grief their lost
relatives and departed property -- are very affecting objects. We tenderly
sympathize with them, and deprecate War as the w^^ judgment with which a just
God afflicts his creatures. -- But let us remember, in this very painful
situation, that God in the midst of judgments forgets not mercy, and often from
excessive evils produces very valuable blessings. -- The violence and misery we
so sensibly feel and pity, may be productive of very important and happy
events: -- They may secure freedom to a people, depressed and miserable, yield
them immediately the most exquisite sensations of satisfaction and pleasure,
and lay a foundation for their public worth and felicity which shall last for
ages. -- They may act like very powerful and painful medicine in the human body
-- produce entire and beneficial charges -- rouse societies thoughtless,
enervated, and abandoned to consideration, and influence them to a change of
manners which shall render them respectable and prosperous. -- They sometimes
place societies incurably vicious, before mankind, affecting examples of the
sad consequence of impious and unsocial manners under the government of God;
and very persuasively urge those which behold them to shun their profligacy,
that they may avoid their ruin. The immediate effects also of the operations of
war, which we are apt to conceive evil, and only evil, are not so. They are
productive of transport of mind, as well as dejection of spirits; very lively
pleasures, as well as very excruciating pains. The stormed and plundered city
is a scene of distress and anguish, but the conquering army is the seat of
congratulation and cheerful festivity. The losses of friends and hard-earned
property of which the vanquished complain with such woeful countenances and
animated expressions of grief; the victorious count their gain, and celebrate
as very signal favors. -- The extreme poverty which overtakes some from want
of employment, is balanced by the new departments of business which war opens,
and the distinction and plenty with which they bless those who prosecute them.
-- It is evident then of war, as it is of many other causes of human suffering,
that it is not a clear and unmixed evil; but by the indulgence of God made
productive of kind effects to balance in a degree the pain which, in many
instances, it occasions.

TAKE the whole variety of human situations, and we shall find no one state so
indulgent to vice, as to exclude entirely respectable characters, useful and
divine virtues. War is productive of much depravity and vice. -- In the state
of war domestic and civil government are much relaxed; and there is such a
continued succession of objects passing before us which engage our imaginations
and passions, and are connected with our most valuable interests, as takes off
our attention from those interesting subjects of religion and morals which
deserve our constant reverence, and should command our constant obedience. The
usual course of things alters; and the alteration has a pernicious influence
upon many. Acquisitions of property and distinction in the natural state of
things are gradually made: And before we make them in any distinguishing
degree, we are prepared to receive them with equal minds, and the resolution of
a wife and good improvement of them. But in war prosperity often comes upon us
by surprise, we are instantly rich and powerful men -- the suddenness of the
elevation intoxicates us, and we act without discretion or virtue. -- Adversity
also, in the natural course of things, advances upon us gradually, and we are
prepared to receive it with firmness, before it seizes us with violence. But,
in war, adversity often falls upon us at an unexpected moment -- distracts our
minds -- breaks our spirits -- and occasions us to blaspheme Divine Providence,
and abandon ourselves without restraint to disreputable and ruinous vices. --
Yet war has not universally this ill operation. -- Its uncertainties and
changes, its prosperities and adversities, tend powerfully to teach us our
dependence upon God, who rules over all, and the insecure nature of human
happiness -- firmness, equanimity, sympathy and compassion, those wisest and
best of lessons. Some there are, who improve War to this worthy purpose, and
make advances in whatever amends, adorns and dignifies the human man character.
The moral and religious prospect around, may to the serious and good be waste,
deformed, and frightful, but there will still be some objects of superior
worth and beauty, as if interspersed on purpose to compensate for the general
scene. -- Particularly we may observe, that the state of war creates characters
of the most brilliant qualities, and extensive usefulness in the judgment of
mankind; and which do not cease with war to be celebrated and beneficial, but
continue through the periods of peace to deserve the attention which is paid
them. The characters which are formed of courage, magnanimity, penetrating
forefight, and a masterly command of the passions and actions of men, are those
which we look upon with the most partial fondness, and unite to address with
the most unaffected praise. These arise amidst the dangers and perplexities of
war as in their proper soil, and are manured and perfected by its progress. Nor
do they cease to live and act when war ceases: They continue in the state of
peace, and are frequently the chief guardians and conservators of the public
interest, when the members of society, in general, are by the seducing
influence of ease and security, wrapped up entirely within themselves, and
account those expenses hard, and services laborious, which the existence,
prosperity and splendor of the State require. -- I feel a degree of pride in
exemplifying this remark from the history of our own country, which I know my
hearers will approve. The late war produced -- Politicians endued with
admirable penetration of mind, and firmness and perseverance of spirit; who
guided us through a situation of eminent hazards with masterly skill, and
established us in a condition of safety, and growing prosperity and happiness,
which nothing will destroy but our own imprudence and folly -- Soldiers, from
Generals to the inferior officers, who displayed the most applauded
qualifications of their station, and won in action the fairest wreaths of
military honor and renown. -- Politicians, who yet have their country near
their hearts, and are unweariedly studying its interests, and laboring to
render it wise and happy -- Soldiers, who disbanded, though unpaid and
injuriously censured; retired to their homes without clamor; and have hitherto
remarkably practiced the virtues which adorn civil life, and manifested those
public dispositions which prove they will yet, should occasion require, be a
firm and intrepid band to support and defend their country.

THESE reflections tend to satisfy our minds with the divine permission of war,
and to render us more composed under it as an evil. -- Yet we may conceive war,
notwithstanding, opposed in all its forms to the spirit of christianity; and,
not only so, but that those cannot be in any sense the true disciples of Jesus
Christ, who patronize, support, or personally bear part in it. -- Those wars
entered into by ancient and modern princes for the mere purpose of gratifying
their ambition, pride, and humor, are abhorrent altogether to the just and
benevolent religion which we profess. -- The abilities of such persons may be
exalted, and their actions splendid, but they are the foes of mankind, and
richly deserve the accumulated pain and misery they have brought upon their
fellow creatures. -- But War which has for its object the security of our
lives, liberties, and estates, and is closed whenever they are secured, has
been conceived by Christians almost universally JUSTIFIABLE SELF DEFENSE. They
have conceived duty and honor call upon them to defend themselves when
injuriously attacked; and that Heaven requires not submission to violence and
robbery, until all their efforts are insufficient to repel them. -- Still is it
not true that Christianity was designed to restrain all those corrupt and
malignant passions which occasion discord, injury and war? -- Would not this
pure and charitable institution, if it had its perfect work upon mankind
generally, put an entire close to war, and establish the supreme dominion of
peace? -- It would undoubtedly, and thereby vastly increase the worth and
happiness of men. -- But the complete operation of this divine religion is not
consistent with the present state of human nature. -- Perfect Christians must
retreat from the world to exemplify their principles. We cannot live in this
state without allowing some movements of resentment, and adopting, at times,
the vigorous means of defense. A very considerable part of mankind are not
Christians, and justify themselves in all the practices of war: Nor would they
fail with eager zeal to improve the non-resistance of Christian countries to
their complete subjugation and misery. -- Most of those who call themselves the
disciples of Christ, notwithstanding they are in some degree influenced by the
just and beneficent spirit of his religion, yet are so far under the government
of selfish desires, that they will privately and publicly attack each other,
and if they are able, wrest from them their possessions and conveniences, and
convert them to their own use. -- Yet we may not say because we are not perfect
Christians, we are altogether unchristian; or, because Christianity does not
produce all those great and good effects in our age, it is capable of producing
in a different situation, therefore it is not a blessing. -- The religion of
Jesus has a real and good influence upon individuals and societies now, though
it has not its fullest and best effects. It renders them more just, equitable,
and humane than they otherwise would be; and as it gradually increases its
power over the minds and feelings and manners of men, becomes a richer and more
important blessing. -- Had christianity a sovereign influence, our situation
would be entirely altered. We should be supported by its single operation
without the influence of resentment, love of life and property, and the public
principles which are in our nature: But until this sovereign influence
commences, we must be indebted for our preservation and safety partly to their
exercise; and aim at approving ourselves the faithful servants of God, not by
rooting them out, but by preserving their operation within the bound of that
great command, enregistered not only in the gospel, but in every mind, "ALL
THINGS, WHATSOEVER YE WOULD THAT MEN SHOULD DO TO YOU, DO YE EVEN SO TO THEM."

WAR being considered as the source of mischief to societies, and misery to the
human race, we have reason to bless God whenever its destructive consequences
are lessened, in any degree, by his merciful influence. Notwithstanding all the
alleviating circumstances which attend the distresses of war, those societies
have the most substantial reasons for blessing God (who appoints the bounds of
our habitations) which conclude upon the best grounds they shall not be
frequently visited with this cruel scourge. -- There is in this respect a
difference between the situations of the nations which people the earth. --
And, may we not suppose, we are favored in our allotment, when we estimate its
worth with immediate reference to the frequency of war? -- Many circumstances
conspire to raise and establish the pleasant idea in our minds.

OUR NATIONAL GOVERNMENT strengthens this conception of our situation. The more
thoroughly and impartially we contemplate this plan of government, the more
fully we shall be persuaded it is well calculated to promote our public and
private safety and felicity. To give us justice, order, and peace at home, and
growing reputation abroad -- To lessen the danger of internal dissension and
foreign war, and put in action all the causes of national honor and
prosperity. -- It secures us all our rights, as men and christians: And has
within itself the strong principles of wise self-regulation -- It will be
observed in all its motions with watchful jealousy by our State governments,
and powerful individuals -- Many of the most active causes will unite to render
it permanent and beneficial. -- And may we not justly hope such a large
description of the people for whose good it was instituted will submit to its
regular administration as to render it an established and efficient government?
-- Will they readily sacrifice a character distinguished for wisdom and a
degree of choice in their governments never exhibited in the world before? Will
they readily throw up probable liberty and happiness, and plunge into the ocean
of uncertain events? -- Nor need we fear but this government will ever be
attended with the best blessings of Heaven while the maxims of its ILLUSTRIOUS
PRESIDENT are adopted as sacred maxims of conduct by its several branches: They
are these, and should be recorded on monuments of brass in full view of all
governing bodies of men throughout the world -- "There is no truth more
thoroughly established, than that there exists in the economy and course of
nature, an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness -- between duty and
advantage -- between the genuine maxims of an honest and magnanimous policy,
and the solid rewards of public prosperity and felicity." -- "A trust of the
greatest magnitude is committed to this Legislature, and the eyes of the world
are upon you. -- Your Country expects from the result of your deliberations, in
concurrence with the other branches of government, consideration abroad, and
contentment at home -- prosperity, order, justice, peace, and liberty -- And
may God Almighty's providence assist you to answer their just expectations." --
With high anxiety we beheld this EDIFICE gradually rising! How sincerely did we
rejoice upon its completion! -- May it be a TEMPLE consecrated to enlightened
liberty, mild and equal legislation, and all the means of public tranquillity
and happiness! May its CHIEF PRIESTS ever be famed for their enlarged minds,
their manly and liberal principles, and execute their high powers so as to
render themselves most justly the veneration and delight of this nation -- And
its MINISTERING SERVANTS an assembly of men who have wisdom to discern, and
magnanimity to pursue its true interests! -- O THOU GOD OF THE UNIVERSE, who
art wiser than the wisest, and the almighty patron of all good societies -- all
space is thy temple and thou condescendest, when particularly present in any
part of thy creation; yet be graciously present at all times in this TEMPLE
made with hands: and may its statutes and commandments put an end to the sound
of the trumpet, and the alarm of war in our borders, and bless us with all that
can render a people free, virtuous, and happy. Again: The comparative strength,
between these United States, and the foreigners in their neighborhood, render
it improbable that they will give frequent occasion for war; and a solicitude
to avoid embroiling themselves with the powerful European nations of which they
are colonies, will render our government particularly cautious to avoid every
thing which justly irritates. The jealousy in the European nations of each
other, which is ever awake, will never permit any one of them, was a scheme of
the kind practicable, to make conquest, and extend its dominion here. Was any
particular nation to adventure this plan, other nations in union with us would
frustrate it. -- Moreover, the distance of Europe from this Continent, and the
number and warlike disposition of the inhabitants of these States, render the
difficulties of successfully preventing war in opposition to them, on their own
ground, almost insuperable. -- Thus we reason upon the subject, and are
confirmed in the very pleasing idea that wars will not be frequent amongst us.
May God fulfill the grateful expectation!.

III. -- BUT, we can never reason with certainty of those events in which the
passions of men have very considerable decision. -- This people intelligent and
free, and now capable of proving to mankind what they have never seen proved
before -- That communities of men are capable of deliberating upon forms of
government, choosing those which are friendly to all the rights which men can
enjoy in society, and yet of establishing an AUTHORITY which shall control
their actions destructive to the social state -- may yet grow mad; and in their
phrenzy despise the warning voice of wisdom and the calls of reputation, and
place themselves before mankind an affecting example of a people ruined by
their own intemperance. -- European Nations may become so jealous of a rising
people, which let alone may rival them in power and commerce, as to forget
their jealousies of each other -- and suffer any state amongst them which
chooses, to extend conquest and dominion upon our territory unrestrained. -- Our
own government may become proud and tyrannical, and aim at prostrating the
rights and liberties of this people before them. An ARMED FORCE is the alone
effectual mean of completing either of these purposes, or of successfully
counteracting them. The seditious subverters of government, if they cannot
secure their wishes by private practices, appeal to arms -- Conquest and
dominion are gained by arms -- Tyrannical power is established by arms -- Nor
can a people defend their territory, or resist an assuming government but by
arms -- "All authority which is not supported by power is nothing but an empty
name." -- Is not then the continuance of this COMPANY, and of every other body
of men designed to keep alive the spirit of arms and diffuse military
knowledge, a valuable measure? -- It is true, this Company when it was first
formed was more immediately beneficial than at present: Yet now, by their
example and advice, they may greatly aid and prosper the military arrangements
of the government. -- In this design they should vigorously unite with his
EXCELLENCY, our Commander in Chief -- and with all other wise and patriotick
men throughout the State. -- A MILITIA is said to be the only legitimate
defense of a free people; it is the only defense which our free governments
will allow us. -- Shall any then speak contemptibly of a Militia? Shall any
fail using their utmost exertions that our's may be regular and well trained?
-- It is the safeguard, under God, in desperate circumstances, of the fair
inheritance which our fathers have left us -- of our government and our
religion. -- Our young men will act worthily in entering into it, and exerting
their best abilities to render it truly respectable, and a substantial security
to their country. -- Nor can I conceive why those of the first rank and
distinction should refuse its services and honors. -- It is the only legal
defense of the land in which they dwell -- Its duties serve to give strength to
their bodies, and elegance to their form and manners -- Its commands give them
rank and popularity with their fellow citizens; and render them capable of
yielding very essential services to their country in peace and war; and of
rising to its first honors. -- The VETERAN GENERAL who has seen long service,
and dignified his station, refuses not to command them. -- But I have tired
your patience and will conclude. --

IV. -- VARIOUS causes have united in our age to render mankind much less
ferocious, and war much less cruel and destructive, than they have been ages
before us. -- The celebrated nations of antiquity made war their alone
business, and it was prosecuted by them with a degree of barbarity which
offends us. A few centuries back, men comparatively uncivilized, without
commerce, arts and science, and under religious impressions, falsely styled
christian, worse than none; in a state of national government too feeble to
control their violence, to render them more reasonable, or to correct and
soften their tempers and manners -- made war their great employment, and chose
it as their first happiness. -- The haughty Noble had no business but when
engaged in feuds with neighbors, or his prince; and his vassals and dependents
followed him from inclination, or the fear of punishment. -- But the energy
which has been acquired by national governments, the progress of civilization,
that spirit of commerce, arts and science, and the influence of the religion of
peace, better understood, have made in this respect an important revolution in
the world. -- War is now seldom entered into but upon necessities of State
which render it unavoidable; and is prosecuted with a degree of temperance and
humanity which does our age honor. -- Let us most sincerely bless God, who
determines the times and seasons, for this favorable alteration in the
condition of the human race! -- The CAUSES of it exist amongst us. May we aid
their influence with all the zeal consistent with our security and happiness.
-- May we with enterprise and industry devote ourselves to commerce. --
Cultivate the arts which will increase our conveniences, adorn and enrich us.
-- Fosterour UNIVERSITY which is our honor, and all seminaries and schools of
learning. By our conversation, examples, and actions, add that strength to our
SUPREME GOVERNMENT which will enable it to preserve its various parts in
harmony and order, and render us respectable in the consideration of other
nations. Especially may we submit to the influence of that divine religion "
which is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated: Full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality and without hypocrisy" -- that we may aid in
bringing on the happy period which the enraptured prophet describes with all
the force of strong and beautiful figures -- " When knowledge and virtue shall
cover the earth as the waters cover the sea;" "when the wolf shall dwell with
the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the
young lion, and the falling together, and a little child shall lead them --
when they shall not hurt or destroy in all God's holy mountain." By thus doing,
though this happy state of things may not be produced in our day, we shall
secure ourselves through the constitution of grace, established by our blessed
Redeemer, as individuals, that peace which passes understanding, which the
world can neither give or take away; which will render us happy in life, enable
us to triumph over death, and prepare us for a blessed immortality -- As a
society we shall place ourselves under the patronage and blessing of Almighty
God, " our light will break forth as the morning, and our health will spring
forth speedily -- our righteousness will go before us; and the glory of the
Lord will be our rere-ward."

May God be ever with us, and prosper us,

AMEN.

