THE DOCTRINE OF PARTICULAR ELECTION AND FINAL PERSEVERANCE, EXPLAINED and
VINDICATED. By Isaac Backus, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

Yea, let God be true, but every Man a Liar. --
The Election obtained it, and the Rest were blinded.
Romans iii. 4. xi. 7. BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, at No. 53,
Cornhill. MDCCLXXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TEACHERS who turn grace into lasciviousness, have men's persons in admiration
because of advantage. Jude 4, 16. With such, nothing can be too bad to say of
any who expose their darling errors, while they will not allow us to be
charitable, if we cannot think them all to be good men, whom they admire. But
in what fellows, I have endeavored to open principles and facts plainly, and
to leave every reader to judge of men by their fruits, and not by their
plausible pretenses.

Middleborough, July 25, 1789.
PARTICULAR ELECTION AND FINAL PERSEVERANCE VINDICATED.
CONTROVERSY is generally complained of, and peace is earnestly sought; but
often in a way, which denies to all others the liberty we claim for ourselves.
The revealed will of God is the only perfect law of liberty; but how little is
it believed and obeyed by mankind. Both the Hebrew and Christian churches, were
to be wholly governed by it; and when the first King of Israel presumed to
violate a plain command of God, and then thought to atone for it by acts of
worship, he was guilty of rebellion, which is as the sin of witchcraft. 1 Samuel
xv. 23. And in like way Mystery Babylon, by her sorceries, has deceived all
nations, and in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of all
that were slain upon the earth. Rev. xviii. 23, 24. Yet these extensive terms
are so limited by carnal reasoners, that none of them, in any nation, will
allow themselves to be of that bloody city. And at the same time they are for
extending general words of grace, beyond any limits; and are ready to accuse us
with making God deceitful, if we hold that he did not design the merits of his
Son, equally for all mankind. If we enquire then, why all are not saved? the
general answer is, that they would not receive that salvation; or if they did
for a while, and then turned away from it, God rejects and destroys them
therefore. We readily grant that God always rewards the righteous, and never
destroys any for any thing but sin and iniquity; but this cannot content many,
without we will allow that grace has put power into the wills of all mankind,
to become righteous, and to obtain salvation, when they shall please to set
about it in earnest. The fruit of which is, that men neglect the great
salvation, because they love darkness rather than light. Yea, every one that
does evil, hates the light. Heb. ii. 3. John iii. 19, 20. And when any are
brought to obey the truth, and so come to the light, every art is made use of,
to get them into darkness again, if possible.

This has been remarkably the case in the southern parts of America. Many of
their teachers were so dark as to swear profanely, drink to excess, and follow
gaming; and at the same time to preach up do and live to their people. But the
light of the pure gospel, produced some reformation among them above forty
years ago; and it has greatly increased since 1768, as I was well informed,
when I was called to travel and preach in Virginia and North Carolina, last
winter. But after this reformation had spread extensively, the followers of Mr.
John Wesley introduced his writings against particular election and final
perseverance, and thereby greatly obstructed the work. I was therefore
requested to publish a brief answer thereto. His first piece on that subject,
was published above fifty years ago, under the title of Free grace, and it was
closed with a hymn called, Universal redemption, and therein he says,

Thine eye surveyed the fallen race,
When sunk in sin they lay,
Their misery called for all thy grace,
But Justice stopped the way.
Mercy the fatal bar removed,
Thy only Son it gave,
To save a world so dearly loved,
A sinful world to save.
For every man he tasted death,
He suffered once for all,
He calls as many souls as breathe,
And all may hear the call.
A power to choose, a will to obey,
Freely his grace restores;
We all may find the living way,
And call the Savior ours.
He denied that man had any natural liberty of will left, after the fall, until
it was restored by grace. This he more explicitly did in a pamphlet on
predestination, election and reprobation, published in 1776; and said upon it,
"We believe, that in the moment Adam fell, he had no freedom of will left; but
that God, when of his own free grace he gave the promise of a Savior to him
and his posterity, graciously restored to mankind a liberty and power to accept
of proffered salvation." P. 16. But if the fall took all natural liberty of
choice from man, until grace restored it, then the fall released him from the
authority of the law of God, as it was first given to him, and he never has
been under it since, but under grace. The beasts are not under that law,
because they never had the powers of thinking and choice, as rational creatures
have; and if men are not under that law, what are they better then beasts? Yea,
do they not corrupt themselves more than brute beasts, that know and obey their
owners? Jude, 10. Isaiah i. 2 -- 4. And if all freedom of will is from grace,
then it is only by grace that any have power to sin against God, as none can
sin against him who have no natural liberty of will. This opinion is most
plainly confuted by the case of the fallen angels, who never had any grace
revealed to them; yet the devil sins from the beginning, and all wilful
sinners are children of the devil, in opposition to all those who are born of
God. John iii. 8 -- 10. In the same book Mr. Wesley says, "1. God's love was
the cause of his sending his Son to die for sinners. 2. Christ's dying for
sinners is the cause of the gospel's being preached. 3. The preaching of the
gospel is the cause (or means) of our believing. 4. Our believing is the cause
or condition of our justification. 5. The knowing ourselves justified through
his blood, is the cause of our love to Christ. 6. Our love to Christ is the
cause of our obedience to him. 7. Our obedience to Christ is the cause of his
becoming the author of eternal salvation to us."
P. 8.

And is not this a going about to establish our own righteousness? For Moses
describes the righteousness which is of the law, That the man who does those
things, shall live by them. This is a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. Romans x. 2 -- 5. Mr. Wesley goes on to say, "I shall now briefly show
the dreadful absurdities that follow from saying Christ died only for the
elect. If Christ died not for all, then unbelief is no sin in them that finally
perish; seeing there is not any thing for those men to believe unto salvation
for whom Christ died not. 2. If Christ died not for all men, then it would be a
sin in the greatest part of mankind to believe he died for them; seeing it
would be to believe a lie. 3. If Christ died not for those that are damned,
then they are not damned for unbelief; otherwise you say, that they are damned
for not believing a lie. 4. If Christ died not for all, then those who obey
Christ, by going and preaching the gospel to every creature, as glad tidings of
grace and peace, of great joy to all people, do sin thereby, in that they go to
most people with a lie in their mouth. 5. If Christ died not for all men, then
God is not in earnest in calling all men every where to repent; for what good
could repentance do those, for whom Christ died not? 6. If Christ died not for
all, then why does he say, He is not willing that any should perish? Surely he
is willing, yea resolved that most men should perish; else he would have died
for them also. 7. How shall God judge the world by the man Christ Jesus, if
Christ did not die for the world? or how shall he judge them according to the
gospel, when there was never any gospel or mercy for them?"
P. 14.

Answer, If Christ died with a design to save all men, why are not all saved?
Can the devil cheat him of a great part of his purchase? Or can men defeat his
merciful designs? No, say many, he died for all, and he will finally save all.
Others go farther, and conclude that a God of infinite goodness could not give
existence to any creature that shall be miserable without end; but that he will
finally deliver every child of Adam from hell, though many of them will be
tormented therein for ages of ages. But how is their deceit here discovered?
Fallen angels were as really the creatures of God, as fallen men; yet no
salvation was ever revealed for them, but they are reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. And this is a clear
evidence against ungodly men, who turn grace into lasciviousness. Jude 4, 6.
God was so far from ever proclaiming atonement to all men, without any
exception, that he said, The soul that does ought presumptuously, the same
reproacheth the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people. And
for such presumption, Korah and his company perished most terribly. Number. xv.
30. xvi. 1 -- 3, 31 -- 34. And teachers who privily brought damnable heresies
into the Christian church, were presumptuous and self-willed, under the name of
liberty. They despised government, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. 2
Peter, ii. 1, 10, 19. Jude 11. For if the inability of debtors and criminals,
could release them from the authority of the laws, until rulers would give them
power to bring the government to their own terms, how would all dominion be
despised! These filthy dreamers have now filled the world with Babylonian
confusion. Jude 8. The Jews called it heresy in Paul, to believe in and obey
Jesus, as a lawgiver above Moses. Acts xxiv. 14. And this is the first place
where the word heresy is used in the Bible; and if we observe what is said in
the last chapter in it, of every man who shall add to, or take from its words,
must we not conclude that all men who do so, and violently impose their
inventions upon others, are guilty of heresy? The head of the church of Rome
assumed God's place in the church, and exalted himself above God, who never
could violate his promise or his oath, or entice any into sin; and how justly
are all those given up to strong delusion, who practice either of these evils?
2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 12. Heb. vi. 18. James i. 13 -- 15. And how happy should we
soon be, if these iniquities were excluded from our land?

True believers are so far from presuming upon the secret designs of God, that
when the same are revealed, they dare not make his designs, but his laws, the
rule of their conduct. Though his design of removing Saul, and making David
King over Israel, was clearly revealed, yet David refused to kill Saul, when
greatly provoked thereto, because he had no direction to do it. Neither did
David assume the regal power over Israel, until each tribe freely received him
as their King by a solemn covenant. But the envious Jews, no sooner had it
declared to them, that Jesus was to die for that nation, than from that day
forth, they took counsel together for to put him to death. John xi. 53. Hereby
we may see the plain difference between true believers and reprobates. For unto
the pure all things are pure; but unto the defiled and unbelieving, is nothing
pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. They profess that they
know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate. Titus i. 15, 16. In this way, teachers who turn
grace into lasciviousness, deny the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Jude 4. But many are deceived by them, because in words they profess to know
him. Since Christ was exalted to the right hand of the Father, his only priests
upon earth, are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. -- Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible,
by the word of God which lives and abides forever. These are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that they
should show forth the praises of him who has called them out of darkness into
his mavelous light. 1 Peter, i. 2, 23. ii. 5, 9. But Mr. Wesley, in his piece
on predestination, election, and reprobation, says, "They were chosen through
belief of the truth, and called to believe it by the gospel; therefore they
were not chosen before they believed, much less before they had a being." P. 5.
And in his sermon from Romans viii. 29, 30, he says, "Good looking on all ages
from the creation to the consummation as a moment, and seeing at once whatever
is in the hearts of all the children of men, knows every one that does or does
not believe in every age or nation. Yet what he knows, whether faith or
unbelief, is in no wife caused by his knowledge. Men are as free in believing
or not believing, as if he did not know it at all." P. 6.

I readily grant that his knowledge does not cause any sin, which is altogether
of the creature. The angels who fell, kept not their first estate, but left
their own habitation. Jude 6. And those who stood were elect angels. 1 Timothy v.
21. And sin came into human nature by violating a known command; and Adam was a
figure of Jesus Christ, and therefore death reigned over all his posterity,
many of whom never committed any actual transgression, as he did. And the word
as, so often used in this affair, cannot be true in any sense, if both Adam and
Christ were not heads and representatives of all the seed of each. It is
certain that Adam was not a figure of Christ, as he conveyed death and ruin to
his posterity by a just sentence of law; for Christ conveys life and salvation
to souls by a free gift of grace. Neither could Adam be a figure of Christ, in
the great things that he did by one offense; for Christ atoned for many
offenses; therefore where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. Romans v. 12.
-- 21. Even to the resurrection of the dead. 1 Cor. xv. 21, 22. I say the word
as cannot be true in these places, unless those two men acted for all their
seed. Many would have it, that this word cannot be true unless Christ atoned
for as many as fell in Adam; but certain death came upon all Adam's race, while
multitudes hold that salvation by Christ is uncertain, and depends upon the
wills of individuals. In this view they would make Christ vastly inferior to
Adam, whose doings were efficacious, and the doings of Christ exceeding
precarious, upon their plan. And they who hold that Christ will finally save
all the race of Adam from hell, yet imagine that the creature's sufferings must
save them, and not the efficacy of the death and grace of Christ. Or if they
hold that he will save all from future sufferings, they hold also that he has
now saved them from the authority of the law of God, which Adam never did. By
the sentence of it, every child of Adam returns to the dust, the righteous as
well as the wicked; so that if the doings of Christ are not efficacious for the
final salvation of his seed, it cannot truly be said that as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. Adam was made upright; but Solomon
could not tell how many inventions his children would seek out. Eccle. vii. 29.
A darling one in our day is, that a man cannot be worthy of reward or
punishment, unless he has power in his will to become righteous when he
pleases. And if so, then faith would be of himself, and not the gift of God,
directly against the truth of his word. Ephesians. ii. 8. Boasting could not be
excluded in such a case, as it is by the law of faith. Romans iii. 27. So that
this controversy is not with poor worms, but with the eternal God. His will was
as really exercised in raising up Pharaoh and others, and suffering them to go
far in their rebellion, and in oppressing the saints; as it was in finally
destroying the former and saving the latter. But the objection against this
doctrine, was and is, Why does he yet find fault? for who has ever resisted
his will? This was the language of those who followed after the law of
righteousness, but did not attain to it, because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the law. Romans ix. 16 -- 32. Yea, and those who
do so are exceeding partial in the law.

Mr. Wesley, in his book called, Predestination calmly considered, says, "I
believe election to be conditional, as well as the reprobation opposite
thereto. I believe the eternal decree concerning both, is expressed in those
words, He that believes shall be saved: he that believes not, shall be
damned. And this decree without doubt God will not change, and man cannot
resist." P. 10. But where did he make any such decree? In the gospel
commission, he says, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Mark
xvi. 16. But men have presumed to alter that decree, ever since the third
century; before which no man has proved that infant baptism was ever named in
the world. By baptism believers put on Christ. Gal. iii. 27. Which no one can
do for another, any more than one can be saved or damned for another in
eternity. Christ is the only lawgiver to his church, and when Kings shall
become nursing fathers to her, they will bow down to his authority therein.
Isaiah xlix. 23. And how great is the difference betwixt a nurse and a
whoremaster. The good tidings to Zion is, Thy God reigns. And with the heart
man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Isaiah III. 7. Romans x. 10, 15. And none will be owned by him in the
last day, who are now ashamed to confess him before men. Mat. x. 32, 33. And if
God looked on all ages as a moment, how could he elect persons, and then reject
them again in that moment? Yet Wesley says, "One who is a true believer, or, in
other words, one who is holy or righteous in the judgment of God himself, may
nevertheless finally fall from grace." P. 49.

His first argument to prove this assertion is taken from God's saying, When
the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, in
his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in
them shall he die. Ezekiel. xviii. 24. From whence Wesley says, "One who is
righteous in the judgment of God himself, may finally fall from grace." P. 51.
Answer, God never promised to support any one in an unrighteous way; neither
will he destroy any true penitent, for his own sins, or for the iniquity of his
fathers; and if God cannot speak of these things in a conditional way, without
having the final event uncertain in his own infinite mind until the creature
decides it, then this argument may stand, and not else. And if the creature
could disappoint the Creator, then we should fear man more than God. A horrible
evil! A second argument is drawn from 1 Timothy i. 18, 19, from whence it is said,
"Observe, 1. These men had once the faith that produces a good conscience,
which they had, or they could not have put it away. 2. They made shipwreck of
the faith, which necessarily implies the total and final loss of it."
P. 51. But in the same chapter it is said, The end of the commandment is
charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned;
from which some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling; desiring
to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof
they affirm. And if men cannot be greatly enlightened and reformed by the
Spirit of truth, and yet afterward swerve from it and put it away, without
ever being born again, then this argument may stand, and not otherwise. His
third argument is framed from Romans xi. 17, etc. Upon which he says, "Those who
are grafted into the spiritual, invisible church, may nevertheless finally
fail." P. 53. To which I reply, That the unbelieving Jews failed from the
visible church, and saving faith was necessary to graft the Gentiles into it,
who ought not to be high-minded, but fear, as is very evident from this
passage; and God says, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. Jer. xxxii 40. And who will dare to contradict him! Mr. Wesley
takes his fourth argument from John xv. 1 -- 6, from whence he infers, "That
true believers, who are branches of the true vine, may nevertheless finally
fall." P. 55. But as Christ is the only head of the true church, many may be
visible branches in him, and yet be cast into the fire for their
unfruitfulness, while living branches are purged and made more fruitful. And to
such Christ said in the same chapter, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain. Afterward he said to the Father, Of them which thou
gave me have I lost none. John xviii. 9. Yet, fifthly, Mr. Wesley brings 2
Peter ii. 20, 21, to prove that "Those who by the inward knowledge of Christ,
have escaped the pollutions of the world, may yet fall back into those
pollutions and perish everlastingly." P. 56. But all ought to know, that the
dog who returns to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire, never had their natures changed, though their behavior
was so for a while. Therefore we are warned against giving the holy things of
the church to dogs, swine or wolves, as far as we can discover them by their
fruits. Mat. vii. 6, 15. His sixth argument is taken from Heb. vi. 4 -- 8. p.
56. But we may see that the persons here spoken of, are like ground which
bears thorns and briars, and are entirely distinct from souls who receive the
seed into good ground. Mat. xiii. 23. Our author takes his seventh argument
from Heb. x. 38, which he says, if rightly translated, is, "If the just man
that lives by faith draws back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him." P. 58.
But we ought to know, that living by faith, and drawing back, are too opposite
things; and the first is here urged as an effectual guard against the last.
Eighthly, our opponant brings Heb. x. 26 -- 29, to prove "That those who are
sanctified by the blood of the covenant, may yet perish everlastingly." P. 62.
But though persons who sin wilfully against the laws, blood and Spirit of
Christ, will have a much sorer punishment than they who died without mercy
under the law of Moses, yet this cannot prove that any such person was ever
truly regenerated. However, after quoting many more scripture warnings against
disobedience and apostasy, Mr. Wesley lets us know, that he would not have us
consider this doctrine by itself, "but as it stands in connection with
unconditional reprobation, that millstone which hangs about the neck of your
whole hypothesis." P. 65.

From whence we may see, that the plain language of revelation is of no avail
with him against his horrid ideas of reprobation. When any try to put that
terrible word out of their minds, he says, "To think about a certain number of
souls, whom alone God has decreed to save, in that very thought reprobation
lurks: it entered your heart the moment that entered: it stays as long as that
stays; and you cannot speak that thought, without speaking reprobation. True,
it is covered with fig leaves, so that a heedless eye may not observe it to be
there. But if you narrowly observe, unconditional election cannot appear,
without the cloven foot of reprobation." P. 9. Answer, We well know that the
doctrine of particular election, implies, that the rest of mankind are left to
perish in their sins, as God might justly have dealt with us all. But this idea
is rejected by Mr. Wesley. And when it was said, "You know in your own
conscience, God might justly have past by you," he said, "I deny it. That God
might justly, for my unfaithfulness to his grace, have given me up long ago, I
grant: but this concession supposes me to have had that grace, which you say a
reprobate never had." P. 18. Answer, We are far from believing that all the
natural liberty of men is by grace, as he has asserted; for God says, In the
last days perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their
ownselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. -- These resist
the truth; reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 8. This is a most
exact description of the reprobates of our day. But I am far from thinking that
grace gave them a power to love themselves above God and their neighbors, and
to run into all this wickedness under a form of godliness, while they deny the
power thereof. Yea, do not all those deny the power of it, who deny particular
election and final perseverance? Mr. Wesley says, "I have heard, that God the
Father made a covenant with his Son, before the world began, wherein the Son
agreed to suffer such and such things, and the Father to give him such and such
souls for a recompense: that in consequence of this, those souls must be saved,
and those only, so that all others must be damned." This idea of the covenant
he rejects, and says, "The tenor of it is this; Whosoever believes unto the
end, so as to show his faith by his works, I the Lord will reward that soul
eternally: but whosoever will not believe, and consequently dies in his sins,
I will punish him with everlasting destruction." P. 44, 45. And what difference
is there between this and saying, The man that does them shall live in them?
They who turn the gospel into this sense, are bewitched. Gal. iii. 1, 12. As to
the covenant, Jesus said, I lay down my life for the sheep. -- Ye believe not,
because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and
I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father who
gave them me, is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of my
Father's hand. Jesus lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is
come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. As thou have given
him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou
have given him. John x. 15, 26 -- 29. xvii. 1, 2. If particular election, and
final perseverance, are not contained in these passages, I know not what can be
intended therein. And as Mr. Wesley and his followers are so vehement against
that doctrine, and tell of showing their faith by their works, it is needful to
examine some of their works concerning America.

In November 1763, Mr. Wesley said in his Journal, "Many have been convinced of
sin, many justified, and many backsliders healed. But the peculiar work of this
season has been, what St. Paul calls The perfecting of the saints. Many persons
in London, in Bristol, in York, and in various parts both of England and
Ireland, have experienced so deep and universal a change, as it had not before
entered into their hearts to receive. After a deep conviction of inbred sin, of
their total fall from God, they have been so filled with faith and love (and
generally in a moment) that sin vanished, and they found from that time no
pride, anger, desire or unbelief. They could rejoice evermore, pray without
ceasing, and in every thing give thanks. Now whether we call this the
destruction or suspension of sin, it is a glorious work of God: such work, as
considering both the depth and extent of it, we never saw in these kingdoms
before. It is possible, some who spoke in this manner, were mistaken, and it is
certain, some have lost what they then received." That many of them were
mistaken, can easily be believed; much easier than to believe that any of them
were perfect, and then fell from it. For as long as their controversy in
Britain, about taxing America, was carried on by words, Mr. Wesley openly
appeared in our favor; but when they came to blows, he shifted sides, and
exerted all his extensive influence in that bloody cause; and so did Mr. John
Fletcher, an author much esteemed by that sect. Mr. Wesley was in the city of
Bristol in September 1774, and highly recommended to his friends a pamphlet
wrote by M. P. entitled, An argument in defense of the exclusive right claimed
by the colonies to tax themselves. But when the sword was drawn the next year,
Mr. Wesley took out the substance of a piece wrote by Dr. J. entitled, Taxation
no tyranny, and added some warm reflections of his own, and published the whole
as his own, to inflame all his followers against us. Therefore a Baptist
minister in Bristol, published a brief answer to him, with a mention of these
facts, under the name of Americanus. Hereupon Wesley reprinted his pamphlet,
with a preface, in which he said, "The book which this writer says I so
strongly recommended, I never yet saw with my eyes. The words which he says I
spoke, never came out of my lips." Two of his friends in Bristol, each wrote to
him, that they knew he herein wronged the truth, yet he refused to make any
public retraction, until Mr. Caleb Evans, the said Baptist minister, published
a letter to him in a newspaper; and then he said,

Rev. Sir,
You affirm, 1. That I once doubted whether the measures taken in respect to
America, could be defended either on the foot of law, equity, or prudence, I
did doubt of this five years, nay indeed five months ago. You affirm, 2. That I
declared last year, the Americans were an oppressed, injured people. I do not
remember that I did; but possibly I might. You affirm, 3. That I then strongly
recommended an argument for the exclusive right of the colonies to tax
themselves. I believe I did; but I am now of another mind. You affirm, 4. You
say in the preface I never saw that book. I did say so: the plain case was, I
had so entirely forgotten it, that even when I saw it again, I recollected
nothing of it, till I had read several pages. If I had, I might have observed,
that you borrowed more from Mr. P. than I did from Dr. J. -- If you please to
advance any new arguments (personal reflections I let go) you may perhaps
receive a further reply from your humble servant,

John Wesley.
London, Dec. 9, 1775.

But did he let go personal reflections? Mr. Evans's reply is before me,
wherein he says, "Your insinuating that I have taken more from Mr. P. that you
have from Dr. J. is an artifice to cover your own plagiarism, too thin not to
be seen through by the most superficial. It is not fact. I have not taken a
line from that or any other author without acknowledging it. But when you
published your address, you gave not even a hint of having taken any part of it
from Dr. J. or any other writer." Thus did Mr. Wesley exert all his influence,
to assist Great Britain in her attempts to bind us in all cases whatever. And
had they succeeded therein, we should have been in as bad a case, as he says
Adam was before a Savior was revealed to him. Yea, as much worse as falling
into the hands of unmerciful men, is worse than being in the hands of a
merciful God. And these men are still pursuing us, with attempts to rob us of
our only hope in Christ, and also of the liberty wherewith he has made us
free. For in 1784, M. Wesley and his followers published a book in England,
which they call, The Sunday service in North America. Three orders of ministers
are prescribed therein, who are to have the whole power of receiving and
excluding church members, without calling any vote of the brethren; and when
the lowest order of those ministers is to be ordained, they say to him, "Will
you reverently obey them to whom the charge and government over you is
committed, following with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions? Answer,
I will endeavor so to do, the Lord being my helper." P. 283. Soon after which
they published a pamphlet, entitled, "A form of discipline, for the ministers,
preachers, and members of the Methodist episcopal church in America; considered
and approved at a conference held at Baltimore, in the State of Maryland, on
Monday the 27th of December, 1784; in which the reverend Thomas Coke, L. L. D.
and the reverend Francis Asbury, presided." In their first section they say,
Quest. 1. What was the rise of Methodism, so called, in Europe? Answ. In 1729,
two young men, reading the Bible, saw they could not be saved without holiness,
followed after it, and invited others so to do. In 1737, they saw likewise,
that men are justified before they are sanctified; but still holiness was their
object. God then thrust them out, to raise an holy people. Quest. 2. What was
the rise of Methodism, so called, in America? Answ. During the space of thirty
years past, certain persons, members of the society, emigrated from England and
Ireland, and settled in various parts of this country. About twenty years ago,
Philip Embary, a local preacher from Ireland, began to preach in the city of
New York, and formed a society of his own countrymen and the citizens. About
the same time, Robert Strawbridge, a local preacher from Ireland, settled in
Frederick county, in the state of Maryland, and preaching there, formed some
societies. In 1769, Richard Boardman and Joseph Pilman, came to New York, who
were the first regular Methodist preachers on the continent. In the latter end
of the year 1771, Francis Asbury and Richard Wright, of the same order, came
over. Quest. 3. What may we reasonably believe to be God's design, in raising
up the preachers called Methodists? Answ. To reform the continent, and spread
scripture holiness over these lands. As a proof hereof, we have seen in the
course of fifteen years a great and glorious work of God, from New York through
the Jersies, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, even
to Georgia."
And before they admit any man to preach in their society, they say to him,
"Have you faith in Christ? are you going on to perfection? do you expect to be
made perfect in love in this life?" After which they say, "We are all agreed,
we may be saved from all sin before death." P. 13, 30. Thus a society, many of
whose laws are contrary to the laws of Christ, and whose head is in
Great Britain, are spreading their influence in America, and have already tried
to get some of their leaders elected into the state Legislature in Virginia, if
not in other States.

The law of Christ puts all Elders in the church upon a level, and says to the
whole community, All of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with
humility, for God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble. 1
Peter v. 1 -- 5. And when Christ came a light into the world, the only persons
that believed on him, were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God. Except a man be born again he cannot see
the kingdom of God. John i. 12, 13. iii. 3. But ever since the rise of the man
of sin, teachers have claimed a power of office above the church, which none
could convey to others but officers; and also a power in their wills to bring
children into the kingdom of God, without their own knowledge or choice. And to
this day men are exceeding tenacious of this arbitrary power. The followers of
Mr. Wesley say, in their form of discipline, "Quest. 1. How is a bishop
constituted? Answer, By the election of the majority of the conference, and the
laying on of hands of a bishop, and the elders present. -- Question 5. If by
death, expulsion or otherwise there be no bishop remaining in our church, what
method shall be pursued? Answer, Let the conference immediately elect a bishop,
and let the elders, or any three of them, consecrate him to his office." The
Presbyterians hold bishops and elders to be equal, but both above the church,
and in this way many hold their succession of office from the old bishops in
England. The president of their university in Connecticut, in a sermon before
the Legislature of that State, said of the first ministers in New England, "The
induction of the ministers of the first churches, was performed by
lay-brethren, and this was called ordination, but should be considered what in
reality it was, only induction or instalment of those who were vested with
official power. These were all ordained before by the bishops in England."
Stiles's election sermon, May 8, 1783, p. 61.
Another of their noted ministers said to the Baptists the same year, "To be
consistent with yourselves, you cannot look on any of us as Christians, or any
church in the world but your own denomination, to be a church of Christ; all
the world but yourselves, are in a state of paganism; not one baptized person
in it except yourselves: not one minister of the gospel, but your own; and when
you rebaptize those in adult years, which we have baptized in their infancy,
you and they jointly renounce that Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whom we adore
and worship, as the only living and true God, and on whom we depend for all our
salvation." Huntington's address, p. 23.
And a Presbyterian minister in North Carolina, though more charitable, yet
says of the Baptists, "They made their appearance in Germany soon after the
reformation began; but the present race of Baptists are happily very unlike the
furious and bloodthirsty bigots who wore the name at that time. -- Considering
that they have no written standard of orthodoxy, and that their preachers are
men without a liberal education, I have often sat with wonder and pleasure to
hear them so sound in doctrine as they really are." Pattillo's sermons, 1788,
P. 47, 48.


Indeed it may justly be matter of thankful wonder to all, considering the
errors of learned ministers on every hand. For if our civil rulers should now
declare, that they derived their office power from Great Britain, and that the
people of America had only inducted them into their offices to which they had a
prior right, what a confusion should we soon be in! But this is not the worst
of our case; for all who have renounced the only living and true God, are
pagans, and the covenant of circumcision, on which infant baptism is built,
required Israel to destroy all the pagans in Canaan, and to seize upon their
estates. And from the bloody imagination, that Christians had a right to do the
like, came the late war. The church of Rome acted upon this bloody imagination,
until England revolted from her in 1533, and set up their king as the head of
their church. The inhabitants of Munster in Germany did the like the same year.
Yet the madness of Munster, because it was soon defeated, has been cast upon
all believers through the world, who refused to put baptism before faith in
Christ. And it is now said, "In church government the Baptists have adopted the
independent plan; the inconveniency of which they often experience, as it
provides no final and decisive judge of controversy, nor tribunal to pronounce
in heresy or false doctrine. But the distinguishing characteristic of the
baptist profession is their excluding infant, and practicing only adult
baptism, and making it their great term of communion, excluding all other
Christians from the Lord's table among them, and not suffering their members to
communicate with other churches. How they can acknowledge any other people to
be a church of Christ, and yet continue this bar of separation, is not to be
accounted for; and we must leave them under the weight of this difficulty,
until themselves are pleased to remove it. Ibid. P. 48, 49.


Here all may see that it is much easier to charge others with inconsistency,
than to act consistently ourselves. For these three last authors profess the
doctrine of particular election and final perseverance, and yet they blame us,
because we dare not practically allow, that persons may be brought into the
covenant of grace without their own knowledge or choice, many of whom fall away
and perish forever. They also condemn the independent plan of government in the
church, though they celebrate it in the state. But there can be no government
in the state if officers therein are not invested with power to compel
delinquents to submit to their lawful judgments; but the votes of officers in
the church, are no more than the votes of the brethren, and the whole community
have no more power in this respect than to exclude unworthy members from their
communion. And to allow ministers a power of office in any church, which that
church could not give, and cannot take away, is to make them lords over God's
heritage, instead of being examples to the flock. We are so far from denying
the visible Christianity of all who do not see with us about baptism, that we
view it as a point of vast importance, that none should be baptized but visible
Christians. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
Without it they are not Christians; yet many contend with us because we dare
not say the contrary in practice. All who have received that Spirit, ought to
be baptized in water. Romans vi. 4. viii. 9. Acts. x. 47, 48. I believe that the
dispensing with the plain laws of Christ, and the forcibly imposing the
inventions of men in his worship, is the scarlet colored beast which supports
the whore of Babylon. It was, and is not, yet is. It will change into all
shapes, as circumstances and inclinations carry men. God has many people in
this mysterious city; but his voice from heaven is, Come out of her, my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
The writings of the apostles, who have explained the prophets, and all center
in Jesus Christ, is the only foundation of his church; and they will triumph
over Babylon when she falls. Ephesians. ii. 19. Rev. xvii. 3, 5, 8. xviii. 4, 20.
Early warning was given, against grievous wolves, and perverse schismatics; to
avoid whom God, and the word of his grace is our only security. Acts xx. 29 --
32. The perfection of the holy scriptures is held up as what must be continued
in, if we would get out of the perils which love to self, under a form of
godliness, has brought upon these last days. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 5, 14 -- 17. In
those writings we have no mention of any instance of baptism without a personal
profession of faith and repentance; nor of any one who was admitted into the
Christian church without water baptism.

The followers of George Fox, who have formed a large society without it, have
set up a rule in themselves above the holy scriptures. A late writer of theirs,
after attempting to excuse George Fox for saying the soul was infinite, and
trying to prove their opinion of an inward rule from the first chapter of the
gospel of John, without being able clearly to do it, said, "Is not the apostle
John's Greek as ordinary as G. Fox's English?" Phipps against Newton; reprinted
at Philadelphia, 1783, P. 191, 203.
Thus he would set the leader of their sect on a level with the oracles of God!
And it is well known that the majority of them held with Great Britain in her
late bloody attempts against American liberty; and also are strongly set
against the doctrine of particular election and final perseverance. And can any
men be found upon earth, who deny that doctrine, and yet make conscience of
obeying the following plain rules of scripture? In Jesus Christ, neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
love. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Let
him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in all good
things. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. Gal. v. 6, 23. vi. 2, 6, 15, 16. God calls
his covenant with Abraham, The covenant of circumcision. And Abraham had no
right to circumcise any stranger, until he had bought him as a servant with
money. Acts vii. 8. Genesis xvii. 13. But the gospel says to Zion, Ye shall be
redeemed without money. Thy God reigns. Isaiah lii. 3, 7. Romans x. 15. He
purchased the church with his own blood. Acts xx. 28. And after he had done it,
he said, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the commandments of God. Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the
servants of men. I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that
is called a brother, be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer,
or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. 1 Cor. v. 2.
vii. 19, 23. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye
therefore partakers with them. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. Ephesians. v. 6, 7, 11. Every tree is known by his
own fruit; for of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush gather
they grapes. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart,
brings forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth
speaks. And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Luke vi. 43 -- 46. When the blade sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also. -- Let both grow together until the harvest. The field
is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are
the children of the wicked one. Mat. xiii. 26, 30, 38.

In these plain scriptures, the covenant of circumcision is repealed, by the
name which God gave to it; and the church and world are clearly distinguished,
as two different judicatories; the one to exclude all who appear by their
fruits to be fornicators, covetous, railers, drunkards, or extortioners, from
their fellowship; the other to let them grow together with the children of the
kingdom, in the world, until the end of it, only punishing such as work ill to
their neighbors. Romans xiii. 1 -- 10. And fighting and oaths are allowed of in
this latter government. John xviii. 36. Heb. vi. 16. And wars will not fully
come to an end, until the nations shall freely receive the law from Zion, and
guile shall be banished from the church. A loud cry will then be heard, Babylon
is fallen, is fallen. Micah iv. 1 -- 10. Rev. xiv. 1 -- 8. The covenant of
circumcision will no more be called the covenant of grace, nor men be
bewitched, as the Galatians were, with the practice of confounding works and
grace together. God never injured Cain, in giving saving faith to Abel, nor the
Midianites, who were of the seed of Abraham, in electing Israel for his church;
neither did he injure Korah, or the children of Reuben, Jacob's first born, in
electing Aaron and his lawful seed for priests: and he never injured any man in
uniting the priestly and kingly offices in Jesus Christ, and in souls who are
born again, who are the only kings and priests in the gospel church. Heb. v. 4
-- 6. Rev. i. 5, 6. v. 10. And no others have any right to be members therein;
and they all ought ever to be like little children, instead of striving who
should be the greatest. Mat. xviii. 3, 4. None can have a right in the kingdom
of God, who do not receive it as a little child. Mark x. 15. Such are glad of
gifts. But Mr. Wesley has flatly denied that God could justly have passed him
by, and not have given him power in his will to believe, which is his notion of
grace. Wages can be recovered by law, but a gift is bestowed on whom, and in
what manner the giver pleases. Therefore God says, Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good? So the last
shall be first, and the first last; for many are called, but few chosen. Mat.
xx. 15, 16.

This is the true idea of election, which men have an amazing quarrel against.
For if it depends entirely upon the will of God, whether he will save any of
us, or not, then we can have no encouragement to set up our wills against him.
If we do so, he can blast all our schemes as he pleases; and when we come to
die, he may then choose whether he will hear our cries for mercy or not. Yea, he
has assured us that he will not hear our cries then, if we now delight in
scorning, and hate knowledge. Prove. i. 20 -- 29. Giving diligence in the
believing pursuit of virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness and charity, is the only way to make our calling and
election sure; while heretics are self-willed, under the name of liberty. 2
Peter i. 5 -- 11. ii. 1, 10, 19. Our Lord has set before us an example of
great faith, which may encourage us in this pursuit. Luke vii. 1 -- 9. Here
observe, 1. That this Roman centurion took all his encouragement from God, as
he revealed himself in his Son, and none of it from any imaginary worthiness in
the creature. I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof; wherefore
neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thee. Yet he believed that Jesus,
of his own infinite mercy, would grant relief. 2. He was careful to seek it in
a lawful way; and before the death of Christ, it was unlawful for a member of
that church to keep company with other nations. Acts x. 28. Therefore he would
not violate the law of God, even to save life. 3. He believed that Jesus could
do it when absent, as well as if he was present. Say in a word, and my servant
shall be healed. Herein his faith was much greater than the faith of Martha,
Mary, or of Thomas the apostle. John xi. 21, 32. xx. 29. He clearly acted by
faith, and not by sight. 4. He made good use of his reason to strengthen his
faith, and not to weaken or destroy it, as is the case with multitudes.
He said, I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers; and I
say unto one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my
servant, Do this, and he does it. And if an unworthy sinner, with a commission
from a heathen power, could be thus obeyed, what can be too hard for the
Captain of our salvation!

He took not on him the nature of angels, but the seed of Abraham, that through
death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil, and
deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to
bondage. Every discovery of sin and want should speed our flight to the throne
of his grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
For he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing
he ever lives to make intercession for them. Heb. ii. 14 -- 18. iv. 16. vii.
25. His only temple here below is in them who are poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and tremble at his word. And if their brethren pretend a regard to the
glory of God, in hating of them, and casting them out, yet he says, I shall
appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. Isaiah lxvi. 1 -- 5. The first
Christian martyr sealed this testimony with his blood. Acts vii. 48 -- 51. And
others overcame the great accuser, by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death. And when their
souls shall be raised, the devil will be bound, and be cast into the bottomless
pit, out of which the beast came who kills the two witnesses. Rev. xi. 7. xii.
11. xx. 1 -- 4. The word of God, both by Moses and the Lamb, is as clear as
glass, and as powerful as fire; and they who obtain the victory over the beast,
and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand
and act joyfully upon the sea of glass, mingled with fire. 2 Cor. iii. 18. Jer.
xxiii. 29. Rev. xv. 2, 3. Covetousness is idolatry. Col. iii. 5. And to destroy
idolatry Elijah said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be
God, follow him; and if Baal, then follow him; which point was decided by fire
from heaven. 1 Kings xviii. 21, 39. And way for the first coming of our Lord
was prepared by a man who came in the Spirit and power of Elijah. Mal. iv. 1,
2, 5. Luke i. 17. And way for his second coming will be prepared, by the
raising of the souls of the old martyrs; which I think means the resurrection
of their Spirit and power in the churches. For God gave them not the spirit of
fear, but of power, of love, and of a a sound mind. 2 Timothy i. 7. Even such love
as to sacrifice their lives, before they would violate any rule of truth or
equity.

All the world have now seen, that love is a vastly more powerful principle of
action than fear. For as long as the Americans were afraid of destruction or
slavery, their union and activity defeated all the attempts of their enemies;
but no sooner was that fear removed, than the love of riches, honors and
pleasures, prevailed over contracts and oaths, and filled the land with
discord, treachery and infidelity. By the love of money, vast numbers have
erred from the truth, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And our
only remedy is, Not to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy. That we do good, that we be rich in good
works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in store a good
foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy vi. 9 -- 19.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
P. 18, l. 33, f. receive r. conceive. -- P. 22, l. 7, f. invited r. incited:
l. 23, f. Pilman r. Pilmoor.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Bible the only perfect law of liberty, page 3 A false idea of liberty
exposed, page 5 Grace and works confounded together, page 6, 12 A false notion
of faith detected, page 7 How government is despised, page 8 True believers
make God's laws and not his designs their rule, page 9 The right idea of
election, page 10, 31 Adam and Christ our public heads, page 11 Wesley partial
in the law, page 12 His arguments for falling away refuted, page 13 And his
unjust notion of reprobation, page 16 The everlasting covenant opened, page 18
The bloody works of men exposed, page 19 Also their invasion of true liberty,
page 21 This done in a measure by all sects, page 24, 27 Mystery Babylon
described, page 3, 27 The perfection of scripture our security against her,
page 28 The covenant of circumcision repealed, page 29 The cause why many hate
particular election, page 31 An example of great faith explained, page 31 Faith
working by love is a fire from heaven, page 33

