MR. BRIDGE'S ELECTION SERMON. MAY 27, 1789.

COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS. IN SENATE, MAY 27, I789.
ORDERED, That Ebenezer Bridge, Cotton Tufts, and Benjamin Austin, jun. Esq'rs.
be a Committee to wait on the Rev. JOSIAH BRIDGE, and thank him in the name of
the Senate, for the SERMON delivered by him this day, before his Excellency the
Governor, the Council, and the two Branches of the General Court; and also to
request of him a copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. SAMUEL COOPER, Clerk.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE His EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE. GOVERNOR; His
HONOR BENJAMIN LINCOLN, ESQUIRE. LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOUR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL,
SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, MAY
27, 1789. BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY JOSIAH BRIDGE, A.M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN EAST-SUDBURY.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY ADAMS and NOURSE, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE GENERAL COURT.

M, DCC, LXXXIX.

N. B. Several passages, omitted for the sake of brevity, in the delivery of
the ensuing discourse, are inserted in the publication.

AN Election SERMON.
PSALM LXXXII. VERSE I. GOD stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: He
judges among the GODS.
THIS passage of inspired scripture may well possess the minds of this numerous
and respectable audience, with reverence and a sacred awe, before him, who is
greatly to be feared in the assembly of his saints; and who will be santified
in all them that come nigh him: It is particularly adapted to arrest the most
serious attention of our honored Rulers; at whose invitation we are assembled
in the House of God on this auspicious anniversary, -- to supplicate the Divine
Presence with them, and his smiles and blessing upon the special business of
the day; and their administration of government the ensuing year; and to
enquire of him from his word, agreeable to the laudable practice of our pious
Progenitors, from the first settlement of the country, to the present period.

OUR text has a primary reference to the Rulers of God's ancient covenant
people. But as this passage of scripture is of no private interpretation, it
will as sitly apply to our civil fathers now before God, as to the Jewish
Sanhedrim of old.

THE words before us, will naturally lead us -- 'To make some brief and general
observations on government.' -- The propriety and usefulness of an assembly,
for conducting the important affairs of it. -- The sublime characters rulers
sustain. -- The Supreme Ruler present with them, as an observer, and judge;
ready for their assistance and support, when acting up to their character; and
carefully noticing whenever they lose sight of the great end of their
appointment: And the powerful influence, the consideration of his presence and
inspection must have, to engage them in a conscientious discharge of the duties
of their exalted stations. May I be indulged your serious and candid attention,
while I attempt to dilate a little, upon these several particulars; all
obviously contained in, or easily deducible from our text. GOD stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty: He judges among the Gods.

THAT our text applies to the supreme government of a community, and involves
the various departments of it, is readily seen by looking into the Psalm before
us; where we find this congregation of the mighty, reproved for the improper
use of their power, and a different mode of conduct enjoined upon them. "How
long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend the
poor and fatherless: Do justice to the afflicted and needy: Deliver the poor
and needy, rid them out of the hand of the wicked."

CIVIL government is both a dictate of nature, and revelation; and is
accordingly indifferently denominated, the ordinance of God, and the ordinance
of man. Man was originally formed for society, and furnished with faculties
adapted thereto: Faculties for the improvement of which social intercourse is
indispensably necessary. Some of the most important duties, and refined
delights of human life are of the social kind.

IN order to obtain the benefits of society, civil rule is essentially
requisite. Those lusts of men, from whence come wars and fightings, are so
prevalent in this apostate world, that they are obliged to form compacts and
combinations, for mutual assistance and support. And there is perhaps no people
no earth, however uncultivated and barbarous, but who have adopted some kind of
civil polity.

THE light and law of nature, which uniformly urges to this mode of procedure,
may well be accepted, as an expression of the divine will: For God addresses
the human mind in diverse manners; and he does it by the voice of reason, as
well as revelation.

THE providence of God is particularly concerned, in elevating man to post of
honor and dignity; and giving them a seat among the congregation of the
mighty. "For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor
from the south: But God is the judge: He puts down one, and fitteth up
another." "By me (says wisdom, or that glorious Being who is the wisdom of God)
by me kings reign, and princes decree justice. By me princes rule and nobles,
even all the judges of the earth." And in the New Testament, we have the same
idea held up, in terms equally express. "Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers; for there is no power, but of God. The powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God." Again, "submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, for the
Lord's sake; whether it be to the King, as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well. For so is the will of God."

THESE declarations apply to civil government in general, which is
indispensably necessary to social felicity and safety. But they are by no means
to be extended to every mode of government that has obtained among mankind: Not
certainly to a despotic and lawless domination. This is not the ordinance of
God. Nor indeed any other government, but such as protects the subjects in the
peaceable possession of their just rights, properties and privileges.

THE particular form of government and mode of administration, that shall
obtain among the various nations of the world, heaven has not seen fit to
prescribe. This seems to be referred to the wisdom of each community to
determine for themselves. And a great variety has in this respect, actually
taken place; in consequence of the different genius, sentiments and situation,
of different people, in different ages and climes.

IN some constitutions, the supreme authority has been vested in one man. In
others, a few are selected for the purpose. Others still have submitted it to
many. The particular mode of government that has obtained the preference with
the people of this land, directs our attention to the latter of these three.
And so does our text. The congregation of the mighty.

THERE seems an evident propriety in committing the management of the
interesting and important affairs of government, to a number selected from the
whole.

POWER is of an intoxicating quality; and for a single individual to be vested
with sovereign rule, is subjecting him to a temptation too strong for human
virtue. A desire of pre-eminence is a natural passion, and when properly
restrained, may prove highly beneficial to society. But when it has a full free
course, and attains the summit of its wish, and feels itself without control;
the subject of this undue elevation, is apt to be puffed up with pride, to
become intolerably supercilious and tyrannical; and to trample upon those
rights of the community, and individuals, which it is the prime design of
government to protect.

WHEREVER the will of a despot is the supreme law, the great end of government
is usually perverted. This is sufficiently attested by facts: And it is no
other than what might justly be expected from the nature of man.

THERE are, it is true, advantages arising from vesting the administration in
the hands of one man, or a few; when they are well furnished with wisdom and
fidelity; advantages from the decision and dispatch, with which affairs of
State may be transacted; and which in particular emergencies, may be peculiarly
beneficial. But they are so counterbalanced by the ills that result from
arbitrary rule, on the one hand, and the safety that arises from good advice on
the other, that there seems a manifest propriety that a number should be
selected for the business.

"WHERE no council is (says the wise Solomon) the people fall: But in the
multitude of counselors there is safety." So limited is the human mind in all
its perceptions and operations, and so diffuse, difficult, and many times
perplexed are human affairs, especially the important ones of government, that
they elude the comprehension of an individual; and demand the combined wisdom
of a number, to conduct them with propriety. In free and judicious debates,
there is frequently much light reflected upon intricate subjects. What escapes
the observation, or recollection of one, may occur to another; and the minds of
all be ripened for a result, by means of the light mutually reflected in their
consultations. Affairs of State, thus carefully canvassed, may doubtless be
conducted with greater propriety, by an assembly of the wisest and best men in
a community, than by a single individual, however improved and judicious he
might be.

SUCH further is the immense weight of government, that it is too heavy for the
shoulders of an individual: A congregation of the mighty, will find the burden
equal to their united strength. Thoughtless and inconsiderate people, may
fondly conceive, that the business of a Ruler is as easy as the character is
honorable. But those who know the circle of their duty, and the various
difficulties that attend it, are fully sensible, that it is an office,
laborious, extensive, and greatly exercising to all the powers of the body and
mind.

WHATEVER refers to the public safety and happiness, demands their attention.
The good and wholesome laws, that are in being, are faithfully to be executed;
and proper persons sought out to carry them into effect. Laws unexecuted,
however good in themselves, and beneficial in their tendency, answer no
valuable purpose; and may really prove injurious, by lowering the general
influence of authority. If men may violate one law without any animadversion;
why not another? There is nothing inspires the public mind with so general a
veneration of government, as an undoubted expectation, that every penalty
incurred, shall be inflicted. New laws are from time to time to be framed,
accommodated to the temper, genius and circumstances of a people, and the
exigencies of state: And to be so framed that it may not be easy to elude their
meaning, or evade their force. Justice, distributive, penal, and commutative,
must have a free uninterrupted course in a community: This seems to be the very
corner stone of its happy existence. Useful literature is to be encouraged,
that youth may be trained up in knowledge and virtue, and fitted to serve God,
and their generation, according to his will. Religion pure and undefiled,
before God and the Father, so indispensably necessary to secure the favor and
blessing of heaven, is particularly to be patronized. They must guard with a
vigilant eye, against the numerous evils which threaten the body politic,
whether from external violence, or internal convulsions; and attend to whatever
serves to promote public prosperity. The commerce, agriculture, and
manufactures of a people should particularly be put under the most judicious
regulations; to encourage honest industry, and banish idleness: The former as
beneficial, as the latter is baneful. The one, continually prompting to vice
and sedition; the other engaging to a quiet and peaceable life.

GREAT and arduous is the labor requisite for so extensive a sphere of action
as this; some outlines of which, we have but hinted at. And the difficulties of
it are sometimes greatly enhanced, by the peculiar embarrassments in which a
people are involved. The cumbrance of a great community is hard to be borne;
but their strifes render the burden still more grievous.

WHEN Jethro, that wise Prince, and priest of Midian, observed Moses attending
this duty from morning to evening, he makes this just remark. -- "The thing
that thou do is not good: Thou will surely wear away: This thing is too
heavy for thee: Thou art not able to perform it thyself alone." And the
excessive labor and fatigue, and various vexations of the service, effectually
convinced Moses of the propriety of his observation. Though he was eminently
furnished with every qualification requisite for a good ruler, and successful
administration; -- such as learning, wisdom, meekness, patience, and the most
perfect patriotism; yet worn down with painful services, and ready to sink
under the burden, we find him pouring out his complaint to God, in these
expressive terms, -- "Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant? And wherefore
have I not found favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this
people upon me? Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten them, that
thou should say unto me, -- carry them in thy bosom as a nursing father
carries the sucking child. -- I am not able to bear all this people alone,
because it is too heavy for me."

UPON this earnest application to heaven, God was pleased to alter their form
of government. Moses is directed to select out of all the people, seventy men
of their first characters: Men known and noted as such, to be joined with him
in the administration. These composed the great Sanhedrim, and are that
Congregation of the Mighty, -- those earthly GODS, to whom our text most
probably has a primary reference.

IT is a divinely glorious character they sustain. The mighty, and according to
the Hebrew dialect; Gods. These terms express their dignity, and point out the
necessity of suitable qualifications for the discharge of the duties of their
station.

THE dignity of rulers, has by some been improved, as a subject of flattery;
and their minds have been immoderately puffed up, by the high strained
compliments of fawning sycophants; till they have conceived themselves
something above human. But they bear the image of God's authority, and are
illustrious by the rays of his majesty, for a very different purpose: -- That
they might imitate the justice and beneficence of that glorious Being they
represent; And exercise the authority with which they are vested in providence,
to the great and good ends, for which they are raised above their brethren.
When the public good engrosses their attention, and engages their unwearied
exertions: When they lay themselves out for the encouragement of whatever is
virtuous, commendable and praise worthy, and for the suppression of every thing
of a contrary nature and tendency: When they improve all the powers of their
minds, and all the advantages of their preferment to these ends: -- Then do
they act up to their honorable character; they fill with dignity their exalted
stations, and may be sitly denominated Gods, and workers together with God.

To be equal to this important character and employ, it is necessary that they
be persons of good natural abilities, and acquired accomplishments. The former
of our bodies and the father of our spirits, has been pleased to exercise, both
his "wisdom and sovereignty in the different make of men. To some he gives
wisdom and understanding exceeding much; and largeness of heart, even as the
sand that is on the sea shore," whereby they are able to discern both time and
judgment, and are ready for every emergency. The powers of others seem formed
upon a lesser scale, and evidently point them to a lower line of duty.
Education serves to keep up the natural diversity in the human composition. The
situation and circumstances of some, in the course of providence, is peculiarly
favorable for improvements in those useful sciences which enlarge and ennoble
the mind, and qualify it for extensive usefulness: While others are necessarily
destitute of those advantages, and consequent improvements. Providence, as with
a sunbeam, points out the former of these, as persons proper to be vested with
ruling powers, in preference to the latter. Their qualifications bespeak it;
the public good demands it; and the word of God directs to it. "Provide out of
all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness,
and place such over them." Able men -- men possessed of wisdom and knowledge;
of sense and substance, of fortitude and firmness; neither enervated by
debauchery, or effeminated by dissipations, equal to the cares, fatigues and
burden of government; and of "attending continually on this very thing." Their
religious and moral qualifications are directly subjoined, and are equally
desirable, in those who rule over men. Such as fear God, are really religious,
in principle and practice; Men of truth, -- of inviolable integrity; who
maintain a sacred regard to their engagements: Hating covetousness; not only
free from that turbid source of corruption; but detesting the low principle
that centers wholly in itself.

SUCH characters collected from a large community, for the purpose of
conducting its important public concerns, compose a truly respectable assembly:
A Congregation of the Mighty: God's vicegerents. They exhibit a saint
resemblance and representation of the source of all power; and are ministers of
the providential government of the great Supreme.

OUR text represents the great Jehovah as present with them; and taking
cognizance of their conduct. God stands in the Congregation of the Mighty: He
judges among the Gods.

INFIDEL minds, and those who by their conduct, have made it for their
interest, either that there should be no God, or that he should be regardless
of their behavior; have sometime flatly denied his superintending human
affairs. At other times endeavored to argue themselves into sceptiscism upon
the subject. The ancients of Israel, in the days of Ezekiel, had the confidence
to assert, that "The Lord had forsaken the earth." Others of a still more
ancient date are represented as querying -- "Is not God in the height of
heaven? And behold the height of the stars, how high they are -- How does God
know? Can he judge through the dark cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him,
that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit of heaven." Others still have
said in their hearts, secretly whispered to themselves, when rebuked by their
consciences for their criminal conduct; not daring to utter aloud the impious
thought: "God has forgotten, he hides his face; he will never see it."

OUR inward feelings revolt at such blasphemous suggestions, and assertions.
And the word of God throughout, reprobates the shocking imagination; and
represents it, as the fruitful source of all the over-flowings of impiety and
immorality, which prevail, in the most degenerate places and periods of time.

THE most high God, the possessor of Heaven and Earth, is uniformly revealed in
his word, as an immense, an infinite Being; omnipresent and omniscient. His
universal presence and inspection, are necessary to the administration of his
providential government now; and to a righteous distribution of rewards and
punishments, in the judgment of the great day.

HE is present in the Congregation of the Mighty as an attentive observer: -- A
powerful assistant: A righteous Judge.

THOUGH he has given the earth to the children of men, and imparted of his
authority to his Vicegerents below; yet he still holds the reins in his own
hands, and has the government on his shoulders; and critically observes the
conduct of those, who by being exalted to rule, are brought especially nigh to
himself.

HE beholds with approbation those wise and faithful servants who conform to
the moral character of the Supreme Ruler, and make his administration the
pattern and standard of theirs. He observes their unwearied endeavors to
possess their minds with political wisdom, that they may fully comprehend the
duties of their station; and their uncorrupted fidelity for the discharge of
them; their careful attention for the removal of every needless burden, and the
redress of every real grievance. He sees their solicitude to remove whatever
obstructs the free course of justice; their assiduous endeavors, that it may
be impartially administered, to all of every rank, and in every part of the
community. He observes the firmness and fortitude with which they oppose
themselves against evil doers, and the workers of iniquity; with what zeal and
ardour, they labor for the suppression of vice and immorality, so utterly
ruinous, both from its natural tendency, and the righteous judgment of God. He
regards their meekness, self-denial and patience, their prudence, paternal
affection and public spirit; and that philanthropy and God-like benevolence
which animates to the noblest exertions for the public good.

HE particularly notices the serious reference they cultivate to his all seeing
eye; and the habitual influence this has upon the temper of their hearts, as
well as the discharge of the duties of their exalted stations.

A LIVELY sense of an ever present God, must powerfully arrest every mind that
is the subject of it; and beget that fear of the Lord, which is the beginning
of wisdom: Which is so essential and important a branch of religion, as to be
frequently substituted for the whole of it. This important principle is
indispensably necessary, for every man, who wishes to approve himself to God.
It is the greatest ornament to a christian Ruler; and of the happiest influence
to the uniform discharge of every incumbent duty. Whenever it exists and exerts
itself, Heaven regards it with approbation. It renders the services and
sacrifices of all who possess it acceptable, and well pleasing in his sight.
The Congregation of the Mighty thus qualified, disposed and employed; will
secure and enjoy the approbation of the Supreme Ruler.

BUT the great God not only takes notice of all their exertions for the honor
of his name, and the good of society; but is present with them for their
assistance and support.

CIVIL Rulers are honored as ministers and instruments of his providential
government; and they are favored with his providential presence, that the
ordinance of Heaven in this respect, might not be rendered void; but that they
may accomplish that which the Supreme Ruler pleases; and prosper in the station
which he has assigned them.

WHEN God has such a favor for his people, as to afford their Rulers his
gracious presence; his right hand and the light of his countenance will do
great things for them, and cause all things to go well with them.

ARE they involved in darkness or embarrassed with difficulties? The fountain
of light, will illuminate their minds, and irradiate their paths, and make
their duty plain before them.

ARE they beset with threatening dangers? He that is with them, is more, and
mightier, than all that are against them; and can easily deliver from the
strivings of the people within; and external violence from abroad.

THE presence of the Supreme Ruler, in the congregation of the mighty, as a fun
and a shield for their direction and defense, is at all times desirable; and
upon some emergencies of the highest importance. Such difficulties may perplex
their minds, and embarrass their paths, as that they may really not know what
to do. But the Father of light, if graciously present with them, can easily
point out to them, the path of duty and safety. He has an immediate access to
the human mind, and an entire command of it. As the rivers of water, he turns
it which way soever it pleases him. He can suggest such a train of thought,
and mode of conduct, as shall lead them out of the labyrinth, set their feet
upon a rock, and establish their goings.

DOES a spirit of sedition arise, and the contagion catch from breast to
breast; do the clouds collect and blacken, the clamor wax louder and louder,
and direct its course, against the constitution and guardians of the State: Is
it ready to burst out in contension, confusion, and every evil work? Oh haw
desirable is the gracious presence and powerful influence of the Supreme Ruler,
at such a period, with those who act under him.

SUCH seasons of danger and distress are not ideal. They have been realized
under every form of government; though more frequently perhaps under those of
the most liberal complexion. It is not the best system of civil rule; or the
most faithful and judicious administration, that is a certain security from
such evils.

UNDER the Jewish theocracy, where God himself condescended to be their King;
enacted their laws, civil as well as sacred; resided among them, exhibiting
continually, a visible appearance of his presence; conducting the affairs both
of Church and State, by the ministry of Moses; -- of whose appointment to
office by Heaven, his qualifications for it, and fidelity in it, they had the
most undeniable proofs. Yet under all these advantages for a quiet
administration, and obligations to a due submission; Korah and company, had the
address to effect a most dangerous insurrection. They first attach to their
interest, a number of leading characters; then raise their posse, and prepare
their charge.

BUT what charge could hold, against so eminent a Ruler as Moses? Whom has he
defrauded, or oppressed? Not a single individual. He declares before the
heart-searching God, he had not. "Respect them not (says he, in his solemn
address to the Diety) I have not taken one ass from them, neither have I hurt
one of them."

WHAT is the terrible grievance, or pretended grievance, that enables these
sons of sedition, to raise the whole Congregation against Moses and Aaron? It
is pride and imperiousness. Strange that this of all things, should be the
charge, when we are assured, from sacred record, that "the man Moses, was very
meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth." But what of
that? The charge takes, and that answers the purpose. "Ye take too much upon
you, (they complain) seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them:
Wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the Congregation of the Lord?

THIS daring rebellion was severely rebuked by the righteous Governor of the
World. The authors of it, and leaders in it, were partly consumed by fire from
the Lord: And for the rest, the earth opened her mouth, and they went down
quick into the pit.

BUT such a malignant effect had this insurrection upon the minds of the
people, that even this awful interposition of the great God of Heaven, was not
sufficient to quell it. The very next day there is a fresh rising, and a new
charge exhibited. Moses and Aaron are impeached with killing the people of the
Lord.

GRACIOUS Heaven! Is it possible, that when those sinners against their own
souls, were cut off by the hand of God, in the open view of thousands and ten
thousand witnesses; and by his creating a new thing too; causing "the earth to
open and swallow them up, with all that appertained to them," that the whole
Congregation should directly charge Moses and Aaron, with the murder of those
pious good people?

THIS was too much for infinite patience to endure. "Get ye up from this
congregation (says the Lord to Moses, prostrate before him as an humble servent
intercessor for them) that I may consume them in a moment." And though Moses
and Aaron stood in the gap, and at length turned away the anger of God: Yet it
was not till fourteen thousand seven hundred, were made monuments of the divine
displeasure; besides them that died about the matter of Korah.

THESE things happened to Israel of old for ensamples; and they are written for
our admonition on whom the ends of the world are come, and they admit of a
profitable improvement. We do not indeed in the present age expect miraculous
interpositions; yet when God is graciously present with his servants, he does
sometimes by a surprising coincidence of events, work out their salvation: So
that "whoever is wise and observes them, may understand the loving kindness of
the Lord." To proceed with our subject.

THE great Governor of the world, is not only present with those in authority,
as an observer of all the good they do for his people; and to afford every
assistance and support, as circumstances require: -- But as a righteous judge,
who critically observes the deportment of the whole, and of each individual,
and takes cognizance whenever they lose sight of the great end of their
appointment. He judges among the Gods.

THAT all-piercing eye which pervades the universe, and penetrates every
disguise, sees who constitute the Congregation of the Mighty. He perfectly
knows the various views they have; and the different improvement they make of
their talents and opportunities. They are raised above their brethren; not that
they may shine in affluence, and fare sumptuously every day; much less, that
they may indulge to inglorious ease and sloth; and least of all, that they
should pervert judgment, and justice; but that having a more extended circle of
duty, they may be more extensively useful. If however there are any who neglect
the business of their station, who permit their talents to lie by them useless,
as though folded up in a napkin, if content with the honors or profits of
preferment, they leave the duties to be performed by others: He who stands in
the midst of their assembly observes it. If through their delinquency,
"judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off: If truth
falls in the street, and equity cannot enter," the Lord sees it. "If they
forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to
perish; if they say, behold we knew it not: Does not He that pondereth the
heart consider it? and He that keeps their soul, does He not know it? and
shall He not render to every man according to his works?"

WHATEVER pleas any may substitute for the neglect of their duty, every
omission is noticed by the righteous Judge; and noted down in the book of his
remembrance. The abuse of their trust, exposes them to the just resentments of
those, who have consided their interests to their care; and to the present
rebukes of that God who judges in the earth. But whether they fall under the
effects of these now, or not -- a severe reckoning and an awful doom awaits
them at the great day: "Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

AND if mere indolence and inattention to duty, be thus resented by the Supreme
Ruler; those who are chargeable with direct and positive breaches of their
trust, will not escape his observation. If they judge unjustly, and accept the
persons of the wicked: If mischief be framed by a law, in effect and
constructively, however covertly done, and men are turned aside from their
right -- He who is higher than the highest regards such violent perversion of
judgment and justice. When this is the case, "all the foundations of the earth
or land, are out of course," as it is expressed in our context: For when
justice is preverted, what good can be expected? "The omniscient God sees, and
shall he not avenge such injustice as this? Hear that declaration of our
blessed Lord, which will apply to the point, and deserves the serious attention
of those who abuse their trust; "But if that evil servant shall say in his
heart, my Lord delayeth his coming; and shall begin to finite his
fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; the Lord of that
servant shall come, in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that
he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites."

AND now will not the consideration of the divine presence in the assembly of
political rulers, most powerfully engage them to a conscientious discharge of
the duties of their exalted station? If their minds are possessed with a lively
sense of his immediate inspection; they will, they must attend to the important
affairs that come before them, with great solemnity of spirit. -- Every matter
that is suggested, or submitted to their consideration, will be impartially
examined; and nothing suffered to pass merely upon the account of its plausible
appearance. In every debate the enquiry will be, not what measure will most
contribute to my popularity; to secure my present station; or advance me to an
higher? Nor, what will be most for my personal interest, or the advantage of
those with whom I am particularly connected? But what is fit, and right in
itself; and in the view of my most calm and retired thoughts, divested as much
as possible of passion and prejudice? What will stand the awful trial of the
Supreme Governor, and meet his final approbation?

A LIVELY sense of an ever present God, habitually impressed upon the mind,
will happily influence the general temper and conduct; and it will prove
peculiarly beneficial in pressing public emergencies: It will raise above that
fear of man which brings a snare; and lessen, if not utterly destroy the
force of temptation, from whatever quarter it originates. It will make them
steadfast, immovable, abounding in the work of the Lord. It will expand the
human heart, and inspire with a laudable ambition, to secure his sacred
sanction. In short it will form a principle of action, which viewed in its
proper connection and extent, is one of the noblest and best that can possess
the Ruler's breast.

THERE are it is true, other principles that have their use, and are often
improved by Providence to produce good effects: Such as a benevolent
disposition: -- A quick sense of honor: -- ambition of being distinguished as
of consequence in the State; and the like. But the influence of all these lower
principles, is very uncertain, especially in times of great trial and
temptation. If present interest, and present duty interfere, as they some times
may; what is there but a serious reference to the invisible God, that will
enable the ruler to hold fast his integrity? This indeed will engage him to go
through honor and dishonor, good report, and evil report; resolutely to
surmount, or charge through every difficulty and opposition that he meets with
in the line of duty. The testimony of his own conscience affords him a constant
support, a continual feast. "The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the
effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance forever."

FAITHFUL Rulers, acting uniformly under the influence of this most excellent
principle, have the fairest prospect of securing the acceptance and approbation
of their fellow-citizens; and thereby of protracting the period, and enlarging
the sphere of their usefulness. But whatever returns are made them, by an
ungrateful world or perverse generation; God is not unrighteous to forget their
work and labor of love. That peace of his which passes all understanding,
shall possess their hearts, and prove their support under every present
pressure. And in the nearest views of dissolution, the testimony of their
consciences, that they have walked before God, with a perfect heart, and have
done that which was right in his sight, will inspire a hope sure and steadfast.
And great shall be their reward in Heaven.

WILL not the subject, thus considered, naturally lead us to reflect, with the
most pleasing sensations, and sincerest gratitude to Heaven, upon our own happy
constitution of civil government. Emancipated from British domination, freed
from that exorbitant claim to a right to bind us in all cases whatever; which
like a horrid vortex threatened to swallow up all that was dear and sacred in
our view; and to reduce us to a state of absolute servility: Freed from these
evils, we have had the singular privilege of forming and establishing a frame
of government for ourselves: And, to render it the more perfect, of availing
ourselves of the examples and maxims of the sacred writings, as well as the
wisdom of all preceding ages. The thought that it is our own is a pleasing
recommendation. The treasure and the blood we have been obliged to expend in
order to its acquisition, must enhance its value. But especially the broad
basis it lays for equal liberty, civil and religious; the security it gives to
all our rights as men, and christians; the favorable aspect it has upon our
peace and prosperity in this life; and the advantages it affords of securing a
good foundation against the time to come; all conspire to raise our esteem even
to veneration. Strangers are not permitted to rule over us. "Our nobles are of
ourselves: And our Governor proceeds from the midst of us." Our best
characters, it is our privilege and our duty to select, out of all the people,
and from every part of the Commonwealth, to conduct our interesting affairs:
And, not by will or caprice, but fixed fundamental rules, which they are under
the oath of God to maintain sacred and inviolable. And if experience should
convince us that amendments or alterations, are eligible, or necessary; a
constitutional mode is pointed out, in which they may be effected, without
exposing us to those intestine jarrs and convulsions, which usually attend
alterations, and especially revolutions in other States. Happy, thrice happy
people, have we but wisdom to know, and virtue to improve, so excellent a
system.

WHAT thanks should we render to God most high, to God who performs all
things for us, for the favorable dispositions of his providence, which opened
the way for, and has enabled us to secure so excellent a constitution! Our
present situation is by no means the result of chance. The revolution that
introduced it was replete with brilliant events; such as engaged the attention
and admiration of distant nations; and will shine with distinguished luster in
the faithful page of history. The hand of Heaven has been conspicuous, in
raising up eminent characters for council and war, in uniting so extensive a
territory in a common cause; in giving us favor in the eyes of foreign powers,
and influencing them to afford us essential aid; and especially in a variety of
mavelous interpositions of his providence, in periods of greatest perplexity,
darkness and danger. How did the Supreme Ruler ride forth upon the Heavens for
our help; and in his Excellency upon the skies! How often did he make bare his
arm on our behalf, and exert the saving strength of his own right hand, till we
obtained the completion of our wishes; peace with established independence;
upon terms too, as honorable to America, as they were humiliating to Britain.

To hint at these interesting events, will not be deemed improper at this time,
as it serves to touch the secret springs of gratitude, and draw forth our whole
souls in love to him, to whom we are so infinitely indebted. And at the same
time, may remind our civil Fathers of the confidence the community repose in
them, by committing the Supreme powers of the constitution, both Legislative
and Executive, to their care: And the sacred obligations they lay themselves
under by accepting the trust.

HIS Excellency will consider his renewed call to the first seat of government
in this Commonwealth, by the voice of the people, as a decided proof of their
continued attachment to his person, and grateful acceptance of his past
services: And the confidence they still repose in his abilities and disposition
for future exertions in their favor.

HIS Honor the Lieutenant-Governour elect: The Honorable the Senate, and the
Honorable House of Representatives, advanced to their respective important
stations by the suffrages of their fellow-citizens, have now an happy
opportunity of improving the large share of public confidence they possess, in
contributing to the peace, order and felicity of the whole community. To this
great end, they will direct their united attention and exertions.

IN filling up the vacancies in the Legislature, and furnishing out a Council,
for the Supreme Executive, their eyes will be upon the faithful in the land,
upon men of known and tried abilities.

IN all the business that comes before our Honored Rulers, they will keep in
view the public good, as the great end of their appointment to office. By a
strict conformity to the principles of the constitution, they will if possible,
cut off all occasion for murmuring and complaint: And where any really exists,
effectually and expeditiously remove it.

THEY will keep a vigilant eye upon those restless spirits, who either from an
aversion to the necessary restraints of government, discontent at their own
situation, or embarrassments in their personal interest, through their own
folly, extravagance or unsuccessful speculations, are continually plotting
mischief, exciting the fears and jealousies of honest people, insinuating that
their liberties and privileges, are invaded, or in danger, etc. Such men are
the pests of society: They should be narrowly observed, and whenever their
factious disposition discovers itself by overt acts, seasonably and severely
animadverted upon; that others may avoid their crimes as they would their fate.
Inattention to evils of this kind in their rise is dangerous, and may prove
fatal.

To contribute to public happiness our civil Fathers will give every
encouragement to industry, so indispensably necessary to bring forward to our
aid, the numerous resources with which our country is blessed. By good laws and
proper encouragements, they will endeavor to improve our agriculture,
fisheries, commerce, arts and manufactures. These extensive fields will furnish
out full, and profitable employ for all parts of the community. And industry in
the improvement of these advantages, attended with proper economy, would enable
us to emerge from our embarrassments, discharge our debts, feel our
independence, and appear to advantage upon the great Theater of the world.

To answer the great end of their appointment, our Rulers will patronize
learning and the liberal arts. They will encourage our Schools and Academics,
and especially our University, so illustrious for the renowned characters it
has already produced: And to which the Commonwealth will still direct her eye
for "strong rods for the scepter of them that bare rule;" to her own sons
nurtured in that feat of learning, will she look for prophets, and to her young
men for Nazarites, to take her by the hand, and lead her in the way she ought
to go.

THEY will moreover endeavor the impartial distribution of justice and
judgment. "The God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke: He that rules
over men, must be just." Would they approve themselves to the Supreme Ruler or
answer the prime design of government; they must conscientiously attend to this
cardinal virtue. All their acts and laws must be founded upon this sure basis.
And all their promises and engagements, held sacred and inviolable.

THEIR promises, their plighted faith for the payment of the public debt, does
in a particular manner solicit their most serious attention. The creditors of
the public, attached to the interest of their country, in the most critical
juncture, cheerfully steped forward, and exposed both their persons, and their
fortunes, to the most threatening dangers, on her behalf. While some jeoparded
their lives in the high places of the field, and endured all the fatigues of a
severe and long continued war; through various perils, many times in cold and
nakedness, hunger and thirst, yea "in deaths often." Others risqued their
interest at the earnest call of their country, in the support of the common
cause, relying upon the public faith. Have they forfeited their right to their
interests, either from loan, or services performed? Britain perhaps, had her
arms been successful, might determine they had; for their treasonable attempts
against her authority. And those among ourselves, who have been uniformly
inimical to the American cause, may be pleased with the cruel mortification to
which they see them subjected. But is there an individual friendly to the
revolution, and possessed of the most moderate share of judgment and integrity,
who does not view them as highly meritorious?

THE decided part they took in favor of their much injured country, and in
periods too of its utmost perplexity and danger, is greatly to their honor.
They asserted her rights and supported her cause, not by a mere profusion and
flourish of words; but by actions, which admitted of no duplicity of sense or
meaning. They risqued their dear-earned interest, and their still dearer lives
for the freedom of their country. Heaven directed and assisted the noble
exertions, and crowned the arduous attempt with glorious success. Had they not
a right to expect, that government would honor themselves, by paying a sacred
regard to their engagements? Did not found policy, justice, honor, gratitude
and every ingenous principle which actuates the human mind, urge to this? Can
specious promises, under the names of certificates, indents, facilities,
due-bills, etc. couched in the fairest terms, while covering the grossest
deception, be considered as a honorable discharge of the public engagements? Is
this class of citizens, to look and expect till their eyes and hearts fail them
with waiting? Have not many already been as effectually ruined by their
dependence upon the public faith, as if their substance had been consumed by
the flames? Have not many, urged by sad necessity, been obliged to part with
their public securities, for a very tri^^^ing consideration? And must not more
directly share their severe fate, unless the justice of government interpose?
Some appear averse to this interposition, because it must now come too late
with respect to many. But if through the delinquency or delay of the public,
many of her faithful and tried friends, who have rendered her the most
essential service, are ruined; is this a good reason why they should make
thorough work, and dispatch the whole body of them?

"To turn away a man from his right, or subvert him in his cause, the Lord
approves not," in any case whatever. But are there not in the case before us
some circumstances, which give a peculiar coloring to the injustice done, to a
part at least, of the public creditors, by withholding their due?

WHEN David while in the strong hold, exclaimed, -- "O that one would give me
water to drink out of the well of Bethlehem; and three of the thirty chief,
break through the host of the Philistines, and drew it, and brought it to him;
he would not drink of it. My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing
(says he.) Shall I drink the blood of these men, that have put their lives in
jeopardy? For with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it." In this view
of the case, and as far as it will fairly apply to our army, -- is there an
individual, who would withold from them their due; and deprive them of that
bread they have acquired a righteous claim to, at the peril of their lives?
Again.

THE aged and helpless, and particularly widows and orphans, may be viewed as
another class of public creditors. These, incapable of vindicating their
rights, have a special claim to the patronage and protection of authority.
Injustice offered to these, and especially to the latter, is ever considered as
greatly aggravated. And some of the most pointed threatenings in the whole book
of God, are directly levelled against this sin. Says the Supreme Ruler of the
universe, -- Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child. If thou
afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me; I will surely hear their
cry, and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless."

THERE is other property, of which the community have availed themselves in the
late contest, the withholding of which, and especially the perversion of it,
from its original design, is perhaps carrying injustice to its highest pitch. I
mean that which has been devoted to God: Consecrated to charitable uses: The
pious donations to our University: The funds for the benefit of Churches, and
other societies: The provision made in one place and another, for the relief of
the aged and necessitous, the widow and orphan. What is an invasion of this
kind of property, but downright sacrilege? A crime that scarce admits of
excuse or extenuation. "If one man sin against another, the Judges shall judge
him: But if a man sin against the Lord, who shall plead for him?"

SHALL these claims upon the public be still suspended to give scope for
speculation? Shall they be vacated, or in any degree mutilated, because the
discharge of them is not to be effected, without laying a burden upon the
community? And this when we are assured, they are entirely competent to the
annual discharge of the interest, and lowering the principal, with a tax no
heavier in proportion to the present number, than was commonly paid before the
war? Would such pleas avail between man and man? Would they with good men and
true, in a Court of Justice? Should an individual endeavor to get rid of his
debts by such means, would it not consign his character to perpetual infamy?
Can any plead for it then in a community; especially when the example it
exhibits is so detestable in itself, and so destructive in its tendency, and
abominable in the eyes of a righteous God, who declares, "I hate robbery for
burnt sacrifice."

PERMIT me only to add here, Our honored Rulers among all their other
exertions for the good of the Commonwealth, will pay a particular attention to
the interest of Religion. Is it their governing aim to approve themselves to
God? They must personally think of, and practice, the graces and virtues of the
Christian character, without which it is not possible to please God. If they
have the interest of religion at heart, they will give it their determined
support: Not by instituting articles of faith, or forms of worship, or in any
manner infringing the rights of conscience; but by promoting none to places of
power and trust, but persons of good moral characters; by countenancing and
encouraging the ministers of religion; by a faithful execution of the laws for
the suppression of profaneness, immorality and impiety; and especially by an
exemplary attendance upon public worship, and gospel institutions. Examples,
and particularly of those in higher life, have a prevailing victorious force;
and by them good Rulers may eminently subserve the interests of piety and
virtue.

"GODLINESS is profitable to all things; having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come." It insures the favor and blessing of
heaven. It contributes to public happiness, by engaging all orders of men to an
upright discharge of their several duties. Rulers possessed of religious
principles, will approve themselves "Ministers of God for good," to their
people. And subjects under similar influences, will yield due obedience; not
merely for wrath, or through fear of punishment; but from a far nobler
principle, -- "for conscience sake." Religion in this view is so far from being
a vain thing, that it is our life.

To these articles, and indeed to the whole circle of the duties of their
elevated stations, our honored civil Fathers will view themselves as under
sacred obligations to attend. It is fit and reasonable in itself, that you do
so. Heaven requires it of you; and the public good, in which your own private
happiness, and that of your dearest connections is involved, demands it. But
there is no consideration can have a more commanding force, than that which our
text holds up to view. May you all feel its fullest effect. God stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty. The Supreme Ruler, before whom the most exalted
intelligences of the upper world, prostrate with veiled faces, is present with
you. He knows you all by name. Your principles, your views and the inmost
recesses of your souls, are all naked and open to his inspection. He is at hand
for your assistance. If you devoutly implore it, he will graciously afford it.
And if you have it, and improve it; we may hope for clear evidence, from your
happy and successful administration, that He is with you of a truth. -- He
judges among the Gods. He carefully notices your conduct, with a view to a
righteous retribution. "Though you are called Gods, yet you must die like men;"
and like your brethren of the dust appear before his dread tribunal, without
any remains of your present civil distinctions. Actuated by this solemn
thought; conducting with a serious reference to the broad eye of heaven, and
the recompense of reward; you will have the fairest prospect of acquitting
yourselves with honor, of being approved of God, and accepted by the multitude
of your brethren. Yea, it (...) give you boldness in the day of Christ Jesus.
Having been faithful in a few things, he will make you rulers over many; and
admit you to the joy your Lord.

How solicitously concerned does it becomes us all to be; that we avail
ourselves to the utmost of our present inestimable advantages; and especially
that we do not forfeit and forego them, by our own folly and perverseness!

OUR advantages are much every way. The lines are fallen to us in pleasant
places; and we have a goodly heritage. The land we possess, like the chosen
residence of God's favorite people of old, is "a land of hills and valleys,
and drinks water of the rain of heaven. The eyes of the Lord our God are
always upon it, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year."
It amply repays the toils of the industrious husbandman; yielding a rich supply
of the necessaries, and most substantial articles of life; and a good
surplusage for the purposes of commerce. Our fields, the uncultivated
wilderness, the fisheries, the trade, and numerous arts and manufactures, offer
business and bread, to every industrious individual; business suited to every
different genius; and a decent support, and what in other countries would be
called luxurious living.

OUR land is a "valley of vision." We are blessed with the bright beams of gospel
light and grace, which afford the highest advantages, for securing an
inheritance in a better, in a heavenly country, when our connections with this
are over.

THE establishment of the new federal system, so favorable to a firm, and at
the same time free government; so well adapted to brace the nerves of civil
authority, through the whole frame; "to establish justice, insure domestic
tranquillity, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and
secure the blessings of liberty for ourselves and our posterity:" The
consideration which our firm bond of union will give us among the nations of
the earth: The bright and pleasing prospect of enjoying the fruits of all our
exertions and expense for liberty and independence, under the wise councils,
and judicious regulations, of those eminent patriots, from the various parts of
the union, which compose our national government; and especially under the
presidency of that illustrious Chief, in whom we all concentre our views with
an unanimity as desirable, as it is unexampled.

THESE advantages we now possess, are great in a separate view; but combined,
are they not singular, and unparralleled, by any part of the whole habitable
world? May I not with the utmost propriety, as well as warmest emotions,
congratulate our honored Rulers, this respectable audience, and our whole
land, upon our present promising situation? More particularly upon the new era
so happily, so auspiciously commenced. The tranquil easy advance to this new
stage of political existence; and all the pleasing scenes which providence is
opening to our view. Have we not the most flattering presages of realizing all
that felicity so beautifully pictured out by the sweet Psalmist of Israel?
"That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may
be as corner-stones, polished after the similitude of a palace; that our
garners may be full, affording all manner of store; that our sheep may bring
forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets; that our oxen may be strong
to labor; that there be no breaking in or going out; no complaining in our
streets." Happy is the people that is in such a case; yea happy is that people
whose God is the Lord.

SAYS an ingenious foreigner with respect to these United States; -- "It is
impossible not to wish ardently, that this people may attain to all the
prosperity of which they are capable. They are the hope of the world. They may
become a model to it. They may prove the fact, that men can be free, and yet
tranquil. They may exhibit an example of political liberty, of religious
liberty, of commercial liberty, and of industry. The asylum they open to the
oppressed of all nations, should console the earth. The case with which the
injured may escape from oppressive governments, will compel Princes to become
just and cautious. And the rest of the world will gradually open their eyes
upon the empty illusions with which they have been hitherto cheated by
politicians."

WITH all these advantages, greater perhaps than providence has ever committed
to any one people "since the transgression of the first pair;" with all our own
raised expectations, and that of others; should we through our folly and
perverseness, miscarry, alas how contemptible shall we appear! How criminal and
wretched shall we be!

AND is there not really danger sufficient to suggest the idea? To put us upon
our guard, if not to alarm our fears? Virtue is justly represented, as the
spirit of a republican government. Have we a sufficiency to animate ours? If
the spirit be departed the form will be of but little worth. Had the people of
these States, in fact, possessed those measures of public and private virtue,
which the consederation gave them credit for; that might have proved a
foundation for many generations. Experience has given the most unequivocal
proofs, that it did not possess energy sufficient for us. And though we promise
ourselves much from the National Constitution, so happily effected, organized
and commenced; yet we may by no means expect to be happy under it, without our
own consent and cooperation too.

IF we are not prudent and cautious in our elections to important public
offices: If we are impatient of the necessary restraints and expense of good
government: If we indulge to mean groundless jealousies and suspicions of those
in authority; and give a loose rein to the vices too prevalent in the present
day; and especially if we get beyond the restraints of religion, and bid adieu
to the fear of God: Have we not every reason to expect, that our most pleasing
prospects will be soon closed, and succeeded by the deepest gloom?

MAY we unite in guarding against this danger; and exert ourselves for the
support of order, peace and good government; which is really no other than our
own support, and that of our nearest and dearest interests. Let us endeavor to
derive a blessing upon the administration of government, by addressing ardent
prayers, supplications, intercessions and thanksgiving, to the throne of Grace,
for all who are in authority. Let us cultivate a condescending, benevolent,
pacific and public spirit: And especially by repentance and reformation, and a
careful practice of the various graces which constitute the christian
character; let us strive to conciliate the favor of Heaven. This will have the
happiest aspect upon our tranquillity. "If God gives quietness, who then can
make trouble? But if he hides his face, who can behold him, whether it be done
against a Nation or a man only?"

To conclude, let us all of every character, seriously remember, that the
all-seeing eye of the Supreme Governor and Righteous Judge of the world, is not
confined to the congregation of the Mighty. It runs to and fro through the
whole earth, beholding the evil and the good. It critically observes the temper
of our hearts, and the tenor of our lives: how we conduct in our several
stations; whether we improve, or neglect, the talents committed to our trust;
whether we make his approbation our governing principle, or live as without God
in the world. We have each our station and work assigned us by our common Lord;
and are under a sacred injunction to occupy till he comes. Come he most
certainly will; and every eye shall behold him: And every one receive an
irreversible award from his mouth, according to the deeds done in the body. Let
this solemn awful thought have its due weight on all our hearts, and it will
have the best effect. It will make us such manner of persons as we ought to be
in all holy conversation and godliness. Thus may we pass with improvement the
varying scenes of this mortal life; and finally be admitted to a kingdom that
cannot be moved; to a city that has foundations whose maker and builder is GOD.

AMEN.

