A DISSERTATION, In Answer to a late LECTURE ON THE Political State of AMERICA,
Read in NEW HAVEN, January 12th, 1789, During the adjourned Sessions of the
Honorable Legislature. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A short POEM spoken at the same Time.

By WILLIAM HILLHOUSE, jun. Esquire. ATTORNEY AT LAW.

NEW HAVEN -- Printed by T. and S. GREEN.

ALTE EXTULISTI, UT GRAVIUS RUEREM. Sen. in Oct.
THE defects of the old Articles of Confederation were universally felt, and
acknowledged, and a dissolution of the federal Compact appeared to be the
inevitable consequence, of a pertinacious adherence, to a system so inadequate.
It neither provided the means of internal safety, nor external defense. A truth
so apparent, that those who oppose the present system, do not rely on the old
"Articles of Confederation:" but as there is no alternative, boldly assert that
a dissolution of the Union, would be preferable to an efficient federal
Government.

The indulgence of a candid Audience, is therefore requested, while we revert
to the enquiry, Is an efficient federal Government essential to the peace and
happiness of this country?

I am sensible that a subject which has been so often handled, like a thrice
told tale, palls upon the sense: Yet as I cannot choose my field, and as the
path is pointed out in which I must follow -- their patience is solicited: and
besides, however irksome the discussion, the subject is of importance.

My audience will likewise pardon the many inaccuracies which will appear, in a
hasty dissertation; as many circumstances prevented an attention to the subject
till within a short time.

The design of government is to protect the life and property of the subject,
and that government best answers the purposes of its institution which most
effectually secures the enjoyment of these; with the least possible impeachment
or diminution.

The reasons which urge to an Union, go to the very essence of government, and
involve in them the only means of providing for our external security and
defense, or our internal safety and peace.

An extensive ocean, it is true, separates the eastern, from this western
hemisphere, and many from thence infer, that nature has placed between them an
insuperable barrier; and that our political measures should have no reference
to the measures there pursued. But has she placed an insuperable barrier
between their commercial interest, and ours? or has she restricted the objects
of ambitious pursuit? In the first division of the subject, the protection of
commerce strikes the mind, as an object peculiarly important.

In the prosecution of this, our vessels are already lead to traverse seas
contiguous to the dominions of every maritime power in Europe; and to
circumscribe the globe. And what can protect the adventurers in such extensive
pursuits, from the insults of the haughty, the restrictions of the designing,
or the depredations of the lawless; but a respectable national character, and a
sufficient national force?

That the potentates of Europe are possessed of this haughty demeanor, I need
not assert; nor that many of these look with a jealous eye, on the rising
greatness of this country, as being one day capable of rivaling and perhaps
supplanting them in their most favorite plans of commerce. These from motives
of pride, rivalship, and interest, will oppose its progress. And what nation
will submit to the insults of the haughty, the impositions of the designing, or
the depredations of the lawless, merely from a jealousy of each other?
Americans will not. What has encouraged the exactions and impositions to which
we have been obliged to submit, but our own weakness! What, but this, has
emboldened a nest of pirates on the Barbary coast, to capture our merchantmen,
and massacre their crews, or drag them into a slavery worse than death! -- Do
not the lives, and sufferings of our countrymen, (thus massacred and enslaved)
call aloud for indignation and vengeance, rather than for the stipulated reward
of treacherous cruelty!

While a contracted policy, and jealousy induce the powers of Europe to
tolerate -- to foster in their bosoms such stains to humanity; the Union will
enable America to wipe them from the escutcheon of mankind.

I am sensible that many of the advocates for the power of annihilation, aware
of the truth and force of these observations, strike at the root, and deny the
necessity of commerce* and would consider the people of this country -- "As
fixed like plants to some peculiar spot,
To suck nutrition, propagate and rot" --


But why has the Almighty implanted in their breast, the spirit of enterprise;
which no people in the universe seem to possess in a higher degree? And from
whence are we to be supplied with the various exotic productions, which are not
merely conducive to the enjoyment, but to the preservation of life? Were we to
depend on a precarious importation from foreigners, we should find ourselves
much more in their power than we now are; and obliged to submit to frauds and
impositions, both as to value and quality, of their merchandise. Unable to
furnish ourselves, they would send such as would answer no other markets; and
in such scanty supplies as to demand their own price. Besides the produce of
our country, though of the most substantial kind, is such as almost every country
affords, and foreigners might not find such a want of this as to induce the
necessity of an application here. Especially as those powers, who are possessed
of adjacent territory, would, for the purposes of emolument to themselves, and
detriment to us, endeavor to supply every market with the avails of their own
colonies.

By restricting commerce, we should cut off the life and source of industry;
and pave the way for indolence, and a train of vices more destructive to
community, than those arts of elegance and (...)it is said, and justly said)
are the concomitants (...) people will raise more than is sufficient for their
own consumption, and to supply the demands of foreign markets. To evince this,
I appeal to those countries, which by their situation, are secluded from the
benefits of commerce, or which have not the spirit to avail themselves of their
local advantages: Such being generally sunk in ignorance, effeminacy and vice.
And to what cause are we to impute the disparity observable between the
improved nations of Europe, and the most ignorant Horde of Tartars, or the most
effeminate people of China or India, but to that spirit of enterprise, which
animates the intercourse of the former, and a destitution which sinks the
latter below the level of man?

In the first stages of society, and when uncivilized by the arts of
refinement, mankind are in a state of hostility, and wage war as uniformly as
the beasts of the forest engage. Ancient Europe, and modern America, afford
striking specimens of this. To meliorate the ferocity natural to the human
mind, to enlarge its faculties, to eradicate local prejudices, and to extend
the principles of toleration, are the effects of commercial intercourse.

A communication with foreign powers, will on the principle of an equilibrum,
attract from countries over stocked with inhabitants, and thus prove a fruitful
source of population an object of the greatest importance in a territory of
such extensive limits. But without an efficient federal government, even this
would not take effect, as those who have been accustomed to a regular
administration, consider a permanent system as of the utmost importance, and
the security of property as the great object of society. Nor can our commerce
be retrieved, or placed on a respectable footing, but by general measures
wisely concerted and strictly adhered to.

The Briton on the North, the Spaniard on the South, and the Savage on the
West, add weight to these suggestions, and speak more forcibly the necessity of
uniting.

It is to little purpose to say that we are separated from the two first by a
watery tract of three thousand miles extent; when by their territorial claims
in this country they are bro't to our neighborhood. By means of these it will
be more peculiarly in their power to annoy our trade, and obstruct our
fisheries, which, if protected, might prove the means of support to the
industrious, and a source of wealth to the community. And have they not shown a
disposition to avail themselves of every circumstance to our disadvantage? They
prohibit us the navigation of the seas and the entrance of rivers common to
both; they exclude us their harbors; and to enforce these mortifying
restrictions, seize our vessels with instances of conduct the most cruel and
unjust, and even insult our weakness by withholding those places ceded to us by
the treaty of peace, and which might be some security against further
encroachments. "If these things are done in the green tree, what will be done
in the dry!" If these things are done when we are in some measure united, what
may we not expect when disunited and perhaps contending among ourselves? Our
apprehensions will be further awakened on this subject when we consider, that
by their increase of power in these settlements which continually populate,
they may at some future period endanger our existence as states.

The dread of the savage tribes extends, at present, no farther than to those
places immediately exposed to their predatory incursions. At some future period
however, they may excite a more serious alarm. Their dominion is even now over
empires still unexplored, and they possess all that devoted attachment to the
national cause, that martial enthusiasm and patience of fatigue which have
always constituted the most essential ingredients in military achievement.
'Twas thus the Romans were invincible, and by these united with a religious
zeal, the Moors, the Arabs, and the Saracens formed that irresistible torrent,
which under Mahomet and his successors, with a desolating force overspread half
the world. And the want of effect so conspicuous in the present operations of
the savage tribes, ought to be imputed more to their want of union, and
consequent desultory mode of attack, than to any other cause; but should some
Tamerlane arise among their scattered Hordes, they might still be formidable,
especially if assisted by the neighboring powers.

Such are the dangers which threaten from without; and shall we tamely submit
to every exaction, and neglect to provide the means of defense; or shall we not
avail ourselves of our own natural advantages? -- That general measures only
can operate effectually to these great purposes, and that an efficient federal
government is necessary in concerting or enforcing a compliance with these, is
evident from the conduct of the states even during the war. In times of danger,
individual interest is forgotten in the general concern. And the war we should
suppose would have been a sufficient memento to the states to act in concert
and in conformity to the general measures: Yet this was not found sufficient.
Many of the states during the period of the utmost danger, were totally
regardless of the general interest and safety -- seeking amidst the common
calamity to promote their own particular views, and to establish claims in
themselves unjust, and leaving the states destitute of the means of supporting
even defensive operations, (such was the contrariety of interests) and those
seeds of disaffection and dissension had then taken root, the rapid growth of
which has since occasioned the most serious alarm.

And suffer me now to call your attention to those considerations which come
still nearer, and which arise within the states themselves.

"Neighboring nations," says a writer of note, "are natural enemies to each
other." Jealousy of power, and contrariety of interest are sufficient to awaken
an apprehension of injury, and experience proves how often this rises into
action; to which source may be traced almost every war of which history treats.
And the more nearly they are connected, the more inveterate is their animosity;
unless there exists a general power as a common arbiter. Greece, while divided
into distinct states, and till subjected by a foreign power, exhibited a
continued scene of horror, bloodshed and confusion. England during the
Heptarchy, and England and Scotland till the Union, exhibited a similar scene.
But not to multiply examples from the same causes, may we not expect similar
effects? And ought we not to use every precaution to guard against such an
event? War is dreadful! but shield thou Guardian Power this country from the
horrors of civil discord! And when we find in addition to those which generally
exist, many causes of dissension peculiar to these states; our apprehension of
the consequences, and endeavors to guard against these should be proportionably
increased. A rivalship in trade, and the imposts and exactions of particular
states, would prove no inconsiderable scource of animosity. The territory ceded
to the Union by the treaty, would be an object, and probably the subject of
contention. The interfering claims of different states to the same territory
would lead to a similar issue. The general debt of the confederacy both from
the mode of adjustment, and mode of payment, would involve many difficulties;
the inability of some states, the disaffection or dishonesty of others, would
each occasion deficiences and delays, which would excite the clamors of
domestic creditors, and the resentment of states more punctual in their
engagements; while foreign creditors would probably speak a more energetic
language, and by the assistance of national authority, resort to a compulsory
recompense.

It is suggested, that there can be no danger of a war between these States, as
they could derive no advantage therefrom. Nor are the combatants in private
quarrels benefited thereby; yet both states and individuals will resort the
ultima ratio. But wars it is said are undertaken to gratify the ambitious
projects of a few, and the people have no concern in their origin. I believe we
shall find, however, that most wars have originated, from the disposition of
the people; whose resentment generally anticipates the views of their rulers;
and often contrary to their wish, precipitates them into measures in conformity
thereto. Instances of this occur frequently in the history of England and other
countries. This spirit is most prevalent in popular governments, and these most
frequently undertake wars from petty provocations and trifling causes, being
more under the influence of turbulence and faction. The examples of Greece,
Carthage, the states of Italy, and the United Netherlands, authorize this
assertion. It is again, however urged, that from the mild effects of the
Christian Religion, or from some other cause, the ferocity of mankind is
softened, and that they are much less inclined to war than in former ages. -- I
have heard of an individual, but never of a national Christian, and the
frequent and recent instances which we have of the contrary disposition in the
examples above referred to, and others which might be adduced, sufficiently
refute the assertion, and prove that mankind are still the same. -- But we come
now to the great specific of these political quacks -- the people of these
States (say they) are too wife, and just to contend with each other. Although the
Utopian idea of the reign of reason and perfect justice is long since exploded;
yet these visionaries adopt an idea equally absurd. A review of the conduct of
the States, and the situation of the country when the Convention met, will
correct this erroneous hypothesis, and furnish additional motives to embrace
the Union. The total neglect of particular states, even in time of danger, to
provide their quotas for the common defense, discovered the folly, of mere
requisition. An avoidance of many of the articles of the treaty, by several
states, involved the residue in the disagreeable consequences of a fresh breach
of national faith; showed how far their political honesty might be relied on,
and would at some future period have been attended with more serious effects;
and I wish this State did not justly come under the imputation. In fine, the
ruin of our trade, our ship-yards deserted, our harbors without shipping, the
loss of public credit, the poverty of our country, and the burdens of the day,
were but a small part of the catalogue of our distresses.

The political horoscope wore a most threatening aspect -- the cloud of
discontent hung over our heads like the flaming sword over the devoted city;
and the rushing, rough blast of commotion already prognosticated, the bursting
of the storm! States stood watching with eager looks, and waiting for the
signal of onset; and had, ever this, unsheated their swords in their divisions
against each other, or in their rebellions against themselves. Anarchy, with
his many heads, and Discord, with her flaming torches, were discovered in all
their ghastly shapes, and the welkin involved in a darker gloom, presented in
prospect, the country desolated with all the horrors, and distresses of civil
war! But the recital is painful -- And hide, oh! hide from view, the hideous
group! and see the curtain drop -- the spirit of conciliation hovers over the
land! and the Sun of union has arisen!

Such, and many additional reasons which might be suggested (...) the necessity
of an efficient federal government. The objections to such a system will now
claim your attention.

"That the system is new, and that every innovation is dangerous and
detrimental," like many suggestions of bigoted form-wife politicians, arises
from want of information; or that incorrigible temper which induces its
votaries to reject every improvement of modern date; and every truth which
their grand mothers have not taught them.

It is from this principle that certain nations still adhere to those
preposterous customs, which their forefathers had practiced. It is from this
principle that the disciples of Mahomet and Confucius reverence the chapter of
the Sheep, and believe in the doctrine of the Avesta, -- The thunders of the
Conclave and the flames of the Inquisition were long levelled at the germe of
inquiry and blighted the expanding bud: And even the inventors or abettors of
the true system of the universe were obliged to renounce the discovery as a
dangerous heresy.

This disposition will equally arrest the progress of arts and the progress of
truth: reason becomes the dupe of prejudice, deductions vain, and every
disquisition civil or religious ends in thus it has been held and so believed.
Nothing so much as this prevents man from being as perfect as reason can make
him; nothing so much as this the universal spread of truth. When, Oh when shall
the time arrive that the inhabitant of the Ganges and the Rio de la Plate shall
acknowledge the same belief! then shall prejudice, bigotry and illusion be
dissipated, this and this shall be the reign of truth!

'But why (it is said) should we wish for a change of system, since no people
in the universe are happier than were the people of these, and of this state in
particular, under the former arrangement?' A change of circumstances renders
necessary a change of measures. We were formerly a minor under the tuition of a
guardian; we are now an independent state; and the other states are alike
situated: we must now consider, and treat them, for such will be their conduct
to us, as rivals in interest and power, or as equals and confederates. We have
found how totally inadequate the former system of confederation has proved; and
how many objects of rivalship may arise. Should we not therefore endeavor to
avoid the mischiefs which we have experienced, and others which may ensue? And
why should the accidental or arbitrary lines drawn by Great Britain, in the
division or distribution of this country still be adhered to, if found
inconvenient? Is it to gratify a preposterous habit or attachment? or to
subserve the purposes of certain individuals, interested in the continuance of
the state establishments?

'The territory of these States, (say the objectors) is too large for a
republican form of government.' That a republican form of government, is
calculated only for small districts, is an idea derived by not attending to the
distinction between a democracy, and a republic.

In a democracy, the people deliberate in a body; in a republic, they may act
by their representatives. There are many writers, and among those of modern
authority, Montesquieu, Hume, Price, Adams and others, who point out a
republic, or a confederated republic, as the most eligible form of government,
for an extensive territory.

"But how (it is said) will the people know those whom they elect to office."
To obviate this, the choice may be, and in fact by the present Constitution, is
made by districts or states. And the acquaintance which those appointed have
with each part of the Confederacy, will enable them to judge of the resources
of each.

'That no general rule of taxation can be devised, to operate equally through the
states,' is an objection which may be made, to every mode of taxation, in the
most petty district; and in the present instance is premature. The resources of
the confederated whole, will be considerable, by the sale of the unappropriated
lands -- by imposts and other sumptuary regulations, which to the separate
states, or to the states when divided into partial confederacies, would be sunk
to nothing, for want of some general rule of collection, or which would be
worse squandered in a contention to decide the right, or rather the power of
appropriation: for in such cases the power would commonly decide the right. By
an oeconimical application of these resources, direct taxation for the
exigencies of the union may be avoided. Nor is it an idea that it will be
necessary, unless on some unforeseen emergency, which it is hoped will never
take place.

In answer to these, some of the advantages of an extensive, confederate
republic will be adverted to, and on this subject the venerable Montesquieu
observes, "There is a kind of government possessed of all the internal
advantages of a republic and external force of a monarchy. This is a
confederate republic, being a convention, by which several smaller states agree
to become members of a larger one, and is an assemblage of societies capable of
increasing by new associations.

A republic of this kind, able to withstand external force, may subsist without
internal corruption, and by its form, prevents all manner of inconveniences.

The intrigues of party will not influence public decisions, as in a small
district; nor has an individual that opportunity to raise himself above the
control of the law. "Should a popular insurrection happen in one of the
confederated states, the others are able to quell it. Should abuses creep into
one part, they are reformed by those that remain sound." And such a government,
composed of small republics enjoys the internal happiness of each."

But why, (it may be asked) if such are the advantages, of an extensive,
confederate republic, have we not more frequent instances of these, among the
nations of the world? -- It would be an herculean task, unless every
circumstance favored the event, to persuade the people of any extensive
territory, to submit to an uniform plan, or system of government. So uncertain
the popular decision, and so different their opinions, on the most common, and
yet interesting subjects. Of this we had sufficient evidence in the late public
deliberations; in which, however, a remarkable coincidence of circumstances
occurred. By contrasting the situation of this, and other countries, we shall
find reasons which would here justify the wish, and would there preclude the
possibility of success.

Here a similarity of language prevailed; there a confusion or contrariety of
languages soon took place; strong prejudices and local attachments had not here
taken root, as was the case with other countries at a much earlier period than
that of which history treats; here the people were at liberty to deliberate;
there the people were shackled with despotic forms, and bound in chains beyond
the possibility of reprieve, before government was considered as an art; before
they had deliberated on the subject, or even considered themselves as
interested in the decision. Here a general toleration of religious sentiment
and an uniformity of principle was a most happy omen. There systems of bigotry
and a spirit of intolerance had early closed the avenues of coalition. Yet even
there Henry the Great, and Fourth of France, and Elizabeth, of illustrious
memory, formed the plan of a confederate republic, comprehending the powers of
Europe. Happy would it have been for mankind had this system of philanthropy
taken place; it would have done away that contracted policy, and by
constituting a common arbiter, have eradicated those seeds of jealousy, which
had before, and which have since involved the nations in many a bloody conflict.

If such the happy concurrence of circumstances, how unpardonable should we be
to neglect the present opportunity to establish the peace and freedom of an
extensive continent? Such an event, by creating a balance in favor of universal
liberty, would constitute America the common arbiter and avenger of the injured
rights of mankind, and constrain the kings and rulers of the earth to "reign
with more mildness and mercy."

Some, however, object to the form of the confederacy, and assert, 'that a
connection with the southern states will precipitate us into many disagreeable
consequences.' We should suppose by the language held forth on this occasion,
that any correspondence with them would be attended with a contagious effect;
but experience on the trial discovers advantages both political and moral in
the union.

'Their ideas of government, it is said, are carried much beyond our principle
or ability.' This objection, like many others, is unfounded in fact, and made
to excite the apprehensions of the uninformed. Were not the governments in the
southern and northern states equally democratical? and are they not equally so
at the present time, and the spirit of the people equally opposed to the
encroachments of an Aristocracy?

It is said, "they are depraved." In every country indeed there is a mixture of
the virtuous and vicious* but are those who suggest this without a fault? --
Precious immaculates! -- But you are not obliged to contract from them their
vicious habits, either by a moral necessity, or by the articles of the compact!

To correct, however, an opinion so erroneous, as that the Southern States are
remarkably depraved, we need only point to the many exemplary, and illustrious
characters, who from that part of the union, during the late war, guided the
councils of America; and directed her arms. And among these we contemplate with
pleasure, the most distinguished ornament of the present age, his country's
boast; and since the mystic, Heaven's best gift to man.

"They are rich" it is said, "and we poor." But do we not find the same
simplicity of manners generally prevalent through the whole? and is not the
uniformity surprising, making allowance for the difference of climate, and the
frequent accession of foreigners there made? -- Are they not brothers, -- bone
of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, for many of their leading men are from
among us; speaking the same language, and differing less than people of the
same district often differ in other countries? Indeed, I consider the
difference which subsists, as a happy circumstance. We can supply each other
with the productions of every climate; if they are possessed of a more
profitable staple, and import more freely, we shall partake of the benefits of
an impost arising therefrom: they will add to our resources, and we shall add
to their strength. Besides, erecting distinct confederacies, would be creating
powerful rivals; and presenting them with arms, which soon they would plunge to
each others hearts.

"But this will induce" it is said, "the necessity of paying the national
debt." And have they the effrontery to urge this as a reason against its
adoption? If it will enforce a compliance with the calls of justice and
humanity, it will, and certainly ought to have the sufferage of every honest
mind; a neglect of which has already deprived the decrepid, the widow, and the
fatherless, of that pittance for which they had suffered -- for which their
husbands and fathers had bled; and constrained them to pine in silence, and
solitude, the want of that little all; which although it could not have dried
their tears, might have relieved their distress. May the time arrive, when
their acknowledgements shall arise, like incense before the throne of the great
Avenger of wrongs, and with the effusions of gratitude, wash away the record of
their sufferings!

"But the tendency of this system, say its opposers, is to form a national
character, and to give these states a degree of importance and weight with the
other powers, and no nation which is or aims to be great can be happy." -- Be
little and be happy, is their motto. I had always imbibed an idea, that a good
character was beneficial both to nations and to individuals. If to be
contemptible and insignificant contributes to their felicity, they are in the
direct road to the accomplishment of their wishes: God grant, however, that
this country may never practice the principles which they inculcate." "But is
not this (they ask) a mere bubble, in which the great body of the people are
not interested, and by which a few only are benefited?" A national character is
the soul of society, and each individual feels its influence; it is like blood
to the human body of which every part partakes. -- And ill betides the state
whose meanest subject is not jealous of her' rights, and emulous of her glory:
it is the firmest bulwark of the commonwealth. -- The ideas of a Roman and his
country were inseparable; and a British tar will sacrifice his life for the
honor of Old-England. Now is the son of Columbia deaf to her calls? follow him
to his cottage which he has reared by his industry, and from which he has
taught the forest to retire; is not this dear to him? would it be so if under
the despot of Constantinople, or dey of Algiers? And is it not doubly dear for
his country's sake? View him in the little circle of his family and neighbors;
he recounts the names of those who have done honor to their country; he recites
their actions; and derives an importance from the recital. Name the injuries
which his country has received, his cheek glows with indignation, and he flies
forth to meet the aggressor: mention the deed of shame in which she bore a
part, he hangs his head, the conscious blush passes over his countenance; it is
the blush of shame. Rest in peace thou honest son of industry, and may the
conscious blush again never tinge thy cheek. May thou enjoy the fruits of
thy labor, and sacred may they remain. Nor shall thy hard earnings be applied
to support an idle pageantry and a voluptuous court: for not such will be the
consequence of an institution, formed equally to promote your happiness and
security. -- May thy country still be dear, and long may thou remain her
strength and pride.

"But it will involve us in all the maze of European politics." -- In which
instance, however, are we most likely to become dupes to the policy of other
powers, in our separate capacity, or under the present system? This question,
from the observations which have been made, and others which will occur, admits
of an easy solution. As distinct states we should neither maintain a dignity of
conduct, or independence of character; we should be the puppets of the play,
played off against each other for the amusement of the performers, and to
subserve the purposes of those concerned in the management of the scene.

But here the appointment of Ambassadors, Placemen, and Pensioners, is like a
hedious apparition, conjured up to disturb the disordered imaginations of these
political knights-errant; and which, Quixote like, they encounter with all fury
and formality of the Windmill Brethren. Unfortunately for them, but
fortunately for us, the reality does not exist under the present system: for
the system has not begun its operation: and there is no clause providing that
such an arrangement shall take place. The appointment of ambassadors and other
officers will be under the direction of those whom we shall constitute, and
will not take place but for the general good. If unnecessary offices have been
established these may be abolished: and we trust in the wisdom and integrity of
our Rulers, to lessen as much as possible, the burdens of the day; and to guard
against every unnecessary imposition.

The rapid progress of the states in improvements of every kind, the
institution of cities, and the establishment of the Cincinnati, are likewise
called forth from the dark cavern of jealousy and suspicion to frighten and
intimidate the weak; and with as much propriety and judgment as many silly
people call on Grey-beard and Bloody-bones to frighten their children. Were
such groundless apprehensions to govern our decision, we should endeavor to
arrest the progress of every improvement, and relapse as soon as possible into
a state of nature. -- It is not the introduction of arts, it is not the
progress of improvement which accelerates the ruin of kingdoms, and the
dissolution of empires; but these are their surest support. And in conformity
to this sentiment, an observing foreigner speaking of the American Revolution
remarks, That it exhibits at one point of view, the experience of age, with the
honest energy of youth.

How the late institution of cities has or can prove unfavorable to liberty,
except that of the bristly herd, I am unable to discover; perhaps it was on
that ground that the objection arose. How far the matchless pen of a -- might
be able to effect a revolution in favor of that much injured species of
animals, I will not pretend to say. It would at least be employed with as
little detriment to the peace and good order of society, as on some late
occasions.

And why thou disciple of Edanus, this wanton attack on the members of a
society, the idea of which is founded in patriotism and benevolence? Is it
their characters against which you object? Their characters are as much above
the shafts of your censure or calumny, as the utmost effort of my praise or
approbation. Or would you wish Americans to revive the punishment of the
Ostracism, and proscribe every virtue? -- This alas would be a cruel
retribution for those services, by which they have established the freedom of
their country, and their own immortal fame!

Is it the institution which you disapprove? This is sacred to the offices of
friendship and humanity. -- After a series of services and common danger, the
fatigues of which they had endured with a patient fortitude, and which had
endeared them to each other; might they not at the moment of separation indulge
the sad, but soothing reflection, that they should again meet, with at least
some of the companions of their sufferings? when they might renew the image of
former days, or drop the tear of sympathy to the memory of those whose hearts
no longer beat with the thrillings of social joy; and who were no longer seen
in the circle of the brave! At the threshold of this institution stand
benevolence and humanity, and cast the pitying eye and stretch the liberal hand
to the necessitous, to the companion in want, to the widow, and to the orphan
in distress.

Or is it the conduct of these which excites the censure? "I venerate," says
the same philanthropic foreigner, "the soul of a WASHINGTON, that great man,
whom our foolish opinions and ideas of false glory, have never led one step
beyond that patriotic barrier which he had prescribed to himself: And who
having drawn his sword to defend his country, had crowned the durable pyramid
of his immortal fame; and raised his greatness to the most elevated pitch in
the very act of abdicating it. He may be called the first of the American
Cincinnati: I love the idea of this institution."

It comprehends, in one view, the duty of the soldier, and the citizen, who
when his country no longer calls, disclaims the profession of arms; and in the
retired walks of life, displays the same virtue which had distinguished the
rougher scenes. -- How far they have conformed to the idea of the institution,
and to the example of their great patron, let candor decide: and even
prejudice must allow, that a parallel instance of decency, order, economy, and
willing industry, in a disbanded army, cannot be adduced in the annals of
history!

And suffer me now to address myself more particularly to you. -- And do you
really consider it, as such a misfortune to the country, that the new
government was adopted before your return from Europe, and before you had an
opportunity to give your opinion of its expediency? Unhappy event! But perhaps
even this might not have varied the issue; and to confess the truth, we do not
see either in your arguments and deductions, or your mode of managing the
subject, any very conclusive reasons to alter the decision. You set out with a
pompous declaration of what you intend and promise something to astonish, and
instruct, before you conclude. "Mons parturit" let the discerning public
determine, how far the sequel, is applicable to your performance.

With great frankness, and generosity you offer yourself to the opposition,
with the modest reserve however, of guiding their measures, and heading the
attack. But have a care, lest by aspiring too high, you raise jealousy in minds
peculiarly inclined thereto. Nor have you established your claim to such a
pre-eminence, by a long service, and a faithful adherence to their cause: And
as yet they would hardly know where to find you, for it is problematical from
your premises and conclusions on which side the scale of your reasoning would
preponderate; the purport and amount of which is, that the present system was
formed by great and wise men, and ought therefore to be rejected; and that
those only who are destitute of wisdom and ability, can be safely trusted; --
that those who composed the late Convention, have served their country with
fidelity, and therefore cannot be confided in -- that the Society of the
Cincinnati, is a dangerous institution, because composed of men to whom their
country is under the highest obligation: that the federal system is
unexceptionable, and therefore a dangerous conspiracy against the liberties of
the people* and lastly, that the people have voluntarily adopted it, and are
therefore opposed in heart and sentiment to it. In one line you arraign the
constitution, and in the next propose to make it the most perfect system ever
devised. Besides, you would make their heads giddy (for they are none of the
steadiest) with your flights and bounds, and they might as well catch a
goose-hawk on the wing, as follow you in your aerial excursions: In the midst
of a pithy argument, you fly off in a tangent, with all the weight of logic on
your shoulders, to take the ^ig of the spheres; which is begun with 'the little
star, discovered only by an Herschel's eye,' beyond the limits of space; and
ended with her ladyship, 'the lazy satellite in the political hemisphere.'
Although by such vagaries, you might equal the flights of a Sheridan, or a Burke,
and show the agility of your imagination, it will not establish your character
for solidity; and is a mere balloon experiment. Ballast, my friend, is
necessary to balance, where fancy stands at helm.

While you arraign, at your mock tribunal, those who merit the love and esteem
of all good men, and censure their measures without color of argument, you
discover a total want of sensibility of character, or decency of conduct; and
insult the feelings and good sense of an audience, who have discovered their
warmest approbation of both.

But this, you say, is comformable to your plan, and will excite that jealousy
necessary to constitute your proposed check, which brings me to take some
notice of your great political nostrum. And are you weak enough to suppose that
any one will adopt an idea so ridiculous; or do you really hold to a position
so absurd, as 'that to render perfect the operations of government, a constant
opposition to the government itself is necessary, and that without a strong
check, it will cease to exist?' To form this, do you propose to rein
government, as you would rein an unruly horse, apprehensive, that like your own
unbribled imagination, it would run (...) into the unformed regions of chaos,
unless yourself, with a sufficient number of sturdy patriots should hang hard
on the halter? Or do you consider it as a building, and that it is necessary a
part should constantly aim to destroy, to keep the others on their guard? But
suppose these underminers should get slyly about their work -- or suppose they
should prove too strong for its supporters, must not your fabric fall?

It is contrary to the laws of motion, and to every principle of the mechanical
powers, that matter should move more easily for obstruction. The political
wagon would drag heavily through the dirt, with numbers working in each
direction, and should those in the rear, prove too strong for their opponents,
the machine itself must take a retrograde motion. -- But there must be, it
seems, an understanding that those in opposition should neither cut too fast,
nor draw too hard. Ridiculous mummery! Childish play!

The charge brought against the good Doctor Adams, of repeatedly mentioning a
balance, without proving its existence, may justly be retorted. -- Your
imaginary balance dances through every line, respecting which, you have
hypothesiz'd without supporting, you have repeated, without proving, you have
systematiz'd, without a system. You say that such a balance, or opposition
exists in England, and in France; but it is not an opposition to government,
but to the measures of government, or the measures of a ministry. -- If it was
an opposition to government, government would be destroyed, when Opposition
prevailed. -- The government, however, subsists through every change of ministers
and of measures: and how absurd the idea of an opposition, purchased by
ministers, to oppose their own measures!

Were the government perfect, and the administration uniform and just, what
necessity or ground of opposition? yet according to your paradox, if a
government is perfect, we must oppose -- if arbitrary in its principles and
corrupt, by withdrawing all opposition, it will crumble to atoms, and cease to
exist. -- A position which confutes itself.

Many divines hold a bad principle, in opposition to a good principle requisite
in the moral dispensation; and that Devils are necessary instruments in the
Divine Government. If your opinion of an opposition to the good principle in
civil administration, is derived from any supposed analogy between the moral,
and political systems; it certainly evinced no small degree of fortitude,
voluntarily to proffer yourself to be the chief of political Devils. As many,
however, in Opposition, may not be fond of the distinction. I would propose,
that you read another lecture, and that the subject be, The necessity of
political Devils, and that all who appear in that character, acquiesce in the
appellation.

The discussion of abler hands, and want of time precludes the necessity, and
on this occasion prevents a more particular attention to the merits of the
present system, the effects of which have been great and the influence
propitious -- its excellence like the force of truth, has been the more
confirmed by enquiry -- (...) of party, interest, and passion -- the demagogue
of Faction has bowed his neck -- it has swept away the wall of partition
between the States -- it has blended the views of all in one general object.
And certainly the suffrages of an applauding continent are no inconsiderable
criterion of its merit; for I revere, and shall always revere the sentiments of
a people who are esteemed, and justly esteemed the most enlightened, and best
informed, even in this enlightened age: and who have the sense to mark with
silent contempt the incoherent rants, and ejaculations of expiring faction,
though gloss'd by the specious pretext of zeal for their safety, aided by the
pomp of sound, and enforced by the energy of theatrical gesture.

The threadbare cant of the danger of trusting men with power which they will
sooner or later inevitably pervert to the purposes of oppression, and of the
tendency of all governments to despotism, would operate equally against every
system, and deserves to be treated as the mere art of a popular declaimer, and
raise himself to notice.

When, however the suggestions of danger come nearer, and it is alleged 'that
Congress are by the present system invested with powers which they may abuse,'
we are induced to observe, and the experience of mankind evinces, "that in all
Democracies there is a tendency rather to anarchy in the members, than to
tyranny in the head." -- The factions of Carthage, prevented her furnishing
Hannibal with necessary supplies, and saved the Roman power, the consequences
of which were fatal to herself. -- The popular influence in Rome, gained a
continual ascendant. -- The abolition of the regal authority, and the repeated
diminutions of the rights and prerogatives of the nobles, and senate, were but
so many sacrifices at the popular shrine, till at length the turbulence of
faction raged without control, and paved the way for the introduction of the
Imperial power. -- The People within the present age, have plucked many a
darling gem from the crowns of their European Potentates.

It would be happy for mankind if they could live without the restraints of
government. -- It would likewise be happy if their temperence and health, and
their disposition to rectitude, precluded the necessity of physical, or moral
assistance: but while they are imperfect in their moral perceptions and natural
habits, both the teacher and the physician are necessary; and while under the
influence of interest and passion, the restraint of law; and each of these are
calculated to supply in some measure, the natural, the moral, and the political
(...) of mankind.

Every trust implies a risque, and it is in the power of each character above
referred to, and of all in whom we confide, to abuse the confidence, if they
will descend to the meaness and treachery of such a conduct. And as the sole
alternative to obviate the danger in the present instance, those should be
selected and appointed to the offices of government, who may be safely
entrusted with the great deposite; in which are involved the sacred rights of
the people: whether such move in the vale of obscurity, or dazzle in the
sunshine of popularity.

The tissue, representing the history of the world, has a variegated
appearance; it is shaded with the crimes of those who have perverted power to
the most pernicious purposes: it is likewise erradiated with the virtues of
such as have exerted this in the exercise of the most benign philanthropy,
whereby they merited the esteem, and were the delights of mankind.

-- " This world it is true.
" Was made for Caesar, but for Titus too. "
And may we not hope that such will be the bright assemblage exhibited in the
part reserved for the history of this, and coming ages? It is a grateful
reflection, and the progress which mankind are making in every improvement, as
well as the assurance of Inspiration, justify the flattering wish --

It is ours to decide, whether the pleasing prospects entertained in
consequence of the present system, shall be realiz'd, or not: and whether we
shall bless, or reprobate the day of its adoption -- for much remains to be
done. Industry, economy, and a true spirit of patriotism can alone retrieve
the distresses of our situation, and relieve us from the burdens under which we
labor, in consequence of a heavy and ruinous war. And it is above all,
incumbent on us to appoint faithful watchmen on the walls of our Jerusalem!
Many are plotting to counteract the beneficial influence of every measure. --
Certainly stronger motives could never operate on the minds of Rulers, and
induce to an unwearied, and self-devoted application to the duties of their
appointment, than at the present crisis. We have been witnesses to scenes
peculiarly striking, and which lead to others still more important and
decisive. -- The attention of mankind is fixed on the event, and the happiness
of numbers exceeding the powers of conception, depends on the issue. How
unfortunate! should they by an ill-judged exertion of the prerogatives with
which they are necessarily invested, excite the spirit of discontent; cloud the
prospect; and disappoint so fair a hope? -- Let them pursue the golden mean
which we have always pursued, and then in return we can assure them of the
affection, and gratitude of a people, who by a cheerful, and ready compliance
with the necessary requirements of government, will still further promote the
happy effects of a system, which we fondly flatter ourselves will continually
progress toward perfection, and fix at length the civil compact 'on the broad
basis of reason.'

" O Thou! by whose almighty nod the scale
Of empire rises or alternate falls,
Send forth thy saving Virtues round the land
In bright patrol: white peace and social Love:
The tender-looking charity, intent
On gentle deeds, and shedding tears through smiles;
Undaunted Truth, and Dignity of Mind;
Courage composed and keen; sound Temperance,
Healthful in heart and look; clear Chastity,
With blushes redd'ning as she moves along,
Disordered at the deep regard she draws;
Rough Industry; Activity untir'd,
With copious life informed, and all awake;
While in the radiant front superior shines
That first paternal virtue, Public Zeal,
Who throws over all an equal wide survey,
And ever musing on the common weal
Still labors, glorious, with some great design."
VILE SOLUM SPARTO EST, ALTE, CECIDERE MYCENAE,
OEDIPODIONIAE QUID SUNT, NISI NOMINA, THEBAE?
QUID PANDONIAE RESTANT, NISI NOMEN ATHENAE?
Ovid.
AS round in annual course, revolved the spheres,
For a long space, of near six thousand years;
Wrapped in oblivious night, from reason's day;
This mighty scene, of future empires lay.
And when revealed, taught Eastern Worlds to own,
Nature had here her fairest semblance shown.
From those bleak coasts, which point the adventurer's way,
Who first through these salutes, the Eastern day,
To where the Pole, through half the the changing year,
In darkness wrapped, points to the Northern bear;
Columbia shares each clime: the Asian shore,
She hails; and hears the hoarse Atlantic roar.
Here Andes rise, high towering to the sky;
While Europe's Alps, like little hillocks lie.
Lawrence, and Amazones here roll their tide,
Wolga, and Danube, there, like streamlets glide.
The Condor here extends his towering wing;
Of all the feathered race, the acknowledged king.
What fabl'd stories tell of monsters vast,
Is in the Mammoth's mighty form surpast.
No pestilential blast, here taints the blood,
No dread volcanos roll, the fiery flood.
Earthquakes less frequent, rock the trembling ground;
And here, less dreadful, their effects are found.
No forms despotic, here, the mind control,
No bigot zeal, inthrals the expanded soul.
But Freedom fair, her banners wide unfurled,
To share these blessings, now invites the world.
Fair Freedom here, with social bliss combined;
Sound Reason tempered; late instructs mankind.
Let us, my Friends, with retrospective view,
Her various stages, and her paths pursue:
See how true happiness, alike refrains,
From lawless License, and from Tyrants' chains.
And show how Freedom's Sons, her dome should rear;
And how each virtue claims alliance there.
When Belus first, and Ninus then aspired,
To lawless sway, with proud ambition fired:
And taught the Asian race, to wear the chain:
Freedom retires, nor visits these again.
With fable Hordes she moves, through Scythian wilds;
At her approach, the dreary prospect smiles;
Europe immersed, in ignorance awhile,
Resists fair science, and defeats her toil:
Yet there at length, she fixed her favorite seat;
There wandering Freedom found a short retreat.
The Grecian story, and the Roman page,
The glories paint, of each successive age.
And when we see, those favorite seats the prey
Of lawless pow'er -- where Ignorance holds her sway;
Anxious we seek, the fatal cause to know:
The cause from whence these mighty mischiefs flow.
To partial policy, Greece fell a prey;
Each separate State aspired to sovereign sway,
While factions rose, with a tumultuous wave,
Her sons, alas! were to her ruin brave.
With freedom's banners, they for slavery fought,
And each achievement, sure, destruction brought.
Against foreign powers, the firm confederate band,
Resistless rise, to guard their natal land;
These dangers past, with equal rage they burn,
And on themselves, their conquering falchions turn.
No ge'ral power to guard, the general good;
In shapes ten thousand, scream the Harpy brood!
Blood flows in torrents, and the Furies hiss!
Then save, oh! save us, from a scene like this!
In separate states, Ausonia first appears;
Till Rome her head, above her equals rears;
She then displays, her golden ensigns high;
Yet shouts aloud, for glorious Liberty!
Her boasts of Freedom, were an empty name;
'Twas lust of thraldom, and 'twas lust of fame.
When over the world she waved her banners proud,
And reams submissive, at her footstool bowed;
Peace she proclaimed, and Freedom still her boast*
That Peace and Freedom which the world had lost.
With blood, and carnage gorged, to lust a prey,
Feeble, and swollen, her bulk enormous lay.
Like Vultures eager, from the Northern hive,
Hordes rise on Hordes, and to the carnage drive --
With tenfold horrors, see Bellona stride!
Famines and Plagues, attendant at her side;
Convulsions dread, earth, sea, and either rend!
Obsequies dire -- her requiem! -- attend!
States formed in wrong, shall with such pangs expire*
Then save, oh save us from the restless fire!
Ambition here, there discords drear ascend
And each fair scene, in one destruction blend.
Thick clouds, and dark, involve the welkin round*
'Twas now the reign, of Ignorance profound.
Freedom expelled, a fugitive again;
Seeks her last refuge, over the Western main.
Long with her savage sons, the forest ranged;
From Science long, and every Art estranged.
Yet drops the tear, impatient for the time,
(...) these, and Commerce, in this Western clime*
Should rise with fame, exceeding all the past;
And fix an Empire, which with time should last!
(...) dangers wait -- yet towering to the skies,
Reared by her Sons, shall Freedom's Dome arise.
A single column first, salutes the day;
And Public Spirit, was its only stay.
But this decreased, fell Discord's billows roll;
And private views, the public good control.
Revolting armies, and revolting states,
Rebellious subjects, warmed with dire debates,
From different views, in general concert join:
Anarch their head, confusion their design.
'Twas then fair Freedom's tottered to its base;
And Anarch's column, tower'd in its place.
Freedom again, a fugitive had fled,
But those who often, had counseled, and had bled,
For her -- convene, the patriot plan they form;
To guide the tempest, and restrain the storm.
And when the Hero, and illustrious Band,
The Scroll presenting, to Columbia stand:
"Accept the civic Crown, which pleased I give;"
She adds -- "and deathless may your honors live."
True to their cause, still Anarch, and his train,
Oppose its progress; but oppose in vain.
For him Suspicion ope'd her cavern wide;
Forth from the gloom, ten thousand phantoms glide:
But when Columbia, thus indignant spoke,
The airy phantoms, vanished in a smoke.
"My sons, what madness guides your councils, say,
Where each dear object, interdicts delay?
Here safety dwells; and this secures your rights;
Here public peace, and happiness unites."
Instructed thus, their ready voice is given,
With joint applause, through trembling other driven.
Freedom no more, a wandering vagrant strays;
But fixed in glory, points to future days.
Where Hudson rolls his stream, and where he meets
His hoary Sire; a lovely landscape greets,
The admiring eye: There freedom's Dome begun,
Expands its portals; and salutes the Sun!
Peace, Wealth, and social Joy, each bless the land;
And Commerce, active on the busy strand:
Bright scenes arise! assembling nations claim,
To share the blessings, and partake the fame!
-- Admiring angels stoop from Heaven to hear!
While this glad voice, assails the enraptured ear,
Joy to the world! fell discord now shall cease;
Freedom and Arts prevail; hail universal Peace!
Hail universal Peace! the skies redound!
While countless Myriads, echo back the sound*

