ALMORAN AND HAMET. AN ORIENTAL TALE. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. I.

LITCHFIELD: REPRINTED BY THOMAS COLLIER. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO THE KING.
SIRE,
AMIDST the congratulations and praises of a free, a joyful, and now united
people, who are ambitious to express their duty and their wishes in their
various classes; I think myself happy to have YOUR MAJESTY'S most gracious
permission to approach You, and, after the manner of the people whose character
I have assumed, to bring an humble offering in my hand.

As some part of my subject led me to consider the advantages of our excellent
constitution in comparison of others; my thoughts were naturally turned to YOUR
MAJESTY, as its warmest friend and most powerful protector: and as the whole is
intended to recommend the practice of virtue, as the means of happiness; to
whom could I address it with so much propriety, as to a PRINCE, who illustrates
and enforces the precepts of the moralist by his life?

I am, May it please Your MAJESTY, Your MAJESTY'S Most faithful, most obliged,
And most obedient Subject and Servant, JOHN HAWKESWORTH.

ALMORAN AND HAMET.
CHAP. I.
WHO is he among the children of the earth, that repines at the power of the
wicked? and who is he, that would change the lot of the righteous? He, who has
appointed to each his portion, is God; the Omniscient and the Almighty, who
fills eternity, and whose existence is from Himself! but he who murmurs is man;
who yesterday was not, and who tomorrow shall be forgotten: let him listen in
silence to the voice of knowledge, and hide the blushes of confusion in the
dust.

Solomon, the mighty and the wife, who, in the one hundred and second year of
the Hegyra, sat upon the throne of Persia, had two sons, ALMORAN and HAMET, and
they were twins. ALMORAN was the first born, but Solomon divided his affection
equally between them: they were both lodged in the same part of the seraglio,
both were attended by the same servants, and both received instructions from
the same teacher.

One of the first things that ALMORAN leart, was the prerogative of his birth;
and he was taught very early to set a high value upon it, by the terms in which
those about him expressed their sense of the power, the splendour and the
delights of royalty. As his mind gradually opened, he naturally considered
these as the objects of universal desire, and the means of supreme felicity: he
was often reminded, that the time was coming, when the sole possession of
sovereign power would enable him to fulfill all his wishes, to determine the
fate of dependent nations with a nod, and dispense life and death, and
happiness and misery, at his will: he was flattered by those who hoped to draw
wealth and dignity from his favor; and interest prompted all who approached
him, to administer to his pleasures with a zeal and assiduity, which had the
appearance of reverence to his merit, and affection to his person.

HAMET, on the contrary, soon became sensible of a subordinate station: he was
not, indeed, neglected; but he was not much caressed. When the gratification of
HAMET came in competition with that of ALMORAN, he was always obliged to give
it up, except when Solomon interposed: his mind was, therefore, naturally led
to seek for happiness in objects very different from those which had sixed the
attention of ALMORAN. As he knew not to how narrow a sphere caprice or jealousy
might confine him, he considered what pleasures were least dependant upon
external advantages; and as the first popular commotion which should happen
after his brother's accession to the throne, might probably cost him his life,
he was very inquisitive about the state into which his spirit would be
dismissed by the Angel of Death, and very diligent to do whatever might secure
him a share of the permanent and unchangeable felicity of Paradise.

This difference in the situation of ALMORAN and HAMET, produced great
dissimilarity in their dispositions, habits, and characters; to which, perhaps,
nature might also in some degree contribute. ALMORAN was haughty, vain, and
voluptuous; HAMET was gentle, courteous, and temperate: ALMORAN was volatile,
impetuous, and irascible; HAMET was thoughtful, patient, and forbearing. Upon
the heart of HAMET also were written the instructions of the Prophet; to his
mind futurity was present by habitual anticipation; his pleasure, his pain, his
hopes, and his fears, were perpetually referred to the Invisible and Almighty
Father of Life, by sentiments of gratitude or resignation, complacency or
confidence; so that his devotion was not periodical but constant.

But the views of ALMORAN were terminated by nearer objects: his mind was
perpetually busied in the anticipation of pleasures and honors, which he
supposed to be neither uncertain nor remote; these excited his hopes, with a
power sufficient to fix his attention; he did not look beyond them for other
objects, nor enquired how enjoyments more distant were to be acquired; and as
he supposed these to be already secured to him by his birth, there was nothing
he was solicitous to obtain as the reward of merit, nor any thing that he
considered himself to possess as the bounty of Heaven. If the sublime and
disinterested rectitude that produces and rewards itself, dwells indeed with
man, it dwelt not with ALMORAN: with respect to God, therefore, he was not
impressed with a sense either of duty or dependence; he felt neither reverence
nor love, gratitude nor resignation: in abstaining from evil, he was not
intentionally good; he practiced the externals of morality without virtue, and
performed the rituals of devotion without piety.

Such were ALMORAN and HAMET, when Solomon their father, full of days and full
of honor, slept in peace the sleep of death. With this event they were
immediately acquainted. The emotions of ALMORAN were such as it was impossible
to conceal: the joy that he felt in secret was so great, that the mere dread of
disappointment, for a moment suspended his belief of what he heard: when his
fears and his doubts gave way, his cheeks were suffused with sudden blushes,
and his eyes sparkled with exultation and impatience: he looked eagerly about
him, as if in haste to act; yet his looks were embarrassed, and his gestures
irresolute, because he knew not what to do: he uttered some incoherent
sentences, which discovered at once the joy that he felt, and his sense of its
impropriety; and his whole deportment expressed the utmost tumult and
perturbation of mind.

Upon HAMET, the death of his father produced a very different effect: as soon
as he heard it, his lips trembled and his countenance grew pale; he stood
motionless a moment, like a pilgrim transfixed by lightning in the desert; he
then smote his breast, and looking upward, his eyes by degrees overflowed with
tears, and they fell like dew distilling from the mountain, in a calm and
silent shower. As his grief was thus mingled with devotion, his mind in a short
time recovered its tranquillity, though not its cheerfulness, and he desired to
be conducted to his brother.

He found him surrounded by the lords of his court, his eyes still restless and
ardent, and his deportment elate and assuming. HAMET pressed hastily through
the circle, and prostrated himself before him: ALMORAN received the homage with
a tumultuous pleasure; but at length raised him from the ground, and assured
him of his protection, though without any expressions either of kindness or of
sorrow: HAMET, says he, if I have no cause to complain of you as a subject, you
shall have no cause to complain of me as a king. HAMET, whose heart was again
pierced by the cold and distant behavior of his brother, suppressed the sign
that struggled in his bosom, and secretly wiped away the tear that started to
his eye: he retired with his looks fixed upon the ground, to a remote corner of
the apartment; and though his heart yearned to embrace his brother, his modest
diffidence restrained him from intruding upon the king.

In this situation were ALMORAN and HAMET, when OMAR entered the apartment.
OMAR, upon whose head the hand of time became heavy, had from his youth
acquainted himself with wisdom: to him nature had revealed herself in the
silence of the night, when his lamp was burning alone, and his (...) only were
open: to him was known the power of the seal of Solomon; and to him the
knowledge of things invisible had been revealed. Nor was the virtue of OMAR
inferior to his knowledge; his heart was a fountain of good, which though it
flowed through innumerable streams was never dry: yet was the virtue of OMAR
clothed with humility; and he was still pressing nearer to perfection, by a
devotion which though elevated was rational, and though regular was warm. From
the council of OMAR, Solomon had derived glory and strength; and to him he had
committed the education of his children.

When he entered the apartment, the crowd, touched at once with reverence and
love, drew back; every eye was cast downward, and every tongue was silent. The
full of days approached the king, and kneeling before him, he put into his hand
a sealed paper: the king received it with impatience, seeing it superscribed
with the hand of his father; and OMAR looked round, and perceiving HAMET,
beckoned him to come forward. HAMET, whose obedience to OMAR had been so long
habitual that it was now almost spontaneous, instantly drew near, though with a
slow and irresolute pace; and ALMORAN, having broken the seal of the paper,
began to read it to himself, with a look that expressed the utmost anxiety and
impatience. OMAR kept his eye fixed upon him, and soon perceived that his
countenance was disfigured by confusion and trouble, and that he seemed
preparing to put up the paper in his bosom: he then produced another paper from
under his robe, and gave it to HAMET: This, says he, is a copy of the will of
Solomon, your father; the original is in the hand of ALMORAN: read it, and you
will find that he has bequeathed his kingdom between you.

The eyes of all present were now turned upon HAMET, who stood silent and
motionless with amazement, but was soon roused to attention by the homage that
was paid him. In the mean time ALMORAN'S confusion increased every moment: his
disappointment was aggravated by the sudden attention of those who were present
to his brother; and his jealousy made him think himself neglected, while those
acts of duty were performed to HAMET, which were now known to be his right, and
which he had himself received before him.

HAMET, however, regarded but little what so much excited the envy of ALMORAN;
his mind was employed upon superior objects, and agitated by nobler passions:
the coldness of his brother's behavior, though it had grieved had not quenched
his affection; and as he was now no longer restrained by the deference due from
a subject to his king, he ran to him, and catching him to his breast attempted
to speak; but his heart was too full, and he could express his affection and
joy only by his tears. ALMORAN rather suffered than received the embrace; and
after a few ceremonies, to which neither of them could much attend, they
retired to separate apartments.

CHAP. II.
WHEN ALMORAN was alone, he immediately locked the door; and throwing himself
upon a sofa in an agony of vexation and disappointment, of which he was
unwilling there should be any witness, he revolved in his mind all the
pleasures and honors of supreme dominion which had now suddenly been snatched
from him, with a degree of anguish and regret, not proportioned to their real,
but their imaginary value. Of future good, that which we obtain is found to be
less than our expectations; but that of which we are disappointed, we suppose
would have been more: thus do the children of hope extract evil, both from what
they gain, and from what they lose. But ALMORAN, after the first tumult of his
mind had subsided, began to consider as well what was left him, as what had
been taken away. He was still without a superior, though he had an equal; he
was still a king, though he did not govern alone: and with respect to every
individual in his dominions, except one, his will would now be a law; though
with respect to the public, the concurrence of his brother would be necessary
to give it force. Let me then, says he, make the most of the power that is now
put into my hand, and wait till some favorable opportunity shall offer to
increase it. Let me dissemble my jealousy and disappointment, that I may not
alarm suspicion, or put the virtues of HAMET upon their guard against me; and
let me contrive to give our joint administration such a form, as may best
favor my design.

Such were the reflections, with which ALMORAN soothed the anguish of his mind;
while HAMET was busied in speculations of a very different kind. If he was
pleased at reflecting, that he was raised from a subject to a prince; he was
pleased still more, when he considered his elevation as a test of his father's
affection to his person, and approbation of his conduct: he was also delighted
with the thought, that his brother was associated with him in the arduous task
which he was now called to perform. If I had been appointed to govern alone,
said he, I should have had no equal; and he who has no equal, though he may have
faithful servants, can have no friend: there cannot be that union of interest,
that equal participation of good, that unrestrained intercourse of mind, and
that mutual dependence, which constitutes the pure and exalted happiness of
friendship. With ALMORAN, I shall share the supreme delight of wresting the
innocent and the helpless from the iron hand of oppression; of animating merit
by reward, and restraining the unworthy by fear: I shall share, with ALMORAN,
the pleasures of governing a numerous, a powerful, and a happy people;
pleasures which, however great, are, like all others, increased by
participation.

While HAMET was thus enjoying the happiness, which his virtue derived from the
same source, from which the vices of ALMORAN had filled his breast with anguish
and discontent; OMAR was contriving in what manner their joint government could
best be carried into execution.

He knew that Solomon, having considered the dispositions of his sons, was of
opinion, that if they had been blended in one person, they would have produced
a character more fit to govern in his stead, than either of them alone:
ALMORAN, he thought, was too volatile and warm; but he suspected, that HAMET
would sink into inactivity for want of spirit: he feared alike ALMORAN'S love
of enterprise, and HAMET'S fondness for retirement: he observed, in HAMET, a
placid easiness of temper, which might suffer the reins of government to lie
too loose; and, in ALMORAN, a quickness of resentment, and jealousy of command,
which might hold them too tight: he hoped, therefore, that by leaving them a
joint dominion, he should blend their dispositions, at least in their effects,
in every act of government that should take place; or that, however they should
agree to administer their government, the public would derive benefit from the
virtues of both, without danger of suffering from their imperfections, as their
imperfections would only operate against each other, while, in whatever was
right, their minds would naturally concur, as the coincidence of rectitude with
rectitude, is necessary and eternal. But he did not consider, that different
dispositions operating separately upon two different wills, would appear in
effects very unlike those, which they would concur to produce in one: that two
wills, under the directions of dispositions so different, would seldom be
brought to coincide; and that more mischiefs would probably arise from the
contest, than from the imperfections of either alone.

But Solomon had so long applauded himself for his project before he revealed
it to OMAR, that OMAR found him too much displeased with any objection, to
consider its weight: and knowing that peculiar notions are more rarely given
up, than opinions received from others, and made our own only by adoption, he
at length acquiesced, lest he should by farther opposition lose his influence,
which on other occasions he might still employ to the advantage of the public;
and took a solemn oath, that he would, as far as was in his power, see the will
carried into execution.

To this, indeed he consented without much reluctance, as he had little less
reason to fear the sole government of ALMORAN, than a joint administration; and
if a struggle for superiority should happen, he hoped the virtues of HAMET
would obtain the suffrages of the people in his favor, and establish him upon
the throne alone. But as change is itself an evil, and as changes in government
are seldom produced without great confusion and calamity, he applied himself to
consider in what manner the government of ALMORAN and HAMET could be
administered, so as most effectually to blend their characters in their
administration, and prevent the conduct of one from exciting jealousy in the
other.

After much thought, he determined that a system of laws should be prepared,
which the sons of Solomon should examine and alter till they perfectly
approved, and to which they should then give the sanction of their joint
authority: that when any addition or alteration should be thought necessary, it
should be made in the same manner; and that when any insuperable difference of
sentiment happened, either in this or in any act of prerogative independent of
the laws for regulating the manners of the people, the kings should refer it to
some person of approved integrity and wisdom, and abide by his determination.
OMAR easily foresaw, that when the opinion of ALMORAN and HAMET should differ,
the opinion of ALMORAN would be established; for there were many causes that
would render ALMORAN inflexible, and HAMET yielding: ALMORAN was naturally
confident and assuming, HAMET diffident and modest; ALMORAN was impatient of
contradiction, HAMET was attentive to argument, and solicitous only for the
discovery of truth. ALMORAN also conceived, that by the will of his father, he
had suffered wrong; HAMET, that he had received a favor: ALMORAN, therefore,
was disposed to resent the first appearance of opposition; and HAMET, on the
contrary, to acquiesce, as in his share of government, whatever it might be, he
had more than was his right by birth, and his brother had less. Thus,
therefore, the will of ALMORAN would probably predominate in the state: but as
the same cause which conferred this superiority, would often prevent
contention, OMAR considered it, upon the whole, rather as good than evil.

When he had prepared his plan, therefore, he sent a copy of it, by different
messengers at the same time, both to ALMORAN and HAMET, enclosed in a letter in
which he expressed his sense of obligation to their father, and his zeal and
affection for them: he mentioned the promise he had made, to devote himself to
their service; and the oath he had taken, to propose whatever he thought might
facilitate the accomplishment of their father's design, with honor to them and
happiness to their people: these motives, which he could not resist without
impiety, he hoped would absolve him from presumption; and trusting in the
rectitude of his intentions, he left the issue to God.

CHAP. III.
THE receipt of this letter threw ALMORAN into another agony of indignation: he
felt again the loss of his prerogative; the offer of advice he disdained as an
insult, to which he had been injuriously subjected by the will of his father;
and he was disposed to reject whatever was suggested by OMAR, even before his
proposal was known. With this temper of mind he began to read, and at every
paragraph took new offense; he determined, however, not to admit OMAR to the
honor of a conference upon the subject, but to settle a plan of government
with his brother, without the least regard to his advice.

A supercilious attention to minute formalities, is a certain indication of a
little mind, conscious to the want of innate dignity, and solicitous to derive
from others what it cannot supply to itself: as the scrupulous exaction of
every trifling tribute discovers the weakness of the tyrant, who fears his
claim should be disputed; while the prince, who is conscious of superior and
indisputable power, and knows that the states he has subjugated do not dare to
revolt, scarce enquires whether such testimonies of allegiance are given or not.

Thus, the jealousy of ALMORAN already enslaved him to the punctilios of state;
and the most trifling circumstances involved him in perplexity, or fired him
with resentment: the friendship and fidelity of OMAR stung him with rage, as
insolent and intrusive; and though it determined him to an immediate interview
with his brother, yet he was embarrassed how to procure it. At first he rose,
and was about to go to him; but he stopped short with disdain, upon reflecting,
that it was an act of condescension which might be deemed an acknowledgement of
superiority: he then thought of sending for HAMET to come to him; but this he
feared might provoke him, as implying a denial of his equality: at length he
determined to propose a meeting in the chamber of council, and was just
dispatching an officer with the message, when HAMET entered the apartment.

The countenance of HAMET was flushed with joy, and his heart was warmed with
the pleasing sensations of affection and confidence, by the same letter, from
which ALMORAN had extracted the bitterness of jealousy and resentment; and as
he had no idea that an act of courtesy to his brother could derogate from his
own dignity or importance, he indulged the honest impatience of his heart to
communicate the pleasure with which it overflowed: he was, indeed, somewhat
disappointed, to find no traces of satisfaction in the countenance of ALMORAN,
when he saw the same paper in his hand, which had impressed so much upon his
own.

He waited some time after the first salutations, without mentioning the scheme
of government he was come to concert; because having observed that ALMORAN was
embarrassed and displeased, he expected that he would communicate the cause,
and pleased himself with the hope that he might remove it: finding, however,
that this expectation was disappointed, he addressed him to this effect.

How happy are we, my dear brother, in the wisdom and fidelity of OMAR! how
excellent is the system of government that he has proposed! how easy and
honorable will it be to us that govern, and how advantageous to the people
that obey!

The advantages, said ALMORAN, which you seem to have discovered, are not
evident to me: tell me, then, what you imagine they are, and I will afterward
give you my opinion.

By establishing a system of laws as the rule of government, said HAMET, many
evils will be avoided, and many benefits procured. If the law is the will only
of the sovereign, it can never certainly be known to the people: -- many,
therefore, may violate that rule of right, which the hand of the Almighty has
written upon the living tablets of the heart, in the presumptuous hope, that it
will not subject them to punishment; and those, by whom that rule is fulfilled,
will not enjoy that consciousness of security, which they would derive from the
protection of a prescribed law, which they have never broken. Neither will
those who are inclined to do evil, be equally restrained by the fear of
punishment; if neither the offense is ascertained, nor the punishment
prescribed. One motive to probity, therefore, will be wanting; which ought to
be supplied, as well for the sake of those who may be tempted to offend, as of
those who may suffer by the offense. Besides, he who governs not by a written
and a public law, must either administer that government in person, or by
others: if in person, he will sink under a labor which no man is able to
sustain; and if by others, the inferiority of their rank must subject them to
temptations which it cannot be hoped they will always resist, and to prejudices
which it will perhaps be impossible for them to surmount. But to administer
government by a law which ascertains the offense, and directs the punishment,
integrity alone will be sufficient; and as the perversion of justice will in
this case be notorious, and depend not upon opinion but fact, it will seldom be
practiced, because it will be easily punished.

ALMORAN, who had heard the opinions of HAMET with impatience and scorn, now
started from his seat with a proud and contemptuous aspect: he first glanced
his eyes upon his brother; and then looking disdainfully downward, he threw
back his robe, and stretching out his hand from him, Shall the son of Solomon,
said he, upon whose will the fate of nations was suspended, whose smiles and
frowns were alone the criterions of right and wrong, before whom the voice of
wisdom itself was silent, and the pride even of virtue humbled in the dust;
shall the son of Solomon be harnessed, like a mule, in the tramels of law?
shall he become a mere instrument to execute what others have devised? shall he
only declare the determinations of a statute, and shall his ear be affronted by
claims of right? It is the glory of a prince, to punish for what and whom he
will; to be the sovereign, not only of property, but of life; and to govern
alike without prescription or appeal.

HAMET, who was struck with astonishment at this declaration, and the vehemence
with which it was uttered, after a short recollection made this reply: It is
the glory of a prince, to govern others, as he is governed by Him, who is alone
most merciful and almighty! It is his glory to prevent crimes, rather than to
display his power in punishment; to diffuse happiness, rather than enforce
subjection; and rather to animate with love, than depress by fear. Has not He
that shall judge us, given us a rule of life by which we shall be judged? is
not our reward and punishment already set before us? are not his promises and
threatenings, motives to obedience? and have we not confidence and joy, when we
have obeyed? To God, His own divine perfections are a law; and these he has
transcribed as a law to us. Let us, then, govern, as we are governed; let us
seek our happiness, in the happiness that we bestow, and our honor in
emulating the benevolence of Heaven.

As ALMORAN feared, that to proceed farther in this argument would too far
disclose his sentiments, and put HAMET too much upon his guard; he determined
for the present to dissemble: and as he perceived, that HAMET'S opinion, and an
administration founded upon it, would render him extremely popular, and at
length possibly establish him alone; he was now solicitous only to withdraw him
from public notice, and persuade him to leave the government, whatever form it
should receive, to be administered by others: returning therefore, to his feat,
and assuming an appearance of complacence and tranquillity, with which he could
not form his language perfectly to agree; Let us then, said he, if a law must
be set up in our stead, leave the law to be executed by our slaves: and as
nothing will be left for us to do, that is worthy of us, let us devote
ourselves to the pleasures of ease; and if there are any enjoyments peculiar to
royalty, let us secure them as our only distinction from the multitude.

Not so, says HAMET; for there is yet much for a prince to do, after the best
system of laws has been established: the government of a nation as a whole, the
regulation and extent of its trade, the establishment of manufactories, the
encouragement of genius, the application of the revenues, and whatever can
improve the arts of peace, and secure superiority in war, is the proper object
of a king's attention.

But in these, said ALMORAN, it will be difficult for two minds to concur; let
us, then, agree to leave these also to the care of some other, whom we can
continue as long as we approve, and displace when we approve no longer: we
shall, by this expedient, be able to avert the odium of any popular measure;
and by the sacrifice of a slave, we can always satisfy the people, and silence
public discontent.

To trust implicity to another, says HAMET, is to give up a prerogative, which
is at once our highest duty and interest to keep; it is to betray our trust,
and to sacrifice our honor to another. The prince, who leaves the government
of his people implicitly to a subject, leaves it to one, who has many more
temptations to betray their interest than himself: a vicegerent is in a
subordinate station; he has, therefore, much to fear, and much to hope: he may
also acquire the power of obtaining what he hopes, and averting what he fears,
at the public expense; he may stand in need of dependants, and may be able no
otherwise to procure them, than by conniving at the fraud or violence which
they commit: he may receive, in bribes, an equivalent for his share, as an
individual, in the public prosperity; for his interest is not essentially
connected with that of the state; he has a separate interest; but the interest
of the state, and of the king, are one: he may even be corrupted to betray the
councils, and give up the interests of the nation, to a foreign power; but this
is impossible to the king; for nothing equivalent to what he would give up,
could be offered him. But as a king has not equal temptations to do wrong,
neither is he equally exposed to opposition, when he does right: the measures
of a substitute are frequently opposed, merely from interest; because the
leader of a faction against him, hopes, that if he can remove him by popular
clamor, he shall succeed to his power; but it can be no man's interest to
oppose the measures of a king, if his measures are good, because no man can
hope to supplant him. Are not th^se the precepts of the Prophet, whose wisdom
was from above? -- "Let not the eye of expectation be raised to another, for
that which only thyself should bestow: suffer not thy own shadow to obscure
thee; nor be content to derive that glory, which it is thy prerogative to
impart."

But is the prince, said ALMORAN, always the wisest man in his dominions? Can
we not find, in another, abilities and experience, which we do not possess? and
is it not the duty of him who presides in the ship, to place the helm in that
hand which can best steer it?

A prince, said HAMET, who sincerely intends the good of his people, can scarce
fail to effect it; all the wisdom of the nation will be at once turned to that
object: whatever is his principal aim, will be that of all who are admitted to
his council; for to concur with his principal aim, must be the surest
recommendation to his favor. Let us then, hear others; but let us act
ourselves.

As ALMORAN now perceived, that the longer this conversation continued, the
more he should be embarrassed; he put an end to it, by appearing to acquiesce
in what HAMET had proposed. HAMET withdrew, charmed with the candor and
flexibility which he imagined he had discovered in his brother* and not without
some exultation in his own rhetoric, which he supposed had gained no
inconsiderable victory. ALMORAN, in the mean time, applauded himself for having
thus far practiced the arts of dissimulation with success; fortified himself in
the resolutions he had before taken; and conceived new malevolence and jealousy
against HAMET.

CHAP. IV.
WHILE HAMET was exulting in his conquest, and his heart was overflowing at
once with self-complacency, and affection to his brother; he was told that OMAR
was waiting without, and desired admittance. HAMET ordered that he should be
immediately introduced; and when OMAR entered, and would have prostrated
himself before him, he catched him in his arms in a transport of affection and
esteem; and having ordered that none should interrupt them, compelled him to
sit down on a sofa.

He then related with all the joy of a youthful and an ardent mind, the
conversation he had had with ALMORAN, intermixed with expressions of the
highest praise and the most cordial esteem. OMAR was not without suspicion,
that the sentiments which ALMORAN had (...) passion, were still predominant in
hi^ mind; but of these suspicions he did not give the least hint to HAMET; not
only because to communicate suspicions is to accuse without proof, but because
he did not think himself at liberty to make an ill report of another, though he
knew it to be true. He approved the sentiments of HAMET, as they had been
infused by his own instructions; and some precepts and cautions were now added,
which the accession of HAMET to a share of the imperial power made particularly
necessary.

Remember, said OMAR, that the most effectual way of promoting virtue, is to
prevent occasions of vice. There are, perhaps, particular situations, in which
human virtue has always failed: at least, temptation often repeated, and long
continued, has seldom been finally resisted. In a government so constituted as
to leave the people exposed to perpetual seduction, by opportunities of
dissolute pleasure or iniquitious gain, the multiplication of penal laws will
only tend to depopulate the kingdom, and disgrace the state; to devote to the
cymitar and the bow^^ring, those who might have been useful to society, and to
leave the rest dissolute, turbulent and factious. If the streets not only
abound with women, who inflame the passenger by their appearance, their
gesture, and their solicitations; but with houses, in which every desire which
they kindle may be gratified with secrecy and convenience; it is in vain that
the feet of the prostitute go down to death, and that her steps take hold on
hell: what then can be hoped from any punishment, which the laws of man can
superadd to disease and want, to rottenness and perdition? If you permit opium
to be publicly sold at a low rate; it will be folly to hope, that the dread of
punishment will render idleness and drunkenness strangers to the poor. If a tax
is so collected, as to leave opportunities to procure the commodity, without
paying it; the hope of gain will always surmount the fear of punishment. If,
when the veteran has served you at the risque of life, you withhold his hire;
it will be in vain to threaten usury and extortion with imprisonment and sines.
If, in your armies, you suffer it to be any man's interest, rather to preserve
the life of a horse than a man; be assured, that your own sword is drawn for
your enemy: for there will always be some, in whom interest is stronger than
humanity and honor. Put no man's interest, therefore, in the balance against
his duty; nor hope that good can often be produced, but by preventing
opportunities of evil.

To these precepts of OMAR, HAMET listened as to the instructions of a father;
and having promised to keep them as the treasure of life, he dismissed him from
his presence. The heart of HAMET was now expanded with the most pleasing
expectations; but ALMORAN was pining with solicitude, jealousy, and distrust:
he took every opportunity to avoid both OMAR and HAMET; but HAMET still
retained his confidence, and OMAR his suspicions.

CHAP. V.
IN the mean time, the system of government was established which had been
proposed by OMAR, and in which HAMET concurred from principle, and ALMORAN from
policy The views of ALMORAN terminated in the gratification of his own
appetites and passions; those of HAMET, in the discharge of his duty: HAMET,
therefore, was indefatigable in the business of the state; and as his sense of
honor, and his love of the public, made this the employment of his choice, it
was to him the perpetual source of a generous and sublime felicity. ALMORAN
also was equally diligent, but from another motive: he was actuated, not by
love of the public, but by jealousy of his brother; he performed his task as
the drudge of necessity, with reluctance and ill will; so that to him it
produced pain and anxiety, weariness and impatience.

To atone for this waste of time, he determined to crowd all that remained with
delight: his gardens were an epitome of all nature, and on his palace were
exhausted all the treasures of art; his seraglio was filled with beauties of
every nation, and his table supplied with dainties from the remotest corners of
his dominions. In the songs that were repeated in his presence, he listened at
once to the voice of adulation and music; he breathed the perfumes of Arabia,
and he tasted the forbidden pleasure of wine. But as every appetite is soon
satiated by excess, his eagerness to accumulate pleasure deprived him of
enjoyment. Among the variety of beauty that surrounded him, the passion, which,
to be luxurious, must be delicate and refined, was degraded to a mere instinct,
and exhausted in endless dissipation; the caress was unendeared by a
consciousness of reciprocal delight, and was immediately succeeded by
indifference or disgust. By the dainties that perpetually urged him to
intemperance, that (...), which (...) could make even dainties tasteful, was
destroyed. The splendour of his palace and the beauty of his gardens, became at
length so familiar to his eye, that they were frequently before him, without
being seen. Even flattery and music lost their power, by too frequent a
repetition: and the broken slumbers of the night, and the languor of the
morning, were more than equivalent to the transient hilarity that was inspired
by wine. Thus passed the time of ALMORAN, divided between painful labors which
he did not dare to shun, and the search of pleasure which he could never find.

HAMET, on the contrary, did not seek pleasure, but pleasure seemed to seek
him: he had a perpetual complacence and serenity of mind, which rendered him
constantly susceptible of pleasing impressions; every thing that was prepared
to refresh or entertain him in his seasons of retirement and relaxation, added
something to the delight which was continually springing in his breast, when he
reviewed the past, or looked forward to the future. Thus, the pleasures of
sense were heightened by those of his mind, and the pleasures of the mind by
those of sense: he had, indeed, as yet no wise; for as yet no woman had fixed
his attention, or determined his choice.

Among the ambassadors whom the monarchs of Asia sent to congratulate the sons
of Solomon upon their accession to the throne, there was a native of Circassia,
whose name was Abdallah. Abdallah had only one child, a daughter, in whom all
his happiness and affection centered; he was unwilling to leave her behind, and
therefore brought her to the court of Persia. Her mother died while she was yet
an infant; she was now in the sixteenth year of her age, and her name was
ALMEDIA. She was beautiful as the daughters of Paradise, and gentle as the
breezes of the spring; her mind was without stain, and her manners were without
art.

She was lodged with her father in a palace that joined to the gardens of the
seraglio; and it happened that a lamp which had one night been left burning in
a lower apartment, by some accident set fire to the network of cotton that
surrounded a sopha, and the whole room was soon after in a flame. ALMORAN, who
had been passing the afternoon in riot and debauchery, had been removed from
his banqueting room asleep; but HAMET was still in his closet, where he had
been regulating some papers that were to be used next day. The windows of this
room opened toward the inner apartments of the house in which Abdallah
resided; and HAMET, having by accident looked that way, was alarmed by the
appearance of an unusual light, and starting up to see whence it proceeded, he
discovered what had happened.

Having hastily ordered the guard of the night to assist in quenching the
flame, and removing the furniture, he ran himself into the garden. As soon as
he was come up to the house, he was alarmed by the shrieks of a female voice;
and the next moment, ALMEDIA appeared at the window of an apartment directly
over that which was on fire. ALMEDIA he had till now never seen, nor did he so
much as know that Abdallah had a daughter: but though her person was unknown,
he was strongly interested in her danger, and called out to her to throw
herself into his arms. At the found of his voice she ran back into the room,
such is the force of inviolate violate modesty, though the smoke was then
rising in curling spires from the windows: she was, however, soon driven back;
and part of the ^^or at the same instant giving way, ^he wrapped her veil round
her, and leaped into the garden. HAMET caught her in his arms; but though he
broke her fall, he sunk down with her weight: he did not, however, quit his
charge; but perceiving she had fainted, he made haste with her into his
apartment, to afford her such assistance as he could procure.

She was covered only with the light and loose robe in which she slept, and her
veil had dropped off by the way. The moment he entered his closet, the light
discovered to him such beauty as before he had never seen: she now began to
revive; and before her senses returned, she pressed the prince with an
involuntary embrace, which he returned by straining her closer to his breast,
in a tumult of delight, confusion, and anxiety, which he could scarce sustain.
As he still held her in his arms, and gazed silently upon her, she opened her
eyes, and instantly relinquishing her hold, shrieked out, and threw herself
from him. As there were no women nearer than that wing of the palace in which
his brother resided, and as he had many reasons not to leave her in their
charge; he was in the utmost perplexity what to do. He assured her, in some
hasty and incoherent words, of her security; he told her, that she was in the
royal palace, and that he who had conveyed her thither was HAMET. The habitual
reverence of sovereign power, now surmounted all other passions in the bosom of
ALMEDIA: she was instantly covered with new confusion: and hiding her face with
her hands, threw herself at his feet: he raised her with a trepidation almost
equal to her own, and endeavored to sooth her into confidence and tranquillity.

Hitherto her memory had been wholly suspended by violent passions, which had
crowded her in a rapid and uninterrupted succession, and the first gleam of
recollection threw her into a new agony; and having been silent a few moments,
she suddenly smote her hands together, and bursting into tears, cried out,
'Abdallah! my father! my father!' -- HAMET not only knew but felt all the
meaning of the exclamation, and immediately ran again into the garden: he had
advanced but few paces, before he discerned an old man sitting on the ground,
and looking upward in silent anguish, as if he had exhausted the power of
complaint. HAMET, upon a nearer approach, perceived by the light of the flame
that it was Abdallah; and instantly calling him by his name, told him, that his
daughter was safe. At the name of his daughter, Abdallah suddenly started up,
as if he had been roused by the voice of an angel from the sleep of death:
HAMET again repeated, that his daughter was in safety; and Abdallah looking
wistfully at him, knew him to be the king. He was then struck with an awe that
restrained him from enquiry: but HAMET directing him where he might find her,
went forward that he might not lessen the pleasure of their interview, nor
restrain the first transports of duty and affection by his presence. He soon
met with other fugitives from the fire, which had opened a communication
between the gardens and the street; and among them some women belonging to
ALMEDIA, whom he conducted himself to their mistress. He immediately allotted
to her and to her father, an apartment in his division of the palace; and the
fire being now nearly extinguished, he retired to rest.

CHAP. VI.
THOUGH the night was far advanced, yet the eyes of HAMET were strangers to
sleep: his fancy incessantly repeated the events that had just happened; the
image of ALMEIDA was ever before him; and his breast throbbed with a
disquietude, which, though it prevented rest, he did not wish to lose.

ALMORAN, in the mean time, was slumbering away the effects of his
intemperance; and in the morning, when he was told what had happened, he
expressed no passion but curiosity: he went hastily into the garden; but when
he had gazed upon the ruins, and enquired how the fire began, and what it had
consumed, he thought of it no more.

But HAMET suffered nothing that regarded himself to exclude others from his
attention: he went again to the ruins, not to gratify his curiosity, but to see
what might yet be done to alleviate the misery of the sufferers, and secure for
their use what had been preserved from the flames. He found that no life had
been lost, but that many persons had been hurt; to these he sent the physicians
of his own household: and having rewarded those who had assisted them in their
distress, not forgetting even the soldiers who had only fulfilled his own
orders, he returned, and applied himself to dispatch the public business in the
chamber of council, with the same patient and diligent attention as if nothing
had happened. He had, indeed, ordered enquiry to be made after ALMEIDA; and
when he returned to his apartment, he sound Abdallah waiting to express his
gratitude for the obligations he had received.

HAMET accepted his acknowledgements with a peculiar pleasure, for they had
some connection with ALMEIDA; after whom he again enquired, with an ardour
uncommon even to the benevolence of HAMET. When all his questions had been
asked and answered, he appeared still unwilling to dismiss Abdallah, though he
seemed at a loss how to detain him; he wanted to know, whether his daughter had
yet received an offer of marriage, though he was unwilling to discover his
desire by a direct enquiry: but he soon found, that nothing could be known,
which was not directly asked, from a man whom reverence and humility kept
silent before him, except when something was said which amounted to a command
to speak. At length, however, he said, not without some hesitation, Is there no
one, Abdallah, who will thank me for the preservation of thy daughter, with a
zeal equal to thy own? Yes, replied Abdallah, that daughter whom thou have
preserved. This reply, though it was unexpected, was pleasing: for HAMET was
not only gratified to hear, that ALMEIDA had expressed herself warmly in his
behalf, at least as a benefactor; but he judged, that if any man had been
interested in her life as a lover, the answer which Abdallah had given him
would not so readily have occurred to his mind.

As this reflection kept HAMET a few moments silent, Abdallah withdrew; and
HAMET, as he observed some marks of haste and confusion in his countenance, was
unwilling longer to continue him in a situation, which he had now reason to
think gave him pain. But Abdallah, who had conceived a sudden thought that
HAMET'S question was an indirect reproach of ALMEIDA, for not having herself
solicited admission to his presence; went in haste to her apartment, and
ordered her immediately to make ready to attend him to the king.

ALMEIDA, from whose mind the image of HAMET had not been absent a moment since
she first saw him, received this order with a mixture of pain and pleasure; of
wishes, hopes, and apprehensions, that silled her bosom with emotion, and
covered her face with blushes. She had not courage to ask the reason of the
command, which she instantly prepared to obey; but the tenderness of Abdallah,
who perceived and pitied her distress, anticipated her wish. In a short time,
therefore, he returned to the chamber of presence, and having received
permission, he entered with ALMEIDA in his hand. HAMET rose in haste to receive
her, with a glow of pleasure and impatience in his countenance; and having
raised her from the ground, supported her in his arms, waiting to hear her
voice; but though she made many attempts, she could not speak. HAMET, who knew
not to what he owed this sudden and unexpected interview, which, though he
wished, he could contrive no means to obtain; imagined that ALMEIDA had some
request, and that therefore urged her tenderly to make it: but as she still
remained silent, he looked at Abdallah, as expecting to hear it from him. We
have no wish, said Abdallah, but to atone for our offense; nor any request, but
that my lord would now accept the thanks of ALMEIDA for the life which he has
preserved, and impute the delay, not to ingratitude, but inadvertence: let me
now take her back, as thy gift; and let the light of thy favor be upon us.
Take her, then, said HAMET; for I would give her only to thee.

These words of HAMET did not escape the notice either of Abdallah or ALMEIDA;
but neither of them mentioned their conjectures to the other. ALMEIDA, who was
inclined to judge of HAMET'S situation by her own, and who recollected many
little incidents, known only to herself, which favored her wishes; indulged
the hope, that she should again hear of HAMET, with more confidence than her
father; nor were her expectations disappointed. HAMET reflected with pleasure,
that he had prepared the way for a more explicit declaration; and as his
impatience increased with his passion every hour, he sent for Abdallah the next
morning, and told him, that he wished to be more acquainted with his daughter,
with a view to make her his wife: As neither you nor your daughter are my
subjects, says HAMET, I cannot command you; and if you were, upon this occasion
I would not. I do not want a slave, but a friend; not merely a woman, but a
wife. If I find ALMEIDA such as my fancy has feigned her; if her mind
corresponds with her form; and if I have reason to think, that she can give her
heart to HAMET, and not merely her hand to the king, I shall be happy. To this
declaration, Abdallah replied with expressions of the profoundest submission
and gratitude; and HAMET dismissed him, to prepare ALMEIDA to receive him in
the afternoon of the same day.

CHAP. VII.
AS eight moons had only passed since the death of Solomon, and as the
reverence of HAMET for the memory of his father would not suffer him to marry
till the year should be completed; he determined not to mention ALMEIDA to his
brother, till the time when he could marry her was near. The fierce and haughty
deportment of ALMORAN, had now left HAMET no room to doubt of his character:
and though he had no apprehension that he would make any attempts upon ALMEIDA,
after she should be his wife; yet he did not know how much might justly be
feared from his passion, if he should see her and become enamoured of her,
while she was yet a virgin in the house of her father.

ALMEIDA had not only unsullied purity of mind, but principles of refined and
exalted virtue; and as the life of HAMET was an example of all that was either
great or good, Abdallah felt no anxiety upon leaving them together, except what
arose from his fears, that his daughter would not be able to secure the
conquest she had made.

As it was impossible for HAMET to have such an acquaintance with ALMEIDA as he
desired, till he could enter into conversation with her upon terms of equality;
it was his first care to sooth her into confidence and familiarity, and by
degrees he succeeded: he soon found, in the free intercourse of mind with mind,
which he established instead of the implicit submission which only ecchoed his
own voice, how little of the pleasure that women were formed to give can be
enjoyed, when they are considered merely as slaves to a tyrant's will, the
passive subjects of transient dalliance and casual enjoyment. The pleasure
which he took in the youthful beauty of ALMEIDA, was now endeared, exalted, and
refined, by the tender sensibility of her heart, and by the reflection of his
own felicity from her eyes: when he admired the gracefulness of her motion, the
elegance of her figure, the symmetry of her features, and the bloom of her
complexion, he considered them as the decorations only of a mind capable of
mixing with his own in the most exquisite delight, of reciprocating all his
ideas, and catching new pleasure from his pleasure. Desire was no longer
appetite; it was imagination, it was reason; it was included remembrance of the
past, and anticipation of the future; and its object was not the ^ex, but
ALMEIDA.

As HAMET never withheld any pleasure that it was in his power to impart, he
soon acquainted Abdallah, that he waited only for a proper time to place
ALMEIDA upon the throne; but that he had some reasons for keeping a resolution,
which he thought himself obliged to communicate to him, concealed from others.

It happened, however, that some of the women who attended upon ALMEIDA, met
with some female slaves belonging to the seraglio of ALMORAN, at the public
baths, and related to them all the particulars of ALMEIDA'S preservation by
HAMET; that he had first conveyed her to his own apartments, and had since been
frequently with her in that which he had assigned her in his palace: they were
also lavish in the praise of her beauty, and free in their conjectures what
might be the issue of her intercourse with HAMET.

Thus the situation of HAMET and ALMEIDA became the subject of conversation in
the seraglio of ALMORAN, who learnt it himself in a short time from one of his
women.

He had hitherto professed great affection for HAMET, and HAMET was deceived by
his professions: for notwithstanding the irregularities of his life, he did not
think him capable of concealed malice; or of offering injury to another, except
when he was urged by impetuous passions to immediate pleasure. As there was,
therefore, an appearance of mutual affection between them, ALMORAN, though the
report of ALMEIDA'S beauty had fired his imagination and fixed him in a
resolution to see her, did not think proper to attempt it without asking
HAMET'S consent, and being introduced by his order; as he made no doubt of
there being a connection between them, which would make him resent a contrary
conduct.

He took an opportunity, therefore, when they were alone in a summer pavilion
that was built on a lake behind the palace, to reproach him, with an air of
mirth, for having concealed a beauty near his apartments, though he pretended
to have no seraglio. HAMET instantly discovered his surprise and emotion by a
blush, which the next moment left his countenance paler than the light clouds
that pass by night over the moon. ALMORAN took no notice of his confusion; but
that he might more effectually conceal his sentiments and prevent suspicion, he
suddenly adverted to another subject, while HAMET was hesitating what to reply.
By this artifice HAMET was deceived; and concluded, that whatever ALMORAN had
heard of ALMEIDA, had passed slightly over his mind, and was remembered but by
chance; he, therefore, quickly recovered that ease and cheerfulness, which
always distinguished his conversation.

ALMORAN observed the success of his artifice, soon after, as if by a sudden
and casual recollection, again mentioned the lady; and told him, he would
congratulate Abdallah upon having resigned her to his bed. As HAMET could not
bear to think of ALMORAN'S mentioning ALMEIDA to her father as his mistress, he
replied, that he had no such intimacy with ALMEIDA as he supposed; and that he
had so high an opinion of her virtue, as to believe, that if he should propose
it she would not consent. The imagination of ALMORAN caught new fire from
beauties which he found were yet unenjoyed, and virtue which stamped them with
superior value by rendering them more difficult to access; and as HAMET had
renounced a connection with her as a mistress, he wanted only to know whether
he intended her for a wife.

This secret he was contriving to discover, when HAMET, having reflected, that
if he concealed this particular, ALMORAN might think himself at liberty to make
what attempts he should think fit upon ALMEIDA, without being accountable to
him, or giving him just cause of offense, put an end to his doubts, by telling
him, he had such a design; but that it would be some time before he should
carry it into execution. This declaration increased ALMORAN'S impatience:
still, however, he concealed his interest in the conversation, which he now
suffered to drop.

He parted from his brother, without any farther mention of ALMEIDA; but while
he was yet near him, turned hastily back, and, as if merely to gratify his
curiosity, told him with a smile, that he must indulge him with a sight of his
Circassian; and desired he might accompany him in his next visit, or at some
more convenient time: with this request, HAMET, as he knew not how to refuse
it, complied; but it filled his mind with anxiety and trouble.

He went immediately to ALMEIDA, and told her all that had happened; and as she
saw that he was not without apprehensions of mischief from his brother's visit,
she gently reproached him for doubting the fidelity of her affection, as she
supposed no power could be exerted by ALMORAN to injure him, who in power was
equal. HAMET, in a transport of tenderness, assured her that he doubted neither
her constancy nor her love; but as to interrupt the comfort of her mind, would
only double his own distress, he did not tell her whence his apprehensions
proceeded; nor indeed had they any determinate object, but arose in general
from the character of his brother and the probability of his becoming a
competitor, for what was essential to the happiness of his life.

But if the happiness of HAMET was lessened, the infelicity of ALMORAN was
increased. All the enjoyments that were in his power he neglected, his
attention being wholly fixed upon that which was beyond his reach; he was
impatient to see the beauty, who had taken entire possession of his mind; and
the probability that he would be obliged to resign her to HAMET, tormented him
with jealousy, envy, and indignation.

HAMET, however, did not long delay to fulfill his promise to his brother; but
having prepared ALMEIDA to receive him, he conducted him to her apartment. The
idea which ALMORAN had formed in his imagination, was exceeded by the reality,
and his passion was proportionably increased; yet he found means not only to
conceal it from HAMET, but from ALMEIDA, by affecting an air of levity and
merriment, which is not less incompatible with the pleasures than the pains of
love. After they had been regaled with coffee and sherbet, they parted; and
HAMET congratulated himself that his apprehensions of finding in ALMORAN a
rival for ALMEIDA'S love, were now at an end.

But ALMORAN, whose passions were become more violent by restraint, was in a
state of mind little better than distraction: one moment he determined to seize
upon the person of ALMEIDA in the night, and secret her in some place
accessible only to himself; and the next to assassinate his brother, that he
might at once destroy a rival both in empire and in love. But these designs
were no sooner formed by his wishes, than they were rejected by his fears: he
was no^ ignorant, that in any contest between him and HAMET, the voice of the
public would be against him; especially (...) a contest, in which it would
appear, th^^ HAMET had suffered wrong.

Many other projects, equally rash violent, and injurious, were by turn
conceived and rejected; and he came a last to no other determination, than
sti^^ carefully to conceal his passion, till (...) should think of some
expedient to gratify it; lest HAMET should have a just reason for refusing to
let him see the lady again, and remove her to some place which he might never
be able to discover.

CHAP. VIII.
IN the mean time OMAR, to whom HAMET had from time to time disclosed the
minutest particulars of his situation and design, kept his eye almost
continually upon ALMORAN; and observed him with an attention and sagacity,
which it was difficult either to elude or deceive. He perceived, that he was
more than usual restless and turbulent; that in the presence of HAMET he
frequently changed countenance; that his behavior was artificial and
inconsistent, frequently shifting from gloomy discontent and furious agitation,
to forced laughter and noisy merriment. He had also remarked, that he seemed
most discomposed after he had been with HAMET to ALMEIDA, which happened
generally once in a week; that he was become fond of solitude, and was absent
several days together from the apartment of his women.

OMAR, who from this conduct of ALMORAN had begun to suspect his principles,
determined to introduce such topics of discourse, as might lead him to discover
the state of his mind; and enable him to enforce and confirm the principles he
had taught him, by new proofs and illustrations.

ALMORAN, who, since the death of his father, had nothing to apprehend from the
discovery of sentiments which before he had been careful to conceal; now urged
his objections against religion, when OMAR gave him opportunity, without
reserve. You tell me, says he, of beings that are immortal, because they are
immaterial; beings which do not consist of parts, and which, therefore, can
admit no solution, the only natural cause of corruption and decay: but that
which is not material, can have no extension; and what has no extension,
possesses no space; and of such beings, the mind itself, which you pretend to
be such a being, has no conception.

If the mind, says OMAR, can perceive that there is in itself any single
property of such a being, it has irrefragable evidence that it is such a being;
though its mode of existence, as distinct from matter, cannot now be
comprehended. And what property of such a being, said ALMORAN, does the mind of
man perceive in itself? That of acting, said OMAR, without motion. You have no
idea, that a material substance can act, but in proportion as it moves: yet to
think, is to act; and with the idea of thinking, the idea of motion is never
connected: on the contrary, we always conceive the mind to be fixed, in
proportion to the degree of ardour and intenseness with which the power of
thinking is exerted. Now, if that which is material cannot act without motion;
and if man is conscious, that to think, is to act and not to move; it follows,
that there is, in man, somewhat that is not matter; somewhat that has no
extension, and that possesses no space; somewhat which, having no contexture or
parts that can be dissolved or separated, is exempted from all the natural
causes of decay.

OMAR paused; and ALMORAN having stood some moments without reply, he seized
this opportunity to impress him with an awful sense of the power and presence
of the Supreme and eternal Being, from whom his own existence was derived: Let
us remember, said he, that to every act of this immaterial and immortal part,
the Father of spirits, from whom it proceeds, is present: when I behold the
busy multitudes that crowd the metropolis of Persia, in the pursuit of business
and projects infinitely complicated and various; and consider that every idea
which passes over their minds, every conclusion and every purpose, with all
that they remember of the past, and all that they imagine of the future, is at
once known to the Almighty, who without labor or confusion weighs every
thought of every mind in His balance, and reserves it to the day of
retribution; my follies cover me with confusion, and my soul is humbled in the
dust.

ALMORAN, though he appeared to listen with attention, and offered nothing
against the reasoning of OMAR, yet secretly despised it as sophistry, which
cunning only had rendered specious; and which he was unable to confute, merely
because it was subtle, and not because it was true: he had been led by his
passions, first to love, and then to adopt different opinions; and as every man
is inclined to judge of others by himself, he doubted, whether the principles
which OMAR had thus labored to establish, were believed even by OMAR himself.

Thus was the mind of ALMORAN to the instructions of OMAR, as a rock slightly
covered with earth, is to the waters of heaven: the craggs are left bare by the
rain that washes them; and the same showers that fertilize the field, can only
discover the sterility of the rock.

OMAR, however, did not yet disclose his suspicions to HAMET, because he did
not yet see that it could answer any purpose. To remove ALMEIDA from her
apartment, would be to show a distrust, for which there would not appear to be
any cause; and to refuse ALMORAN access to her when he desired it, might
precipitate such measures as he might meditate, and engage him in some
desperate attempt: he, therefore, contented himself with advising HAMET, to
conceal the time of his marriage till the evening before he intended it should
take place, without assigning the reason on which his advice was founded.

To the council of OMAR, HAMET was implicitly obedient, as to the revelations
of the Prophet; but, like his instructions, it was neglected by ALMORAN, who
became every moment more wretched. He had a graceful person, and vigorous mind;
he was in the bloom of youth, and had a constitution that promised him length
of days; he had power which princes were emulous to obey, and wealth by which
whatever could administer to luxury might be bought; for every passion, and
every appetite, it was easy for him to procure a perpetual succession of new
objects: yet was ALMORAN, not only without enjoyment, but without peace; he was
by turns pining with discontent, and raving with indignation; his vices had
extracted bitter from every sweet; and having exhausted nature for delight in
vain, he was repining at the bounds in which he was confined, and regretting
the want of other powers as the cause of his misery.

Thus the year of mourning for Solomon was completed, without any act of
violence on the part of ALMORAN, or of caution on the part of HAMET: but on the
evening of the last day, HAMET, having secretly prepared every thing for
performing the solemnity in a private manner, acquainted ALMORAN by a letter,
which OMAR undertook to deliver, that he should celebrate his marriage on the
morrow. ALMORAN, who never doubted but he should have notice of this event much
longer before it was to happen, read the letter with a perturbation that it was
impossible to conceal: he was alone in his private apartment, and taking his
eye hastily from the paper, he crushed it together in his hand, and thrusting
it into his bosom, turned from OMAR without speaking; and OMAR thinking himself
dismissed, withdrew.

The passions which ALMORAN could no longer suppress, now burst out in a
torrent of exclamation: Am I then, said he, blasted for ever with a double
curse, divided empire and disappointed love! What is dominion, if it is not
possessed alone? and what is power, which the dread of rival power perpetually
controuls? Is it for me to listen in silence to the wrangling of slaves, that I
may at last apportion to them what, with a clamorous insolence, they demand as
their due! as well may the sun linger in his course, and the world mourn in
darkness for the day, that the glowworm may still be seen to glimmer upon the
earth, and the owls and bats that haunt the sepulchers of the dead enjoy a
longer night. Yet this have I done, because this has been done by HAMET: and my
heart sickens in vain with the desire of beauty, because my power extends not
to ALMEIDA. With dominion undivided and ALMEIDA, I should be ALMORAN; but
without them, I am less than nothing.

OMAR, who, before he had passed (...) pavilion, heard a sound which he knew to
(...) the voice of ALMORAN, returned hastily to the chamber in which he left
him, believi^^ he had withdrawn too soon, and that the king, as he knew no
other person was present, was speaking to him: he soon drew near enough to hear
what was said; and while he was standing torpid in suspense, dreading to be
discovered, and not knowing how to retire, ALMORAN turned about.

At first, both stood motionless with confusion and amazement; but ALMORAN'S
pride soon surmounted his other passions, and his disdain of OMAR gave his
guilt the firmness of virtue.

It is true, said he, that thou have stolen the secret of my heart: but do not
think, that I fear it should be known: though my poignard could take it back
with thy life, I leave it with thee. To reproach, or curse thee, would do thee
honor, and lift thee into an importance which otherwise thou can never
reach. ALMORAN then turned from him with a contemptuous frown: but OMAR caught
him by the robe; and prostrating himself upon the ground, entreated to be
heard. His importunity at length prevailed; and he attempted to exculpate
himself, from the charge of having insidiously intruded upon the privacy of his
prince; but ALMORAN sternly interrupted him: -- And what art thou, said he,
that I should care, whether thou art innocent or guilty? If not for my sake,
said OMAR, listen for thy own; and though my duty is despised, let my affection
be heard. That thou art not happy, I know; and I now know the cause. Let my
lord pardon the presumption of his slave: he that seeks to satisfy all his
wishes, must be wretched; he only can be happy, by whom some are suppressed. At
these words ALMORAN snatched his robe from the hand of OMAR, and spurned him in
a transport of rage and indignation: The suppression of desire, said he, is
such happiness, as that of the deaf who do not remember to have heard. If it is
virtue, know, that, as virtue, I despise it; for though it may secure the
obedience of the slave, it can only degrade the prerogative of a prince. I cast
off all restraint, as I do thee: begone, therefore, to HAMET, and see me no
more.

OMAR obeyed without reply; and ALMORAN being again alone, the conflict in his
mind was renewed with greater violence than before. He felt all that he had
disguised to OMAR, with the keenest sensibility; and anticipated the effects of
his detection, with unutterable anguish and regret. He walked backward and
forward with a hasty but interrupted pace; sometimes stopping short, and
pressing his hand hard upon his brow; and sometimes by violent jestures showing
the agitation of his mind: he sometimes stood silent with his eyes fixed upon
the ground, and his arms folded together: and sometimes a sudden agony of
thought forced him into loud and tumultuous exclamations: he cursed the
impotence of mind that had suffered his thoughts to escape from him unawares,
without reflecting that he was even then repeating the folly; and while he felt
himself the victim of vice, he could not suppress his contempt of virtue: If I
must perish, said he, I will at least perish unsubdued: I will quench no wish
that nature kindles in my bosom; nor shall my lips utter any prayer, but for
new powers to feed the flame.

As he uttered this expression, he felt the palace shake: he heard a rushing,
like a blast in the desert; and a being of more than human appearance stood
before him. ALMORAN, though he was terrified, was not humbled; and he stood
expecting the event, whether evil or good, rather with obduracy than courage.

Thou see, says the Appearance, a Genius, whom the daring purpose of thy mind
has convoked from the middle region, where he was appointed to wait the signal;
and who is now permitted to act in concert with thy will. Is not this the
language of thy heart? -- Whatever pleasure I can snatch from the hand of Time,
as he passes by me, I will secure for myself: my passions shall be strong, that
my enjoyments may be great; for what is the portion allotted to man, but the
joyful madness that prolongs the hours (...) festivity, the fierce delight that
is extorted from injury by revenge, and the sweet succession of varied
pleasures which the wish that is ever changing prepares for love?

Whatever thou art, said ALMORAN, whose voice has thus disclosed the secret of
my soul, accept my homage; for I will worship thee: and be thou henceforth my
wisdom and my strength.

Arise, said the Genius, for therefore am I sent. To thy own powers, mine shall
be superadded: and if, as weak only, thou have been wretched; henceforth thou
shall be happy. Take no thought for tomorrow; to-mor-row, my power shall be
employed in thy behalf. Be not affrighted at any prodigy; but put thy
confidence in me. While he was yet speaking, and the eyes of ALMORAN were fixed
upon him; a cloud gathered round him; and the next moment dissolving again into
air, he disappeared.

CHAP. IX.
ALMORAN, when he recovered from his astonishment, and had reflected upon the
prodigy, determined to wait the issue, and refer all his hopes to the
interposition of the Genius, without attempting any thing to retard the
marriage; at which he resolved to be present, that he might improve any
supernatural event which might be produced in his favor.

HAMET, in the mean time, was anticipating the morrow with a mixture of anxiety
and pleasure; and though he had no reason to think any thing could prevent his
marriage, yet he wished it was over, with an impatience that was considerably
increased by fear.

Though the anticipation of the great event that was now so near, kept him
waking the greatest part of the night, yet he rose early in the morning; and
while he waited till ALMEIDA should be ready to see him, he was told that OMAR
was without, and desired admittance. When he came in, HAMET, who always watched
his countenance as a mariner the stars of heaven, perceived that it was
obscured with perplexity and grief. Tell me, said HAMET, whence is the sorrow
that I discover in thy face? I am sorrowful, said OMAR, not for myself, but for
thee. At these words HAMET stepped backward, and fixed his eyes upon OMAR,
without power to speak. Consider, said OMAR, that thou art not a man only, but
a prince: consider also, that immortality is before thee; and that thy felicity
is before thee; and that thy felicity, during the endless ages of immortality,
depends upon thyself: fear not, therefore, what thou can suffer from others;
the evil and the good of life are transient as the morning dew, and over these
only the hand of others can prevail.

HAMET, whose attachment to life was strong, and whose expectations of
immediate enjoyment were high, did not feel the force of what OMAR had said,
though he assented to its truth. Tell me, said he, at once, what thou fear
for me; deliver me from the torments of suspense, and trust my own fortitude to
save me from despair. Know then, said OMAR, that thou art hated by ALMORAN, and
that he loves ALMEIDA. At this declaration, the astonishment of HAMET wa^ equal
to his concern; and he was (...) doubt whether to believe or disbeliev^^ what
he heard: but the moment he recollected the wisdom and integrity (...) OMAR,
his doubts were at an end; and having recovered from his surprise, he was about
to make such enquiries as might gratify the anxious and tumultuous curiosity
which was excited in (...) breast, when OMAR lifting up his hand and beginning
again to speak, HAMET remained silent.

Thou know, said OMAR, that when my cheeks were yet ruddy with youth, and my
limbs were braced by vigor, that mine eye was guided to knowledge by the lamp
that is kindled at midnight; and much of what is hidden in the innermost
recesses of nature, was discovered to me: my prayer ascended in secret to Him,
with whom there is wisdom from everlasting to everlasting, and He illuminated
my darkness with His light. I know, by such sensations as the world either
feels not at all, or feels unnoticed without knowledge of their use, when the
powers that are invisible are permitted to mingle in the walks of men; and well
I know, that some being, who is more than mortal, has joined with ALMORAN
against thee, since the veil of night was last spread upon the earth.

HAMET, whose blood was chilled with horror, and whose nerves were no longer
obedient to his will, after several ineffectual attempts to speak, looked up at
OMAR; and striking his hand upon his breast, cried out, in an earnest, but
faultering voice, 'What shall I do?' Thou must do, said OMAR, that which is
RIGHT. Let not thy foot be drawn by any allurement, or driven by any terror,
from the path of virtue. While thou art there, thou art in safety; and though
the world should unite against thee, by the united world thou can not be hurt.

But what friendly power, said HAmet, shall guard even the path of virtue from
grief and pain; from the silent shaft of disappointed love, or the sounding
scourge of outrageous jealousy? These, surely, have overtaken the foot of
perseverance; and by these, though I should persevere, may my feet be
overtaken. What thou say'est, replied OMAR, is true; and it is true also, that
the tempest which roots up the forest, is driven over the mountain with
unabated rage: but from the mountain, what can it take more than the vegetable
dust, which the hand of nature has scattered upon the moss that covers it? As
the dust (...) to the mountain, so is all that (...) storms of life can take
from virtue to the sum of good which the Omnipotent has appointed for its
reward. HAMET, whose eye now expressed (...) kind of doubtful confidence, a
hope that was repressed by fear, remained still silent; and OMAR, perceiving
the state of his mind, proceeded to fortify it by new precepts: If heaven, said
he should vanish like a vapor, and this firm orb of earth should crumble into
dust, the virtuous mind would stand unmoved amidst the ruins of nature: for He,
who has appointed the heavens and the earth to fail, has said to virtue, (...)
not; for thou can neither perish, nor be wretched. Call up thy strength,
therefore, to the fight in which thou art sure of conquest: do thou only that
which is RIGHT, and leave the event to Heaven.

HAMET, in this conference with OMAR, having gradually recovered his fortitude;
and the time being now near, when he was to conduct ALMEIDA to the court of the
palace, where the marriage ceremony was to be performed; they parted with
mutual benedictions, each recommending the other to the protection of the Most
High.

At the appointed hour, the princes of the court being assembled, the mufti and
the imans being ready, and ALMORAN seated upon his throne; HAMET and ALMEIDA
came forward, and were placed one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
The mufti was then advancing, to hear and to record the mutual promise which
was to unite them; ALMORAN was execrating the appearance of the Genius, as a
delusive dream, in all the tumults of anguish and despair; and HAMET began to
hope* that the suspicions of OMAR had been ill founded; when a stroke of
thunder shook the palace to its foundations, and a cloud rose from the ground,
like a thick smoke, between HAMET and ALMEIDA.

ALMORAN, who was inspired with new considence and hope, by that which had
struck the rest of the assembly wi^^ terror, started from his seat with an
(...) dent and furious look; and at the (...) moment, a voice, that issued from
(...) cloud, pronounced with a loud but hol^ low tone,'Fate has decreed, to
ALMORAN, ALMEIDA.'

At these words, ALMORAN rushed forward, and placing himself by the sid^^ of
ALMEIDA, the cloud disappeared and he cried out, Let me now proclaim to the
world the secret, which (...) this moment I have hidden in my bosom: I love
ALMEIDA. The being who alone knew my love, has now by miracle approved it. Let
his decree be accomplished. He then commanded that the ceremony should proceed;
and seizing the hand of the lady, began to repeat that part of it which was to
have been repeated by HAMET. But ALMEIDA instantly drew her hand from him in an
agony of distress; and HAMET, who till then had stood motionless with amazement
and horror, started from his trance, and springing forward rushed between them.
ALMORAN turned fiercely upon him; but HAMET, who having ^een warned by OMAR,
knew the prodigy to be effected by some evil being whom it was virtue to
resist, laid his hand upon his scymitar, and, with a frown of indignation and
defiance, commanded ^im to stand off: I now know thee, said he, as a man; and,
therefore, as a brother, I know thee not.

ALMORAN reflecting that the foundtion of, his reproach was unknown to (...)
who were present, and that to them he would therefore appear to be injur^^;
looked round with an affected smile of wonder and compassion, as appealing to
them from a charge that was thus fiercely and injuriously brought against him,
and imputing it to the violence of sudden passions by which truth and reason
were overborne. The eye of HAMET at once detected the artifice, which he
disdained to expose; he, therefore, commanded the guard that attended to carry
off ALMEIDA to her apartment. The guard was preparing to obey, when ALMORAN,
who thought he had now such an opportunity to get her into (...) own power as
would never return, ordered them to see her safely lodged (...) his own
seraglio.

The men, who thus received opposite commands from persons to whom they owed
equal obedience, stood still in suspense, not knowing which to prefer* ALMORAN
then reproached them wit^ want of obedience, not to him, but to God, appealing
to the prodigy for the^ justification of his claim. HAMET, (...) the contrary,
repeated his order, with (...) look and emphasis scarce less commanding than
the thunder and the voice. But the priests interposing in favor (...) ALMORAN,
upon presumption that his right had been decided by a superior power; the guard
rushed between HAMET and ALMEIDA, and with looks that expressed the utmost
reluctance and regret, attempted to separate their hands, which were clasped in
each other. She was affrighted at the violence, but yet more at the
apprehension of what was to follow; she, therefore, turned her eyes upon HAMET,
conjuring him not to leave her, in a tone of tenderness and distress which it
is impossible to describe: he replied with a vehemence that was worthy of his
passion, I will not leave thee, and immediately drew his sabre. At the same
moment they forced her from him; and a party having interposed to cover those
that were carrying her off, HAMET lifted up his weapon to force his passage
through them; but was prevented by OMAR, who, having pressed through the crowd,
presented himself before him. 'Stop me not,' said HAMET, 'it is for ALMEIDA.'
If thou would save ALMEIDA," said OMAR, and thyself, do that only which is
RIGHT. What have these done who oppose thee, more than they ought? and what end
can their destruction answer, but to stain thy hands with unaviling murder?
Thou can only take the life of a few faithful slaves, who will not lift up
their hands against thee: thou can not rescue ALMEIDA from thy brother; but
thou can preserve thyself from guilt.

These words of OMAR suspended the rage of HAMET, like a charm; and returning
his scymitar into its sheath, Let me then, said he, suffer, and be guiltless.
It is true, that against these ranks my single arm must be ineffectual; but if
my wrongs can rouse a nation to repress the tyranny, that will shortly extend
over it the injuries that now reach only to me, justice shall be done to HAMET.
Then turning to ALMORAN, Henceforth, said he, the kingdom shall be mine or
thine. To govern in concert with thee, is to associate with the powers of hell.
The beings that are superior to evil, are the friends of HAMET; and if these
are thy enemies, what shall be thy desence? ALMORAN replied only by a
contemptuous smile; and the assembly being dismissed, he retired to his
apartment; and HAMET and OMAR went out to the people, who had gathered in an
incredible multitude about the palace.

CHAP. X.
ARUMOUR of what had happened within had reached them, which some believed, and
some doubted: but when they saw OMAR and HAMET return together, and observed
that their looks were full of resentment and trouble, they became silent with
attention in a moment; which OMAR observing, addressed them with an eloquence
of which they had often acknowledged the force, and of which they never
repented the effect.

He told them the tender connection between HAMET and ALMEIDA, and disclosed
the subtle hypocricy of ALMORAN: he expatiated upon the folly of supposing,
that the power that was supreme in goodness and truth, should command a
violation of vows that had been mutually interchanged, and often repeated; and
devote to ALMORAN the beauties, which could only be voluntarily surrendered to
HAMET. They heard him with a vacant countenance of surprise and wonder: and
while he waited for their reply, they agreed among themselves, that no man
could avoid the destiny that was written upon his head; and that if ALMEIDA had
thus been taken from HAMET, and given to ALMORAN, it was an event that by an
unchangeable decree was appointed to happen; and that, therefore, it was their
duty to acquiesce. OMAR then beckoned with his hand for audience a second time;
and told them, that ALMORAN had not only practiced the arts of sorcery to
deprive HAMET of ALMEIDA, but that he meditated a design to usurp the sole
dominion, and deprive him of the share of the government to which he had a
right by the will of Solomon his father. This also they heard with the same
sentiments of wonder and acquiescence* If it is decreed, said they, that
ALMORAN shall be king alone, who can prevent it? and if it is not, who can
bring it to pass? But know ye not, said OMAR, that when the end is appointed,
the means are appointed also. If it is decreed that one of you shall this night
die by poison, is it not decreed also that he shall drink it?

The crowd now gazed upon each other without reply, for some minutes: and at
last they only said, that no effort of theirs could change the universal
appointment of all things; that if ALMORAN was to be king alone, he would be so
notwithstanding all opposition; and that if he was not to be king alone, no
attempt of his own, however supported, could make him so. I will not, said
OMAR, contradict your opinion; I will only tell you what I have heard, and
leave you to suffer the calamities which threaten you, with a fortitude and
resignation that are suitable to your principles; having no consolation to
offer you, but that HAMET, whose destiny it was not to make you happy, will
suffer with you the evils, that neither he nor you could prevent: the mournful
comfort of this fellowship, he will not be denied; for he loves you too well,
to wish even to be happy alone. The crowd fixed their eyes upon HAMET, for whom
their affection was now strongly moved, with looks of much greater intelligence
and sensibility; a confused murmur, like the fall of the pebbles upon the beach
when the surge retires from the shore, expressed their gratitude to HAMET, and
their apprehensions for themselves.

OMAR waited till they were again silent, and then improved the advantage he
had gained. ALMORAN, said he, considers you as the slaves of his power; HAMET
as the objects of his benevolence: your lives and your properties, in the
opinion of ALMORAN, are below his notice; but HAMET considers his own interest
as connected with yours. When ALMORAN, therefore, shall ^e unchecked by the
influence of HAMET; he will leave you to the mercy of some delegate tyrant,
whose whole power will be exerted to oppress you, that he may enrich himself.

A new fire was now kindled in their eyes, and their cheeks glowed with
indignation at the wrongs that threatened them; they were no longer disposed to
act upon the principles of fatality, as they had perversely understood them;
and they argued at once like reasonable and free beings, whose actions were in
their choice, and who had no doubt but that their actions would produce
adequate effects. They recollected that OMAR had, in the reign of Solomon,
often rescued them from such oppression, as now threatened them; and that the
power of HAMET had since interposed in their behalf, when ALMORAN would have
stretched his prerogative to their hurt, or have left them a prey to the farmer
of a tax. Shall HAMET, said they, be deprived of the power, that he employs
only to our benefit; and shall it center in ALMORAN, who will abuse it to our
ruin? Shall we rather support ALMORAN in the wrong he has done to HAMET, than
HAMET to obtain justice of ALMORAN? HAMET is our king; let him command us, and
we will obey. This was uttered with a shout that echoed from the mountains
beyond the city, and continued near a full hour. In the men time, the multitude
was increasing every moment; and the troops that lay in and near the city
having taken arms, fell in with the stream: they were secretly attached to
HAMET, under whose eye they had been formed, and of whose bounty they had often
pertaken; and their fear being removed by the general cry, which left them no
room to apprehend an opposition in favor of ALMORAN, they were now at full
liberty to follow their inclinations.

In the mean time, ALMORAN, who had retired to the intermost court of the
palace, had heard the (...), and was alarmed for his safety: he ran from room
to room, confused and terrified, without attempting or (...) any thing either
for his defense or escape* yet he sent every (...) to know the (...) of the
insurrection and to what end its force would be directed.

Among those whom accident rather than choice had attached to the interest of
ALMORAN, were Osmyn and Caled: they were both distinguished by his favor; and
each had conceived hopes that, if he should possess the throne alone, he would
delegate his authority to him. ALMORAN now ordered them to take the command of
the troops, that were appointed to attend his person as their peculiar duty,
with as many others as had not declared for HAMET, and to secure all the
avenues that led to his seraglio.

OMAR and HAMET were now on horseback, and had begun to form the troops that
had joined them, and as many others as were armed, which were before mingled
together in a confused multitude. An account of this was brought to ALMORAN by
Osmyn; and threw him into a perturbation and perplexity, that disgraced his
character, and confounded his attendants. He urged Osmyn, in whom he most
confided, to dispatch, without giving him any orders to execute; then turning
from him, he uttered, in a low and inarticulate voice, the most passionate
exclamations of distress and terror, being struck with the thought that his
guard might betray him: when he recollected himself, and perceived that Osmyn
was still present, he burst into a rage, and snatched out his poignard, he
swore by the soul of the Prophet, that if he did not instantly attempt
something, he would stab him to the heart. Osmyn drew back trembling and
confused; but having yet received no orders, he would have spoken, but ALMORAN
drove him from his presence with menaces and execrations.

The moment that Osmyn left him, his rage subsided in his fears, and his fears
were mingled with remorce: -- Which way soever I turn, said he, I see myself
surrounded by destruction. I have incensed Osmyn by unreasonable displeasure,
and causeless menaces. He must regard me at once with abhorrence and contempt:
and it is impossible, but he should revolt to HAMET.

In this agony, the terrors of futurity rushed upon his mind with all their
force; and he started as if at the bite of a scorpion: To me, said he, death,
that now approaches, will be but the beginning of sorrow. I shall be cut off at
once from enjoyment, and from hope; and the dreadful moment is now at hand.
While he was speaking, the palace again shook, and he ^^ood again in the
presence of the Genius.

'ALMORAN,' said the inhabitant of the unapparent world, the evil which thou
fear, shall not be upon thee. Make haste, and show thyself from the gallery
to the people, and the tumult of faction shall be still before thee: tell them,
that their rebellion is not against thee only, but against Him by whom thou
reignest: appeal boldly to that power for a confirmation of thy words, and rely
for the attesting sign upon me. ALMORAN, who had stooped with his face to the
ground, now looked upward, and found himself alone: he hasted, therefore, to
follow the directions he had received; and hope was again kindled in his bosom.

Osmyn, in the mean time, made a proper disposition of the troops now under his
command; and had directed a select company to remain near the person of the
king, that they might at least make good his retreat. While he was waiting at
his post, and revolving in his mind the total disappointment of his hopes, and
considering what he should do if HAMET should establish himself alone, he was
joined by Caled.

Caled had a secret enmity against Osmyn, as his rival in the favor of
ALMORAN; but as he had concealed (...) own pretensions from Osmyn, Osmyn had no
ill will against Caled. As they were now likely to be involved in one common
calamity, by the ruin of (...) prince whose party they had espoused; Caled's
enmity subsided, and the indifference of Osmyn was warmed into kindness: mutual
distress produced mutual confidence; and Caled, after condoling with Osmyn on
their present hopeless situation, proposed that they should draw off their
forces, and revo^^ to HAMET. This proposition Osmyn rejected, not only from
principle, (...) from interest: Now we have accepted of a trust, said he, we
ought not (...) betray it. If we had gone over to HAMET, when he first declared
against his brother, he would have received us with joy, and probably have
rewarded our service; but I know, that his virtue will abhor us for treachery,
though practiced in his favor: treachery, under the dominion of HAMET, will
not only cover us with dishonor, but will probably devote us to death.

In this reasoning, Caled could not but acquiesce; he felt himself secretly but
forcibly reproved, by the superior virtue of Osmyn: and while he regretted his
having made a proposal, which had been rejected not only as imprudent but
infamous; he concluded, that Osmyn would ever after suspect and despise him;
and he, therefore, from a new cause, conceived new enmity against him. They
parted, however, without any appearance of suspicion or disgust; and, in a
short time, they were in circumstances very different from their expectations.

END OF VOL. I.
ALMORAN AND HAMET. AN ORIENTAL TALE. IN TWO VOLUMES. VOL. II.

LITCHFIELD: REPRINTED BY THOMAS COLLIER. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

ALMORAN AND HAMET.
CHAP. XI.
ALMORAN had now reached the gallery; and when the multitude saw him, they
shouted as in triumph, and demanded that he should surrender. HAMET who also
perceived him at a distance, and was unwilling that any violence should be
offered to his person, pressed forward, and when he was come near, commanded
silence. At this moment ALMORAN, with a loud voice, reproached them with
impiety and folly; and appealing to the power, whom in his person they had
offended, the air suddenly grew dark, a flood of lightning descended from the
sky, and a peal of thunder was articulated into the these words: Divided sway,
the God who reigns alone
Abhors; and gives to ALMORAN the throne.


The multitude stood aghast at the* prodigy; and hiding their faces with their
hands, every one departed in silence and confusion, and HAMET and OMAR* were
left alone. OMAR wa^ taken by some of the soldiers who ha^ adhered to ALMORAN,
but HAMET made his escape.

ALMORAN, whose wishes were th^^ far accomplished by the intervention o^ a
power superior to his own, exulted (...) the anticipation of that happiness
which he now supposed to be secured; and was fortified in his opinion, that he
ha^^ been wretched only because he had be^^ weak, and that to multiply and not
(...) suppress his wishes was the way to acquire felicity.

As he was returning from the galle^^^ he was met by Osmyn and Caled, (...) had
heard the supernatural declaration in his behalf, and learned its effects.
ALMORAN, in that hasty flow of unbounded but capricious favor, which, in
contracted minds, is the effect only of unexpected good fortune, raised Osmyn
from his feet to his bosom: As in the trial, said he, thou have been faithful,
I now invest thee with a superior trust. The toils of state shall from this
moment devolve upon thee; and from this moment, the delights of empire
unallayed shall be mine: I will recline at ease, remote from every eye but
those that reflect my own felicity; the felicity that I shall taste in secret,
surrounded by the smiles of beauty, and the gaieties of youth. Like heaven, I
will reign unseen; and like heaven, though unseen, I will be adored. Osmyn
received this delegation of power with a tumultuous pleasure, that was
expressed only by silence and confusion. ALMORAN remarked it; and exulting in
the pride of power, he suddenly changed his aspect, and regarding Osmyn, who
was yet blushing, and whose eyes were swimming in tears of gratitude, with a
stern and ardent countenance; Let me, however, said he, warn thee to be
watchful in thy trust: beware, that no rude commotion violate my peace by thy
fault; left my anger sweep thee in a moment to destruction. He then directed
hi^ eyes to Caled: and thou too, said he, have been faithful; be thou next in
honor and in power to Osmyn. Guar^ both of you my paradise from dread and
care; fulfill the duty that I have assigned you, and live.

He was then informed by a messenger, that HAMET had escaped, and tha^ OMAR was
taken. As he now despised the power both of HAMET and OMAR, he expressed
neither concern nor anger that HAMET had fled; but he ordered OMAR to be
brought before him.

When OMAR appeared bound and disarmed, he regarded him with a smile* of insult
and derision; and asked him, what he had now to hope. I have indeed, said OMAR,
much less* (...) hope, than thou have to fear. (...) insolence, said ALMORAN,
is eq^^^ to thy folly: what power on earth (...) there, that I should fear?
'Thy own,' said OMAR. I have not leisure now,' replied ALMORAN, to hear the
paradoxes of thy philosophy explained: but to show thee, that I fear not thy
power, thou shall live. I will leave thee to hopeless regret; to wiles that
have been scorned and defeated; to the unheeded petulence of dotage; to the
^o^dness that is repayed with neglect; ^o restless wishes, to credulous hopes,
and to derided command: to the slow and complicated torture of despised old
age; and that, when thou shall long have abhorred thy being, shall destroy it.
The misery, said OMAR, which thou have menaced, it is not in ^hy power to
inflict. As thou have ta^en from me all that I possessed by the bounty of thy
father, it is true that I am poor; it is true also, that my knees are now
feeble, and bend with the weight of years that is upon me. I am, as thou art, a
man; and therefore I have erred: but I have still kept the ^^arrow path in view
with a faithful ^^gilance, and to that I have soon re^^rned: the past,
therefore, I do not ^egret; and the future I have no cause ^o fear. In Him who
is most merciful, I have hope; and in that hope even now I rejoice before thee.
My portion in the present hour, is adversity: but I receive it, not only with
humility, but thankfulness; for I know* that whatever is ordained is best.

ALMORAN, in whose heart there were no traces of OMAR'S virtue, and therefore
no foundation for his confidenc^ sustained himself against their force, by
treating them as hypocrisy and affectation: I know, says he, that thou have
long learned to echo the specious (...) pompous sounds, by which hypocri^^
conceal their wretchedness, and exci^^ the admiration of folly and the
co^^tempt of wisdom: yet thy walk in th^^ place, shall be still unrestrained.
He^^ the splendour of my felicity shall fill thy heart with envy, and cover thy
face with confusion; and from thee sha^^ the world be instructed, that the
en^mies of ALMORAN can move no passion in his breast but contemp^, (...) that
most to punish them is to (...) them to live.

OMAR, whose eye had till now been fixed upon the ground, regarded ALMORAN with
a calm but steady counte^ance: Here then, said he, will I follow thee, constant
as thy shadow; though, as thy shadow, unnoticed or neglected: here shall mine eye
watch those evils, that were appointed from everlasting to attend upon guilt:
and here shall my voice warn thee of their approach. From thy breast may they
be averted by righteousness! for without this, though all the worlds that roll
above thee should, to aid thee, unite all their power, that power can aid thee
only to be wretched.

ALMORAN, in all the pride of grati^^ed ambition, invested with dominion that
had no limits, and allied with pow^rs that were more than mortal; was ^^erawed
by this address, and his coun^nance grew pale. But the next mo^ent, disdaining
to be thus controuled ^y the voice of a slave, his cheeks were ^^ffused with
the blushes of indignation: (...) turned from OMAR, in scorn, anger, and
confusion, without reply; and OMAR departed with the calm dignity of (...)
benevolent and superior being, to whom the smiles and frowns of terrestrial
tyranny were alike indifferent, and in whom abhorrence of the turpitude of vice
was mingled with compassion for its folly.

CHAP. XII.
IN the mean time, ALMEIDA, who ha^ been conveyed to an apartment i^ ALMORAN'S
seraglio, and delivered to the care of those who attended upon his women,
suffered all that grief and terror could inflict upon a generous, a tenter, and
a delicate mind; yet in this complicated distress, her attention was
principally fixed upon HAMET. The disappointment of his hope, and the violation
of his right, were the chief objects of her regret and her fears, in all that
had already happened, and in all that was still to come; every insult that
might be offered to herself, she considered as an injury to him. Yet the
thoughts of all that he might suffer in her person, gave way to her
apprehensions of what might befall him in his own: in his situation, every
calamity that her imagination could conceive, was possible; her thoughts were,
therefore, bewildered amidst an endless variety of dreadful images, which
started up before them which way soever they were turned; and it was impossible
that she could gain any certain intelligence of his fate, as the splendid
prison in which she was now confined, was surrounded by mutes and eunuchs, of
whom nothing could be learned, or in whose report no confidence could be placed.

While her mind was in this state of agitation and distress, she perceived the
door open, and the next moment ALMORAN entered the apartment. When she saw him,
she turned from him with a look of unutterable anguish; and hiding her face in
her veil, she burst into tears. The tyrant was moved with her distress; for
unfeeling obduracy is the vice only of the old, whose sensibility has been worn
away by the habitual perpetration of reiterated wrongs.

He approached her with looks of kindness, and his voice was involuntarily
modulated to pity; she was, however, too much absorbed in her own sorrows, to
reply. He gazed upon her with tenderness and admiration; and taking her hand
into his own, he pressed it ardently to his bosom: his compassion soon kindled
into desire, and from soothing her distress, he began to solicit her love. This
instantly roused her attention, and resentment now suspended her grief: she
^urned from him with a sirm and haugh^y step, and instead of answering his
^rofessions, reproached him with her wrongs. ALMORAN, that he might at once
address her virtue and her passions, observed, that though he had loved her from
the first moment he had seen her, yet he had concealed his passion even from
her, till it had received the sanction of an invisible and superior power; that
he came, therefore, the messenger of heaven; and that he offered her unrivalled
empire and everlasting love. To this she answered only by an impatient and fond
enquiry after HAMET. Think not of HAMET, said ALMORAN; for why should he who is
rejected of Heaven, be still the favorite of ALMEIDA? If thy hand, said
ALMEIDA, could quench in everlasting darkness, that vital spark of intellectual
fire, which the word of the Almighty has kindled in my breast to burn for ever,
then might ALMEIDA cease to think of HAMET; but while that shall live, whatever
form it shall inhabit, or in whatever world it shall reside, his image shall be
for ever present, and to him shall my love be for ever true. This glowing
declaration of her love for HAMET, was immediately succeeded by a tender
anxiety for his safety; and a sudden reflection upon the probability of his
death, and the danger of his situation if alive, threw her again into tears.

ALMORAN, whom the ardour and impetuosity of her passions kept sometimes
silent, and sometimes threw into confusion, again attempted to sooth and
comfort her: she often urged him to tell her what was become of his brother,
and he as often evaded the question. As she was now about to renew her enquiry,
and reflected that it had already been often made, and had not yet been
answered, she thought that ALMORAN MORAN had already put him to death: this
threw her into an agony, of which he did not immediately discover the cause;
but as he soon learned it from her reproaches and exclamations, he perceived
that he could not hope to be heard, while she was in doubt about the safety of
^^^MET. In order, therefore, to ^ootl^^^er mind, and prevent its being longer
possessed with an image that excluded every other; he assumed a look of concern
and astonishment at the imputation of a crime, which was at once so horrid and
so unnecessary. After a solemn deprecation of such ^^ormous guilt, he observed,
that it was now impossble for HAMET to succeed as his rival, either in empire
or in love, without the breach of a command, which he new his virtue would
implicitly obey; he had no motive either to desire his death, or to restrain
his liberty: His walk, says he, is still uncircumscribed in Persia; and except
this chamber, there is no part of the palace to which he is not admitted.

To this declaration ALMEIDA listened, as to the music of paradise; and it
suspended for a while every passion, but her love: the sudden ease of her mind
made her regardless of all about her, and she had in this interval suffered
ALMORAN to remove her veil, without reflecting upon what he was doing. The
moment she recollected herself, she made a gentle effort to recover it, with
some confusion, but without anger. The pleasure that was expressed in her eyes,
the blush that glowed upon her cheek, and the contest about the veil, which to
an am^^ous imagination had an air of dalliance, concurred to heighten the
passion of ALMORAN almost to phrensy: she perceived her danger in his looks,
and her spirits instantly took the alarm. He seized her hand, and gazing
ardently upon her, he conjured her, with a tone and emphasis that strongly
expressed the tumultuous vehemence of his wishes, that she would renounce the
rites which had been forbidden above, and that she would receive him to whom by
miracle she had been allotted.

ALMEIDA, whom the manner and voice of ALMORAN had terrified into silence,
answered him at first only with a look that expressed aversion and disdain,
overawed by fear. Will thou not, said ALMORAN, fulfill the decrees of Heaven? I
conjure thee, by Heaven to answer. From this solemn reference to Heaven,
ALMEIDA derived new fortitude: she instantly recollected that she stood in the
presence of Him, by whose permission only every other power, whether visible or
invisible, can dispense evil or good: Urge no more, said she, as the decree of
Heaven, that which is inconsistent with Divine perfection. Can He, in whose
hand my heart is, command me to wed the man whom He has not enabled me to love?
Can the Pure, the Just, the Merciful, have ordained that I should suffer
embraces which I loath, and violate vows which His laws permitted me to make?
Can He have ordained a perfidious, a loveless, and a joyless prostitution? What
if a thousand prodigies should concur to enforce it a thousand times, the deed
itself would be a stronger proof that those prodigies were the works of
darkness, than those prodigies that the deed was commanded by the Father of
light.

ALMORAN, whose hopes were now blasted to the root, who perceived that the
virtue of ALMEIDA could neither be deceived nor overborne; that she at once
contemned his power, and ab^orred his love; gave way to all the suries of his
mind, which now slumbered ^o more: his countenance expressed at once anger,
indignation, and despair; his gesture became furious, and his voice was lost in
menaces and execrations. ALMEIDA beheld him with an earnest yet steady
countenance, till he vowed to revenge the indignity he had suffered, upon
HAMET. At the name of HAMET, her fortitude forsook her; the pride of virtue
gave way to the softness of love; her cheeks became pale, her lips trembled,
and taking hold of the robe of ALMORAN, she threw herself at his feet. His fury
was at first suspended by hope and expectation; but when from her words, which
grief and terror had rendered scarce articulate, he could learn only that she
was pleading for HA^E^, he burst from her in an ecstasy of rage; and forcing his
robe from her hand, with a violence that dragged her after it, he rushed out of
the chamber, and left her prostrate upon the ground.

As he passed through the gallery with a hasty and disordered pace, he was seen
by OMAR; who knowing that he was returned from an interview with ALMEIDA, and
conjecturing from his appearance what had happened, judged that he ought not to
neglect this opportunity to warn him once more of the delusive phantoms, which,
under the appearance of pleasure, were leading him to destruction: he,
therefore, followed him unperceived, till he had reached the apartment in which
he had been used to retire alone, and heard again the loud and tumultuous
exclamations, which were wrung from his heart by the anguish of disappointment:
What have I gained, said he, by absolute dominion! The slave who, secluded from
the gales of life and from the light of heaven, toils without hope in the
darkness of the mine, riots in the delights of paradise compared with me. By
the caprice of one woman, I am robbed not only of enjoyment but of peace, and
condemned for ever to the torment of unsatisfied desire.

OMAR, who was impatient to apprize him that he was not alone, and to prevent
his disclosing sentiments which he wished to conceal, now threw himself upon
the ground at his feet. Presumptuous slave! said ALMORAN, from whence, and
wherefore art thou come? I am come, said OMAR, to tell thee that not the
caprice of a woman, but the wishes of ALMORAN, have made ALMORAN wretched. The
king, stung with the reproach, drew back, and with a furious look laid his hand
upon his poignard; but was immediately restrained from drawing it, by his
pride. I am come, said OMAR, to repeat that truth, upon which, great as thou
art, thy fate is suspended. Thy power extends not to the mind of another; exert
it, therefore, upon thy own: suppress the wishes, which thou can not fulfill;
and secure the happiness that is within thy reach.

ALMORAN, who could bear no longer to hear the precepts which he disdained to
practice, sternly commanded OMAR to depart: Be gone, said he, lest I crush thee
like a noisome reptile, which men cannot but abhor, though it is too
contemptible to be feared. I go, said OMAR, that my warning voice may yet again
recall thee to the path of wisdom and of peace, if yet again I shall behold
thee while it is to be found.

CHAP. XIII.
ALMORAN was now left alone; and throwing himself upon a sofa, ^e sat some time
motionless and silent, as if all his faculties had been suspended in the
stupefaction of despair. He revolved in his mind the wishes that had been
gratified and the happiness of which he had been disappointed: I desired, said
he, the pomp and power of undivided dominion; and HAMET was driven from the
throne which he shared with me, by a voice from heaven: I desired, to break off
his marriage with ALMEIDA; and it was broken off by a prodigy, when no human
power could have accomplished my desire. It was my wish also to have the person
of ALMEIDA in my power, and this wish also has been gratified; yet I am still
wretched. But I am wretched, only because the means have not been adequate to
the end: what I have hitherto obtained, I have not desired for itself; and of
that, for which I desired it, I am not possessed: I am, therefore, still
wretched, because I am weak. With the soul of ALMORAN, I should have the form,
of HAMET: then my wishes would indeed be fulfilled; then would ALMEIDA bless me
with consenting beauty, and the splendour of my power should distinguish only
the intervals of my love; my enjoyments would then be certain and permanent,
neither blasted by disappointment, nor withered by satiety. When he had uttered
these reflections with the utmost vehemence and agitation, his face was again
obscured by gloom and despair; his posture was again ^ixed; and he was falling
back into his former state of silent abstraction, when he was suddenly roused
by the appearance of the Genius, the sincerity of whose friendship he began to
distrust.

ALMORAN, said the Genius, if thou art not yet happy, know that my powers are
not yet exhausted: fear me not, but let thine ear be attentive to my voice. The
Genius then stretched out his hand toward him, in which there was an emerald
of great lustre^ cut into a figure that had four and twenty sides, on each of
which was engraven a different letter. Thou see, said he, this talisman: on
each side of it is engraven one of those mysterious characters, of which are
formed all the words of all the languages that are spoken by angels, genii, and
men* This shall enable thee to change thy figure: and what under the form o^
ALMORAN thou can not accomplish; thou shall still be able to effect, if it,
can be effected by thee, in the form of any other. Point only to the letters
that compose the name of him whose appearance thou would assume, and it is
done. Remember only, that upon him, whose appearance thou shall assume, thine
shall be impressed, till thou restore his own. Hide the charm in thy bosom, and
avail thyself of its power. ALMORAN received the talisman in a transport of
gratitude and joy, and the Genius immediately disappeared.

The use of this talisman was so obvi^ous, that it was impossible to overlook
it. ALMORAN instantly conceived the design with which it was given, and
de^ermined instantly to put it in execution: I will now, said he, assume the
figure of HAMET; and my love, in all its ardour, shall be returned by ALMEIDA.
As his fancy kindled at the anticipation of his happiness, he stood musing in a
^leasing suspense, and indulged himself (...) the contemplation of the several
gradations, by which he should ascend to the sumn^^^ ^f his wishes.

Just at this moment, Osmyn, whom ^e had commanded to attend him at this hour,
approached his apartment: ALMORAN was roused by the sound of his foot, and
supposed it to be OMAR, who had again intruded upon his privacy; he was enraged
at the interruption which had broken a series of imaginations so flattering and
luxurious; he snatched out his poignard, and lifting up his arm for the stroke,
hastily turned round to have stabbed him; but seeing Osmyn, he discovered his
mistake just in time to prevent the blow.

Osmyn, who was not conscious of any crime, nor indeed of any act that could
have given occasion of offense; started back terrified and amazed, and stood
trembling in suspense whether to remain or to withdraw. ALMORAN, in the mean
time, sheathed the instrument of death, and bid him fear nothing, for he should
not be hurt. He then turned about; and putting his ^and to his forehead, stood
again silen^ in a musing posture: he recollected, that if he assumed the figure
of HAMET, it was necessary he should give orden for HAMET to be admitted to
ALMEIDA, as he would otherwise be excluded by the delegates of his own
authority; turning, therefore, to Osmyn, Remember, said he, that whenever HAMET
shall return, it is my command, that he be admitted to ALMEIDA.

Osmyn, who was pleased with an opportunity of recommending himself to ALMORAN,
by praising an act of generous virtue which he supposed him now to exert in
favor of his brother, received the command with a look, that expressed not
only approbation but joy: Let the sword of destruction, said he, be the guard
of the tytant; the strength of my lord shall be the bonds of love: those, who
honor thee as ALMORAN, shall rejoice in thee as the friend of HAMET. To
ALMORAN, who was conscious of no kindness for his brother, the praise of Osmyn
was a reproach: he was offended at the joy which he saw kindled in his
countenance, by a command to show favor to HAMET; and was fired with sudden
rage at that condemnation of his real conduct, which was implied by an incomium
on the generosity of which he assumed the appearance for a malevolent and
persidious purpose: his brow was contracted, his lip quivered, and the hilt of
his dagger was again grasped in his hand. Osmyn was again overwhelmed with
terror and confusion; he had again offended, but knew not his offense. In the
mean time, ALMORAN recollecting that to express displeasure against Osmyn was
to betray his own secret, endeavored to suppress his anger; but his anger was
succeeded by remorse, regret, and disappointment. The anguish of his mind broke
out in imperfect murmurs: What I am, said he, is, to the wretch, the object not
only of hatred but of scorn; and he commends only what I am not, in what to him
I would seem to be.

These ^ounds, which, though not articulate, were yet uttered with great emotion,
were still mistaken by Osmyn for the overflowings of capricious and causeless
anger: My life, says he to himself, is even now suspended in a doubtful
balance. Whenever I approach this tyrant, I tread the borders of destruction:
like a hood-winked wretch who is left to wander near the brink of a precipice,
I know my danger; but which way soever I turn, I know not whether I shall incur
or avoid it.

In these reflections, did the sovereign and the slave pass those moments, in
which the sovereign intended to render the slave subservient to his pleasure or
his security, and the slave intended to express a zeal which he really felt,
and a homage which his heart had already paid. Osmyn was at length, however,
dismissed with an assurance, that all was well; and ALMORAN was again left to
reflect with anguish upon the past, to regret the present, and to anticipate
the future with solicitude, anxiety, and perturbation.

He was, however, determined to assume the figure of his brother, by the
talisman which had been put in his power by the Genius: ^ut just as he was
about to form the spell, he recollected, that by the same act he would impress
his own likeness upon HAMET, who would consequently be invested with his power,
and might use it to his destruction. This held him some time in suspense: but
reflecting that HAMET might not, perhaps, be apprized of his advantage, till it
was too late to improve it; that he was now a fugitive, and probably alone,
leaving Persia behind him with all the speed he could make; and that at the
worst, if he should be still near, if he should know the transformation as soon
as it should be made, and should instantly take the most effectual measures to
improve it; yet as he could dissolve the charm in a moment, whenever it should
be necessary for his safety, no formidable danger could be incurred by the
experiment, to which he, therefore, proceeded without delay.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the mean time, HAMET, to whom his own safety was of no importance but for
the sake of ALMEIDA, resolved if possible, to conceal himself near the city.
Having, therefore, reached the confines of the desert, by which it was bounded
on the east, he quitted his horse, and determined to remain there till the
multitude was dispersed, and the darkness of the evening might conceal his
return, when in less than an hour he could reach the place.

He sat down at the foot of the mountain Kabessed, without considering, that in
this place he was most likely to be found, as those who travel the desert
seldom fail to enter the cave that winds its way under the mountain, to drink
of the water that issues there from a clear and copious spring.

He reviewed the scenes of the day that was now nearly passed, with a mixture
of astonishment and distress, to which no description can be equal. The sudden
and amazing change that a few hours had made in his situation, appeared like a
wild and distressful dream, from which he almost doubted whether he should not
wake to the power and the felicity that he had lost. He sat some time
bewildered in the hurry and multiplicity of his thoughts, and at length burst
out into passionate exclamations: What, says he, and where am I? Am I, indeed,
HAMET; that son of Solomon who divided the dominion of Persia with his brother,
and who possessed the love of ALMEIDA alone? Dreadful vicissitude! I am now an
outcast, friendless and forlorn; without an associate, and without a dwelling:
for me the cup of adversity overflows, and the last dregs of sorrow have been
wrung out for my portion: the powers not only of the earth, but of the air,
have combined against me; and how can I stand alone before them? But is there
no power that will interpose in my behalf? If He, who is supreme, is good, I
shall not perish. But wherefore am I thus? Why should the desires of vice be
accomplished by superior powers; and why should superior powers be permitted to
disappoint the expectations of virtue (...) Yet let me not rashly question the
ways of Him, in whose balance the world is weighed: by Him, every evil is
rendered subservient to good; and by His wisdom, the happiness of the whole is
secured. Yet I am but a part only, and for a part only I can feel. To me, what
is that goodness of which I do not partake? In my cup the gall is unmixed; and
have I not, therefore, a right to complain? But what have I said? Let not the
gloom that surrounds me, hide from me the prospect of immortality. Shall not
eternity atone for time? Eternity, to which the duration of ages is but as an
atom to a world! Shall I not, when this momentar^ separation is past, again
meet ALMEIDA to part no more? and shall not a purer flame than burns upon the
earth, unite us? Even at this moment, her mind, which not the frauds of sorcery
can taint or alienate, is mine: that pleasure which she reserved for me, cannot
be taken by force; it is in the consent alone that it subsists; and from the
joy that she feels, and from that only, proceeds the joy she can bestow.

With these reflections he soothed the anguish of his mind, till the dreadful
moment arrived, in which the power of the talisman took place, and the figure
of ALMORAN was changed into that of HAMET; and the figure of HAMET into that of
ALMORAN.

At the moment of transformation, HAMET was seized with a sudden langour, and
his faculties were suspended as by the stroke of death. When the recovered, his
limbs still trembled, and his lips were parched with thirst: he rose,
therefore, and entering the cavern, at the mouth of which he had been sitting,
he stooped over the well to drink; but glancing his eyes upon the water, he
saw, with astonishment and horror, that it reflected, not his own countenance,
but that of his brother. He started back from the prodigy; and supporting
himself against the side of the rock, he stood some time like a statue, without
the power of recollection: but at length the thought suddenly rushed into his
mind, that the same sorcery which had suspended his marriage, and driven him
from the throne, was still practiced against him; and that the change of his
figure to that of ALMORAN, was the effect of ALMORAN'S having assumed his
likeness, to obtain, in this disguise, whatever ALMEIDA could bestow. This
thought, like a whirlwind of the desert, totally subverted his mind; his
fortitude was borne down, and his hopes were rooted up; no principles remained
to regulate his conduct, but all was phrensy, confusion and despair. He rushed
out of the cave with a furious and distracted look; and went in haste toward
the city, without having formed any design, or considered any consequence that
might follow.

The shadows of the mountains were now lengthened by the declining sun; and the
^pproach of evening had invited OMAR to meditate in a grove, that was adjacent
to the gardens of the palace. From this place he was seen at some distance by
HAMET, who came up to him with a hasty and disordered pace; and OMAR drew back
with a cold and distant reverence, which the power and the character of ALMORAN
concurred to excite. HAMET, not reflecting upon the cause of this behavior,
was offended, and reproached him with the want of that friendship he had so
often professed: the vehemence of his expression and demeanor, suited well with
the appearance of ALMORAN; and OMAR, as the best proof of that friendship which
had been impeached, took this opportunity to repeat his admonitions in the
behalf of HAMET: Whatever evil, said he thou can bring upon HAMET, will be
doubled to thyself: to his virtues, the Power that fills infinitude is a
friend, and he can be afflicted only till they are perfect; but thy sufferings
will be the punishment of vice, and as long as thou art vicious they must
increase.

HAMET, who instantly reco^ected for whom he was mistaken, and the anguish of
whose mind was for a moment suspended by this testimony of esteem and kindness,
which could not possibly be feigned, and which was paid him at the risque of
life, when it could not be known that he received it; ran forward to embrace
the hoary sage, who had been the guide of his youth, and cried out, in a voice
that was broken by contending passions, The face is the face of ALMORAN; but
the heart is the heart of HAMET.

OMAR was struck dumb with astonishment; and HAMET, who was impatient to be no
longer mistaken, related all the circumstances of his transformation, and
reminded him of some particulars which could be known only to themselves* Can
thou not yet believe, said he, that I am HAMET? when thou have this day seen me
banished from my kingdom; when thou have now met me a fugitive returning from
the desert; and when I learnt from thee, since the sun was risen which is not
yet set, that more than mortal powers were combined against me. I now believe,
said OMAR, that thou, indeed, art HAMET. Stay me not, then, ^^id HAMET; but
come with me to revenge. Beware, said OMAR, lest thou endanger the loss of more
than empire and ALMEIDA. If not to revenge, said HAMET, I may at least be
permitted to punish. Thy mind, says OMAR, is now in such a state, that to
punish the crimes by which thou have been wronged, will dip thee in the guilt
of blood. Why else are we forbidden to take vengeance for ourselves? and why is
it reserved as the prerogative of the Most High? In Him, and in Him alone, it
is goodness guided by wisdom: He approves the means, only as necessary to the
end; He wounds only to heal, and destroys only to save; He has complacence, not
in the evil, but in the good only which it is appointed to produce. Remember,
therefore, that he, to whom the punishment of another is sweet; though his act
may be just with respect to others, with respect to himself it is a^deed of
darkness, and abhorred by the Almighty. HAMET, who had stood abstracted in the
contemplation of the new injury he had suffered, while OMAR was persuading him
not to revenge it, started from his posture in all the wildness of distraction;
and bursting away from OMAR, with an ardent and furious look hasted toward the
palace, and was soon out of sight.

CHAP. XV.
IN the mean time, ALMORAN, after having effected the transformation, was met,
as he was going to the apartment of ALMEIDA, by Osmyn. Osmyn had already
experienced the misery of dependent greatness, that kept him continually under
the eye of a capricious tyrant, whose temper was various as the gales of
summer, and whose anger was sudden as the bolt of heaven; whose purpose and
passions were dark and impetuous as the midnight storm, and at whose command
death was inevitable as the approach of time. When he saw ALMORAN, therefore,
in the likeness of HAMET, he felt a secret desire to apprize him of his
situation, and offer him his friendship.

ALMORAN, who with the form assumed the manners of HAMET, addressed Osmyn with
a mild though mournful countenance; At length, said he, the will of ALMORAN
alone is law; does it permit me to hold a private rank in this place, without
molestation? It permits, said Osmyn, yet more; he has commanded, that you
should have admittance to ALMEIDA. ALMORAN, whose, vanity betrayed him to
flatter his own power in the person of HAMET, replied with a smile: I know,
that ALMORAN, who presides like a God in silent and distant state, reveals the
secrets of his will to thee; I know that thou art -- I am, said Osmyn, of all
thou see, most wretched. At this declaration, ALMORAN turned short, and fixed
his eyes upon Osmyn with a look of surprise and anger: Does not the favor of
ALMORAN, said he, whose smile is power, and wealth, and honor, shine upon
thee? My lord, said Osmyn, I know so well the severity of thy virtue, that if I
should, even for the sake, become perfidious to thy brother -- ALMORAN, who was
unable to preserve the character of HAMET with propriety, interrupted him with
a fierce and haughty tone: How! said he, perfidious to my brother! to ALMORAN
perfidious!

Osmyn, who had now gone too far to recede, and who still saw before him the
figure of HAMET, proceeded in his purpose: I knew, said he, that in thy
judgment I should be condemned; and yet, the preservation of life is the
strongest principle of nature, and the love of virtue is her proudest boast.
Explain thyself, said ALMORAN, for I cannot comprehend thee. I mean, said
Osmyn, that he, whose life depends upon the caprice of a tyrant, is like the
wretch whose sentence is already pronounced; and who, if the wind does but rush
by his dungeon, imagines that it is the bow-string and the mute. 'Fear not,'
said ALMORAN, who now affected to be again calm; be still faithful, and thou
shall still be safe. Alas! said Osmyn, there is no diligence, no toil, no
faith, that can secure the slave from the sudden phrensy of passion, from the
causeless rage either of drunkenness or lust. I am that slave; the slave of a
tyrant whom I hate. The confusion of ALMORAN was now too great to be concealed,
and he stood silent with rage, fear and indignation. Osmyn, supposing that his
wonder suspended his belief of what he had heard, confirmed his declaration by
an oath.

Whoever thou art, to whose mind ALMORAN, the mighty and the proud, is present;
before whom, the lord of absolute dominion stands trembling and rebuked; who
see the possessor of power by which nature is controuled, pale and silent
with anguish and disappointment: if, in the fury of thy wrath, thou have
aggravated weakness into guilt; if thou have chilled the glow of affection,
when it ^^ushed the cheek in thy presence, with the frown of displeasure, or
repressed the ardour of friendship with indifference or neglect; now, let thy
heart smite thee* for, in thy folly, thou have cast away that gem, which is the
light of life; which power can never seize, and which gold can never buy!

Thy tyrant fell at once from his pride, like a star from Heaven; and Osmyn,
still addressing him as HAMET, at once increased his misery and his fears: O,
said he, that the throne of Persia was thine! then should innocence enjoy her
birthright of peace, and hope should bid honest industry look upward. There is
not one to whom ALMORAN has delegated power, nor one on whom his transient
favor has bestowed any gift, who does not already feel his heart throb with
the pangs of boding terror. Nor is there one who, if he did not fear the
displeasure of the invisible power by whom the throne has been given to thy
brother, would not immediately revolt to thee.

ALMORAN, who had hitherto remained silent, now burst into a passionate
exclamation of self pity: what can I do? said he, and whither can I turn?
Osmyn, who mistook the cause of his distress, and supposed that he deplored
only his want of power to avail himself of the general disposition in his
favor, ^ndeavoured to fortify his mind against ^^spair: Your state, said
he,indeed is distressful, but not hopeless. The king who, though addressed as
HAMET, was still betrayed by his confusion to an^wer as ALMORAN, smote his
breast, and replied in an agony. 'It is hopeless!' Osmyn remarked his emotion
and depair, with a concern and astonishment that ALMORAN observed, and at once
recollected his situation. He endeavored to retract such expressions of
^rouble and despondency, as did not suit the character he had assumed; and
^elling Osmyn, that he thanked him for ^is friendship, and would improve the
advantages it offered him, he directed ^im to acquaint the eunuchs that they
were to admit him to ALMEIDA. When he was left alone, his doubts and perplexity
held him long in suspense; a thousand expedients occurred to his mind by turns,
and by turns were rejected.

His first thought was to put Osmyn to death: but he considered, that by this
he would gain no advantage, as he would be in equal danger from whoever should
succeed him: he considered also, that against Osmyn he was upon his guard; and
that he might at any time learn, from him, whatever design might be formed in
favor of HAMET, by assuming HAMET'S appearance: that he would thus be the
confident of every secret, in which his own safety was concerned; and might
disconcert the best contrived project at the very moment of its execution, when
it would be too late for other measures to be taken: he determined, therefore,
to let Osmyn live; at least, till it became more necessary to cut him off.
Having in some degree soothed and fortified his mind by these reflections, he
entered the apartment of ALMEIDA.

His hope was not founded upon a design to marry her under the appearance of
HAMET, for that would be impossible, as the ceremony must have been performed
by the priests who supposed the marriage with HAMET to have been forbidden by a
divine command; and who, therefore, would not have confented, even supposing
they would otherwise have ventured, at the request of HAMET, to perform a
ceremony which they knew would be displeasing to ALMORAN: but he hoped to take
advantage of her tenderness for his brother, and the particular circumstances
of her situation, which made the solemnities of marriage impossible, to seduce
her to gratify his desires, without the sanction which alone rendered the
gratification of them lawful: if he succeeded in this design, he had reason to
expect, either that his love would be extinguished by enjoyment; or that, if he
should still desire to marry ALMEIDA, he might, by disclosing to her the
artifice by which he had effected his purpose, prevail upon her to consent, as
her connection with HAMET, the chief obstacle to her marriage with him, would
then be broken for ever; and as she might, perhaps, wish to sanctify the
pleasure which she might be not unwilling to repeat, or at least to make that
lawful, which it would not be in her power to prevent.

In this disposition, and with this design, he was admitted to ALMEIDA; who,
without suspicion of her danger, was exposed to the severest trial, in which
every passion concurred to oppose her virtue: she was solicited by all the
powers of subtilty and desire, under the appearance of a lover, whose
tenderness and fidelity had been long tried, and whose passion she returned
with equal constancy and ardour; and she was thus solicited, when the rites
which alone could consecrate their union, were impossible, and were rendered
impossible by the guilty designs of a rival, in whose power she was, and from
whom no other expedient offered her a deliverance. Thus deceived and betrayed,
she received him with an excess of tenderness and joy, which flattered all his
hopes, and for a moment suspended his misery. She enquired, with a fond and
gentle solicitude, by what means he had gained admittance, and how he had
provided for his retreat. He received and returned her caresses with a
vehemence, in which, to less partial eyes, desire would have been more apparent
than love; and in the ^umult of his passion, he almost neglected her enquiries:
finding, however, that she would be answered, he told her, that being by the
permission of ALMORAN admitted to every part of the palace, except that of the
women, he had ^ound means to bribe the eunuch who kept the door; who was not in
danger of detection, because ALMORAN, wea^^ed with the tumult and fatigue of
the day, had retired to sleep, and given order to be called at a certain hour.
She then complained of the solicitations to which she was exposed, expressed
her dread of the consequences she had reason to expect from the sudden sally of
the tyrant's rage, and related with tears the brutal outrage she had suffered
when he last left her: Though I abhorred him, said she, I yet kneeled before
him for thee. Let me bend in reverence to that Power, at whose look the
whirlwinds are silent, and the seas are calm, that his fury has hitherto been
restrained from hurting thee.

At these words, the face of ALMORAN was again covered with the blushes of
confusion; to be still beloved only as HAMET, and as ALMORAN to be still hated;
to be thus reproached without anger, and wounded by those who knew not that
they struck him; was a species of misery peculiar to himself, and had been
incurred only by the acquisition of new powers, which he had requested and
received as necessary to obtain that felicity, which the parsimony of nature
had placed beyond his reach. His emotions, however, as by ALMEIDA they were
supposed to be the emotions of HAMET, she imputed to a different cause: As
Heaven, says she, has preserved thee from death; so has it, for thy sake,
preserved me from violation. ALMORAN, whose passion had in this interval again
surmounted his remorse, gazed eagerly upon her, and catching her to his bosom:
Let us at least, says he, secure the happiness that is now offered; let not
these inestimable moments pass by us unimproved; but to show that we deserve
them, let them be devoted to love. 'Let us then,' said ALMEIDA, 'escape
together.' To escape with thee, said ALMORAN, is impossible. I shall retire,
and, like the shaft of Arabia, leave no mark behind me; but the slight of
ALMEIDA will at once be traced to him by whom I was admitted, and I shall thus
retaliate his friendship with destruction. Let him then, said ALMEIDA, be the
partner of our flight. Urge it not now, said ALMORAN; but trust to my prudence
and my love, to select some hour that will be more favorable to our purpose.
And yet, said he, even then, we shall, as now, sigh in vain for the completion
of our wishes: by whom shall our hands be joined, when in the opinion of the
priests it has been forbidden from above? Save thyself, then, said ALMEIDA, and
leave me to my fate. 'Not so,' said ALMORAN. What else, replied ALMEIDA, is in
our power? It is in our power, said ALMORAN, to seize that joy, to which a
public form can give us no new claim; ^or the public form can only declare that
right by which I claim it now.

As they were now reclining upon a sofa, he threw his arm round her; but she
suddenly sprung up, and burst from him: the tear started to her eye, and she
gazed upon him with an earnest but yet tender look: 'Is it?' says she -- No
sure, it is not the voice of HAMET! O! yes, said ALMORAN, what other voice
should call thee to cancel at once the wrongs of HAMET and ALMEIDA; to secure
the treasures of thy love from the hand of the robber; to hide the joys, which
if now we lose we may lose for ever, in the sacred and inviolable stores of the
past, and place them beyond the power not of ALMORAN only but of fate? With
this wild effusion of desire, he caught her again to his breast, and finding no
resistance his heart exulted in his success; but the next moment, to the total
disappointment of his hopes, he perceived that she had fainted in his arms.
When she recovered, she once more disengaged herself from him, and turning away
her face, she burst into tearsL When her voice could be heard, she covered
herself with her veil, and turning again toward him, All but this, said she, I
had learnt to bear; and how has this been deserved by ALMEIDA of HAMET? You was
my only solace in distress; and when the tears have stolen from my eyes in
silence and in solitude, I thought on thee; I though it upon the chaste ardour of
thy sacred friendship, which was softened* refined, and exalted into love. This
was my hoarded treasure; and the thoughts of possessing this, soothed all my
anguish with a miser's happiness, who, blessed in the consciousness of hidden
wealth, despises cold and hunger, and rejoices in the midst of all the miseries
that make poverty dreadful: this was my last retreat; but I am now desolate and
forlorn, and my soul looks round, with terror, for that refuge, which it can
never find. 'Find that refuge,' said ALMORAN, 'in me.' Alas! said ALMEIDA, can
he afford me refuge from my sorrows, who, for the guilty pleasures of a
transient moment, would for ever fully the purity of my mind, and aggravate
misfortune by the consciousness of guilt?

As ALMORAN now perceived, that ^t was impossible, by any importunity, to
induce her to violate her principles; he had nothing more to attempt, but to
subvert them. When, said he, shall ALMEIDA awake, and these dreams of folly and
superstition vanish? That only is virtue, by which happiness is produced; and
whateve^ produces happiness, is therefore virtue; and the forms, and words, and
rites, which priests have pretended to be required by Heaven, are the fraudful
arts only by which they govern mankind.

ALMEIDA, by this impious insult, was roused from grief to indignation: As thou
have now dared, said she, to deride the laws, which thou would first have
broken; so have thou broken for ever the tender bonds, by which my soul was
united to thine. Such as I fondly believed thee, thou art not; and what thou
art, I have never loved. I have loved a delusive phantom only, which, while I
strove to grasp it, has, vanished from me. ALMORAN attempted to reply; but on
such a subject, neither her virtue nor her wisdom would permit debate. That
podigy, said she, which I thought was the sleight of cunning, or the work of
sorcery, I now revere as the voice of Heaven: which, as it knew thy heart, has
in mercy saved me from thy arms. To the will of Heaven shall my will be
obedient; and my voice also shall pronounce, to ALMORAN ALMEIDA

ALMORAN, whose whole soul was now suspended in attention, conceived new hopes
of success; and foresaw the certain accomplishment of his purpose, though by an
effect directly contrary to that which he had labored to produce. Thus to have
incurred the hatred of ALMEIDA in the form of HAMET, was more fortunate than to
have taken advantage of her love; the path that led to his wishes was now clear
and open; and his marriage with ALMEIDA in his own person, waited only till he
could resume it. He, therefore, instead of soothing, provoked her resentm^^t*
If thou have loved a phantom, said he, which existed only in imagination; on
such a phantom my love also has been fixed: thou have, indeed, only the form of
what I called ALMEIDA; my love thou have rejected, because thou have never
loved; the object of thy passion was not HAMET, but a throne; and thou have
made the observance of rituals, in which folly only can suppose there is good
or ill, a pretense to violate thy ^aith, that thou may still gratify thy
ambition.

To this injurious reproach, ALMEIDA made no reply; and ALMORAN immediately
quitted her apartment, that he might reassume his own figure, and take
advantage of the disposition which, under the appearance of HAMET, he had
produced in favor of himself: But Osmyn, who supposing him to be HAMET, had
intercepted and detained him as he was going to ALMEIDA, now intercepted him a
second time at his return, having placed himself near the door of the apartment
for that purpose.

Osmyn was by no means satisfied with the issue of their last interview: he had
perceived a perturbation in the mind of ALMORAN, for which, imagining him to be
HAMET, he could not account; and which seemed more extraordinary upon a review,
than when it happened; he, therefore, again entered into conversation with him,
in which he farther disclosed his sentiments and designs. ALMORAN,
notwithstanding the impatience natural to his temper and situation, was thus
long detained listening to Osmyn, by the united influence of his curiosity and
his fears; his enquiries still alarmed him with new terrors, by discovering new
objects of distrust, and new instances of disaffection: still, however, he
resolved, not yet to remove Osmyn from his post, that he might give no alarm by
appearance of suspicion, and consequently learn with more ease, and detect with
more certainty, any project that might be formed against him.

CHAP. XVI.
ALMEIDA, as soon as she was left alone, began to review the scene that had
just past; and was every moment affected with new wonder, grief, and
resentment. She now deplored her own misfortune; and now conceived a design to
punish the author of it, from whose face she supposed the hand of adversity had
torn the mask under which he had deceived her: it appeared to her very easy, to
take a severe revenge upon HAMET for the indignity which she supposed he had
offered her, by complaining of it to ALMORAN; and telling him, that he had
gained admittance to her by bribing the eunuch who kept the door. The thought
of thus giving him up, was one moment rejected, as arising from a vindictive
spirit; and the next indulged, as an act of justice to ALMORAN, and a
punishment due to the hypocricy of HAMET: to the first she inclined, when her
grief, which was still mingled with a tender remembrance of the man she loved,
was predominant; and to the last, when her grief gave way to indignation.

Thus are we inclined to consider the same action, either as a virtue, or a
vice, by the influence of different passions, which prompt us either to perform
or to avoid it. ALMEIDA, from deliberating whether she should accuse HAMET to
ALMORAN, or conceal his fault, was led to consider what punishment he would
either incur or escape in consequence of her determination; and the images that
rushed into her mind, the moment this became the object of her thoughts, at
once determined her to be silent: Could I bear to see, said she, that hand,
which has so often trembled with delight when it ensolded mine, convulsed and
black! those eyes, that as often as they gazed upon me were dissolved in tears
of tenderness and love, start from the sockets! and those lips that breathed
the softest sighs of elegant desire, distorted and gasping in the convulsions
of death!

From this image, her mind recoiled in an agony of terror and piety; her heart
^unk within her; her limbs trembled; she sunk down upon the sofa, and burst
into tears.

By this time, HAMET, on whose form the likeness of ALMORAN was still
impressed, had reached the palace. He went instantly toward the apartment of
the women. Instead of that cheerful alacrity, that mixture of zeal and
reverence and affection, which his eye had been used to find wherever it was
turned, he now observed confusion, anxiety and terror; whoever he met, made
haste to prostrate themselves before him, and feared to look up till he was
past. He went on, however, with a hasty pace; and coming up to the eunuch's
guard, he said with an impatient tone; 'To ALMEIDA.' The slave immediately made
way before him, and conducted him to the door of the apartment, which he would
not otherwise have been able to find, and for which he could not directly
enquire.

When he entered, his countenance expressed all the passions that his situation
had roused in his mind. He first looked sternly round him, to see whether
ALMORAN was not present; and then fetching a deep sigh he turned his eyes, with
a look of mournful tenderness, upon ALMEIDA. His first view was to discover,
whether ALMORNA had already supplanted him; and for this purpose he collected
the whole strength of his mind: he considered that he appeared now, not as
HAMET, but as ALMORAN; and that he was to question ALMEIDA concerning ALMORAN,
while she had mistaken him for HAMET; he was therefore to maintain the
character, at whatever expense, till his doubts were resolved, and his fears
either removed or confirmed: he was so firmly persuaded, that ALMORAN had been
there before him, that he did not ask the question, but supposed the fact; he
restrained alike both his tenderness and his fears; and looking earnestly upon
ALMEIDA, who had risen up in his presence with blushes and confusion, To me,
says he, is ALMEIDA still cold? and has she lavished all her love upon HAMET?

At the name of HAMET, the blushes and confusion of ALMEIDA increased: her mind
was still full of the images, which had risen from the thought of what HAMET
might suffer, if ALMORAN should know that he had been with her; and though she
feared that their interview was discovered, yet she hoped it might be only
suspected, and in that case the removal or confirmation of the suspicions, on
which the fate of HAMET depended, would devolve upon her.

In this situation, she, who had but a few moments before doubted, whether she
should not voluntarily give him up, when nothing more was necessary for his
safety than to be silent; now determined, with whatever reluctance, to secure
him, though it could not be done without dissimulation, and though it was
probable that in this dissimulation she would be detected. Instead, therefore,
of answering the question, she repeated it* 'On whom said my lord, on HAMET?'
HAMET, whose suspicions were increased by the evasion, replied with great
emotion, Aye, on HAMET; did he not this moment leave you? Leave me this moment?
said ALMEIDA, with yet greater confusion, and deeper blushes. HAMET, in the
impatience of his jealousy, concluded, that the passions which he saw expressed
in her countenance, and which arose from the struggle between her regard to
truth an^ her tenderness for HAMET, proceeded from the consciousness of what he
had most reason to dread, and she to conceal, a breach of virtue, to which she
had been betrayed by his own appearance united with the vices of his brother:
he, therefore, drew back from her with a look of inexpressible anguish, and
stood some time silent. She observed, that in his countenance there was more
expression of trouble, than rage; she, therefore, hoped to divert him from
pursuing his enquiries, by at once removing ^is jealousy; which she supposed
would ^e at an end, as soon as she should disclose the resolution she had taken
in his ^^vour. Addressing him, therefore, as ALMORAN, with a voice which though
it was gentle and soothing, was yet mournful and tremulous; Do not turn from
me, said she, with those unfriendly and frowning looks: give me now that love
which so lately you offered, and with all the future I will atone the past.

Upon HAMET, whose heart involun^^rily answered to the voice of ALME^DA, these
words had irresistible and ^^stantaneous force; but recollecting, (...) a
moment, whose form he bore, and (...) whom they were addressed, they struck him
with new astonishment, and increased the torments of his mind. Supposing what
he at first feared had happened, and that ALMORAN had seduced her as HAMET; he
could not account for her now addressing him, as ALMORAN, with words of favor
and compliance: he, therefore, renewed his enquiries concerning himself, with
apprehensions of a different kind. She, who was still solicitous to put an end
to the enquiry, as well for the sake of HAMET, as to prevent her own
embarrassment, replied with a sigh, Let not thy peace be interrupted by one
thought of HAMET; for of HAMET ALMEIDA shall think no more. HAMET, who, though
he had fortified himself against whatever might have happened to her person,
could not bear the alienation of her mind, cried out, with looks of distraction
and a voice scarcely human, 'Not think of HAMET!' ALMEIDA, whose astonishment
was every moment increasing, replied, with a tender and interesting enquiry, Is
ALMORAN then offended, that ALMEIDA should think of HAMET no more? HAMET, being
thus addressed by the name of his brother, again recollected his situation; and
now first conceived the idea, that the alteration of ALMEIDA'S sentiments with
respect to himself, might be the effect of some violence offered her by ALMORAN
in his likeness; he, therefore, recurred to his first purpose, and determined,
by a direct enquiry, to discover, whether she had seen him under that
appearance. This enquiry he urged with the utmost solemnity and ardor, in terms
suitable to his present appearance and situation: Tell me, said he, have these
doors been open to HAMET? Has he obtained possession of that treasure, which,
by the voice of Heaven, has been allotted to me?

To this double question, ALMEIDA answered by a single negative; and her
answer, therefore, was both false and true: it was true that her person was
still inviolate, and it was true also that HAMET had not been admitted to her;
yet her denial of it was false, for she believed the contrary; ALMORAN only had
been admitted, but she had received him as his brother. HAMET, however, was
satisfied with the answer, and did not discover its fallacy. He looked up to
heaven, with an expression of gratitude and joy; and then turning to ALMEIDA,
Swear then, said he, that thou have granted to HAMET, no pledge of thy love
which should be reserved for me. ALMEIDA, who now thought nothing more than the
asseveration necessary to quiet his mind, immediately complied: I swear, said
she, that to HAMET I have given nothing, which thou would wish me to
withold: the power that has devoted my person to thee, has disunited my heart
from HAMET, whom I renounce in thy presence for ever.

HAMET, whose sortitude and recollection were again overborne, was thrown into
an agitation of mind, which discovered itself by looks and gestures very
different from those which ALMEIDA had expected, and overwhelmed her with new
confusion and disappointment: that he, who had so lately solicited her love
with all the vehemence of a desire impatient to be gratified, should now
receive a declaration that she was ready to comply, with marks of distress and
anger, was a mystery which she could not solve. In the mean time, the struggle
in his breast became every moment more violent: Where, then, said he, is the
constancy which you vowed to HAMET; and for what instance of his love is he now
forsaken?

ALMEIDA was now more embarrassed than before; she felt all the force of the
reproof, supposing it to have been given by ALMORAN; and she could be justified
only by relating the particular, which at the expense of her sincerity she had
determined to conceal. ALMORAN was now exalted in her opinion, while his form
was animated by the spirit of HAMET; as much as HAMET had been degraded, while
his form was animated by the spirit of ALMORAN. In his resentment of her
perfidy to his rival, though it favored his fondest and most ardent wishes,
there was an abhorrence of vice, and a generosity of mind, which she supposed
to have been incompatible with his character. To his reproach, she could reply
only by complaint; and could no otherwise evade his question, than by observing
the inconsistency of his own behavior: Your words, said she, are daggers to my
heart. You condemn me for a compliance with your own wishes; and for obedience
to that voice, which you supposed to have revealed the will of heaven. Has the
caprice of desire already wandered to a new object? and do you now seek a
pretense to refuse, when it is freely offered, what so lately you would have
taken by force?

HAMET, who was now fired with resentment against ALMEIDA, whom yet he could
not behold without desire; and who, at the same moment, was impatient to
revenge his wrongs upon ALMORAN; was suddenly prompted to satisfy all his
passions, by taking advantage of the wiles of ALMORAN and the perfidy of
ALMEIDA, to defeat the one and to punish the other. It was now in his power
instantly to consummate his marriage, as a priest might be procured without a
moment's delay, and as ALMEIDA'S consent was already given; he would then
obtain the possession of her person, by the very act in which she perfidiously
resigned it to his rival; to whom he would then leave the beauties he had
already possessed, and cast from him in disdain, as united with a mind that he
could never love. As his imagination was fired with the first conception of
this design, he caught her to his breast with a fury, in which all the passions
in all their rage were at once concentred: Let the priest, said he, instantly
unite us. Let us comprize, in one moment, in this instant, NOW, our whole of
being, and exclude alike the future and the past! Then grasping her still in
his arms, he looked up to heaven: Ye powers, said he, invisible but yet
present, who mould my changing and unresisting form; prolong, but for one hour,
that mysterious charm, that is now upon me, and I will be ever after
subservient to your will!

ALMEIDA, who was terrified at the furious ardor of this unintelligible
address, shrunk from his embrace, pale and trembling without power to reply.
HAMET gazed tenderly upon her; and recollecting the purity and tenderness with
which he had loved her, his virtues suddenly recovered their force; he
dismissed her from his embrace; and turning from her, he dropped in silence the
tear that started to his eye, and expressed, in a low and faultering voice,
thoughts that rushed upon his mind: No, said he; HAMET shall still disdain the
joy, which is at once sordid and transient: in the breast of HAMET, lust shall
not be the pander of revenge. Shall I, who have languished for the pure delight
which can arise only from interchange of soul with soul, and is endeared by
mutual confidence and complacency; shall I snatch under this disguise, which
belies my features and degrades my virtue, a casual possession of faithless
beauty, which I despise and hate? Let this be the portion of those, that hate
me without a cause; but let this be far from me! At this thought, he felt a
sudden elation of mind; and the conscious dignity of virtue, that in such a
conflict was victorious, rendered him, in this glorious moment, superior to
misfortune: his gesture became calm, and his countenance sedate; he considered
the wrongs he suffered, not as a sufferer, but as a judge; and he determined at
once to discover himself to ALMEIDA, and to reproach her with her crime. He
remarked her confusion without pity, as the effect not of grief but of guilt;
and fixing his eyes upon her, with the calm severity of a superior and offended
being, Such, said he, is the benevolence of the Almighty to the children of the
dust, that our misfortunes are, like poisons, antidotes to each other.

ALMEIDA, whose faculties were now suspended by wonder and expectation, looked
earnestly at him, but continued silent. Thy looks, said HAMET, are full of
wonder; but as yet thy wonder has no cause, in comparison of that which shall
be revealed. Thou know the prodigy, which so lately parted HAMET and
ALMEIDA: I am that HAMET, thou art that ALMEIDA. ALMEIDA would now have
*interrupted him; but HAMET raised his voice* and demanded to be heard: At that
moment, said he, wretched as I am, the child of error and disobedience, my
heart repined in secret at the destiny which had been written upon my head; for
I then thought thee faithful and constant: but if our hand had been then
united, I should have been more wretched than I am; for I now know that thou
art fickle and false. To know thee, though it has pierced my soul with sorrow,
has yet healed the wound which was inflicted when I lost thee: and though I am
now compelled to wear the form of ALMORAN, whose vices are this moment
disgracing mine, yet in the balance I shall be weighed as HAMET, and I shall
suffer only as I am found wanting.

ALMEIDA, whose mind was now in a tumult that bordered upon distraction,
bewildered in a labyrinth of doubt and wonder, and alike dreading the
consequence of what she heard, whether it was false or true, was yet impatient
to confute or confirm it; and as soon as she had recovered her speech, urged
him for some token of the prodigy he asserted, which he might easily have given
by relating any of the incidents which themselves only could know. But just at
this moment, ALMORAN, having at last disengaged himself from Osmyn, by whom he
had been long detained, resumed his own figure: and while the eyes of ALMEIDA
were fixed upon HAMET, his powers were suddenly taken from him, and restored in
an instant; and she beheld the features of ALMORAN vanish, and gazed with
astonishment upon his own: Thy features change! said she, and thou indeed art
HAMET. The sudden trance, said he, has restored me to myself; and from my
wrongs where shall thou be hidden? This reproach was more than she could
sustain; but he caught her as she was falling, and supported her in his arms.
This incident renewed in a moment all the tenderness of his love: while he
beheld her distress, and pressed her by the embrace that sustained her to his
bosom, he forgot every injury which he supposed she had done him; and perceived
her recovery with a pleasure, that for a moment suspended the sense of his
misfortunes.

Her first reflection was upon the snare, in which she had been taken; and her
first sensation was joy that she had escaped: she saw at once the whole
complication of events that had deceived and distressed her; and nothing more
was now necessary, than to explain them to HAMET; which, however, she could not
do, without discovering the insincerity of her answers to the enquiries which
he had made, while she mistook him for his brother: If in my heart, says she
thou have found any virtue, let it incline thee to pity the vice that is
mingled with it: by the vice I have been ensnared, but I have been delivered by
the virtue. ALMORAN, for now I know that it was not thee, ALMORAN, when he
possessed thy form, was with me: he profaned thy love, by attempts to supplant
my virtue; I resisted his importunity, and escaped perdition; but the guilt of
ALMORAN drew my resentment upon HAMET. I thought the vices which, under thy
form, I discovered in his bosom, were thine; and in the anguish of grief,
indignation, and disappointment, my heart renounced thee: yet as I could not
give thee up to death, I could not discover to ALMORAN the attempt which I
imputed to thee; when you questioned me, therefore, as ALMORAN, I was betrayed
to dissimulation, by the tenderness which still melted my heart for HAMET. 'I
believe thee,' said HAMET, catching her in a transport to his breast: I love
thee for thy virtue; and may the pure and exalted beings, who are superior to
the passions that now throb in my heart, forgive me, if I love thee also for
thy fault. Yet, let the danger to which it betrayed thee, teach us still to
walk in the straight path, and commit the keeping of our peace to the Almighty;
for he that wanders in the maze of falsehood, shall pass by the good that he
would meet, and shall meet the evil that he would shun. I also was tempted; but
I was strengthened to resist; if I had used the power, which I derived from the
arts that have been practiced against me, to return evil for evil; if I had not
disdained a secret and unavowed revenge, and the unhallowed pleasures of a
brutal appetite; I might have possessed thee in the form of ALMORAN, and have
wronged irreparably myself and thee: for how could I have been admitted, as
HAMET, to the beauties which I had enjoyed as ALMORAN? and how could thou
have given, to ALMORAN, what in reality had been appropriated by HAMET?

CHAP. XVII.
BUT while ALMEIDA and HAMET were thus congratulating each other upon the evils
which they had escaped, they were threatened by others, which, however obvious,
they had overlooked.

ALMORAN, who was now exulting in the prospect of success that had exceeded his
hopes, and who supposed the possession of ALMEIDA before the end of the next
hour, was as certain as that the next hour would arrive, suddenly entered the
apartment; but upon discovering HAMET, he started back astonished and
disappointed. HAMET stood unmoved; and regarded him with a fixed and steady
look, that at once reproached and confounded him. What treachery, said ALMORA,
has been practiced against me? What has brought thee to this place; and how
have thou gained admittance? Against thy peace, said HAMET, no treachery has
been practiced, but by thyself. By those arts in which thy vices have employed
the powers of darkness, I have been brought hither; and by those arts I have
gained admittance: thy form which they have imposed upon me, was my passport;
and by the restoration (...) my own, I have detected and disappointed the
fraud, which the double change was produced to execute. ALMEIDA, whom, as
HAMET, thou could teach to have thee, it is now impossible that, as ALMORAN,
thou should teach to love.

ALMEIDA, who perceived the storm to be gathering, which the next moment would
burst upon the head of HAMET, interposed between them, and addressed each of
them by turns; urging HAMET to be silent, and conjuring ALMORAN to be merciful.
ALMORAN however, without regarding ALMEIDA, or making any reply to HAMET,
struck the ground with his foot, and the messengers of death, to whom the
signal was familiar, appeared at the door. ALMORAN then commanded them to seize
his brother, with a countenance pale and livid, and a voice that was broken by
rage. HAMET was still unmoved; but ALMEIDA threw herself at the feet of
ALMORAN, and embracing his knees was about to speak, but he broke from her with
sudden fury: If the world should sue, said he, I would spurn it off. There is
no pang that cunning can invent, which he shall not suffer: and when death at
length shall disappoint my vengeance, his mangled limbs shall be cast out
unburied, to feed the beasts of the desert and the fowls of heaven. During this
menace, ALMEIDA sunk down without signs of life; and HAMET struggling in vain
for liberty to raise her from the ground, she was carried off by some women who
were called to her assistance.

In this awful crisis, HAMET, who felt his own fortitude give way, looked up;
and though he conceived no words, a prayer ascended from his heart to heaven,
and was accepted by Him, to whom our thoughts are known while they are yet afar
off. For HAMET, the fountain of strength was opened from above; his eye
sparkled with confidence, and his breast was dilated by hope. He commanded the
guard that were leading him away to stop, and they implicitly obeyed; he then
stretched out his hand toward ALMORAN, whose spirit was rebuked before him:
Hear me, said he, thou tyrant! for it is thy genius that speaks by my voice.
What has been the fruit of all thy guilt, but accumulated misery? What joy have
thou derived from undivided empire? what joy from the prohibition of my
marriage with ALMEIDA? what good from that power, which some evil demon has
added to thy own? what, at this moment, is thy portion, but rage and anguish,
disappointment and despair? Even I, whom thou see the captive of thy power,
whom thou have wronged of empire, and yet more of love; even I am happy in
comparison of thee. I know that my sufferings, however multiplied, are short;
for they shall end with life, and no life is long: then shall the everlasting
ages commence; and through everlasting ages thy sufferings shall increase. The
moment is now near, when thou shall tread that line which alone is the path to
heaven, the narrow path that is stretched over the pit, which smokes for ever,
and for ever! When thine aching eye shall look forward to the end that is far
distant, and when behind thou shall find no retreat; when thy steps shall
faulter, and thou shall tremble at the depth beneath, which thought itself is
not able to fathom; then shall the angel of distribution lift his inexorable
hand against thee: from the irremediable way shall thy feet be smitten; thou
shall plunge in the burning flood; and though thou shall live for ever, thou
shall rise no more.

As the words of HAMET struck ALMORAN with terror* and overawed him by an
influence which he could not surmount; HAMET was forced from his presence,
before any other orders had been given about him, than were implied in the
menace that was addressed to ALMEIDA: no violence, therefore, was yet offered
him; but he was secured, till the king's pleasure should be known, in a dungeon
not far from the palace, to which he was conducted by a subterraneous passage;
and the door being closed upon him, he was left in silence, darkness, and
solitude, such as may be imagined before the voice of the Almighty produced
light and life.

When ALMORAN was sufficiently recollected to consider his situation, he
despaired of prevailing upon ALMEIDA to gratify his wishes, till her attachment
to HAMET was irreparably broken; and he, therefore, resolved to put him to
death. With this view he repeated the signal, which convened the ministers of
death to his presence; but the sound was lost in a peal of thunder that
instantly followed i^, and the Genius, from whom he received the talisman,
again stood before him.

ALMORAN, said the Genius, I am now compelled into thy presence by the command
of a superior power; whom, if I should dare to disobey, the energy of his will
might drive me, in a moment, beyond the limits of nature and the reach of
thought, to spend eternity alone, without comfort, and without hope. And what,
said ALMORAN, is the will of this mighty and tremendous being? His will, said
the Genius, I will reveal to thee. Hitherto, thou have been enabled to lift the
rod of adversity against thy brother, by powers which nature has not entrusted
to man: as these powers, and these only, have put him into thy hand, thou art
forbidden to lift it against his life; if thou had prevailed against him by
thy own power, thy own power would not have been restrained: to afflict him
thou art still free; but thou art not permitted to destroy. At the moment, in
which thou shall conceive a thought to cut him off by violence, the punishment
of thy disobedience shall commence, and the pangs of death shall ^e upon thee.
If then, said ALMORAN, this awful power is the friend of HAMET; what yet
remains, in the stores of thy wisdom, for me? Till he dies, I am at once
precluded from peace, and safety, and enjoyment. Look up, said the Genius, for
the iron hand of despair is not yet upon thee Thou can be happy, only by his
death, and his life thou art forbidden to take away: yet may thou still arm
him against himself; and if he dies by his own hand, thy wishes will be full. O
name said ALMORAN, but the means, and it shall this moment be accomplished!
Select, said the Genius, some friend.

At the name of friend, ALMORAN started and looked round in despair. He
recollected the perfidy of Osmyn; and he suspected that, from the same cause,
all were perfidious: While HAMET has yet life, said he, I fear the face of man,
as of a savage that is prowling for his prey. Relinquish not yet thy hopes,
said the Genius; for one in whom thou will joyfully confide, may be found. Let
him secretly obtain admittance to HAMET, as if by stealth: let him profess an
abhorrence of thy reign, and compassion for his misfortunes; let him pretend
that the rack is even now preparing for him; that death is inevitable, but that
torment may be avoided: let him then give him a poignard, as the instrument of
deliverance; and, perhaps, his own hand may strike the blow, that shall give
thee peace. But who, said ALMORAN, shall go upon this important errand? Who,
replied the Genius, but thyself? Have thou not the power to assume the form of
whomsoever thou would have sent? I would have sent Osmyn, said ALMORAN, but
that I know him to be a traitor. Let the form of Osmyn then, said the Genius,
be thine. The shadows of the evening have now stretched themselves upon the
earth: command Osmyn to attend thee alone in the grove, where Solomon, thy
father, was used to meditate by night; and when thy form shall be impressed
upon him, I will there seal his eyes in sleep, till the charm shall be broken;
so shall no evil be attempted against thee, and the transformation shall be
known only to thyself.

ALMORAN, whose breast was again illuminated by hope, was about to express his
gratitude and joy; but the Genius suddenly disappeared. He began, therefore,
immediately to follow the instructions that he had received: he commanded Osmyn
to attend him in the grove, and forbad every other to approach; by the power of
the talisman he assumed his appearance, and saw him sink down in the
supernatural slumber before him: he then quitted the place, and prepared to
visit HAMET in the prison.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE officer who commanded the guard that kept the gate of the prison, was
Caled. He was now next in trust and power to Osmyn: but as he had proposed a
revolt to HAMET, in which Osmyn had refused to concur, he knew that his life
was now in his power; he dreaded lest, for some slight offense, or in some fit
of causeless displeasure, he should disclose the secret to ALMORAN, who would
then certainly condemn him to death. To secure this fatal secret, and put an
end to his inquietude, he resolved from the moment that ALMORAN was established
upon the throne, to find some opportunity secretly to destroy Osmyn: in this
resolution, he was confirmed by the enmity, which inferior minds never fail to
conceive against that merit, which they cannot but envy without spirit to
emulate, and by which they feel themselves disgraced without an effort to
acquire equal honor; it was confirmed also by the hope which Caled had
conceived, that, upon the death of Osmyn, he should succeed to his post: his
apprehensions likewise were increased, by the gloom which he remarked in the
countenance of Osmyn; and which, not knowing that it arose from fear, he
imputed to jealousy and malevolence.

When ALMORAN, who had now assumed the appearance of Osmyn, had passed the
subterranean avenue to the dungeon in which HAMET was confined, he was met by
Caled; of whom he demanded admittance to the prince; and produced his own
signet, as a testimony that he came with the authority of the king. As it was
Caled's interest to secure the favor of Osmyn till an opportunity should offer
to cut him off, he received him with every possible mark of respect and
reverence; and when he was gone into the dungeon, he commanded a beverage to be
prepared for him against he should return, in which such spices were infused,
as might expel the malignity which, in that place, might be received with the
breath of life; and taking himself the key of the prison, he waited at the door.

When ALMORAN entered the dungeon, with a lamp which he had received from
Caled, he found HAMET sitting upon the ground: his countenance was impressed
with the characters of grief; but it retained no marks either of anger or fear.
When he looked up, and saw the features of Osmyn, he judged that the mutes were
behind him; and, therefore, rose up, to prepare himself for death. ALMORAN
beheld his calmness and fortitude with the involuntary praise of admiration;
yet persisted in his purpose without remorse. I am come, said he, by the
command of ALMORAN, to denounce that fate, the bitterness of which I will
enable thee to avoid. And what is there, said HAMET, in my fortunes, that has
prompted thee to the danger of this attempt? The utmost that I can give thee,
said ALMORAN, I can give thee without danger to myself: but though I have been
placed, by the hand of fortune, near the person of the tyrant, yet has my heart
in secret been thy friend. If I am the messenger of evil, impute it to him only
by whom it is devised. The rack is now preparing to receive thee; and every art
of ingenious cruelty will be exhausted to protract and to increase the agonies
of death. 'And what,' said HAMET, 'can thy friendship offer me?' I can offer
thee, said ALMORAN, that which will at once dismiss thee to those regions,
where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary rest for ever. He then
produced the poignard from his bosom; and presenting i^ to HAMET, 'Take this,'
said he, 'and sleep in peace.'

HAMET, whose heart was touched with sudden joy at the sight of so unexpected a
remedy for every evil, did not immediately reflect, that he was not at liberty
to apply it: he snatched it in a transport from the hand of ALMORAN, and
expressed his sense of the obligation by clasping him in his arms, and shedding
the tears of gratitude in his breast. Be quick, said ALMORAN: this moment I
must leave thee; and in the next, perhaps, the messengers of destruction may
bind thee to the rack. I will be quick, said HAMET; and the sigh that shall
last linger upon my lips, shall bless thee. They then bid each other farewell:
ALMORAN retired from the dungeon, and the door was again closed upon HAMET.

Caled, who waited at the door till the supposed Osmyn should return, presented
him with the beverage which he had prepared, of which he recounted the virtues;
and ALMORAN received it with pleasure, and having eagerly drank it off,
returned to the palace. As soon as he was alone, he resumed his own figure, and
s^te, with a confident and impatient expectation, that in a short time a
messenger would be dispatched to acquaint him with the death of HAMET. HAMET,
in the mean time, having grasped the dagger in his hand, and raised his arm for
the blow, This, said he, is my passport to the realms of peace, the immediate
and only object of my hope! But at these words, his mind instantly took the
alarm: Let me reflect, said he, a moment: from what can I derive hope in death?
-- from that patient and preserving virtue, and from that alone, by which we
fulfill the task that is assigned us upon the earth. Is it not our duty, to
suffer, as well as to act? If my own hand consigns me to the grave, what can it
do but perpetuate that misery, which, by disobedience, I would shun? what can
it do, but cut off my life and hope together? -- With this reflection he drew
the dagger from him; and stretching himself again upon the ground, resigned
himself to the disposal of the Father of man, most Merciful and Almighty.

ALMORAN, who had now resolved to send for the intelligence which he longed to
hear, was dispatching a messenger to the prison, when he was told that Caled
desired admittance to his presence. At the name of Caled, he started up in an
ecstasy of joy; and not doubting but that HAMET was dead, he ordered him to be
instantly admitted. When he came in, ALMORAN made no enquiry about HAMET,
because he would not appear to expect the event, which yet he supposed he had
brought about; he, therefore, asked him only upon what business he came. I
come, my lord, said he, to apprize thee of the treachery of Osmyn. I know, said
ALMORAN, that Osmyn is a traitor; but of what do thou accuse him? As I was
but now, said he, changing the guard which is set upon HAMET, Osmyn came up to
the door of the prison, and producing the royal signet demanded admittance. As
the command which I received, when he was delivered to my custody, was
absolute, that no foot should enter, I doubted whether the token had not been
obtained, by fraud, for some other purpose; yet, as he required admittance
only, I complied: but that if any treachery had been contrived, I might detect
it; and that no ar^^^^ce might be practiced to favor an escape; I waited
myself at the door, and listening to their discourse I overheard the treason
that I suspected. What then, said ALMORAN, did thou hear? A part of what was
said, replied Caled, escaped me: but I heard Osmyn, like a perfidious and
presumptuous slave, call ALMORAN a tyrant; I heard him profess an inviolable
friendship for HAMET, and assure him of deliverance. What were the means I know
not; but he talked of speed, and supposed that the effect was certain.

ALMORAN, though he was still impatient to hear of HAMET; and discovered, that
if he was dead, his death was unknown to Caled; was yet notwithstanding
rejoiced at what he heard: and as he knew what Caled told him to be true, as
the conversation he related had passed between himself and HAMET, he exulted in
the pleasing confidence that he had yet a friend; the glooms of suspicion,
which had involved his mind, were dissipated, and his countenance brightened
with complacency and joy. He had delayed to put Osmyn to death, only because he
could appoint no man to succeed him, of whom his fears did not render him
equally suspicious: but having now found, in Caled, a friend, whose fidelity
had been approved when there had been no intention to try it; and being
impatient to reward his zeal, and to invest his fidelity with that power, which
would render his services most important; he took a ring from his own finger,
and putting it upon that of Caled, Take this, said he, as a pledge, that
tomorrow Osmyn shall lose his head; and that, from this moment thou art
invested with his power.

Caled having, in the conversation between ALMORAN and HAMET, discerned
indubitable treachery, which he imputed to Osmyn, whose appearance ALMORAN had
then assumed, eagerly seized the opportunity to destroy him; he, therefore, not
trusting to the event of his accusation, had mingled poison in the bowl which
he presented to ALMORAN when he came out from HAMET: this, however, at first he
had resolved to conceal.

In consequence of his accusation, he supposed Osmyn would be questioned upon
the rack; he supposed also, that the accusation, as it was true, would be
confirmed by his confession; that whatever he should then say to the prejudice
of his accuser, would be disbelieved; and that when after a few hours the
poison should take effect, no inquisition would be made into the death of a
criminal, whom the bow-string or the scimitar would otherwise have been
employed to destroy. But he now hoped to derive new merit from an act of zeal,
which ALMORAN had approved before it was known, by condemning his rival to die,
whose death he had already insured: May the wishes of my lord, said he, be
always anticipated; and may it be found, that whatever he ordains is already
done: may he accept the zeal of his servant, whom he has delighted to honor;
for, before the light of the morning shall return, the eyes of Osmyn shall
close in everlasting darkness.

At these words, the countenance of ALMORAN changed; his cheeks became pale,
and his lips trembled: What then, said he, have thou done? Caled, who was
terrified and astonished, threw himself upon the ground, and was unable to
reply. ALMORAN, who now, by the utmost effort of his mind, restrained his
confusion and his fear, that he might learn the truth from Caled without
dissimulation or disguise, raised him from the ground and repeated his enquiry.
If I have erred, said Caled, impute it not: when I had detected the treachery
of Osmyn, I was transported by my zeal for thee. For proof that he is guilty, I
appeal now to himself; for he yet lives: but that he might not escape the hand
of justice, I mingled, in the bowl I gave him, the drugs of death.

At these words, ALMORAN, striking his hands together, looked upward in an
agony of despair and horror, and fell back upon a sofa that was behind him.
Caled, whose astonishment was equal to his disappointment and fears, approached
him with a trembling though hasty pace; but as he stooped to support him, ALMORAN
suddenly drew his dagger and stabbed him to the heart; and repeated the blow
with reproaches and execrations, till his strength failed him.

In this dreadful moment, the Genius once more appeared before him; at the
sight of whom he waved his hand, but was unable to speak. Nothing, said the
Genius, that has happened to ALMORAN, is hidden from me. Thy peace has been
destroyed alike by the defection of Osmyn, and by the zeal of Caled: thy life
may yet be preserved; but it can be preserved only by a charm, which HAMET must
apply. ALMORAN, who had raised his eyes, and conceived some languid hope, when
he heard ^^at he might yet live; ^ast them again down in despair, when he heard
that he could receive lise only from HAMET. From HAMET, said he, I have already
taken the power to save me; I have, by thy counsel, given him the instrument of
death, which, by the counsel also, I urged him to use: he received it with j^^,
and he is now doubtless (...) with the dead. HAMET, said ^he Genius, is not
dead; but from the fountain of virtue he drinks life and peace. If what I shall
propose, he refuses to perform, not all the powers of earth, and sea, and air,
if they should combine, can give thee life: but if he complies, the death, that
is now suspended over thee, shall fall upon his head; and thy life shall be
again delivered to the hand of time. Make haste then, said ALMORAN, and I will
here wait the event. The event, said the Genius, is not distant; and it is the
last experiment which my power can make, either upon him or thee: when the star
of the night, that is now near the horizon, shall set, I will be with him.

When ALMORAN was alone, he reflected, that every act of supernatural power
which the Genius had enabled him to perform, had brought upon him some new
calamity, though it always (...) him some new advantage. As he would not impute
this disappointment to the purposes for which he employed the power that he had
received he (...) a suspicion, that it proceeded from the perfidy of the Being
by whom it was bestowed; in his mind, therefore, he thus reasoned with himself:
The Genius, who has pretended to be the friend of ALMORAN, has been secretly in
confederacy with HAMET: why else do I yet sigh in vain for ALMEIDA? and why
else did not HAMET perish, when his life was in my power? By his counsel, I
persuaded HAMET to destroy himself; and, in the very act, I was betrayed to
drink the portion, by which I shall be destroyed: I have been led on, from
misery to misery, by ineffectual expedients, and fallacious hopes. In this
crisis of my fate, I will not trust, with implicit confidence, in another: I
will be present at the interview of this powerful, but suspected Being, with
HAMET; and who can tell, but that if I detect a fraud I may be able to
disappoint it: however powerful, he is not omniscient; I may, therefore, be
present, unknown, and unsuspected even by him, in a form that I can choose (...)
a thought, to which he cannot be ^^^scious.

CHAP. XIX.
IN consequence of this resolution, ALMORAN, having commanded one of the
soldiers of the guard that attended upon HAMET into an inner room of the
palace, he ordered him to wait there till his return: then making fast the
door, he assumed his figure, and went immediately to the dungeon; where
producing his signet, he said, he had received orders from the king to remain
with the prisoner, till the watch expired.

As he entered without speaking, and without a light, HAMET continued stretched
upon the ground, with his face toward the earth; and ALMORAN, having silently
retired to a remote corner of the place, waited for the appearance of the
Genius.

The dawn of the morning now broke; and, in a few minutes, the prison shook,
and the Genius appeared. He was visible by a lambent light that played around
him; and HAMET starting from the ground, turned to the vision with reverence
and wonder: but as the Omnipotent was ever present to his mind, to whom all
beings in all worlds are obedient, and on whom alone he relied for protection,
he was neither confused nor afraid. 'HAMET,' said the Genius, 'the crisis of
thy fate is near.' Who art thou, said HAMET, and for what purpose art thou
come? I am, replied the Genius, an inhabitant of the world above thee; and to
the will of thy brother, my powers have been obedient: upon him they have not
conferred happiness, but they have brought evil upon thee. It was my voice,
that forbad thy marriage with ALMEIDA; and my voice, that decreed the throne to
ALMORAN: I gave him the power to assume thy form; and, by me, the hand of
oppression is now heavy upon thee. Yet I have not decreed that he should be
happy, nor that thou should be wretched: darkness as yet rests upon my
purpose; but my heart in secret is thy friend. If thou art indeed my friend,
said HAMET, deliver me from this prison; and preserve HAMET for ALMEIDA. Thy
deliverance, said the Genius, must depend upon thyself. There is a charm, of
which the power is great; but it is by thy will only, that this power can be
exerted.

The Genius then held out toward him a scroll, on which the seal of seve^
powers was impressed. Take, said he, this scroll, in which the mysterious name
of Orosmades is written. Invoke the spirits, that reside westward from the
rising of the sun; and northward, in the regions of cold and darkness: then
stretch out thy hand, and a lamp of sulphur, self-kindled, shall burn before
thee. In the fire of this lamp, consume that which I now give thee; and as the
smoke, into which it changes, shall mix with the air a mighty charm shall be
formed, which shall defend thee from all mischief: from that instant, no
poison, however potent, can hurt thee; nor shall any prison confine: in one
moment thou shall be restored to the throne, and to ALMEIDA; and the Angel of
death shall lay his hand upon thy brother; to whom, if I had confided this last
best effort of my power, he would have secured the good to himself, and have
transferred the evil to thee.

ALMORAN, who had listened unseen to this address of the Genius to HAMET, was
now confirmed in his suspicions, that evil had been ultimately intended against
him; and that he had been entangled in the toils of perfidy, while he believed
himself to be assisted by the efforts of friendship: he was also convinced,
that by the Genius he was not known to be present. HAMET, however, stood still
doubtful, and ALMORAN was kept silent by his fears. Whoever thou art, said
HAMET, the condition of the advantages which thou have offered me is such as it
is not lawful to fulfill: these horrid rites, and this commerce with unholy
powers, are prohibited to mortals in the Law of Life. See thou to that, said
the Genius: Good and evil are before thee; that which I now offer thee, I will
offer no more.

HAMET, who had not fortitude to give up at once the possibility of securing
the advantages that had been offered, and who was seduced by human frailty to
deliberate at least upon the choice, stretched out his hand, and receiving the
scroll, the Genius instantly disappeared. That which had been proposed as a
trial of his virtue, ALMORAN believed indeed to be an offer of advantage; he
had no hope, therefore, but that HAMET would refuse the conditions, and that he
should be able to obtain the talisman, and fulfill them himself: he judged that
the mind of HAMET was in suspense, and was doubtful to which side it might
finally incline: he, therefore, instantly assumed the voice and the person of
OMAR, that by the influence of his council he might be able to turn the scale.

When the change was effected, he called HAMET by his name; and HAMET who knew
the voice, answered him in a transport of joy and wonder: My friend, said he,
my father! in this dreary solitude, in this hour of trial, thou art welcome to
my soul as liberty and life! Guide me to thee by thy voice; and tell me, while
I hold thee to my bosom, how and wherefore art thou come? Do not now ask me,
said ALMORAN: it is enough that I am here; and that I am permitted to warn thee
of the precipice on which thou stand. It is enough, that concealed in this
darkness, I have overheard the specious guile, which some evil demon has
practiced upon thee. Is it then certain, said HAMET, that this being is evil?
Is not that being evil, said ALMORAN, who proposes evil as the condition of
good? Shall I then, said HAMET, renounce my liberty and life? The rack is now
ready; and, perhaps, the next moment, its tortures will be inevitable. Let me
ask thee then, said ALMORAN, to preserve thy life, will thou destroy thy soul?
O! stay, said HAMET -- Let me not be tried too far! Let the strength of Him who
is Almighty, be manifest in my weakness! HAMET then paused a few moments; but
he was no longer in doubt: and ALMORAN, who disbelieved and despised the
arguments, by which he intended to persuade him to renounce what, upon the same
condition, he was impatient to secure for himself, conceived hopes that he
should succeed; and those hopes were instantly confirmed. Take then, said
HAMET, this unholy charm; and remove it far from me, as the sands of Alai from
the trees of Oman; lest in some dreadful hour my virtue may fail me, and thy
counsel may be wanting. 'Give it me then,' said ALMORAN; and feeling for the
hands of each other, he snatched it from him in an ecstasy of joy; and instantly
resuming his own voice and figure, he cried out, At length I have prevailed:
and life and love, dominion and revenge, are now at once in my hand!

HAMET heard and knew the voice of his brother, with astonishment; but it was
too late to wish he had withheld the charm, which his virtue would not permit
him to use. Yet a few moments pass, said ALMORAN, and thou art nothing. HAMET,
who doubted not of the power of the talisman, and knew that ALMORAN had no
principles which would restrain him from using i^ ^o his destruction, resigned
himself to dea^^, with a sacred joy that he had escaped from guilt. ALMORAN
then, with an elation of mind that sparkled in his eyes, and glowed upon his
che^k, stretched o^t his hand, in which he held the scroll; and a lamp of
burning sulphur was immediately suspended in the air before him: he held the
mysterious writing in the flame; and as it began to burn, the place shook with
^^iterated thunder, of which every peal was more terrible and more loud. HAMET,
wrapping his robe round him, cried out, In the Fountain of Life that flows for
ever, let my life be mingled! Let me not be, as if I had never been; but still
conscious of my being, let me still glorify Him from whom it is derived, and be
still happy in his love.

ALMORAN, who was absorbed in the anticipation of his own felicity, heard the
thunder without dread, as the proclamation of his triumph: Let thy hopes, said
he, be thy portion; and the pleasures, that I have secured, shall be mine. As
he pronounced these words, he started as at a sudden pang; his eyes became
fixed, and his posture immovable; yet his senses still remained, and he
perceived the Genius once more to stand before him. ALMORAN, said he, to the
last sounds which thou shall hear, let thine ear be attentive! Of the spirits
that rejoice to fulfill the purpose of the Almighty, I am one. To HAMET, and to
ALMORAN, I have been commissioned from above: I have been appointed to perfect
virtue by adversity; and, in the folly of her own projects, to entangle vice.
The charm, which could be formed only by guilt, has power only to produce
misery: of every good which thou, ALMORAN, would have secured by
disobedience, the opposite evil is thy portion: and of every evil which thou,
HAMET, wast, by obedience, willing to incur, the opposite good is bestowed upon
thee. To thee, HAMET, are now given the throne of thy father, and ALMEIDA. And
thou, ALMORAN, who, while I speak, art incorporating with the earth, shall
remain, through all generations, a memorial of the truths which thy life has
taught!

At the words of the Genius, the earth trembled beneath, and above the walls of
the prison disappeared: the figure of ALMORAN, which was hardened into stone,
expanded by degrees; and a rock, by which his form and attitude are still
rudely expressed, became at once a monument of his punishment and his guilt.

Such are the events recorded by ACMET, the descendant of the Prophet, and the
preacher of righteousness! for, to ACMET, that which passed in secret was
revealed by the Angel of instruction, that the world might know, that, to the
wicked, increase of power is increase of wretchedness; and that those who
condemn the folly of an attempt to defeat the purpose of a Genius, might no
longer hope to elude the appointment of the Most High.

FINIS.

