OBSERVATIONS ON THE AGRICULTURE, MANUFACTURES AND COMMERCE OF THE UNITED
STATES. IN A LETTER TO A MEMBER OF CONGRESS.

BY A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES.

NEW YORK. PRINTED BY FRANCIS CHILD'S AND JOHN SWAIN, M.DCC.LXXXIX.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE AGRICULTURE, MANUFACTURES, AND COMMERCE OF THE UNITED
STATES.
SIR,
I AM very sensible that in communicating my sentiments on the policy of the
United States, I expose myself to the censure of many; particularly those who
are appointed by the people to superintend the political interest of the
nation. This idea forcibly strikes my mind. I see the impropriety of wandering
out of the road which Providence has assigned me, and stepping into that
allotted to more conspicuous characters. I feel myself also inadequate to the
task of writing judiciously on the subject, and I already anticipate the
mortification of finding my views and performance reprobated.

But notwithstanding these forbidding circumstances, I have determined to
communicate my reflections on this subject, and that for the following reasons:
1st, Because the welfare of the United States ever has been and now is an
object of my warmest wishes and desires, which has produced an irresistible
inclination to contribute every thing in my power to promote so great and
important an end. 2d, Because, although all men are not warranted in taking upon
themselves the office of dictators, or powers of legislation; yet, they are
encouraged by the general consent of the people, and by the most liberal and
judicious maxims, to contribute to the general welfare of the nation, by an
unrestrained communication of sentiments and observations. Such an
encouragement, which in some respects is peculiar to this country, I look upon
as essential to its political interest and happiness; because it supports a
general spirit of enquiry and observation among the people, by which means they
acquire such a degree of political knowledge, as to be able to distinguish
between proper and improper measures of government -- to discover errors and
propose remedies -- to be seasonably alarmed on just occasions, and to be
satisfied under a wise and good administration. 3d, Because the interest and
happiness of the citizens of the United States will be influenced and
immediately affected by the system of revenue and commerce which the national
legislature may form and establish; and, as I apprehend, the subject when
brought into consideration will be found involved in many difficulties; so, I
flatter myself, that the communication of such remarks and observations on the
subject as are founded in truth and reason, and written with decency and
modesty, will be noticed according to their merit. If those gentlemen who have
made the political interest of the United States a subject of reflection and
observation, would communicate their result, it appears to me that much
advantage might be derived therefrom. It would tend, I conceive, to the forming
a system of revenue and commerce in a greater degree of perfection; for,
although it is to be presumed that the general Congress will be composed of the
most enlightened men in the states, and I trust, I may add, the most patriotic,
yet, it is not to be supposed that infinite knowledge or infallible measures
will distinguish that from all other public bodies of men. Even this body, I
conceive, may draw information from a variety of quarters, and knowledge from
many sources. 4th, Because, notwithstanding I entertain no vain idea of my own
sagacity or abilities, yet, as light may spring up out of darkness, and a spark
be struck from a very unpolished material; so I am encouraged to proceed from a
consideration of the possibility of my suggesting something, which, in the
hands of wise and judicious men, may be improved to advantage. And 5th, I am
the more encouraged to this communication from a further consideration, that in
addressing you in particular, I have nothing to fear, being confident that the
best and most proper use will be made of it. From the short time in which I
have had the honor, as well as the pleasure of being known to you, I am
convinced your sentiments and wishes respecting the welfare and prosperity of
the United States, are congenial with my own: You will therefore, I doubt not,
put a liberal construction on my views, and treat the performance with candor.
If you find nothing here worthy of notice, you will not improve it to my
disadvantage; if any thing capable of improvement, you will make the best use
of it.

With respect to the composition, I could assign many reasons as an apology for
the numberless defects which you will discover, but shall omit them: You are
probably acquainted with some of them, and will for that reason, I hope, treat
the imperfections of the piece with the tenderness of a friend.

Without further explanation or apology, therefore, I will proceed to give you
the result of my reflections on the political interest of the United States,
and some of the measures which to me appear necessary to promote and secure
their welfare; in doing of which I aim at proceeding on original principles,
without entangling my mind with the systems and maxims of other nations.

As it is with individuals, so it is with nations in their connections and
transactions with one another; the acquisition of property or accumulation of
wealth is a grand and principal object; for on the wealth of a nation does its
security and the temporal felicity of the people in a great measure depend; and
the same measures which an individual does or ought to take for the
accumulation of wealth should be pursued by a nation. In both cases, a
dependence on their own resources, and the best improvement of the natural
advantages which they may possess, is that alone by which either can hope or
expect to succeed.

Despots who have held nations in vassalage, although their avarice has been
insatiable, have very often overlooked that which would the nearest have come
up to their views. They have drained their subjects of their money by
oppression; have reduced them to poverty and distress, and at the same time
neglected the most proper and necessary measures to have put them into and kept
them in a flourishing condition. By this means they have, at times, filled a
treasury; but at the expense of those resources and advantages whereby a
treasury might be replenished from time to time, as occasions required.

This I conceive always has been, and always will be the case, more or less,
where the views and interest of the government, and those of the people at
large, are considered in any degree or respect different and independent of one
another. But in free governments, where the views of the legislature and of
administration, the interest of the public, and the interest and views of
individuals are considered the same, the measures of government do, or ought to
aim at the increase of the wealth of the people, rather than at the drawing
their property into the public treasury; because, by increasing the riches of
the people, or by laying a suitable foundation for a constant accumulation of
wealth, an inexhaustible source is provided for national purposes, which can
always be applied to as occasions may require, without rendering public demands
oppressive and distressing.

The first object therefore to be had in view by government in its system of
policy, as it particularly respects property, is, I conceive, the increase of
the wealth of the people.

This being premised, I would observe.

First. That there are certain resources and natural advantages which all
nations are in the possession of, and certain ways and means by which they may
increase their wealth, and in proportion to those resources and advantages may
their wealth be increased; but the actual increase of wealth depends on the
manner of improvement. A nation, possessing every advantage which it is in the
power of nature to endow it with, may nevertheless be embarrassed, poor and
dependent; and a nation possessing but few natural advantages, may, by wise and
prudent measures, joined with industry and enterprise, become independent and
even opulent. Exemplary instances in proof hereof might be adduced. It is
therefore, by a judicious improvement of the resources and natural advantages
which the United States possess, that they can expect to become opulent or
truly independent.

Second. By agriculture, manufactures and commerce, the resources and
advantages of a country are improved, and applied in the first place, to the
furnishing the people with the means of subsistence and conveniences of life;
and in the next, to the acquisition of property or accumulation of wealth. But
as these in their operation and influence may counteract one another and
destroy their ultimate intention, it remains with the government or legislative
authority of the nation, on whom its welfare depends, to confine these general
and common interests, in their operation, in such a manner, as that they may
cooperate to answer the end for which they are designed, viz. To promote the
general welfare of the nation.

Third. If the riches of a nation may be increased inproportion to its natural
advantages and resources, which cannot be disputed, then it may be rationally
concluded, that the United States may become more opulent than any other
nation; because the resources and advantages which they possess, are greater
and more various than any other nation enjoys. The diversity of climate and
soil within the limits of the United States, are adapted to the greatest
variety of vegetable and animal production of any nation whatever. The earth
abounds with the most necessary minerals, and the sea furnishes a great variety
and plenty of fish. They have the advantage of an extensive sea coast, and no
nation can boast of such inland seas and water communication as the United
States.

This country has all the means within itself of furnishing every necessary,
convenience and luxury of life, and of carrying on an extensive foreign and
domestic commerce; consequently it has every thing which nature can bestow, to
render it opulent and powerful, and the people easy and happy in their
circumstances. All that is wanting to produce these effects is to improve the
advantages of the country in the best manner and to the most valuable purposes;
to encourage industry and the useful arts, and by a judicious system of
commerce, so to encourage, protect and regulate the agricultural, manufacturing
and commercial interests in their various branches and departments, as to
render them mutually subservient to the general weal.

In the prosecution of my design, I shall confine my observations generally to
agriculture, manufactures and commerce, and attempt to show some of the most
essential advantages which are to be derived therefrom; the influence which
they reciprocally have on each other; the embarrassments they are now under;
the measures necessary to remove the impediments in the way of their
advancement and prosperity; and in short, a brief sketch of that general plan
of regulations which appear to me necessary and proper to advance the wealth
and power of the United States, by rendering their agriculture, manufactures
and commerce mutually subservient thereunto. And as it will be impossible to
consider these as fully as will be necessary, without embracing in the idea a
national revenue, so far as it is founded on, and derived from commerce, shall
consider them in connection with each other. But before I enter on these, I
would introduce two or three prefatory observations.

First. It is a matter which ought to be impressed on the mind of every one,
that in any general regulations which may be adopted by the national
legislature relative to the general interests of the people, it is impossible
equally to regard the interest of every individual; and indeed in some
instances it would be improper; because the private interest of individuals, is
very often directly opposed to the general interest of the nation.

The interest of the public, or that which is the best calculated to promote
the common interest of the nation, is undoubtedly to be regarded in preference
to the partial interest of any of its parts, or the private interest of any
individual, and that for this reason; because it is impossible to increase the
wealth of a nation, let it come in by what door or through whose hands it will;
or let it in the first instance benefit whom, or whatever particular parts of
the nation it may, without its having a proper influence and effect on every
individual, either directly or in a more indirect manner. And so on the other
hand, the wealth of a nation cannot be diminished, let it be through whose
hands it will, without its affecting every individual in the nation. The
detached parts of the United States, as well as individuals, ought therefore,
and undoubtedly they will be convinced, that the system of revenue and
commerce, which the national government may form and establish, having for its
object the general interest and welfare of the states, should meet with the
approbation and support of the people, notwithstanding some may be more
directly and immediately benefited than others.

Second. But, notwithstanding this, as the United States are in some
particulars differently circumstanced with respect to their interests, from the
people of any other nation, a spirit of accommodation, I conceive, ought to run
through the general regulations of trade. But such accommodations ought not to
be without limits. They ought not to be so calculated as to keep the interests
of the several states different, and forever separate and distinct; but rather,
by some easy and eligible mode in the change of their commercial interests and
connections, eventually consolidate, and render them the same.

At present, the same regulations of trade which would be most advantageous to
the northern states, might injure the interests of the southern states; for
instance, it would be to the advantage of the northern states, if the
freighting business should be wholly confined to the vessels of the United
States, because they have vessels and seamen sufficient to freight the whole of
their productions to market; but this is not the case with the southern states;
they have neither vessels nor seamen sufficient for that purpose, and this
deficiency the northern states are not at this time able fully to supply. Had
the northern states vessels and seamen sufficient to serve the interest of the
southern states in their freighting business, they ought by a general
regulation to have a preference: But as they have not at present, as they might
at this time be much more improved than they are, and as in a short time they
might increase their navigation in such a manner as to freight the produce of
the southern states, should the southern states neglect to increase their
navigation, and still depend on foreign vessels, I apprehend that the
regulations of trade respecting the admission of foreign vessels in the
commerce of the United States, ought to be adapted to the circumstances of the
southern states; but in such a manner, that a preference of some kind be
eventually secured to the vessels of the United States, either by an imposition
of duties on foreign vessels, or by cutting off the original causes of the
preference which has been given to them in the commerce of the States. Again,

The northern states are able to furnish their vessels with a full complement
of seamen; the southern states are not, and probably the northern states are
not able to supply this deficiency, for which reason I conceive, that the laws
of navigation in this particular, should be adapted to the circumstances of the
southern states, and admit of a greater proportion of foreign seamen in the
navigation of American vessels, than would be proper, were all the states able
to furnish a full proportion. The northern states would employ American seamen
none the less, on account of such an indulgence; and as the proportion which
may probably be fixed, will oblige the southern states to give greater
encouragement and support to American seamen than they have heretofore done, it
will be the means of producing at last a sufficient number of American seamen,
to give a full complement throughout the states to their navigation. Again,

It would be to the interest of the northern states, totally to prohibit the
importation of many articles of produce and manufacture; because they do, or
might furnish them sufficiently for their own use; and because they do produce
and manufacture many articles in sufficient quantities for the use of all the
states. In the regulations of trade therefore respecting importations, I
conceive many articles of produce and manufacture should be prohibited from
foreign nations throughout the states, and others prohibited in the northern
states, which may be found necessary to be admitted in the southern states, for
perhaps a limited time. But at the same time subject to such a duty as would
give support and encouragement to American manufactures, throughout all the
states.

Some accommodations of the nature of those here suggested, I apprehend, might
take place in the general regulations, much to the present advantage of
particular states, without creating any new disadvantages to the general
interest, as the states are now circumstanced.

Third. As the system of revenue and commerce will have a direct and immediate
influence on the property and interests of the people, it should have certain
objects in view, besides the drawing of money into the national treasury. I
always had an objection in my own mind, to the five per cent impost on this
account. It appeared to have nothing further in view than a revenue; whereas,
as I apprehend, a system of revenue and commerce in its construction, ought to
aim, 1st. At accommodating the interests of agriculture, manufactures and
commerce in such a manner, as to render them reciprocally a support to each
other, and mutually beneficial to the interest of the nation. 2d. It should aim
at securing to the people the advantages and emoluments of every occupation,
business and employment, in which they are severally engaged, not repugnant to
the general welfare, by preventing rivalries. 3d. It should aim at preventing a
too general and profuse a use of luxurious and frivolous articles of
merchandise, whereby the taste of the people becomes vitiated, their morals
corrupted, and the valuable property of the country drawn out of it for things
of no real worth. 4th. It should aim at drawing money from the rich and
opulent, for public services in such ways and by such methods, as their own
choice and approbation may concur therein; and in this way, 5th. To ease the
burdens of the lower classes of the people; and 6th. If there is not
circulating money in the states to answer the purposes of the public, as well
as of individuals, one great object to be aimed at in a system of commerce, is
the increase of money.

In the further treatment of the subject, I shall not aim at system, but
communicate my ideas in desultory observations, under the general divisions of
AGRICULTURE, MANUFACTURES and COMMERCE.

AGRICULTURE.
AGRICULTURE is the original source, from whence the people derive their
subsistence, comforts and conveniences, and the foundation of the commerce and
wealth of a nation. By cultivating and improving the face of a country, its
real value is augmented; by the productions of the field, the people subsist
and enjoy life; by furnishing the manufacturer and artizan with materials for
fabrication, provision is made for the support of an increased number of
inhabitants, and the people thereby supplied with their conveniences; and on
agriculture does commerce depend, as its original support. Agriculture should
therefore be considered as the first and most important interest of a nation,
and the most useful and honorable of all professions. And for the encouragement
and support of the agricultural interest of the United States, I would suggest
the following particulars. 1st. Every article which is produced in the United
States should be prohibited from other nations. Beef, butter, cheese, indigo
and iron, are the natural productions of this country, and produced in
sufficient quantities for the use of the people throughout the states, and for
that reason ought to be prohibited. Nevertheless, beef and butter are imported
from Ireland, cheese from England, iron frequently from Sweden, and indigo from
the West Indies, manifestly prejudicial to the agricultural interest of the
states.

In justification of the practice of importing these articles from abroad, it
is said that they are of a superior quality. To this I would observe, that
although some preference on this account might be given to those articles of
foreign production, yet, such of them as are articles of consumption, and
produced in this country, are of a quality sufficiently good to satisfy any
reasonable taste. The others are of a quality of sufficient goodness to answer
all the necessary purposes required of them; but even if they were not, they
might be improved to any degree of perfection. All the productions of the
United States might be so improved as to render them equally good with the
productions of other countries, and no doubt would be, were suitable
encouragement given.

It is, I conceive, by the encouragement of having a certain market secured,
and a price adequate to the goodness of commodities, that people are induced to
make improvements. It tends to excite a spirit of emulation among them, and
whenever that is properly excited, it will render the productions of America in
the highest degree excellent in quality; for there is no natural or other
insuperable obstacle in the way of it.

A prohibition therefore on the importation of these articles from abroad, I
conceive, would be proper, and a means of encouraging and supporting the
agricultural interest of the United States.

2d. Such articles as are not, but that might be produced in sufficient
quantities for the use and services of the people, should be encouraged by
duties laid on the like articles imported from abroad; or by bounties, or both,
as circumstances may require and render most advisable.

There are three articles which come within this description, and which I have
ever thought to be of important consideration. These are silk, hemp and wine;
all of which I conceive might be produced in this country to any requisite
quantity.

By the experiments which have been made, it is found that silk may be
cultivated in all, even the northern states, and that to the greatest
advantage; particularly in these respects: 1st. It does not interfere with the
interest or common business of husbandry. Mulberry trees may be planted in such
lands, and in such a manner, as not to interfere with or prejudice any other
production; and children who are not capable of working in the field, may take
care of the worms in every stage of their existence. 2d. The time required to
attend to the feeding of the worms is but trifling, compared with any other
kind of agricultural business. Six weeks is sufficient to bring the production
to maturity, and the necessary employment of that time, children will always
consider not a disgustful service, but an agreeable amusement. And 3d. It is
the most productive. Five or six children, with the advantage of a mulberry
orchard, might produce silk sufficient to clothe a family, with more ease than
a family, with its common advantages, could produce wool and flax enough for
that purpose.

Without diminishing any of the usual productions of the field, the culture of
silk might very soon be increased to such a degree in the United States, as to
enable them to export manufactured silk in quantities equal to their present
importations.

All the states have more or less lands suitable for the cultivation of hemp;
but the middle and southern states have abundance which might be improved in
this culture to better advantage than in any other; and when we consider the
annual large importations of hemp, cordage and sail-cloth, together with the
increasing demand of these articles, by an increasing navigation, and a still
farther increase in the demand, in consequence of the establishment of a navy,
which will probably take place in some short time, the importance of the
culture of hemp must forcibly strike the attention of every man.

And with respect to the production of wine, it may be observed, that there is
no country whose climate and soil are better adapted to the cultivation of
grapes, than the southern states, and none under better advantages to carry it
to a great extent.

It is very possible that the population of this part of the country, and the
consequent productions of their present staple commodities, will, in some short
time, outrun a profitable demand for them. In such a case, to what could they
turn their attention with more sure prospects of advantage to the public, and
profit to themselves, than making of wine? This is an article which cannot well
be overdone; for the demand for wine is daily increasing in this country, and
many other countries are dependent, and always will be, for the wines which
they consume: So that the southern states would have no reason to apprehend a
failure and disappointment, let their exertions be ever so great in the
cultivation of grapes, and production of wines.

The advantages which this country would derive from the cultivation of these
articles, are many and important -- of such magnitude as to demand the
attention of every well-wisher to the interest of the country, and the
particular consideration of the National Legislature; and, as the culture of
these lies out of the common road of husbandry in this country, and the best
methods of management, are perhaps not well understood, I apprehend, to charge
a duty on the like articles imported from foreign nations, with a view of
giving a preference in market to our own productions, would not be sufficient
to introduce and establish them. It therefore appears to me, that premiums
might be proposed with propriety, and a good prospect of success and public
advantage.

The particular mode of offering premiums, which I apprehend would be the most
likely to produce a proper effect, and at the same time the most conformable to
the circumstances of the United States, is as follows, viz. For the greatest
quantity and best quality of hemp, produced by any one person or company, in
either of the United States, in any one year, within twenty years, one thousand
pounds, for the second greatest quantity and best quality, five hundred pounds,
for the third, etc. two hundred pounds, and for the fourth, one hundred pounds;
and the same for silk and for wine, made from foreign grapes cultivated in the
States.

Premiums of this amount would excite a spirit of emulation and rivalry among
the people, the length of time would be sufficient to make every necessary
experiment and improvement, and not too long for that purpose, and by that time
the public will probably be able to pay such premiums. In the mean time also,
the public would be doubly advantaged by the quantities, by that time already
produced, and still more so by the quantities which would succeed, for the
cultivation of these being once established, would never be suspended.

3d. For the further encouragement and support of the agricultural interest,
good and safe markets for the productions of the country should be secured by
treaties of commerce, and by the most effectual measures in the power of the
States to promote and protect their trade.

Congress hitherto has not been unmindful of this, and probably all that could
be done under the political embarrassments of the States, has been done; but
it is hoped and expected, the present national government can do something more
for the advancement of commerce.

Agreeably however to the best political maxims, a market at home for the
productions of the field, ought to be sought in preference to one abroad, which
are undoubtedly founded in reason and good policy; because it presupposes that
in doing this a nation must necessarily increase its artisans and laborers,
from whence are derived many additional public advantages.

MANUFACTURES.
THE public advantages derived from the establishment of manufactures, are
greater in some respects than can be derived from agriculture or commerce,
particularly as manufactures are more immediately and directly productive of
wealth. The various articles of manufacture made use of by a people, amount to
a much greater sum than those of subsistence, including every luxury;
consequently were a nation so circumstanced as to be obliged to make a choice,
it would be found more advantageous to attend to its manufactures, and depend
on other nations for its means of subsistence, than to supply itself with these
and depend on other nations for its manufactures.

An agricultural nation which exports its raw materials, and imports its
manufactures, never can be opulent, because every profitable advantage which
can be derived from its productions is given into the hands of the
manufacturing nation. -- The amount of the profitable advantages thus given
away, cannot perhaps be precisely ascertained; but if we consider the usual
prices of the raw materials and the price of the general run of manufactures,
we shall find that there is at least a difference of three hundred per cent.
The benefit therefore, of three hundred pounds on every one hundred pound, is
given away by, and lost to that nation which exports its natural productions
and imports its manufactures.

Neither can an agricultural nation become powerful, and that for this one
plain reason, (without descending to a minute consideration) the means of
support is, by importing its manufactures drawn out of the nation. This benefit
of three hundred pounds on one hundred pounds, goes to the support of the
inhabitants of the manufacturing nation, and by that an importing nation
deprives itself of the advantage of increasing its inhabitants, in a proportion
equal to the means of support thus drawn away.

Connecticut is perhaps the best populated State in the Union, but it has
arrived at its ne plus ultra. On its present system, it will never be capable
of supporting a greater number of inhabitants than (...) has done for many
years back. -- At the same time, if that State should add manufactures to its
agriculture, -- support a commerce on its improvements, -- make returns in
productive commodities, and on the whole, apply its natural resources in the
most judicious manner to the support of its inhabitants, it might as easily
support eight hundred thousand, as it does now about two hundred thousand
inhabitants.

Some countries are so circumstanced as not to he capable of manufacturing; --
they have neither the materials or conveniences; -- to some of whom nature has
been so bountiful as to supply these deficiencies with rich staple productions;
yet even such countries can never be independent, opulent or powerful. -- The
present state of the West India islands is aproof of this; their lands are
fertile and their productions valuable, yet they are dependent on other
countries for their necessary supplies, the balance of their trade is against
them, and they are incapable without foreign aid and support, to make a
respectable defense. And the southern States whose climate and soil are much in
their favor, and whose productions are the most valuable of any of the States,
are nevertheless dependent, embarrassed, and by no means populous. The northern
States, in all these respects have a preference, notwithstanding the
unfavourable difference in their climate and foil.

That which will render a nation in the highest degree opulent, is, its
supplying and furnishing itself, from its own resources, and by its own labor
and arts, all its necessaries, and a surplus for the support of commerce. The
amount of this surplus determines the degree of wealth to which a nation may
arrive. -- A nation therefore like the United States, which does produce every
necessary article of subsistence in a great abundance, which might produce and
furnish all of the essential materials for fabrication and manufacture, and
which might introduce and support every necessary art, should undoubtedly have
in view as its first object, the supplying itself with all its necessaries. --
By this and by the surplus productions which the United States will always have
for the support of commerce, they may become perhaps the most independent,
opulent and powerful nation that ever was known; for their resources are equal
to it, but by neglecting the useful arts, and continuing in the habit of
importing their manufactures, the States will remain dependent, impoverished
and embarrassed, let their resources and agricultural productions be what they
will.

A nation in fact may produce all its necessary articles of subsistence, -- it
may increase its real value by cultivation and improvement, -- it may carry on
an extensive trade, and it may be remarkable for industry; yet if it, at the
same time depends on other nations for its manufactures, it will never increase
its circulating property, and consequently will suffer all the inconveniences
and distresses, which result from straitened circumstances. -- The experience
of this country sufficiently proves and illustrate this observation, without
entering into a train of reasoning and remark.

As by a combination and mutual cooperation of the general interests of
agriculture, manufactures and commerce, the wealth and power of a nation is
promoted; so by the concurrence of a variety of advantageous circumstances,
contained in the particular interest of manufactures, the wealth and power of a
nation receives more essential and important supports from this, than from
either or both of the other general interests, they being detached therefrom:
-- As 1st, by manufactures the natural strength of the nation is augmented.
This I have just mentioned before, but I would beg leave to bring it into view
again. A moment's reflection will convince us of the importance of
manufactures, considering it in this point of light. -- How many persons do the
importations of the United States support in foreign nations, who possibly may
take up arms one day or another against them? The number cannot be ascertained
with any degree of exactness, but it is so great as to merit consideration; for
whether the arms of these will ever in fact be employed against the States or
not, it would undoubtedly be more prudent to support so many citizens who would
contribute to the national safety and defense, than to support so many
foreigners, whose services could on no occasion be claimed. -- 2d. By
manufactures the circulating property is not only increased but retained, which
is as necessary to the commercial life and vigor of a nation, as the blood is
to the life and vigor of animals. A sufficient quantity (to pursue the simile)
will force its way to the smallest and most extensive vessel, giving it life
and activity; while a deficiency in quantity will not only throw the exterior
parts but the whole body into a languishing condition. 3d. By manufactures, the
productions of the field, those especially which are suitable for
manufacturing, are rendered in the highest possible degree valuable.
Manufacturing adds three fourths of the value of manufactured articles;
consequently must be considered a most important improvement on the productions
of the country, and a sure and most eligible means of augmenting the riches of
a nation. 4th. By manufactures, a more profitable commerce can be supported,
than by the natural productions of the country. A cargo of manufactured
merchandise is immensely more valuable, and of consequence will make more
advantageous returns than any cargoes the States can now export, except only
the article of Indigo. 5th. By the support of manufactures in the United
States, returns in trade would be made, not as usually have been made, not in
superfluous and unprofitable merchandise, nor in articles incapable of
improvement, but in something really valuable, -- something capable of
improvement, -- something productive and accumulating, -- something in short
which will increase the wealth of the nation.

The manufacturing interest therefore, of the United States, is I conceive of
such importance, as to merit particular attention, and to excite the utmost
exertions of every true friend to the country.

The enemies to the real interest of the United States, or at least those who
regard their own private interest in preference to every other consideration,
have ever suggested a number of objections to the establishment of
manufactures; as

1st. That we can always purchase goods cheaper than can be manufactured in the
country. This as relates to individuals may in part be true, but as it relates
to the public, is by no means a fact. An individual may purchase foreign
manufactured goods, probably for less money than this country could at at this
time afford to manufacture, many articles particularly, but this simple fact
does by no means determine the matter in question. The question to be
determined is not, which cost most money, the manufactures of Europe or the
manufactures of America; but whether the money thus laid out in the purchase of
foreign goods, cost the country more than would have cost by manufacturing the
goods themselves or not? To determine the question justly, there is no other
rule but a calculation of the labor bestowed on the foreign goods bought, and
the labor expended on the produce of the country, which procured the money
that purchased the goods; for the value of all productions must be traced up to
this original standard. If the question be decided by this rule, which I think
must be admitted as the only just one, then I conceive by two circumstances it
can be proved, that the United States pay much more for their necessary
manufactures by importing them, than they would do by manufacturing themselves;
that is, they expend more labor on their produce for market, than would be
necessary to expend on the manufactures which their produce purchases. The one
is the balance of trade is greatly against them. -- It is an industrious
country and very productive, yet after exporting all the avails of its labor
annually, a balance remains against it; this I know is occasioned in part, by
importing too many luxurious and superfluous articles, nevertheless no country
as industrious and productive as the United States, but would supply itself
with all its necessaries, and all the luxuries made use of by the people,
besides leaving a considerable surplus, if its labor was applied in a direct
manner to the supplying itself, or did it receive an adequate return.

There is not more labor performed in Great Britain, according to the number
of inhabitants, than in the United States, probably not as much; and as a large
or larger sum in the same proportion is expended there for luxuries and
superfluities, yet, the balance of the trade of that nation is greatly in its
favor, while that of the United States is greatly against them; for which I
can assign no other reason but that which I just now mentioned, the labor
performed in Great Britain is well applied and receives an adequate return; in
the United States it is, and does not.

The other circumstance in proof of the point in question is, that from
observation and the best information, we know of no article of American produce
sold in Europe, that neats twenty shillings, which did not cost more labor
than the same amount of manufactures received there in return. -- How much more
cannot be precisely stated, but if we were to say double, it would not perhaps
exceed the truth.

These circumstances show the reason why this country with all its fertility
and industry, is nevertheless embarrassed and distressed; and proves at the
same time, that were the labor which is performed in the United States,
applied to the production of the necessary materials for manufacturing, and to
manufacturing itself, it would be more publicly advantageous, than to apply it
to the production of certain articles for foreign market, for the purpose of
procuring their necessary manufactures.

This objection however, let it have what weight it may, might be soon removed,
by suitable encouragement and support given to manufactures, by being
established on good and sufficient capitals, by being put under good
regulations, by the increase of manufactures, by habit and use in the
manufacturing arts, and by the increase of the materials for manufacturing, the
price of manufactures would soon be reduced to a reasonable standard, many
articles cheaper than can be imported.

2d. It has frequently been mentioned by way of objection, that land being so
cheap and easy to be obtained, people dependent on their labor for support,
would so generally go into husbandry as to render the support of manufactories
in the United States impracticable; but I conceive this objection is not well
founded.

Since the government is establishing, and probably will finally be established
on a good and safe footing, and manufactures patronized, many manufacturers
will migrate into this country; these people will never go into husbandry; they
understand nothing of it; their sole object in coming into this country will be
to enter into those kinds of employment in which they have been educated and
brought up, on a prospect of receiving better encouragement and support here,
than in their own country. Many have already come and as fast as encouragement
may be offered, or prospect of success appear, so fast will the manufactories
of the United States be supported by foreign workmen; besides this, there are
thousands of youths in the States, suffering for such kinds of employment as
the different branches of manufacture would afford them.

The creator and benefactor of men, has in great wisdom and goodness, so
diversified the natural abilities, genius and disposition of mankind, that they
have a natural propensity and turn of mind to different occupations and
employments, whereby their necessities and conveniences are mutually provided
for, and supplied. Husbandry therefore is not preferred by every one as an
agreeable employment, nor entered into by those who have a natural propensity
to some other occupation, if such could be found and entered into with prospect
of success.

To this we may add another consideration; the manufacturing business is not so
laborious as field husbandry, and productive of more advantage to a labourer,
so that those who have no lands of their own and nothing to depend on for a
support but their labor, will undoubtedly, and in fact, such always did prefer
some kind of handicraft business to husbandry.

3d. It has also been suggested by way of objection, that manufactures would
prejudice the agricultural and commercial interests of the United States. That
it would lessen the occasion of trade, the necessity of importations being
diminished, and of consequence would lessen the demand for the usual
productions of the country -- To this I would observe --

That in proportion to the extent of manufactures, would be the increase of
inhabitants, and consequently of the consumption of the fruits of the earth,
and in the same proportion would be the demand for the materials for
manufacturing, which would be an advantageous substitute for many of the
unprofitable productions of the country; for many of them are the result of
necessity, and had much better be suspended. -- The increase in the home
consumption of the agricultural productions of the country, by the
establishment of manufactures, would I conceive be more than a counterbalance
to a diminution in their demand in foreign markets in consequence thereof;
besides such of the productions of the United States as now find a profitable
market abroad, will probably continue the same, let returns be made in what
they will.

The West India islands will always receive many supplies from the States, for
they are dependent on this country for them. The European nations also will
receive many articles of produce from the States, because they can supply
themselves from hence on better terms than from any other country. In addition
to these the trade just began in Asia, together with that which might be
established on the coast of Africa, and that which may probably be opened up
the Mediterranean, will altogether be fully sufficient to take the surplus
productions of the United States.

But so far from commerce being injured by the establishment of manufactures,
it would derive essential supports therefrom. Manufactures I conceive might
soon be so increased in this country, as to enable it to export many articles
of manufacture, which in every respect is preferable and far more profitable
than the exportation of unimproved produce.

4th. Notwithstanding the objections which have been and are still made, by
many to the establishment of manufactures in the United States, yet I conceive
there are no obstacles in the way but may be surmounted.

Great Britain was once under much greater disadvantages, with respect to the
introduction and progress of manufactures, than the United States now are, yet
by the judicious measures and spirited exertions of the government of that
nation, it has overcome every difficulty; carried manufactures to an
astonishing length and degree of perfection; and by that has become the most
opulent and powerful nation in Europe.

The United States are under better natural advantages to manufacture than
Great Britain ever was, or ever will be; they have a greater variety of raw
materials, which if not now, might very soon be increased to any requisite
quantity; they produce in a great abundance all the necessary articles of
subsistence, which is not always the case in Great Britain; there is not a
manufacturing art in Europe but might readily be obtained, and with respect to
workmen, I apprehend as fast as manufactures are encouraged, workmen will be
found and on reasonable terms.

There is therefore, I conceive no natural or insuperable obstacle in the way
of the establishment, and successful progress of manufactures in the United
States; and the advantages of manufacturing are of of such importance both to
the nation as such, and to individuals, that it certainly ought to be made an
object of particular attention, and excite the exertions of the people in
general, and of the national legislature. The patriotism of the people might do
much, but without the aid of government, manufactures in the United States will
never be carried to any great extent, or arrive at a great degree of perfection.

Many measures I conceive might be taken both by individuals and by the
government, for the advancement and support of the interest of manufactures in
the states.

1st. The establishment of manufactures on good and sufficient capitals is
essential to their prosperity. Every branch of manufacture would be greatly
benefited by this; but there are some could not be put into operation without
great pecuniary assistance. A fear of failure has I apprehend hitherto deterred
people of property from attempting such manufactures; but if the national
government should give suitable protection to manufactures which cannot be
doubted, they will, it is to be hoped and expected, receive the aid of men of
wealth. By supports of this kind the linen, woollen and cotton manufactures in
this country might soon rival the European manufactures in their cheapness and
quality, if not in their quantity; and I cannot but be of opinion from many
facts which have fallen within the observation of every one, that those
gentlemen who have loose property and have improved their money in trade
because they could not find a more profitable use to put it to, would have
profited themselves and benefited the public much more had they have turned
their attention, and applied their money to the establishment of manufactures.

At the close of the late war the trading part of the people and those who
entered into trade about that time, were possessed of money sufficient to have
established every necessary manufactory in the country, even at the high prices
labor and materials then were, besides furnishing the people with their
necessaries. Had this money been improved in this way it would have been
retained and secured, at the same time a property as permanent and productive
as the lands, which are esteemed the most so. But it has been exported out of
the country, and brought in return luxurious, superfluous and frivolous
merchandise, most or all of which are now consumed and perished, leaving
nothing but a disagreeable reflection of the misapplication of a property of
great magnitude.

2d. Another support which manufactures might receive from individuals, is the
cultivation and increase of the necessary raw materials; this support depends
on the planters and husbandmen, and two motives ought, I conceive, to stimulate
them to exertions herein: the one is the public, and the other the private
advantages which are to be derived from manufactures; setting aside
considerations of public advantage, it would undoubtedly be more to the private
interest of individuals to exchange their raw productions for home manufactures
on terms of equality, than to throw away a great deal of labor in the
productions of certain articles for foreign markets for the purpose of
procuring foreign manufactures, which has always been done on terms of
inequality.

It is true, one of the most powerful incentives a planter or husbandman could
have to exertions in the cultivation of the necessary materials for
manufacturing, is a sure and profitable market. Such a market depends on the
support and encouragement which the government may give to manufactures, and as
every possible encouragement and support will undoubtedly be given by the
legislature, the planter and husbandman may begin with a good degree of
assurance, to make the cultivation and production of the manufacturing
materials an object of attention.

3d. The particular measures which government might take and which I conceive
are essential to the encouragement and support of the manufacturing interest of
the United States are -- 1st. To prohibit the importation of such articles of
manufacture as are already furnished in sufficient quantities for the use of
the people -- 2d. To prohibit the importation of such articles as might
specially be furnished, and which by a temporary deficiency the people would
not be laid under any special inconvenience -- 3d. Such articles as might be
soon furnished, and which would discommode the people, were they prohibited
before supplies could be obtained from our own manufactories, I apprehend
should be charged with such a duty on their importation as would give a small
preference in market to the productions of the United States -- and 4th.
Whenever any branch of manufacture arrives to such a degree of perfection as to
answer the purposes of the people, protect it by a total prohibition on the
importation of the like foreign articles; even let it be in itself of ever so
trifling a consideration, for many small things in the course of time will
amount to something of importance.

Under the two first description of articles I consider the following, viz --
Anchors, axes, plantation hoes, scythes, cast iron of all kinds, scale beams,
steelyards, stoves, English steel, mounted swords, hangers and cutlasses, sheer
iron, bells of all descriptions, saddles, bridles, shoes, boots, boot legs and
foal leather; every other kind of leather manufactures, coaches and all kinds
of carriages, fire engines, cabinet, joiners and turners work, walking sticks
and whips, billiard tables, backgammon tables, umbrellas clocks, jewelry,
gold and silver plate, gauging rods, sea compasses, quadrants, cordage, burr
millstones manufactured, cider, porter, ale, cordial waters, soap, candles,
lintseed oil, paints ground in oil, refined sugar, snuff, and all kinds of
manufactured tobacco, starch, mustard, clothes and millenery ready made up,
beaver, castor and felt hats, playing cards, paper hangings, buckles of every
kind, sleeve-buttons, toys, brushes of every sort, wool and cotton cards, tin
ware, horn combs, musical instruments, salt petre, probably several other
articles which have escaped my recollection; also, spelling-books, primers,
psalters, testaments, perhaps bibles, together with a number of frivolous
articles, as bird cages, mouse traps and the like; also, joiners tools in
stocks.

To this enumeration I would add a few remarks.

1st. I have frequently heard objections made to the laying prohibitions,
because as it is said the manufacturers in this country will take advantage of
it and raise the price of their productions. To which I would observe, 1st.
That if the United States ever intend to make manufactures an object, they must
at one time or another lay prohibitions, for without, the manufactures of this
country will not be sufficiently encouraged; and whenever prohibitions do take
place, this consequence may possibly follow; but it will not be of long
duration. By the encouragement of good prices, numbers will be influenced to
enter into the manufacturing business; by numbers entering into the business
their productions will be increased beyond an immediate demand, and as soon as
this is the case the price of manufactures will be reduced to a reasonable
standard -- 2d. Such an inconvenience to individuals will be of no prejudice to
the interest of the public; so much property will be in the nation, let it be
in whose hands it will -- 3d. The advantages to the public of acquiring
property by the arts and industry of the people, which eventually benefits
every individual, are by a great difference more important than the
disadvantages of giving a small advance in the price of their necessary
manufactures. The objection therefore does dot appear to me to have a weight
sufficient to prevent such prohibitions being laid as may be found necessary to
encourage and support the manufactures of the United States.

2d. It is probable it will be found necessary to permit the importation of
some of these articles into some of the states while they are prohibited in
others for reasons already assigned; but on such terms I conceive as will
encourage and support home manufactures in all the states.

3d. As it is of importance to mankind that the scriptures be preserved and
handed down to posterity in a state of the greatest purity, so I conceive it to
be of consequence that their publication in this country should be under proper
regulations. The editions published in the states, which I have seen, are
faulty. Faulty and incorrect editions may and indeed they tend to the
introduction of essential errors. To prevent which, I would suggest as a
question, whether it would not be proper that the publication of the scriptures
or any parts of them should not be licensed and patented, and the press under
the inspection of a committee?

Under the third description of articles, I consider sail cloth and all kinds
of hempen cloth, cotton cloths, woollen, linen and cotton hosiery, iron shovels
and spades, frying pans, brass, copper and pewter manufactures; fire arms,
gunpowder, hand bellows, and paper, types, and probably some other articles
which not at this time occur to me.

Most or all our woollen and linen manufactures might very soon be performed in
this country, with exertions, so also might our ironmongery and cutlery; but as
they are necessary for the use and services of the people, and but few of these
manufactures began; I conceive to charge them with a heavy duty at this time,
would lay the people under a real hardship, without the prospect of immediate
advantage, as in the case of those articles which I have enumerated; however
when these, in any of their branches shall be so far advanced, as to afford a
prospect of their arriving at a point of importance, they should receive the
support of government.

Besides the prohibitions and duties on articles of importation, I conceive
there are some other public measures, which if adopted would tend essentially
to the support of the manufactures of the United States. Among several which
might be suggested, I would mention the following:

1st. A prohibition on the exportation of such materials, as might be wholly
manufactured in the country; of such I think of but one at present, and that is
fur. All the fur collected in the country might, I apprehend be manufactured in
it, if so, an advantage of three or four hundred per cent, on the fur which is
now exported, would be acquired and retained.

2d. A free importation of such articles as are necessary for the support and
successful progress of manufactures in the States, which are not produced in
them, or not produced in sufficient quantities, or of a quality sufficiently
good of such articles, I reckon cotton. The culture of this article is
increasing fast in the southern States, and bids fair to render a prohibition
on the importation of foreign cotton requisite in a short time, unless it
should be found of advantage to mix foreign cotton with it, but at present an
importation may be necessary. To this may be added fine wool, until at least
the breed of sheep is improved in this country, -- also hemp, until the
cultivation of this article becomes more extensive in the States, together with
alum, copperas, sulphur, tinplates, pewter, lead, brass, copper, paints not
ground, except lampblack, burr stones, dying woods and all kind of dies, except
indigo, mahogany, lignumvitae, ebony, box wood, elephants teeth, perhaps hides,
-- also machines, new constructed instruments, etc. for the improvement of
agriculture and manufactures, and for the benefit of the arts and sciences.

3d. Some special encouragements for the introduction of such manufacturing
arts as are not generally known; such offers I conceive might be made, as would
introduce into the States, every manufacturing secret in Europe.

4th. Some exemptions with respect to taxes, granted to manufactories and to
manufacturers; encouragements of this nature have a great influence on the
minds of artificers and laborers, much more than on their property. The very
idea of patronage gives life and vigor to industry and the arts. It stimulates
the people to exertions, and throws a cheerful ray on the toilsome labor of
their hands; and I know of no demonstration of a public and general patronage
of manufactures, more expressive than an exemption from taxes those who are
employed in the manufacturing business.

COMMERCE.
COMMERCE in its connections and influences is undoubtedly capable of producing
a variety of important advantages to a nation, particularly in these respects:
It provides a market for the surplus productions of a country, which otherwise
would be rendered useless and of no value: It furnishes the people with such
necessaries, comforts and conveniences, as their own country does not furnish
and produce, and it gives employment and support to a great number of people of
various professions and occupations: It is also the medium by which a nation
accumulates wealth -- Commerce therefore merits the encouragement and support
of government.

But, although commerce is adapted to the promotion of public interest, and
productive of many private benefits and advantages; yet, it may produce ruinous
consequences to a nation: for which reason, it is incumbent on the legislative
authority, to restrain the licentious operations of commerce, to which it
naturally tends, and so to regulate it as to render it subservient to the
general interest of the nation.

If a free and open trade was admitted by all nations, it would, perhaps,
promote the greatest interest and happiness of mankind, at least, it is the
opinion of many writers on the subject; but since most, or all nations keep
their mercantile interest separate -- since they aim at engrossing an unequal
share of commercial advantages -- at securing in a particular manner the
advantages which result from their own situation and circumstances, and of
rivalling other nations; the idea of a free and unlimited trade is highly
impolitic and absurd: The chain of a free and universal commercial intercourse
being once broken, by any one nation, every other nation included in the circle
of correspondence, is laid under an obligation thereby to secure their own
interests, and retain their just share of advantages.

The nations of Europe, with whom the United States maintain a commercial
intercourse, have considered their mercantile interest as wholly separate from
the interest of all other nations, and taken the most effectual measures to
prevent others from participating in the advantages which their situation and
circumstances afford. The United States therefore ought to adopt and establish
the same principles, and regulate their trade in such a manner as to secure
themselves the commercial advantages which are to be derived from their
circumstances, and prevent other nations from taking such prejudicial liberties
as a licentious commerce unavoidably exposes them to.

There are certain objects, therefore, to which the commerce of the United
States ought to be directed, and to which it should be confined; as 1st. To
procure a profitable and advantageous market for the surplus productions of the
country: 2d. To supply the people with such necessaries as the country does not
furnish: 3d. To give employment and support to the merchant, mariner and
mechanic: 4th. To increase the circulating property; and 5th. To become a basis
on which to establish a national revenue.

These are objects which I conceive should be particularly attended to, and had
in view in forming a system of commercial regulations; and that I may
communicate my ideas on this subject in the clearest and best manner, I would
arrange them under the several particulars which I have here stated.

I. To procure an advantageous foreign market for the surplus productions of
the country, is one benefit of commerce, and an object to be had in view in the
commercial regulations.

The first and most striking idea which arises in our minds here, is, the
obtaining the greatest price for the productions of the country. The spirit of
speculation so prevalent among merchants, will always direct to a proper choice
in this particular; and were it not for circumstances connected therewith, the
interference of government with respect to markets would be unnecessary. But
when trade is under no legal restrictions, and the productions of the country
at liberty to be exported to such markets and in such methods as are most
agreeable to the interest, convenience and private views of individuals,
notwithstanding the greatest prices are obtained, yet it will most commonly be
attended with two consequences extremely prejudicial to the interest of the
nation; the one is with respect to the returns which are frequently such as
tend to interfere with and suppress the agricultural and manufacturing
interests, and which are luxurious, frivolous and unprofitable; and the other
is, it may and in fact often does contribute to the support of rival interests
in foreign nations; for which reasons it appears to me that there is a
necessity that government should not only prescribe the mode of commerce, but
direct the foreign markets to which the productions of the country may be
exported.

The particular measures which I conceive government might take to procure and
promote a beneficial market for the productions of the country in foreign
nations and countries are these, viz. 1st. To form treaties of friendship and
commerce with such nations, wherein there is a profitable demand for the
productions of the states, and with whom a trade may be established on the
principles of mutual advantage -- 2d. To remove the impediments out of the way
of such profitable markets as may be obstructed -- 3d. To aid and assist the
merchants in the establishment of any new trade which may be found, and which
may require public support -- and 4th, To form such regulations as would tend
to support the value of the produce of the United States in foreign markets. To
these I would observe,

1st. That although the states have entered into treaties of friendship and trade
with some of the European nations, in which a good market for many of their
productions are found; yet with Great Britain where a great part of the produce
of the states go to for a market, and from whom the greater part of their
supplies of manufactures are received, no treaty has or could be entered into;
the reason of which I conceive to be that Great Britain entertaining an opinion
that in consequence of the broken state of the American government, the
difference in their local interests, the spirit of rivalry and jealousy
subsisting between them, and the obligations the merchants of the states were
under to the merchants of that nation, no general regulations such as would
render the commerce of the two countries reciprocally beneficial, would ever be
adopted by the states. Great Britain therefore proceeded on this idea, and
prescribed the terms and mode of trade between that nation and this, which are
founded on the principles of a monopoly. All the prosits, all the advantages
which are to be derived from the trade are secured to Great Britain; all the
disadvantages devolve on the states. The advantages which Great Britain derives
from the commerce of the United States in the mode in which it is now carried
on are many and important; and so long as they can be held, no proposals for a
treaty of commerce will I conceive be attended to by that nation; and I am
humbly of opinion that nothing but the spirited and decided measures of the
legislature of the United States will ever produce a treaty of commerce with
Great Britain, or secure to the states an equal share of advantages in the
commerce of the two countries.

In general I would observe, that a trade carried on between two nations on
sufferance, is always precarious, liable to many impositions, and never
reciprocally advantageous; for no two nations were ever so circumstanced as to
maintain an equilibrium in the benefits of commerce, without stipulating the
terms on which it should be prosecuted: One will derive unequal advantages; the
other in consequence thereof will be subjected to proportional disadvantages;
for which reason I conceive a treaty of commerce should in the first instance
be formed and entered into by the United States, with those nations in which an
advantageous market for their productions may be found.

2d. A profitable trade I apprehend might be carried on by the United States up
the Mediterranean, could a settlement, and a treaty of amity with the Dey of
Algiers be effected; but as the depredations committed on the navigation of the
United States by the Algerines, were begun and are now supported by the
intrigues, and through the influence of the British court, it will be a work of
no small difficulty to procure the peace and friendship of that piratical
state. The legislature of the United States however will undoubtedly continue
attempts for the accomplishment of so important an end, whereby the freedom and
property of the citizens of the States may be secured, and a trade opened up
the Mediterranean.

3d. An advantageous trade I conceive might be established on the coast of
Africa, particularly that part called the Gold Coast, where a profitable market
might be found for the productions of the States; this country distilled rum
particularly; and where also several valuable articles by way of return are to
be had. But whether an extensive and safe trade could be carried on there
without establishing factories, and they supported by the power of the States,
I will not pretend to determine; neither will I pretend to say whether the
States have it conveniently in their power to support factories on that coast,
should national support be necessary. If however, it should appear that an
extensive trade could be opened and carried on there, I should imagine the
government would consider it an object worthy of attention, and as far as was
in its power, give the trade every aid and support; for every new market which
can be found for, and every new consumer of the productions of the States, not
only advances the interest of commerce in particular, but eventually promotes
every particular interest of the nation, except in those instances where a
rival interest is supported thereby. Besides, I know of no nation or country
with whom the States carry on a trade, where commodities in return are to be
found more valuable.

4th. A profitable market for several of the productions of the States, might
be found in the Spanish American dominions, were it possible to obtain
permission for that purpose from the court of Spain. This however, can scarcely
be hoped for, considering the policy of the Spanish nation with respect to its
trade. It may nevertheless be worth while to attempt it, for there are certain
times when nations, as well as individuals, feel more liberally disposed than
is usually the case.

5th. The trade just began to Asia, might, I apprehend, be productive of many
benefits to the States, were it prosecuted upon a judicious and well
constructed plan; but if my informations are to be depended upon, and my ideas
of the trade as it is now circumstanced, just, I cannot think it beneficial to
the States, or as lucrative to adventurers as such a trade ought to be.

There are among others, two objects to be kept in view as essential to the
interest of this trade; -- the one is the support of the value of the produce
of the States in the markets of Asia, and the other is the quality of the
merchandise received there in return.

If the value of American produce exported, could be supported in such a manner
as to make profitable returns to the merchants, it would render the trade
beneficial to the public; because it would be the most direct and advantageous
method by which the States could import the productions of Asia; but if the
produce of the States, fall in their price in such a manner as to render the
exportation of considerable sums of money necessary, in order to make the
voyages profitable, I apprehend no advantage accrues to the public by the
trade: for in the first place I conceive the States cannot at this time export
large sums of money without distressing other interests, of more consequence
than any, or all the luxuries of the East. Were there such an influx of money
into the States, that there was a danger of its depreciating in value, the
exportation of money would be advisable and necessary, -- this however is not
the case at present; or were the importations from Asia necessary, or applied
to the support and promotion of some other national interest, the exportation
of money for the support of the trade, might not be disadvantageous; but this
is not the case. The importations from that country are all of the luxurious
kind; are incapable of improvement, and are not applied to the promotion of any
other interest, or did the Asiatic trade bring into the states as much money as
it carried out, no inconvenience to the public interest would arise by the
exportation of money; but this also is not the case -- The States have no
foreign market for their importations from Asia; the trade originates and
terminates within themselves. In the second place, as no freight can be made on
money, the profits on the importation or returns must be augmented, in order to
support the merchant in the trade. This additional profit must necessarily be
drawn from the people of the States, since no foreign market is opened for
India goods through this channel.

A supply of any kind of merchandise, more than sufficient for the immediate
use and consumption of the people, will always be the occasion of reducing
their price in any market. This is a circumstance common to all, for which
reason suitable measures ought to be adopted to prevent, as far as possible,
such an inconvenience in voyages, as lengthy, expensive and important as those
are from the United States to Asia.

The voyages from this country to that are wholly unconnected with one another;
and consequently the business of negotiation is in the hands of the
supercargoes of each ship. The interest of each particular voyage is the object
of the respective supercargoes; and of course a competition of interests
naturally takes place between them. Dispatch is with them a consideration of
equal, or greater moment, than the support of the value of the produce of this
country, and a temporary private advantage of greater account than a permanent
and durable public profit and interest. These circumstances, I conceive, have
been the occasion of American produce being sold at a reduced price from time
to time in the markets of Asia, until, as I have been informed, it will not pay
a freight in any measure equal to the length and expense of the voyage: And as
there are no established American factories in the sea ports of Asia -- no well
established correspondents in the country, and American cargoes sold on the
spot, on the best terms that can be obtained, and cargoes received in return in
such articles as are at hand, and that can be the easiest procured,
unmerchantable goods, such as are refused at the European factories, are in
consequence of these circumstances palmed upon the American merchants,
extremely prejudicial to the trade.

I am by no means positive in my opinion respecting the Asiatic trade, for it
is founded on but transient information, and my own reflections on the subject;
but until I am convinced by superior evidence, I must think that if the trade
from the United States to Asia was a company concern, and the business in that
country negociated by one set of merchants; or in any method which would unite
the American mercantile interest in Asia, and render it the same, it would be a
means of supporting the value of American produce in those markets, and of
procuring in return merchandise of the best qualities; and these I conceive are
objects of important consideration in the trade. Nevertheless, admitting these
remarks to be just, and that it would be possible to put the trade upon a more
advantageous footing, I know not whether the government could constitutionally,
or with propriety interfere, or take any measures respecting it. If however it
should be found that any regulations which government might form, would tend to
keep an important branch of commerce from dwindling into nothing -- to restore
it to its expected consequence, and to render it of public benefit, I should
imagine such national measures as would answer these purposes, might with
reason and propriety be taken.

II. To supply the people with such necessary articles of produce and
manufactures as their own country does not furnish, is one principal end and
design of commerce.

No man ever was or ever will be so independent as not to need assistance from
his fellow creatures, or to render a commercial intercourse unnecessary; and
the same mutual dependence which subsists between individuals in the same
country, subsists between countries themselves. No nation or country furnishes
every thing necessary to the comfort and convenience of its inhabitants, in
such a manner that the happiness of the inhabitants of the respective countries
could not be augmented by an exchange of their productions. Commerce therefore
is essential to the interest and happiness of mankind on this account. Besides,
it is the best calculated mean of promoting the interest of society; but as
this is foreign from my design, shall wave it.

By an exchange of commodities, giving such as an individual or a country
produces in surplus quantities, and receiving by way of return such as are not
produced, and which are necessary to subsistence, comsort and convenience, the
happiness of mankind is reciprocally promoted, and the original end and design
of commerce fully answered: And so long as the commerce of two nations or
countries is carried on with this view, and confined within the limits of this
rule, it answers its original and essential purposes. But whenever it breaks
over this natural boundary -- when no restrictions are laid on the importations
into a country, and the emolument of individuals becomes the only object of
trade, without regard to national welfare, it will necessarily and unavoidably
produce prejudicial consequences; and in proportion to the prejudices which one
nation suffers by such an unrestricted commerce, will be the extraordinary
advantages received by the other nation.

We often overlook the influence and effect of a licentious trade on the
interest of a nation, either because we do not like to investigate a subject of
so extensive and complicated a nature, in which we suppose we have no immediate
concern; or because they are diffusive, and not confined to any particular
object. But, should a wealthy planter in any part of the country, permit his
children or servants to import from another part of the country, such articles
of produce as he produced himself, and supply his usual customers and
purchasers therewith, the effect it would have on his interest would be
striking and obvious to every one: The effect and the cause would be clearly
seen and understood by every man, and it would be a conclusion universally
agreed in, that such a man, continuing to permit such a conduct, must in the
end be inevitably ruined. This conclusion applies with equal force and justice
to a nation that permits a licentious trade -- that permits the importation of
such articles of produce and manufacture as it produces and manufactures
itself. All the difference between a nation and an individual consists in this;
in the one case, the prejudice is pointed and insupportable; in the other, it
is diffusive, and by being borne by a nation, is supportable. And,

If it be repugnant to the interest of a nation to import into it such articles
of produce and manufacture as it actually does furnish, it must also in some
degree be prejudicial to import freely such articles as it might produce and
manufacture; because this would be cutting off a source of national wealth at
the fountain head; it would be destroying a seed in the earth, which one day
might have become a flourishing plant.

But my idea in stating this rule or maxim, extends further, and aims at laying
a restraint on the importation of foreign luxuries, and frivolous articles of
merchandise, notwithstanding the country may not furnish them; because they are
not necessary.

The free importation and unrestrained use of such articles, injures the
interest of the country in a variety of respects. It tends to vitiate the
taste, and corrupt the morals of the people; to enervate the sinews of
industry; to destroy that spirit of economy which ought to be preserved in the
body of the people; to inspire them with a spirit of vanity, and to excite an
illaudable ambition of being distinguished by pageantry and show; to draw them
insensibly into habits of dissipation and profuse expenses; and it directly
draws their hard earned and valuable property away for that which is of no real
use to them.

Were articles of luxury and superfluity the production of the country which
consumes them, one material ill consequence, as it respects the interest of the
public, would not follow; which is, that notwithstanding individuals might be
ruined by a too free use of unnecessary articles, still the property would
remain in the nation: But by freely importing from foreign nations, and making
use of such articles, the folly and loss becomes national.

In applying these general remarks to the commerce of the United States, since
the revolution, it is to be observed, that the welfare of the nation, and the
convenience and happiness of the people, have not been the objects aimed at by
their trade, but the private advantage and profit of individuals: And as no
legal restrictions, have been laid on importations, not only necessary, but
luxurious, trifling and useless articles have been imported, and freely made
use of; and the consequence has been, poverty and distress among the people.

From among a great variety of luxurious and unnecessary articles imported into
the United States, I will select one for particular consideration; that is
ardent spirits. The trifling duty laid on these by the different States, have
laid no restraint on their use. They are within the reach of every one, and are
as freely made use of as of the cheapest and most innocent drinks; and what are
the consequences? Perhaps half a million of pounds in money and other property
has annually been drawn out of the States for rum, brandy and geneva. Many who
might have been useful members of society, have become by the intoxicating
draught, perfect brutes -- lost to society -- lost to their friends and
connections, and lost to themselves. We frequently observe idleness and
dissipation -- families reduced to infamy and distress -- riots, quarrels and
murders -- a good constitution destroyed early in life, and persons sent
prematurely to the grave, in consequence of the free importation and
unrestrained use of ardent spirits.

The United States is a young nation, and requires a great deal of industry and
good economy to render it independent and opulent: No nation therefore can be
more essentially injured by a luxurious, dissipated habit of living; yet none
expends so great a quantity of spirituous liquors, according to the number of
inhabitants, as the United States, and with less occasion; for all the
necessary drinks might be furnished within themselves, in a great plenty and
sufficient variety.

Great Britain is an old nation, and has become opulent; yet, were she to admit
of as free a use of ardent spirits as the United States, it would go nigh to
ruining the agricultural and manufacturing interests of that nation. So
sensible is Great Britain of the ruinous consequences of an unrestrained use of
spirituous liquors, that rum, the produce of their own islands, is charged with
such a duty, as to put it beyond the reach of people in general.

As spirituous liquors are no ways necessary to the existence, comfort or
convenience of the people, but productive of ruinous consequences to
individuals, and prejudicial effects on the interests of the nation, such a
restraint, I conceive, ought to be put on their use, as would be sufficient to
lessen it, and to turn the attention of the people to those means and
advantages which the country has put into the hands of every man.

A duty therefore so high as would produce this effect, should be laid on rum,
brandy and geneva imported into the United States. For my own part I believe a
duty of five or six shillings a gallon, would not be too much to answer the
purposes intended thereby. Their prices would be raised in consequence of such
a duty about two hundred per cent. and if the quantity made use of was to be
lessened in that proportion, it would be fully sufficient to answer the people
every necessary purpose. The man the most attached to spirituous liquors, must
admit in his sober moments, that one third of the rum, etc. used by the people,
is enough, and more than enough for their benefit. But, as the habits of the
people will overpower reason, and as their virtue is too weak to produce a
general reformation, the exertions of the powers of government becomes
necessary to this purpose.

Those who are concerned in the rum trade, and import spirituous liquors, might
suppose themselves injured should such a duty be laid; but two considerations
are worthy of notice here; the one is, that no good and sufficient reason can
be given, why a general and public evil should be continued, merely because
some individuals are benefited by it; and the other is, the importer would not
be so much injured as might at first be imagined: The small duties now laid on
rum, etc. are in general a tax on the importer, not on the consumer. Rum is
sold at about the same price it would have been, were there no duties laid on
it; but if it was charged with a heavy duty, the importer would never think of
giving it away: He would consider it a part of the prime cost, and accordingly
compute his profits; and the duty in this case would fall where duties always
ought to fall, viz. on the consumer. Besides this, if the importation of rum,
etc. should be lessened in consequence of such a duty, the demand would be
greater than usual; for, let the price be what it may, there will be those who
will purchase and make use of spirits; consequently, the importation might be
rendered as profitable as by importing larger quantities.

The importer might make another objection -- That the rum, etc. would not
produce money sufficient to pay such a duty. In this case, if he had no other
method of procuring money for that purpose, he would import money with the rum,
etc. and, as I just observed, consider it a part of the prime cost. By this the
importer would suffer no inconvenience, and the public derive an additional
advantage.

Another objection might also be made -- That lessening the importation of
these articles, would lessen the demand for the produce of the country. This I
will admit, so far as to the staves and hoops which would be necessary to make
casks for the rum imported. But to this I would observe, that if the lands and
labor of the people produces nothing in return more valuable and publicly
beneficial than spirituous liquors, it would be much more to the benefit of the
people to lay aside such productions, and turn their attention to something
more profitable and advantageous.

Ever since I can remember, and long before, Connecticut has pushed a trade
with the West Indies, exporting horses, and importing rum as a principal
article of return. In this trade, I apprehend, a large sum has annually been
sunk. For, in the first place, the horse, at the time it is sold for
exportation, has in general twice eaten up its value; and the next its returns
are consumed in a few days without producing the least benefit to the public. I
reckon every horse exported and returned in rum, as so much property lost to
the general interest; and who the individual is that makes any advantage by
raising and exporting horses, I know not; it is evidently not the farmer, and
as certainly not the merchant; not one in ten ever made any thing by it, and at
least five out of that number have been ruined by pursuing the trade.

Were the people to turn their attention to raising of sheep and the
cultivation of the necessary materials for manufacturing, and give manufactures
the necessary support, instead of raising horses for exportation and the
production of other commodities for the purchase of rum, they would soon find
themselves in the event essentially beneficial; besides the satisfaction of
reflecting on the advantages which the general interests of the nation would
derive from their patriotic exertions.

The importation of wines I do not consider as attended with such prejudicial
consequences as of ardent spirits; wines are not so intoxicating -- are not so
destructive to the constitution, and coming at a higher price are not so
generally made use of. For these reasons -- I do not think so high a duty
should be laid on them as on rum, brandy and geneva.

Besides spirituous liquors, there are a variety of luxurious and frivolous
articles of merchandise imported into the states, in the highest degree
unnecessary. These being the produce and manufacture of foreign nations, the
people are extremely unwise in making a general and liberal use of them. In
doing this they give a great deal of valuable and hard earned property away for
things of no real value; and while they thus impoverish themselves they
contribute largely to the emolument of other nations, who possibly one day or
another may scourge the states with the money which they now profusely give
them for considerations of little worth. Motives of patriotism and of policy
ought to induce the people to oeconomise better. However, as considerations of
public utility and benefit have little or no influence on the minds of those
whose views center in themselves, and whose objects are the gratification of
their vanity and their apperites; and as the people have been long habituated
to the use of many supersluous and frivolous articles of foreign produce and
manufacture, it will probably be thought not advisable to lay a prohibition on
their importation; but I conceive a higher duty should be laid on them than on
necessary articles; and that for two reasons -- the one of which is, it would
tend to lessen their use and importation; and the other is, they are a proper
medium, by which to apply to the pockets of the rich and opulent for money for
the services of the public.

Such has been the perplexed situation of the government of the United States,
that no system or uniform rule respecting their importations could be formed
and established by legislative authority; and although it is a maxim with many
that trade will regulate itself, yet the experience of this country teaches us
that views of private advantage with the merchants, oftentimes carry them
beyond the interest of the public, and in many instances pushes them beyond
their own; so that no rule such as would best promote the public welfare, can
ever be expected will be adopted by the merchants or take place in the common
course of mercantile business; and indeed the experience of all commercial
nations proves that the interest and views of individuals are so discordant
among themselves, and in many instances and many respects so opposed to the
interest of the whole with respect to importations in a particular manner, that
to suffer the commerce of a nation to be prosecuted under the idea of its
regulating itself, it would be the means of ruining the merchants and of
injuring in a special manner the national interest and welfare; trade never
regulated itself except with respect to the prices of merchandise in market.

The natural sources of the wealth of the United States, and the general
interests of the people therefore require the aid of the powers of government
for their encouragement, support and protection; by confining importations from
foreign nations to such necessary articles of produce and manufacture as the
states do not furnish. By laying a restraint on the too free importation of
such articles of produce, but especially manufactures, as the states are
capable of producing and manufacturing, that they may have an opportunity of
being brought forward; and on the too free importation and use of foreign
luxuries and frivolities.

III. To give employment and support to the merchant, mariner, mechanic, etc.
is another end and design of commerce, and an object to be had in view in
forming the general regulations of trade.

The private emoluments of trade are of great consequence, and as they are of a
diffusive nature and go to the support of a considerable proportion of the
inhabitants, who as seamen, mechanics and laborers depend on the merchants for
employment; and as the acquisitions of commerce are drawn out of the industry
of the people, it is a matter of essential difference whether the profits of
trade are acquired by foreigners, drawn out of the country and applied to the
support of the subjects of foreign nations, or whether they are acquired by the
subjects or citizens of the states, and by that means retained, added to the
stock of national wealth, and applied to the support of those citizens who are
dependent on commerce for employment.

This is an object which it appears to me the states have hitherto entirely
overlooked; for they have seemed to vie with each other in granting
encouragements to foreign merchants to reside and establish mercantile houses
in them. Some few circumscribed and unimportant benefits result to a mercantile
town by crouding it with merchants; but no general and national advantages are
derived from an unnecessary number of merchants, even if they are subjects or
citizens. But the advantages of increasing foreign merchants in a country or a
town, are by no means equal to the disadvantages which smally take place. They
circulate a little money it is true among the people in the course of business;
but this is no more than the merchants of the states would do. They acquire
property by trade out of the industry of the people, and draw it out of the
country into other nations. This the merchants of the states would not do;
whatever property they acquired would be retained, which in its revolutions
would revert back to the benefit of those who produced the property by their
labor. Wherein then consists the advantage of employing foreigners in the
commercial business of the United States? For my own part, I must confess
whether it proceeds from ignorance or prejudice, or not, I cannot see any
advantage in it; but on the other hand I see, or at least imagine I see,
numberless important disadvantages and prejudicial consequences flowing
therefrom. Neither can I see any necessity for it. The states require nothing
more of their merchants than to exchange their surplus productions for such
articles of foreign production as they need on the best and most advantageous
terms; and surely there are men enough in the states of sufficient property and
competent knowledge and skill in mercantile matters, to transact all the
necessary commercial business of the states; men who are natives of the country
-- who have no attachments to any other -- who would retain all the emoluments
of trade, and apply them to the benefit of the citizens; then certainly there
can be no necessity or special reason for calling in the aid and assistance of
foreign merchants.

Were the foreign mercantile houses established in the United States, but few
in number, it would scarcely demand a serious consideration; but this is not
the case; most of the states have foreign merchants residing in them, and in
the southern states the greater part of their mercantile business is engrossed
by foreigners; consequently most of the acquisitions of property by the
commerce of these states is drawn out of the country into foreign nations. What
the annual amount of this is cannot be ascertained; but when we consider the
quantity of goods sold by foreign merchants, the advance price generally put on
them together with the amount of freights, which in this course of trade is
naturally secured to foreign ships, we must be convinced that it is of
magnitude and worthy of attention.

Great Britain by the measures which it has taken through the indulgence of the
states, and I believe I may justly add their ill policy, has engrossed and
secured every profitable advantage which is to be derived from the commerce of
the states. From the avails of the labor of our husbandmen does Great Britain
derive support for her merchants, manufacturers and seamen. They are literally
hewers of wood and drawers of water to that nation, and in consequence of this
servile and humiliating state of trade, the citizens of the United States are
left destitute of the means of support; many of their merchants have been
crowded out of business and bankrupted; many of their seaman have either been
forced from home or reduced to the necessity of begging the most servile
offices on shore; and thousands of mechanics have been driven abroad to solicit
that support from foreign nations which their own country could not afford them.

Such indulgencies and such a preference ought not to be granted by the United
States to any nation whatever. To Great Britain the last. Every man of common
understanding throughout the states must know that Great Britain as a nation is
an enemy to this country, and is making use of every means in its power to ruin
the interests of the United States, and to bring about an opportunity of
re-establishing a dominion over them. The apparent friendly disposition which
may have been shown by the nation, are but the smiles of a false friend; so
long as the advantages which are now derived from the commerce of the United
States shall be continued to Great Britain, so long may its spirit of enmity be
restrained within bounds; but no longer after such monopolizing advantages
cease, than until a favorable opportunity offers of employing its power against
the states with a good prospect of success. And I believe it would not be doing
violence to truth were I to add, that the same spirit of prejudice and enmity
which prevails in the British nation, predominates in the breast of most if not
every British merchant residing in the states; the number of whom is so great,
that should the country be again involved in a war, it would find a formidable
enemy where it ought to look for friends and supports.

I would not be understood to mean by this that every British merchant residing
in the states is such an enemy as to be anxious for an opportunity of drawing
his sword on their citizens. Mercantile connections will for a time, so long as
private interest can be promoted thereby, sheath the sword of the bitterest
enemy. But it cannot be supposed that these people have the interest and
welfare of the United States in view as an object. Their view primarily is to
advance their own private interest; and secondarily is to promote the interest
of the nation to which they belong. Their friendship therefore, I was going to
observe, would be co-existent and coequal with the benefits they derive from
the country, but the events of the late war prove the contrary.

It must I apprehend, be deemed by every man who duly considers the subject,
extremely unwise and impolitic for the United States to throw such pecuniary
advantages as they have done into the hands of Great Britain, who is a known
and avowed enemy to their interests and political existence, and the
continuance of whose peaceable disposition depending on contingencies, cannot
be relied upon.

I entertain moreover an opinion that giving so much of the mercantile interest
of the states as is given into the hands of the British merchants, has had, and
will continue to have, an ill influence on the policy of the nation.

In republican governments public measures are much under the influence of
popular clamor, which is often excited and carried to a great height by men of
intrigue. Merchants by their knowledge of men and things -- by the weight which
property gives them, and by an influence over the minds of the people in
consequence of mercantile connections, dependencies, obligations, acquaintance,
etc. are better qualified for, and in fact often do influence the people, and
excite popular clamor than any other class of men. To give therefore such a
weight and importance to foreigners in the mercantile interest of the nation as
would enable them by intrigue to injure it in its political views and
interests, is in my humble opinion putting the interest, tranquillity and safety
of the United States at too great a hazard.

If my ideas on this point are just, and I have fairly represented it, the
question which naturally arises thereupon is, how this state of the trade of
the United States is to be altered and the inconveniences resulting therefrom
to be remedied? In answer to which I would observe that I would not pretend to
determine how the measures which I should suggest would be conformable to the
treaties of commerce now subsisting between the United States and several
nations, but as there is no treaty of commerce between the states and Great
Britain, there can be no legal impediment in the way of it with respect to that
nation. The measure I would suggest in this case is that no foreigner be
permitted to establish a mercantile house in the United States or transact any
mercantile business in the states, except as a supercargo or transient
merchant, until he shall have first become a citizen agreeable to the laws of
naturalization; and that no merchant of the United States be permitted to be
connected with any foreign merchant or mercantile house, either as a partner,
agent or factor.

The ill effects of such restrictions on account of which objections might be
made, I conceive would be that in some of the states the present course of
business would be interrupted and the people laid under some inconveniences in
the sale of their produce, and possibly in the procuring their necessary
supplies; but I apprehend these inconveniences would be but temporary; trade
would soon settle in a regular channel. In those states where there is a
deficiency in their native merchants, there are nevertheless men of integrity
and knowledge sufficient to transact all their necessary mercantile business,
and if such should need pecuniary assistance there are men of property enough
in all the states to support their commercial it terests by affording the
necessary aids to their own merchants should such be requisite.

The salutary and beneficial effects of such measures would be that the profits
acquired by merchandise would be retained in the country; the improvement of
American ships in the freighting business be increased, and the American
merchant, seaman and tradesman find employment and support.

IV. To increase the circulating property of a nation, is another intention of
commerce, and an object in the general regulations of trade.

As the balance of the trade of the United States has ever, on the whole, been
against them, this maxim or rule, in its application to the commerce of the
States, has in view as its first object, the turning the balance of trade in
their favor.

The balance of trade being against the United States, distressing consequences
have followed. The circulating property having annually been drawn out of the
country, has left it destitute of the means of supplying the national treasury;
has put it out of the power of the debtor to pay his debts; has distressed and
embarrassed the merchant in the prosecution of his business; has reduced real
property to trifling considerations in money, and been the occasion of throwing
a great deal of real property into the hands of foreigners, from whence has
arose an additional prejudicial consequence, which is, that a large sum of
money is annually drawn out of the States for rents. To turn the balance of
trade therefore in favor of the United States, and relieve them from the
embarrassments and distresses which have taken place in consequence of the
balance of trade being against them, is an object of interesting importance to
their welfare, and demands particular attention, and the most strenuous
exertions.

From the first settlement of the country, down to the revolution, there was
some kind of necessity for a credit in Great Britain; because but very few
articles were manufactured, and at various periods, the produce of the country
was not sufficient to furnish the people with their necessaries, without such
an anticipation, and as the States were then a part of the British empire, no
public injury resulted therefrom. But since the independency of the States, and
the separation of their interests from the interests of every other nation,
they can depend on no other resources, but what they find within themselves, to
counterbalance the injury which they sustain by such a state of their trade.

A question therefore very naturally rises in a consideration of this point,
necessary to be determined before we proceed far, and that is, whether the
balance of the trade of the United States being against them at this period, is
the effect of necessity? For, if it be the consequence of an unavoidable
necessity, nothing further need be said about it; it is an evil which must be
submitted to, and borne.

This question is to be determined by the decision of another, which, though
the same in substance, is a little different with respect to order; and that
is, whether the produce of the United States exported to foreign markets, is
sufficient to purchase those articles of foreign produce and manufacture, which
are necessary for the use and consumption of the people? It is not in my power
at present, to make those accurate calculations, which would be necessary to
determine the question with precision, but from general appearances, and common
observations, I think, we cannot mistake in the conclusion.

When we come to detach from the usual importations of the States, articles of
luxury and superfluity in no respect necessary. Articles which are, and might
be produced and manufactured, and those which have for years been lying unfold,
on which an interest probably has annually been paid. And when, in addition to
these we consider the manufacturing spirit of late excited in the country, we
shall find sufficient reason to conclude, that whatever necessity the country
may formerly have been under to anticipate their productions, at this time, the
produce which is exported, is sufficient to procure in return, every article of
foreign produce and manufacture, necessarily wanted by the people, and to leave
a balance of considerable consequence. If so, there is no real necessity for
the balance of the trade of the United States being against them, and
consequently no prejudice could arise to the States, as a nation, or to any
individual (except speculators) were their importations, confined within the
bounds of their exportations. But even if this was not the case, if the
exportations of the States were not fully sufficient to procure every article
which may be supposed necessary, the prejudice done to the common interests of
the nation by incurring an annual debt, is far greater than any inconvenience
the people would be laid under, by any small deficiencies which might happen in
their necessary supplies.

Another question arises, which may be necessary to consider; What are the
principal original causes of the balance of the trade of the United States
being against them? The causes, I conceive to be the monopolizing spirit of the
British, and the mercenary views of the American merchants.

The British merchants, well aware of the importance of the commerce of the
United States, to the commercial interest of Great Britain, as soon as peace
was restored to the two countries, in order to be beforehand of the merchants
of other nations, and to engross the trade, immediately established mercantile
houses in every part of the States, where an establishment could be made to any
advantage, offering at the same time, extensive credit to the American
merchants. The merchants of the States availed themselves of these offers, and
imported, not only over supplies in necessary articles, but immense sums in
costly, superfluous, and frivolous articles of merchandise; so that the country
was at once, between them both, over-stocked with necessary, and unnecessary
goods.

The inconveniences, and general injuries attending the first excessive
importations after the peace, might have been surmounted, in a great measure,
before this day, could importers of goods have stoped where they where, but
they could not. Their assortment of goods soon became broken; a large amount
lay unfold; and they were deeply in debt. In order therefore, to preserve their
custom, to vend their unsaleable goods, and support their business until events
should enable them to discharge their obligations, they have found themselves
under a necessity of continuing their importations. In consequence of which,
the balance of trade has continued to be against the States.

The importation of goods on credit, I conceive to be extremely prejudicial to
the interest of the United States in a variety of particular respects.

1st. The view of the merchant in his importations, having such an indulgence,
is to get what property he can into his hands, in order to enlarge his
business; he therefore, never consults the interest and necessity of the
people, but their humor and vanity, and accordingly, imports such articles as
he imagines will please their fancy, and sell to a profit. Hence it is, that
very large amounts in superfluous and frivolous merchandise are annually
imported, much beyond the necessity and abilities of the people. I know it is
often said, by way of palliation, that the people are under no obligation to
purchase superfluous and trifling goods, and thereby embarrass their
circumstances, let there be ever so many in the country. This is true, and it
is equally true that Eve was under no obligation to have received the fruit
when offered her. The experience of all countries, and all ages, prove the
irresistible power of every kind of temptations. When the merchants therefore,
offers the people such kind of goods, as serve to gratify a spirit of vanity
and ostentation, offers them at low prices and on credit, which he is obliged
to do, in order to get them off his hands, it becomes a temptation too mighty
to be resisted; people will accept of the offers, and by that means, contribute
to the public embarrassments, by distressing their own interests in such a
manner (in many instances) that, as the final consequences prove to be, it
would have been much better for themselves, and the public, had such goods
never have been seen. 2d. Goods imported on credit, come at an advanced price.
The merchants in Europe always in fixing a price on the goods which they fell
on credit, consider the failures that may happen, as well as the difference
between credit and prompt payment. This on the quantity of goods imported
annually into the United States, amounts to a sum of importance. And 3d. As
there are but few instances of punctuality in the discharge of debts due from
the merchants of the States, to the merchants in Europe, interest takes place
-- compound interest succeeds, and in many instances, continued so long, that
by the time an account is closed and the debt discharged, twice as much
property is exported out, as was imported into the country.

Notwithstanding these obviously prejudicial circumstances, which attend the
importation of goods on credit, it is strenuously insisted on by many that
credit is of advantage, as it facilitates commerce.

There are circumstances, I will admit, which render credit not only not
prejudicial, but advantageous. Domestic credit for instance, is no way
detrimental to the interest of the public, because the property still remains
in the nation, and it is very often of benefit to the interest of individuals.
Foreign credit also is of no disadvantage, and often of public benefit,
provided the property obtained on credit can be, and is improved in the
advancement of an interest at home, whereby the debt can be discharged, and a
profit saved; or in the prosecution of some other foreign business, productive
of advantages sufficient to counterbalance the disadvantages attending the
credit. The balance of the trade of Great Britain with some nations, is against
her; but, as the property obtained on credit is made use of, and applied to the
advancement of some profitable interests, (...) which a profit is secured, it
is so far from being an injury, that it contributes to national emolument. But
to argue from hence, that the United States derive an advantage from being
credited with European manufactures, which are articles of use and consumption,
which are incapable of improvement, and which are not applied to the
advancement of any other profitable interest; and this credit to a greater
amount than the productions of the country for exportation, to me, appears the
height of absurdity and false reasoning.

From these brief and desultory remarks, I think we may rationally draw the
following conclusions, viz. 1st. That the balance of trade being against the
United States, they are (as a natural consequence thereof) greatly embarrassed
and distressed, both in their public and private interests, and therefore, to
alter this state of trade, and turn the balance in favor of the States, the
most effectual measures of government should be adopted, together with the
patriotic exertions of the people. 2d. The balance of trade against the states
is not the effect of necessity. Their productions for foreign market being
fully sufficient to procure every necessary article or foreign produce and
manufacture. 3d. The balance of trade against the States, originates in the
private, mercenary views of the merchants, and is supported by the vanity of
the people. 4th. So long as the British merchants are permitted to introduce
whatever kind and quantity of goods they please into the States, and the
merchants of the States to import goods on credit, without restraint, so long
will the balance of trade remain against them. For the monopolising spirit of
the British, and the speculating spirit of the American merchants, would
forever overrun the resources and productions of the country, let them be what
they will. And 5th. On the whole we may draw this further conclusion, that as
there are so many powerful, private interests and motives opposed to the true
interests of the United States, in their trade, some decided measures become
necessary to confine their imports within the bounds of their exports, and to
turn the balance of trade in their favor.

Several measures which might be taken would conduce to this end, and be
attended with great and good effects; such, as the encouragement and support of
industry, economy and the useful arts; a discouragement on the use of foreign
luxuries and superfluities, and a prohibition on the establishment of foreign
mercantile houses. But after all this, one great cause of this national evil
would still remain. Suppose then (I propose it as a matter of question) the
national legislature should pass an act of this nature, viz. that from and
after the term of five years, no debt contracted in Europe, for any kind of
manufactures, should be recoverable by law in the United States? What would be
the probable effects of such a law? Would it not stimulate the people to
exertions in the manufacturing business? Would it not excite those who are
concerned in the European trade, to make such preparations and arrangements, as
to admit of the operation of the law without inconvenience? And would not the
idea of such a law taking place at a fixed time, produce such exertions and
preparations, as to render the execution of it unnecessary? I should suppose
such would be the effects, and I should imagine also, that no prejudice of
either a public, or private nature would take place in consequence of it. For I
think every man who considers the subject with any degree of attention, must be
convinced that the productions of the country are sufficient, and more than
sufficient to procure the people every necessary of foreign manufacture, and
that all that is necessary to reduce the importations of the States, within the
circumference of their exportations is, to alter the present course of the
mercantile business.

Whether such a law in fact, would be the most elegible and proper to answer
the necessary purposes, I will not take upon myself to determine; but I would
observe, that a desperate political evil, like a natural disorder, requires a
desperate remedy, and on that ground, if no other, justifiable. To turn the
balance of trade in favor of the United States, is a matter of the utmost
consequence to the future welfare of the nation; and could this point be once
fixed, importations restrained within the compass of exportations, it would lay
a foundation for the rapid increase of national wealth: For, if the States
could once get rid of the expense of advance prices on their goods imported, of
an interest which is annually added, and of the inconveniences which they
suffer on account of the sums of money which are annually drawn out for the
rent of real property. If, in consequence of such restraints, the exertions and
economy of the people should render a foreign credit unnecessary; and the
merchants were to arrange their business in such a manner as to export the
produce of the States to the most advantageous markets; to purchase returns of
the necessary kinds, at the lowest prices, and with the fewest incidental
expenses, the advantages would not stop at any one point, but be continually
progressive.

Besides this, there are other measures which would tend to increase the wealth
of the nation. One of which is, to secure the benefit of the freighting
business, as far as it can be done consistent with the existing treaties of
commerce, and the circumstances of the several states.

A nation derives many benefits from commerce, but all the real profit which
accrues by its trade, consists in the freights made by its vessels; the
advantage which a merchant makes in the sale of the produce of the country in
foreign markets, is seldom more than sufficient to pay the freight and
incidental charges; and the profits which he makes on returns are drawn from
the people and not from any other nation. It adds nothing to the common stock;
but freights outward, admitting a cargo, sells for sufficient profit to pay the
freight, which is always to be supposed are drawn from the consuming nation and
becomes an accumulation of wealth to the nation the vessel freighted belongs
to; and freights home, if by the vessels belonging to the importing nation
although they are ultimately drawn from the people, yet the amount is retained;
whereas if freights home are performed by foreign vessels, the amount is drawn
out and goes to the emolument of a foreign nation. The freighting business
therefore is an object of consequence to the United States and merits
particular consideration.

From a false idea of freedom in trade, and considering it as the foundation of
national wealth, the states have thrown the doors of their commerce open to all
nations without limitation or restriction, the consequence of which has been
the loss of freights to their vessels, together with all the essential
advantages of commerce. The United States have given greater indulgencies to
foreigners in their trade than (I believe) are granted by any other nation.
They permit a foreign ship to freight into their ports cargoes not only of the
growth, produce and manufacture of the nation or country to which they belong
but of any other nation whatever. They permit also foreign ships to freight out
not only to the nation to which such ships belong and their dependencies, but
to any other nation or country, whereby the trade to diverse free ports opened
for the reception of American produce and the benefit of the United States,
has fallen into the hands of foreign, particularly British merchants, in a
considerable degree, and become a new acquisition to the commerce of Great
Britain. Besides these, the states have indulged the British nation so far in
its illiberal and monopolizing humor as to permit it an unlimited, undefined
and exclusive right to the enjoyment of all the advantages and emoluments of
the trade between the United States and the British West India islands.

Upon a conjectural calculation the freights between the United States and the
British dominions in America, amount to more than 100,000 l. annually, and from
the southern ports three quarters of the freights between this country and
Europe is performed by British vessels, together with a large proportion out of
the northern states. One third of the value of the produce thus freighted
probably goes to the emolument of Great Britain under the denomination of
freight, insurance and incidental charges.

To retain the advantages of the freighting business and to render it one means
of increasing the wealth of the nation in such ways and methods as in the best
and most eligible manner would accommodate the interests and circumstances of
the different states, will I conceive, be attended with no small difficulty,
for which reason I feel a diffidence in saying any thing on the subject; but as
I have begun, I will proceed and give you my thoughts thereon; and in order to
come at the most rational conclusions on this point, I would state two or three
facts.

1st. The United States have not ships at present sufficient to freight the
whole of their productions to market: but with what ships they already have
they might freight much more than they do; and in three years time they might
increase the number of their ships to such a degree as to be able to freight
the whole of their produce should sufficient encouragement and support be given.

2d. There are American ships already built sufficient to freight into the
United States every article of foreign produce and manufacture necessary for
the people; and this service they would perform were it secured to them, at
least as far as treaties of commerce would admit of.

3d. The British West India islands, Bermuda, etc. are dependent on the United
States for many of their necessary supplies. This dependence is founded in
nature, and will exist as long as the countries exist.

From this brief statement of a few facts I would observe, 1st. That as there
are not at this time American ships sufficient to freight the whole of the
produce of the United States to the European markets, I conceive it would not
be to the general interest to prohibit the freighting of foreign ships, and I
am much at a loss to determine in my own mind, what judicious measure could be
adopted, to give a proper preference to American ships in the freighting
business. If any extraordinary impositions should be laid on British vessels,
it would only produce retaliating measures, and if a tax was laid on the
freighter of a British ship, it would be a real hardship in all such cases,
where American ships could not be obtained; so that it appears to me, no
positive preference by law can with propriety, or to public advantage be given.
It must, I think, be left to the patriotism, and at the option of the people.
But I conceive, such regulations as tend to destroy those connections which
blend the commercial interests of Great Britain, with those of the United
States, and to give the mercantile business into the hands of the merchants of
the States, would at the same time, destroy the original cause of the great
preference and employment which has been given to British ships, in the trade
between the two nations. American merchants, having no connections of interest
with the merchants of Great Britain, would naturally give a preference to
American ships. An imposition of duties on British ships I conceive, ought to
be regulated by the laws of Great Britain; for extraordinary impositions and
their consequent retaliations, have neither end nor bounds.

One measure which appears necessary to be adopted is, that British ships from
Great Britain, or Ireland, should be permitted to freight out of the United
States to those kingdoms only, and to no where else; because, if they are
permitted to freight even to their own American dominions, it would destroy the
effect of such regulations, as I apprehend, will be found necessary, respecting
the trade between the States and the British dominions in America; and because
by circumscribing the freights of British vessels in such a manner, other
freights, which are now taken up by those vessels, will be reserved for the
vessels of the United States.

2d. As the United States have now, and probably always will have vessels
sufficient to freight into them every necessary foreign production, the
freights of foreign vessels into the United States, should be confined to the
produce and manufactures of those nations, to which they respectively belong.
This would give some advantage to the navigation and trade of the States; for
hitherto, foreign, particularly British vessels, have freighted quantities of
merchandise from various ports of other nations, whereby the freighting
business of the States is greatly injured and not only the freighting interest
in particular, but the mercantile interest in general; for, by this indulgence,
such quantities of many kinds of merchandise are at times introduced, as to
reduce their price and render them unsaleable, whereby the merchants suffer
great inconveniences, and heavy damages.

It is thought by many, I am sensible, that a great influx of goods into a
country, and their consequent low prices, is of public benefit. For my own part
I think otherwise. The diminution of the prices of goods, is the occasion of a
proportional larger consumption, very often to the extreme of licenciousness,
so that it seldom happens, that the amount of the general expenditures of a
nation, is much lessened by goods being sold at a reduced price. Besides, the
merchant must be essentially injured thereby, which I conceive is as
prejudicial to the interest of a nation to do, as to injure the agricultural,
or manufacturing interest. With equal propriety, might the merchant and
mechanic affirm, that the interest of the nation was promoted by the value of
the productions of the field being reduced in such a manner, that the
husbandman could not support and keep his interest good, as that the husbandman
should assert the nation was growing rich, because imported goods were so
reduced in price, that in consequence of it the merchant could not support this
business. The mercantile interest is of importance to a nation, and equally a
support to agriculture and manufactures, as they are to commerce. Those foreign
sources therefore of our supplies, whereby the freighting business of the
vessels of the United States is interfered with, and the merchants injured in
the sale and price of their merchandise, I conceive ought to be cut off by
prohibiting the importation of the produce and manufacture of any foreign
nation or country, by a foreign vessel, except those that belong to the nation
where such commodities are produced and manufactured.

3d. As the British islands in America are dependent on the United States for a
variety of their necessary supplies, and as this dependence is founded in the
nature of things, the States undoubtedly, have it in their power to prescribe
the mode in which they shall obtain supplies from hence. If Great Britain
should continue to refuse a treaty of commerce, and the admission of American
vessels into those ports, the States would have a right, as well as good
reason, to take such measures as eventually to produce a treaty, or secure to
themselves equal advantages in the trade.

Should the United States prohibit the exportation of those articles of
produce, which are suitable for the British West India markets, in British
bottoms, I apprehend they would be under the necessity of procuring their
supplies from those ports, where American produce in American vessels are
permitted. This was their mode of obtaining supplies before the last
prohibitory orders of the British ministry were issued, and had it not been for
the imbecility of the American government, they never would have been given; or
if given, would not have taken effect. And I conceive it to be a matter of very
little or no consequence to the commerce of the States, whether they freight
their produce to, and deliver it in St. Eustatius, or St. Christophers, a
freight is equally secured, which is the great object.

But, as the southern States make a great dependence on British merchants and
vessels, to purchase and carry off their produce, and as a total prohibition in
this case might lay them under some temporary inconveniences, I would suggest,
whether to lay British vessels from the West Indies, etc. under the same
restrictions that are laid on American vessels going to Turk's-Island for salt,
could not be proper, and as well adapted to the interest and circumstances of
the States, as any measure that would be proposed. An American vessel is
admitted at Turk's-Island in ballast only, paying a tonnage of two shillings
and sixpence sterling.

I apprehend, if such a resolution should be laid, some vessels would import
money for the purchase of their cargoes; at the same time, it would diminish
the number of British vessels in the American trade, and open a door for the
introduction of American vessels into the business, without producing any
immediate consequences, which might be the case, should the present course of
business be violently, or suddenly interrupted.

It is, that the full effects of such a restriction might be produced, that I
conceive British vessels from Great Britain and Ireland, should not be
permitted to freight out of the States to the West Indies, etc. -- Again,

It appears to me to be extremely impolitic, and much against the interest of
the United States, to contribute to the support of rival interests, which, in
some instances, they have hitherto done.

Nova Scotia is so situated and circumstanced, that it is capable of rivaling
the United States, in their ship-building and whale-fishery, with the supports
which it derives from them; but without such supports, I conceive, those
interests would never flourish in that province.

Ship-building in the United States, both for their own service, and foreign
markets, is an object of importance, and an interest, which merits support and
protection: They cannot therefore, with any reason, or regard to their own
interest, supply the deficiencies of other nations or States, in such a manner,
as to enable them to prejudice this interest. Nova Scotia has some advantages,
and natural resources, well adapted to the interest of ship-building, yet, it
is dependent for iron, carpenters and provisions, particularly flour, for the
support of this, as well as other interests. Some carpenters, and some
provision may be had from Great-Britian and Ireland; but iron, and a full
supply of carpenters, as well as provisions, are drawn from the States.

The States it is true derive some present advantages from supplying
Nova Scotia with provisions and iron; and it may be a matter of question,
whether the advantages or disadvantages are the greater? To this I would
observe, 1st. That Nova Scotia is a neighboring rival power, and its inimical
disposition toward the States avowed, and universally known. To contribute
therefore to the increase of this power, and render it the more able to assist
in disturbing the tranquillity, and endangering the safety of the States,
appears to me to be impolitic, and of sufficient weight to supercede
considerations of a trifling pecuniary advantage. 2d. If ship building in
Nova Scotia does not exceed its own service and employment, no prejudice will
result to the States therefrom: But if by the supplies of carpenters and
provision received from the States, the price of labor should be so reduced as
to enable that province to build cheaper, and obtain a preference on that
account in the sale of ships, the States would be prejudiced, and for that
reason should prohibit such supports. This however, on the whole, considered
independent of and detached from other interests, might admit of a doubt in the
minds of some; but when we add to this the whale fishery, which flourishes in
Nova Scotia, by the supports in men and provision received from the States, I
think it must manifestly appear that the interests of the United States are
injured by the supplies afforded to that province.

The whale fishery is an interest of importance to the States: It employs a
great number of people; produces a considerable annual sum out of the sea, and
always has brought into the country large sums in money. The little island of
Nantucket, unimportant in itself, contributes as largely to the wealth of the
nation as any spot of ground of its bigness in the United States, perhaps more
so. It has formerly employed about two hundred fail of vessels; supported from
four to five thousand inhabitants, and produced at a moderate computation,
about forty thousand pounds sterling annually, wholly by this business. At
present the business is not so great, but is increasing; and might with
suitable encouragements and supports arrive at and exceed its former importance.

Great Britain before the revolution was the best, and indeed the only market
this country had for its oil. But in order to suppress the interest of the
States, and to support Nova Scotia in its rivalry, Great Britain, since the
peace, has charged oil imported from the States with such a heavy duty, as to
render the market unprofitable. The continuation of this imposition; and other
discouragements on the consumption of oil imported from the States into
Great Britain, I apprehend, depends principally on one circumstance, which is
this; If the whaling business in Nova Scotia should bid fair to arrive at
something of consequence, these discouragements will be continued; but if it
should dwindle into insignificance, they will be removed; for Great Britain, if
I am not mistaken, is under a necessity of completing its supply of oil from
America; at least I know of no other foreign resources. And whether the whale
fishery in Nova Scotia flourishes or not, I apprehend depends on the views and
measures of the States. Should they prohibit the exportation of provision, and
the emigration of whalemen to Nova Scotia, I conceive it would reduce it to a
state of unimportance.

Some provision it produces, and some it may import from Europe; but these
supplies are precarious and inadequate to the support of a great number of
seamen and mechanics. Flour in a particular manner in Nova Scotia is dependent
on the States for. And,

The knowledge necessary to prosecute the whale fishery to advantage, is on
this side the Atlantic, confined to the people of the United States. Without a
support in whalemen from the States, Nova Scotia would fail in this business.
It is now carried on by the people from the States, and for its future support
and increase every artifice is made use of to draw whalemen away to that
province.

Whether it would be to the interest and advantage of the States to stop these
supplies, may be fully determined, I conceive, by one consideration only.

The only advantage the States derive from supporting the whale fishery in
Nova Scotia, consists in the sale of a little provision. Let us see what this
amounts to. If that business should fail in Nova Scotia, a great part of the
whalemen now employed there would probably return again to the States. The
consumption of provision would therefore be still the same. Besides, a
whaleman's annual industry may be computed to amount, on an average, at thirty
pounds sterling; his consumption of provision at not more than ten pounds. The
States therefore would acquire twenty pounds benefit by every whaleman
supported in them, which they deprive themselves of by supporting them in
Nova Scotia. From this consideration it is evident that the United States
injure themselves much, in contributing to the support of the whaling business
in Nova Scotia. And on the whole, when we consider the amount of the benefits
that the States derive from the supplies which they afford to Nova Scotia, in
mechanics, whalemen, provisions, etc. and on the other hand, the prejudices
resulting therefrom to the interests of the States, by their rivalry in the
whale fishery, and in ship building; and in consequence thereof, the increase
of a neighboring inimical power, we shall find the advantages to bear no
proportion to the disadvantages.

The United States, it is true, have no right to interfere with the advantages
which Nova Scotia derives from its government, situation and natural resources;
but they undoubtedly have a good right to withhold such supports as would
enable Nova Scotia to injure them.

Besides these, Nova Scotia derives other supports from the United States,
which I conceive is prejudicial to their interests. Fish of all kinds have been
imported into the United States from that province: This is manifestly wrong,
because it deprives the cod fishery of the United States (which is an important
interest) of so much support that ought to be given it, and contributes to the
support of a foreign interest, for which no good reason can be assigned. The
importation of fish therefore of every kind from any foreign nation or country
into the United States, I conceive should be prohibited.

The West India trade also, of Nova Scotia, is greatly supported by the United
States, particularly by the supplies of lumber which it receives from them.
This is impolitic, because every cargo of lumber furnished Nova Scotia,
deprives the States of a freight. But this will probably be considered in the
regulations of trade between the United States and the British West India
islands. If it should be found proper to admit British vessels from the
West Indies, Bermuda, etc. in ballast only, for the purpose of taking cargoes
out of the States for those islands, the same reasons for this permission I do
not think will hold good with respect to the supplying Nova Scotia with cargoes
for the support of its navigation, because it interferes with the navigation of
the United States. In short, as the United States want nothing from
Nova Scotia, and Nova Scotia wants nothing from them, but what in point of
interest or policy is injurious to supply them with, I can see no reason for
continuing any commercial intercourse with that province.

Furthermore -- The States have a rival in their navigation, where from the
natural state of things, it could not have been expected.

Formerly the States were carriers for the West India Islands; but the table is
now turned, and the West Indies have become carriers for the States; and from
the support which the British merchants receive by the sole enjoyment and
benefit of the trade between the two countries, they are enabled not only to
purchase and improve, but to build vessels. Many have already been built, and
many more are on hand.

This is an object worthy of attention; for it would be much against the true
interest of the States, and contrary to the natural order of things, for them
to contribute to the support of ship building, and the interest of navigation
in the West Indies.

V. A basis on which to establish a national revenue, is one public advantage
of commerce; and a material object in the general regulations of trade.

Much money is required by all governments for national services. The safety
and welfare of the nation, and a due administration of justice, cannot be
provided for and supported without. And although individuals may, and often do
grudge the money they pay to the public, and consider it a kind of oppression,
and so much money thrown away; yet, they should consider that the security and
support of private interest, depends on the support and protection of the
general interests of the nation; and therefore, whatever money is required for
and applied to these purposes, is but a contribution to the private interest of
individuals.

Did the people rightly consider this; did they thoroughly understand the
intimate connection and mutual dependence subsisting between the general
interest of the nation, and the private interest of individuals, it would
reconcile them to the necessary regulations of commerce, and to any judicious
system of revenue which was calculated to draw money from them for public
services, upon principles of justice and equality, and in eligible rational
modes.

But it is necessary that the demands of government be proportionate to the
abilities of the people, and the quantity of money in the nation. If a nation
possesses no money, it is certain none can be collected -- if there are but
five millions of dollars among the peoples, it would be in vain to require ten
millions. If the rich only have money, the rich only are to be applied to.
Government in short, must require money from those who have it, and that in
proportion to the quantity which the people may be in the possession of. And it
is necessary also that government should raise money from the people in such
modes, and by such methods as are equitable, eligible, and not oppressive.

This country in most of its parts has been accustomed to raise public money by
a direct tax on real property, which, when the expenses of government were
small, and the taxes but trifling, the oppressive nature of this mode was
scarcely felt by any; but since the expenses of the United States have arose to
a considerable magnitude, it has operated with great inequality, and in many
instances, extremely oppressive and distressing.

That the people should pay in proportion to the real and visible property
which they respectively possess, appears to be a fundamental and governing
principle in the doctrine of taxation, without considering whether it is
competent, or more than competent to the original design of property, which is
the comfortable subsistence and support of the proprietor and his family. Every
man is entitled to this benefit from his property, in preference to every other
consideration. If this be just, it will follow as a necessary consequence, that
to lay a heavy tax on the property of those who derive no other benefit from it
than a bare subsistence, and that perhaps not a comfortable one, is oppressive
and distressing on such individuals. Whether it be just or unovoidable is a
matter of further consideration.

The inhabitants of most countries, are, with respect to property, divided into
three classes: The rich, the middling, and the poor.

The rich are enabled to live in ease, and add nothing to the wealth of a
nation by their own labor; and in proportion to the value of their property,
are able to add an annual sum to their original stock, besides supporting
themselves and families in affluence. The rich however, are not a useless
unimportant class of citizens. They are able to establish and carry on many
kinds of business of public advantage and utility, which those in middling or
low circumstances could not do. But at the same time, the immediate advantages
and profits of such kinds of business go to the emolument of the rich man. The
rich also are of advantage to the public, as they are enabled to give
employment and support to the poor -- those who have nothing to depend on for a
livelihood but their labor. But then, the property of the rich derives as
great or greater advantage from the labors of the poor, as the poor acquire to
themselves.

The middling class of people, those who have some small property, by their
industry and frugality procure a support for themselves and families -- some
but a scanty -- some a comfortable support, and some perhaps may add a small
sum to their property annually. This class of the people are the most numerous,
and promote the wealth and strength of a nation, by cultivating and improving
the face of the country, and by populating it with a hardy race of industrious
citizens, while in general, the only benefit they derive from their property
and labor, is a bare subsistence and support.

The poor, as they are wholly dependent on the rich for employment, so the rich
have it always in their power to fix the price of the labor of the poor; and
if we consider the condition of the rich, and take the trouble of looking into
the houses of the poor; observe their subsistence, their clothing and general
mode of living, we shall find convincing evidence, that the profitable parts of
the labor of the poor are accumulated by the rich.

If this be a just representation; if the middling class of the people
accumulate little or no wealth by their property and labor, and if the profits
of the labor of the poor are accumulated in one way, and in another by the
rich, then I think it may be rationally concluded, that on the principles of
justice, the rich are to be applied to by government for money, for the
services of the public, to the relief, if not to the exoneration of the other
classes of the people.

There are many within the compass of my knowledge who have a small property,
which to be taxed in proportion to the property of many rich people, according
to the common rules of apportionment, would produce a considerable sum, equal
in some instances to what is received from many other people worth ten times as
much. This is unavoidable in the common modes of taxation; for no general rule
can be devised, to apply to the various kinds and different value of property
with equality; and some kinds of property in some circumstances cannot be
touched. Such modes therefore which operate with inequality, and are productive
of distress on particular classes of the people, must be considered as
erroneous in their principles; and such I conceive are the modes of taxation
generally established in the States.

To more fully explain and illustrate my ideas on this point, I will propose a
case which I believe is much more than a supposeable one.

A. has a property in lands and stock of the value of five hundred pounds, on
which a tax is laid of ten pounds. This property with his own labor produces a
comfortable support for himself and family, and nothing more, which we will
suppose amounts to one hundred pounds. B. has a property of the same kind,
worth five thousand pounds, on which a tax is laid in the same proportion of
one hundred pounds. This property, with an equal proportion of labor, will
produce one thousand pounds, which is nine hundred pounds more than sufficient
to support his family, in the manner A. supports his. The additional expense of
labor, necessary to be performed on the larger estate, we will compute at four
hundred pounds, which leaves a nett profit of five hundred pounds. From this
state of the case, which I believe is just, it appears that B. could pay five
hundred and ten pounds into the public treasury, with as little prejudice to
his interest, as A. could ten pounds. But, by the common rules of assessment,
he pays only one hundred pounds, by which A. sinks ten pounds of his property
annually, and B. adds four hundred pounds to his. This is the general operation
of the common modes of taxation, and methods of raising money for public
services, adopted by most or all the States, which on account of their
inequality and oppressive consequences in their application, ought to be
condemned.

There is an instance which occurs that further illustrates this point, and in
my mind places it in a striking point of light. This was the sinkage of the
continental money.

I think it must appear evident to every one, that had that money been sunk by
a tax on real property, in the common modes of taxation, the property of
seven-eights of the people, or at at least a very great proportion, would have
fallen into the hands of the other eighth: But by its sinking as it did, those
people who had acquired it by exorbitant profits, without affecting their real
property, paid it without being distressed. Some instances it is true there
were of injustice and oppression taking place, in consequence of the
depreciation and final sinkage of that money; but these were so few in
comparison with what would have happened by its being sunk by a tax on
property, that on the whole it must be considered as the most just and eligible
mode that could have been devised to pay that debt.

Because therefore, no general rule of assessment can be so calculated as to
apply with propriety and equality to the property of the people, without
producing numberless instances of oppression and distress; the necessity of
resorting to other methods of raising public moneys, appears obvious; and among
other proper ways and means, a tax on articles of importation is evidently one.
By this, application is made directly to the pockets of the rich; the amount of
the money paid to the public is optional and voluntary; the effect is not
sensibly felt; and it is also the most summary, eligible and sure method of
collecting money for the services of the nation.

A tax of this kind, and to be considered by government, as its principal
resource would, in my humble opinion, go farther toward the peaceable and firm
establishment of the new form of government, than all the revisions and
amendments, which could render the constitution more perfectly agreeable to the
ideas of the opponents; for I know of nothing more really feared by the most
numerous part of the people, than heavy taxes on their property, and for this
reason with others, I conceive the government will consider an impost, with the
addition of an excise, its principal, if not only resource, and never attempt a
land tax, except in cases of special emergency.

But, as an impost on foreign articles imported into the United States, may,
and I conceive, ought to be so calculated, as to answer a variety of beneficial
purposes besides supplying the national treasury, which I at first took notice
of; I would beg leave to explain and illustrate my ideas thereon, by
enumerating a number of imported articles, annexing thereunto a proportion of
duties, upon the principle. I have all along proceeded upon.

Rum, brandy and geneva, per. gallon, 1s. Madeira wine 3s. claret, 1s. other
wines, arrack, hock, etc. in that proportion; Hyson tea, 3 s. per lb. Bohea tea
3d. other teas in proportion; brown sugar, 1-2 d. per lb. coffee, cocoa and
pimento, 1-2 d. per lb. molasses, 1-2 d. per gallon; Lisbon lemons, 1 s. per
hundred, other fruit in that proportion; salt, 2 d. per bushel; iron shovels
and spades, 9 s. per dozen; gun powder, 6 d. per lb. sweet oil,

ARTICLES at 15 per cent. on prime cost.
Gold and silver lace, gold watches, embroidered cloth, looking glasses of more
than 30 s. value, confectionaries, perfumeries, lotions, wash balls, ostrich
feathers, artificial flowers.

ARTICLES at 10 per cent. on prime cost.
Silver, pinchbeck and shagreen cased watches, china ware, carpets, cambrick,
lawns, muslin, gauze, catgut, etc. silk and thread lace, silk cloth and
hosiery, ribbands, chintz, money scales and weights, coffin furniture, marble
slabs, grind-stones, brass and polished steel dogs, tongs and shovels, ivory
and plated handle knives and forks in cases, japaned servers, ivory sticked
ladies sans, Morocco pocket books, etc. brass and plated candlesticks, brass
sire fenders, brass and glass sconces, costly coat and vest buttons, snuff
boxes of more than 1 s. prime cost, prints, raisins, currants, figs, prunes,
almonds, olives, capers, anchovies, ketchup, etc.

ARTICLES at 5 per cent. on prime cost.
Cotton manufactures, except chintz, glass manufactures, excepting looking
glasses of more than 30 s. prime cost, silk handkerchiefs, silk thread, writing
paper, iron, brass, copper, steel and pewter manufactures, excepting such as
are otherwise enumerated, shot, fire arms, earthen ware, or porcelain,
excepting china, stone and other seals.

ARTICLES at 2 1-2 per cent on prime cost.
Linen, woollen and hemp manufactured cloths, and hosiery, linen thread, German
steel, books and stationary, not before particularly enumerated, including
maps, draughts, etc. spectacles, watch chains, chrystals, faces and keys,
stone, and paste, bolting clothes, bone and ivory combs, spices, drugs and
medicine.



In this enumeration and arrangement, I have not aimed at precision, or a great
degree of certainty and regularity. What I had principally in view, was to
explain my own ideas, respecting the purposes a duty on articles of importation
may be calculated to answer, which are 1st. To draw money from the rich and
opulent for public uses. 2d. To lessen the two general use of luxurious,
unnecessary and trifling articles of foreign production. And 3d. to encourage
and support the manufacturing interest of the United States.

Neither have I aimed at a full and complete enumeration, nor am I positive
with respect to the propriety of the arrangment, for I do not think my
information, relative to the present state of the manufactures, is competent to
determine with certainty the rate, or amount of duties which would be proper to
be laid on several articles in order to give the necessary support, and at the
same time, the best adapted to the circumstances of the people. But I conceive,
a duty on articles of importation, formed and established on the principles
here held forth, would be productive of essential advantages to the interest of
the nation.

The adoption of the ideas here suggested, in forming a system of revenue and
commerce, may probably, with sufficient reason be found, on examination to be
improper. They may prove to be absurd; or if not absolutely absurd, yet
objectionable, on many accounts, particularly as they may appear to have a
tendency to circumscribe commerce within too narrow limits. For my own part, I
have no idea of circumscribing trade (properly directed) with regard to its
extent, but of confining it to proper channels, and directing it to proper
objects; and if I have mistook the most suitable measures to answer these
purposes, I have missed my intention. But I must as yet, continue to think it a
mistaken idea which many entertain, that trade is the foundation of national
wealth, and that to extend it to extreme lengths, and carry it on in every
possible way in which it may be prosecuted, promotes the interest of the
nation, or finally will promote the interest of individuals.

Agriculture and manufactures, I consider as the sources and foundation of
national wealth. Commerce the handmaid, or medium, by which the surplus
productions of agriculture and manufactures are turned to the best account, and
rendered in the highest degree advantageous and profitable. Commerce therefore,
cannot exceed the bounds which agriculture and manufactures may affix, without
injuring the general interest of the nation, and without prejudicing the
interest of the merchants.

The United States, since the revolution, have fully experienced the
licentiousness of trade, and can witness the ruinous and distressing
consequences of it. They, as a nation, have suffered a great diminution of
property; and if we consider the number of bankruptcies, the languishing state
of trade, and the great complaints of the merchants throughout the States, we
shall find sufficient reason to conclude, that but very few have made trade as
beneficial to themselves as their hopes flattered them it would.

Such a regulation of trade therefore as will tend to restrain its licentious
operations, as will tend to support the mercantile, agricultural and
manufacturing interests of the United States and render it subservient on the
whole to the general welfare of the nation, must necessarily promote the
particular interest of those who are concerned in trade.

Foreign merchants and speculators may be frustrated in their views thereby,
but I conceive that to be a consideration not of sufficient consequence to the
interest of the United States, to supersede considerations and measures of
national utility and advantage.

Speculators belonging to the states, and those who are inclined to quit a
business in which they have been educated in order to commence merchants and
traders may also be disappointed in their wishes and expectations; but this is
not an object of public attention.

If my ideas are just on this point, an increase of merchants and traders in a
nation beyond what is necessary to transact its mercantile business and what
can obtain a support by it, is on the one hand of no benefit to the nation, as
the stock of national wealth receives no augmentation therefrom; and on the
other is essentially prejudicial to the commercial interest.

Regularity and a good degree of permanency in the mode of business and the
prices of merchandise, together with honorable dealing and punctuality, are
essential to the support of the interest of commerce, to a national reputation
and general confidence, and on the whole to the prosperity and advancement of
the commerce of a nation; and I know of nothing which tends to destroy such a
proper order of things in trade and to introduce confusion, perplexity and
embarrassment into the mercantile interest than supernumeraries in the
business; for which reason I conceive that although it is not consistent with the
principles and spirit of a free government, to lay prohibitions on persons
entering into any lawful business for the purpose of obtaining a livelihood;
yet that the commercial regulations should not be so calculated as to encourage
more people to enter into trade than is necessary to perform the business of
merchandise to the advantage of the public, and to the benefit of those who are
occupied therein.

Thus, sir, have I communicated in as brief a manner as I could, my ideas and
sentiments on the agriculture, manufactures, and commerce of the United States,
as they are connected with a national revenue; together with some of those
measures, which appear to me necessary to render them reciprocally beneficial
to each other, and mutually subservient to the welfare of the nation. In all
which I have no pretensions to infallibility. They are the result of my own
reflections on the subject, and I give them as a contribution to the general
stock of speculation.

The first (...) which the system of revenue and commerce, at first adopted and
put in operation by the national legislature, may make on the minds of the
people, will be attended with important consequences. If it be such as will
commend itself to the good sense and judgment of the people, such as shall
appear to be sounded in reason and good policy, it will be approved and
supported by them, notwithstanding it may be particularly more unfavourable to
the interest of some individuals than others. It will stop the mouths of
gainsayers to the constitution, and contribute most essentially to the
peaceable and firm establishment of the national government. But if it should
be with reason objectionable, either in its principles, or effects, it may
create a general uneasiness, and give the opponents a great opportunity to
disturb the public peace, by exciting jealousies, and instigating popular
clamor. And as the subject is capable of being exhibited in various points of
view; as various conclusions may be drawn; and various measures proposed; so I
conceive some advantages in framing the most perfect system, may be derived
from every representation, and every proposition which can be made. Some new
light may be thrown on the subject thereby; some new hint suggested, which may
serve as a clue, to the fullest and clearest investigation, and lead to the
most judicious conclusions.

With these views, and to this end, I have prevailed on myself to communicate
my sentiments and observations; and, if they should be found worthy of notice
-- if any thing capable of improvement, my most flattering hopes will be fully
answered. If not, I shall always enjoy the consolation of reflecting, that the
United States do not want my warmest wishes, for their happiness and welfare.

I have already intruded too far on your patience; but I would nevertheless,
beg leave to add a few transient and unconnected observations further, relative
to the POLICY of the United States.

AN EXCISE.
I HAVE before observed, that to lay a heavy tax on real property, and to make
it the principal resource of government, ought, if, possible, to be avoided.
Many, I am sensible, are of opinion, that an impost will be inadequate to the
necessities of government; yet, I must think, that most of the money which
could be drawn from the people with convenience, might be drawn in this way;
but at the same time, as one general principle which I have all along aimed at
supporting, would not have its weight and full effect without an excise, I
apprehend it ought to be included in the system of revenue. The principle I
allude to is, that the luxuries, superfluities, etc. made use of by the people,
should be considered and taxed as a proper medium of revenue.

It is an opinion which I have long entertained, that there are vices, follies,
extravagancies and vanity enough in all nations, to support their necessary
expenses, were they properly applied to, without taxing industry and other
national virtues. And as many of the superfluities, etc. made use of by the
people, are of the manufacture of the United States, and many other proper
objects of taxation, not within the limits of an impost, a system of revenue
would be imperfect were these not to be taxed by way of excise, or be charged
with a tax of some denomination.

And I am of opinion also, that an excise should not be laid on any imported
article; because, all the tax which ought to be laid on these, might as well be
collected at their entry, as to be at further expenses in collecting an
additional duty.

I would therefore, suggest the following particulars, as proper objects of
taxation by way of excise. This country distilled rum, brandy, geneva, whiskey,
cordial waters, etc. snuff, tobacco, loaf sugar, gold and silver plate,
jewellry, playing cards, hair powder, etc. The amount of a tax on these, to be
in proportion with the impost on the like classes of foreign articles, so as to
put them on an equal footing.

And I would suggest also, by way of quere, whether a tax on licenses granted
to attorneys at law, to practice in the national courts, would not be proper
and consistent with the principles here held forth.

I would furthermore propose livery servants, carriages, race-horses and packs
of hounds, as proper objects of taxation.

As the exportation of the manufactures of the United States should be
encouraged, so such an excise may have been paid paid on, and afterward
exported, should be entitled to the benefit of a drawback; and the same benefit
also, ought to be extended to articles imported, on which a duty has been
paid, and which may be afterward exported out of the States.

THE NAVIGATION OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE importance of navigation to a nation, is too great to escape general
notice; and as there is no nation which has the resources and natural
advantages to support an extensive navigation, and at last, to obtain the
empire of the sea, that the United States have, I conceive, a foundation ought
to be laid as early as possible for the support and increase of their
navigation.

The resources of the States, and the enterprising spirit of their citizens are
known by most of the maritime powers of Europe. They know the States can build,
equip and navigate, and consequently can freight cheaper than any nation in
Europe. And they are sensible, that by an encouragement of the navigation of
the States, a foundation would be laid for such a maritime force, as to
endanger their American dominions. It is, I conceive, for these reasons among
others, that Great Britain in particular, is taking the most decided measures
in its power, to suppress the navigation of the States. And it is for this
reason also, that the States, ought to exert themselves, and take the most
effectual measures in their power, for the support of their navigation, and of
their right with other nations to the occupancy of the seas.

No vessel therefore, should be employed in the navigation of the United
States, but those which are built in them; and navigated by the master and
greater part of the crew who are citizens, or American subjects. And for the
prevention of fraud, and uncertainties, with respect to the build, owners and
crew; the register should particularly state and set forth the place where, the
time when, and carpenter by whom the vessel was built. Her rig, general form
and model. Her length from her stem to her transom, on the main deck. Her
extreme width, and her depth at the forepart of her hatchway; also her true
tonage, according to carpenters measurement. The owner, or owners, if more than
one the part each may own, and their respective places of residence; should
likewise be stated and set forth in the register. Certificates also, I
conceive, should accompany every clearance, descriptive of the master and crew,
the place of their nativity and their present allegiance.

In case of any alteration in the rig, form and model of the vessel, or in the
owners, the register should be returned and canceled, and a new one taken out.

These measures, I conceive, are necessary to the support of the navigation of
the United States, and the increase of their seamen.

AMERICAN NAVY.
THE disposition of the people of the United States, is now pacific. They think
of nothing at present but cultivating the arts of peace, and apprehend no
danger of invasion; neither do their views extend to the enlargement of
territory. But this will, probably, not always be the case. The ambition of the
people of this country, like that of all other nations, will be excited by, and
increase with their increasing power.

The first objects of their ambition lie open before them, are now obvious to
every attentive observer. The natural boundaries of the United States, are the
river St. Lawrence on the north, and the Mississippi on the south, to which,
one day or another the dominion of the States will probably be extended; and
the West India islands, are the natural appendages of this continent. Beyond
these, I think the United States can never have a justifiable object of
ambition,

The increase of the power of the States will, I am of opinion, be more rapid
than the people in general are aware of, and of consequence, bring these things
into contemplation sooner, than may be generally imagined. By the great
migrations into this country, in consequence of the establishment of a good and
safe government, together with its natural population, the number of
inhabitants will, I am persuaded, in fifty years, amount to about twenty
millions. Such an increase of the power of the States, together with their
natural resources, will excite the jealousy, and arouse the fears of those
nations who have possessions on this side the Atlantic. Some of whom may secure
the friendship of the States, others may not, particularly Great Britain, who
so long as she retains her present ideas of omnipotency, will never solicit the
friendship of the United States; but instead thereof, will make use of every
method to suppress their rising power, and when that is found impracticable,
will attempt to form a confederacy against them. This, although it be a matter
of conjecture, is, I think, founded on such circumstances, as to render it
warrantable, and notwithstanding events of this nature are reserved for a
future period of time, yet I conceive, they are objects which always ought to
be kept in view, and provided for as soon, and as fast as it may be in the
power of the States so to do. And to this end,

Besides the measures necessary to be taken to increase the wealth of the
nation, and to keep the militia in a state of good military order and
discipline, a naval force, I conceive, should be collected, and increased as
fast as it can conveniently be done.

Many I know, are of opinion, that a naval force will never be requisite; but I
must differ from such in opinion; considering those circumstances which I have
now taken notice of; considering that the navigation and commerce of the United
States, will more and more tend to the rivalry of the commerce of several of
the maritime powers of Europe, and in consequence thereof, the policy of those
nations will be opposed to the policy of the United States, and considering
also, that the only sure dependence the States can have in any event, will be
on their own strength and resources, I cannot but think, they will have a great
and necessary occasion for a naval force. If so, the establishment of a navy
should be begun as soon as possible, for it will require a length of time to
render it formidable.

A naval force must necessarily be but small at the first, but however small it
may be, it would answer several good and necessary purposes. As 1st. It would
be a means of preventing a smuggling business on the coast, which is very
practicable to be done, by sure-concerted measures. 2d. It wouldbe a means of
preventing acts of piracy, which have frequently been committed on the coast,
and even in our harbors. And 3d. That which I esteem a matter of the greatest
consequence is, the teaching the order and discipline of a navy. Such a school
is wanted, for those young men, who might be disposed to improve themselves in
naval and nautical knowledge; for which reason, if a naval force should be
collected, let it be ever so small, a strict discipline should always be
maintained, and considered a principal object -- Should a naval armament at any
future time, be necessary for the defense of the nation, or other national
purposes, it would lay the States under great disadvantages, had they no
citizens capable of commanding.

Russia has become a considerable maritime power, yet she has introduced
Englishmen into her navy as officers; and that to such a degree, that were they
to quit her service, her navy would be prejudiced, if not ruined -- And should
a rupture happen between Russia and Great Britain, which is by no means
impossible, what dependence would Russia make on her navy, commanded by
Englishmen.

The SECURITY and COLLECTION of the IMPOST.
A JUST and punctual payment of the impost, is not only of importance to the
revenue, but to the interest of the fair trader; for which reason, it becomes
the interest and duty of the public and of individuals, particularly the
merchants, to make use of the best and most effectual measures in their power,
for the security and collection of the duties which may be imposed on articles
of importation.

The coast of the United States is so extensive, with so many harbors, inlets,
etc. that a smuggling business might easily be carried on, and that withoutmuch
fear of detection. And even in the ports smuggling might easily and safely be
done, unless a great number of officers should be added to the custom houses.

As the States have patterned after the British nation in many things, so,
among others, they have adopted the British methods of securing the impost,
which consists in oaths and a multiplicity of custom-house officers. But I
conceive, a much better mode could be devised; for a multiplicity of officers
is but a burden on the revenue, and so far as my observation extends, I cannot
but think a national revenue is in general, more defrauded by the custom-house
officers, than by smugglers.

The United States would undoubtedly prefer the most eligible and effectual,
and at the same time, the least burdensome methods of securing and collecting
the revenue. And among a variety of methods that might he proposed, I would
take the liberty to propose one, which, considering every circumstance, appears
to me, the most eligible. I will not pretend to say it is, in fact, worthy of
approbation; but it may nevertheless, be a means of producing something better.

The mode I would propose is this To appoint a collector general, who will keep
his office at the seat of government. Appoint a collector in each port, where a
custom-house may be necessary; and weighers, guagers and measurers in the
ports, where a custom-house is established, in number, according to the
business to be performed in the respective ports; the same also, in such out
ports as vessels may belong to, and discharge at. These, I conceive, are all
the officers necessary to be appointed.

The duty of the weighers, etc. to ascertain the contents of such cargoes as
require weighing, guaging and measuring, and to return certificates thereof
(they being under oath, and penal obligations) to the custom-house. The duty of
the collectors to be, besides what is usual and common to the office, the
making of weekly, or monthly returns, in the original papers of the entry of
each vessel, to the Collector General's office. The duty of the Collector
General to re-enter in his books every vessel and cargo originally entered in
the respective ports, and and to keep a regular account with each custom-house.
Besides, it will probably be found necessary to invest this office with certain
powers, and to require certain duties of it, which circumstances may suggest
and particularize.

Some material advantages, I apprehend, would be derived from such an
institution and arrangement, and render it preferable to the common and usual
methods made use of in Great Britain, and in this country. It would render the
office, duty and burden of searchers, tide-waters, etc. unnecessary: It would
give the revenue every security against the mal-practices of custom-house
officers, which is intended to be provided against, by a plurality of officers
in the custom-houses of Great Britain; and, what I conceive would be a matter
of weighty consideration, is, that government could at all times receive
official information of the state of the revenue, without delay, trouble or
expense.

The master of a vessel to be required to make report of his arrival at the
custom-house, within twenty-four hours after, if he arrives at a port where a
custom-house is established; if at an out port, within forty-eight hours. He
shall deliver into the custom-house a manifest of his cargo, which shall
contain a particular account thereof, so far as to the kind and quality, as far
as he may know, and also, of the casks, bales and others packages, together
with their marks and numbers, and their general contents, as far as he may have
the knowledge of.

If the cargo consists of such articles as require weighing, guaging and
measuring before the quantity can be ascertained, the manifest to be left blank
until certificates are returned into the office, and to this end, the collector
to issue an order to a weighter, etc. directing him to attend to the discharge
of the vessel -- take account of the contents of the cargo, and make returns.

If the cargo consists of dry goods, etc. of which the invoices contain a just
account, the merchant, to whom the goods belong, or are consigned, shall
deliver a copy of the invoice or invoices into the custom-house under oath; in
which copy the particular articles shall be arranged under the different
denomination or rates of duty.

On the master's giving in his manifest, and before permission be granted for
the discharge of the vessel, he shall execute a bond, with one sufficient
security, in a penal sum sufficient for the purpose; the condition of which to
be, that he, the master, has made a full and just report of his cargo; that he
has not landed out of his vessel, or suffered to be landed, or put, or
suffered to be put on board of any vessel or boat, for the purpose of being
landed in any part of the United States, any part of his cargo, at any time
since his departure from his port of clearance, until that time, with intent to
defraud the revenue, And this bond to remain in force for the term of five
years. If no information is made within that time, accompanied with substantial
proof of a false entry, etc. the bond then to become void. But, if within that
time it shall appear, by sufficient testimony, that any part was smuggled, the
penalty to be forfeited, and the bond prosecuted.

By the requisition of such a bond, to remain in force for so great a length of
time, it appears to me, the duties would be more effectually secured, than by
any other method; for, I think, no master of a vessel would dare to run the
risque of a short entry, when so much time was reserved for detection; and no
man would be willing to join in such a bond, until he was sure of being safe.
The propriety of the measure I will submit, but I am humbly of opininion, that
without some methods of this nature, the duties in the United States will never
be fully secured, being situated and circumstanced as they are.

I am aware of some inconveniences which may arise from this mode, but I know
of none wholly unexceptionable. It may be objectionable on account of its
litigiousness. This would arise principally from the various rates of duties
imposed on a great variety of particular articles; but no method occurs to me
in which this inconvenience could be fully remedied, unless the idea of
encouraging and supporting the manufacturing interest of the states should be
given up, which I presume will not be the case. However, I conceive that the
forms of entry may be so simplified and methodized, as to remedy most of the
inconveniences which may arise from this cause. It may be found exceptionable
on another account. Vessels belonging to, and discharging at an out port, would
lay the master and his securities under the necessity of making two journies to
the custom-house, before the duties could be settled. This is an inconvenience
for which I know of no remedy, for I conceive no delay should be made in the
settlement of the duties. Forty-eight hours after the contents of the cargo is
ascertained, is time sufficient for that purpose, if at an out port; and
twenty-four hours, if at the port where a custom-house is established. To delay
the settlement of the duties until it may be convenient for the master to
attend at the custom-house, or, until he should have occasion to clear his
vessel out, in order to save the trouble of an extra journey, would be so out
of rule, and so dangerous to the revenue, that such an indulgence could not
with any propriety be granted. Another objection may be made. It frequently
happens, that vessels belonging to one port of the States, having cargoes on
board consigned to the master or supercargo, enter in other ports of the
States, out of which cargoes on extra commission could not, without
inconvenience, be given as an inducement to a merchant to become a security in
the requisite bonds. In order therefore to remedy this, and to accommodate the
interest of the merchants of the United States, in all such cases, the masters
executing the bonds, might be declared by law to be sufficient to bind the
owner, or owners, let them reside in whatever part of the States they may. This
is one reason among others, why, I conceive, that registers should be
particular and explicit in the statement of the owners of vessels. On the whole
therefore, I cannot see any reason why the impost may not be secured and
collected, in the most effectual manner, and with as few inconveniences, in
some methods of the nature here suggested, as in any which can be proposed.

To what I have here observed, I would beg leave to add a few remarks relative
to this subject.

I have had frequent opportunities of observing the conduct of revenue officers
in a variety of situations and circumstances, and the proceedings of maritime
courts in cases of seizure for a breach of the laws of trade; and I have
remarked a number of abuses to the revenue and many hardships and grievances
suffered by people who have unfortunately fell into the hands of the officers
of the customs.

In most or all nations, a prosecution in the case of a breach of the laws of
trade is confined to the officers of the customs, by which means they have it
in their power to defraud the revenue for the sake of a bribe; in a manner safe
to themselves as well as the person indulged. Instances of this nature are
frequent in many ports. To prevent such practices I conceive a liberal reward
should be proposed to an informer and prosecutor, and that any person whatever
be authorized to prosecute on giving sufficient bonds as well as a custom house
officer; besides, a custom house officer should be subjected to heavy penalties
and high forfeitures in cases of mal-practice. On the other hand, a person who
maliciously or wantonly informs against or prosecutes any person for a breach
of the laws of trade, should be liable to a severe punishment besides making
good all damages. An informer ought not to be given up except in this case,
neither should he be admitted as an evidence.

In cases of seizure I have observed under the British government very unfair
and ungenerous methods made use of in the preparatory examinations. Those
people who are supposed to be knowing to the fact are separately examined and
cross examined, accompanied often with threats or promises, until something is
in this manner drawn out sufficient to serve the end in view; and without
admitting the person or persons concerned to be present. By this means many
innocent people have suffered extremely.

No examinations of this nature I conceive ought to be admitted but in the
presence of the parties concerned.

I have known an established customary compliment to the judge of a court of
admiralty in all cases of condemnation. This is so barefaced a piece of
bribery, that no government would avow and support it: But in seasons of
popular zeal, as was lately the case among the English, for the suppression of
the navigation of the United States, it may be winked at. Such abuses however
of the judicial powers, should undoubtedly be guarded against.

I have known also, ruin and distress brought on persons by a rigorous
execution of the laws, who have exposed themselves to a prosecution, ignorantly
or inadvertently. As the intention and design constitutes the criminality of
actions, so the laws in all cases ought to discriminate between intentional and
wilful offenders, and those who have been guilty of a breach of law, ignorantly
and undesignedly. The courts of admiralty therefore, I conceive, should be
invested with a diseretionary power to mitigate penalties and forfeitures, in
such cases wherein there may be sufficient reason to determine they were
incurred through ignorance or inadvertence. There are, I apprehend, but few
cases brought into any court in which it cannot be determined how sar a
delinquent was intentionally criminal.

I have but one matter of observation more, and that is respecting the

TITLES OF THE PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
MANY of the customs and usages of this country are copied from the practices
of Great Britain; some of which are suitable and proper, and some are not;
among which, the usage of conferring the title of Excellency on the governors
of the states, was continued since the revolution, for no other reason but
because that the governors of provinces under the British government had such a
title conferred on them. The propriety or impropriety of this usage depends on
the original intention of it, applying it to present circumstances.

The title of Excellency is conferred by the British government, (where it
originated) on persons of distinguished rank; yet, they are always considered
as inferior. It is given to persons at the head of departments, but at the same
time, such as are considered subordinate to the supreme executive authority of
the nation. To render the application of the title proper therefore, and
consistent with the original idea on which it was founded, it ought not to have
been conferred on the first and highest executive authority of the States,
before their late union; because the office and rank was supreme and
unsubordinate. But as the states have united in a general government, and by
that have rendered the government of the states in some respects subordinate to
the national government, the title of Excellency becomes again proper for the
governors of the respective states; at the same time however, it renders it
improper for the President and Vice President of the United States.

If titles mean and intend any thing, it is undoubtedly to distinguish persons
in the various ranks they hold, either in the civil, military, or
ecclesiastical departments. To apply a title therefore, founded on the idea of
inferiority to the first offices of the nation, and highest ranks in life, or
to confer a title indiscriminately on supreme, and subordinate ranks, appears
to me to be the confounding of ideas, and making use of titles without meaning.

The presidency of the United States is as high an office, and of as much
dignity and importance as can be constituted and established by any nation on
earth; and although I should object in my own mind to the President's being
ornamented with unmeaning and ostentatious titles; yet, such a title, in my
humble opinion, ought to be conferred, as would in a rational and decent
manner, distinguish the rank, and be expressive of the respect due from the
people to that person, who, by their own suffrages, they advance to a station
of the highest national dignity and honor.

In primitive times, when titles were made use of for no other purposes but
that of distinguishing persons in the various ranks and offices which they
filled, the simple title of king was given to the head of the nation, which was
sufficient; for to that could be affixed every idea of distinction, honor and
respect, that ought to be connected therewith, as well as by adding a
multiplicity of distinguishing appellations. But since then, as people have
refined and improved in the arts of pride and vanity, and as the kings of the
earth have, at times, maintained an absolute dominion over the minds and
persons of their subjects, they have assumed titles which are repugnant to
reason, religion and propriety. In fact, many of them approach nigh on the
borders of idolatry. They are not properly titles, but attributive
appellations, attributing certain qualifications and properties, supposed, or
admitted to be inherent in kings; the evident design and reason of which is to
gratify a spirit of pride and vanity, the first and most predominating quality
of a royal mind; to excite a spirit of servility and awe in the minds of the
people, and to erase out of the mind the mortifying idea of humanity.

The British nation, as enlightened as it is, has gone as far into this spirit
of pride and ostentation, and species of idolatry, as any nation in Europe,
which is called in Great Britain, the dignity of government. But I cannot but
hope and expect the United States will never consider the dignity of their
government to consist in titles, or in an awful distance placed between the
officers of state, and the people at large; but in something more essential to
real national dignity and honor.

The citizens of the United States, in all their public proceedings, have
exhibited an unprecedented example, of a people spread over an extensive
territory, remote from one another; whose interests, customs and manners are
different, yet, uniting in national measures, and without a dictator, or any
coercive power, governing themselves by reason and principle; and the same good
sense which on all occasions has dictated the most proper measures, will, I
doubt not, suggest some proper titles for the President and Vice President;
such as will be free from European arrogance and impiety, and consistent with
common sense, republican principles, and the genius of the people; such as will
distinguish ranks and offices of the first national dignity and importance, and
be expressive of that degree of honor and respect which is reasonably and
preceptively enjoined on the people.

I will take the liberty to mention what has struck my mind on this subject,
but as it is a late and transient thought, I do it with diffidence.

That which has appeared to me as proper and consistent with my own ideas, is
this: For the President, The High and Most Honorable, the President, etc. And
for the Vice President, The High and Honorable, the Vice President, etc.

The only objection which at present occurs to me, that could be made to such
titles, by the most rigid commonwealths-men, would be with respect to their
personal application. Your Highness, and His Highness might in some ears sound
unpleasant, and too much like royalty. But I apprehend it would be found on
examination, to contain nothing but what is quite proper and reasonable, and
perfectly consistent with the Constitution, and the spirit and principles of a
free government. I suggest it however as a matter of speculation.

I have the honor to be, With great esteem and respect, Sir, your most obedient
and Very humble Servant, --.


