Doctor DANA's SERMON on The Nativity of CHRIST.

The NATIVITY of CHRIST: A DISCOURSE delivered in Christ-Church, Wallingford,
December 25, 1788; and in the City of New Haven, on Lord's Day, January 4,
1789. To which is subjoined (by particular Desire) a PRAYER after the Sermon
when delivered at Wallingford.

By JAMES DANA, D. D. Senior Pastor of the First Church in Wallingford.

There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
That there should be no schism in the body, but that the members should have
the same care one for another.
Saint PAUL. NEW HAVEN: Printed by J. MEIGS, 1789.

On the NATIVITY of CHRIST.
LUKE II. 14. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men.
THE entrance of Emmanuel into our world was first announced by an angel to
some humble shepherds. "I bring you," said the heavenly herald, "good tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all people. For this day is born, in the city
of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord -- And suddenly there was with the
angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men When this sermon was
preached at New Haven, the general distribution of the subject was thus
introduced: "The substance of what will he offered to your consideration, was
delivered a few days since to an episcopal congregation, on occasion of the
celebration of the nativity of Christ. But it is equally applicable to the
present occasion The holy COMMUNION.
, and to professor of all denominations.
."

We will consider, FIRST, the subject matter of this acclamation of the
heavenly host.

SECONDLY, The foundation laid by the advent of the Savior for the united
acknowledgments of men and angels.

THIRDLY, Recommend the spirit of his religion, the prevalence of which would
be most happy for mankind on earth, and bring glory to God on high.

FIRST, Of the subject matter of this acclamation.

Here we may take a general survey of the Christian institution, as a
promulgation of peace to mankind in a state of apostasy. They are represented
as alienated, and enemies in their mind, without strength, children of
disobedience, and consequently of wrath. They therefore need reconciliation to
God. -- Nor less to one another. For unrenewed nature is thus described: Living
in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another; full of all
unrighteousness, malignity, and deceit. The old man, in distinction from such
as are renewed in the spirit of their mind, is known by pride, jealousy,
malice, revenge, and other unfriendly passions, the bane of society, the source
of private animosities and national wars. And even those who have put off the
old, and put on the new man, having remains of human depravity, experience and
manifest more or less of the carnal mind, which is enmity. "All have gone out
of the way. There is not a just man who does good, and sins not."

THE existence of the above alienation has been, and is manifest over all the
earth: It is supposed in all those scriptures which speak of reconciliation for
iniquity, and represent Jesus Christ as our peace, coming into the world, and
enduring the cross to restore peace on earth. God made man upright. He has
fallen from original rectitude. His glory is departed from him.

THE peace celebrated by angels, as in the text, denotes, first, peace with
GOD. He is reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their tresspasses. He
proclaims peace through Jesus Christ, who knew no sin, and whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation for it, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. It is to the glory of God's grace, that he makes us accepted in
the beloved. He first loved us, or no mediator would have been provided. Hence
the ransom Jesus paid is the effect, not the cause of the love of God. In this
greatest gift of the Father's love, grace superabounds where sin abounded.

IN the parable of the prodigal son, the father met the profligate while a
great way off; fell on his neck, and kissed him; put the best robe on him, and
a ring on his finger, and shoes on his feet, receiving him with every mark of
paternal affection and joy. Such is the divine condescension and compassion to
wandering, perishing sinners. "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?"
Let the glory of his grace be celebrated by heaven and earth. For if God be for
us, who shall be against us? No temptation can happen to us above that we are
able. All things shall work together for good. Should any injure us in our
outward interest, it will not be in their power to deprive us of the special
protection and smiles of a reconciled God. If not reconciled to him, what power
can deliver us from his hand who is able to destroy soul and body? Whom then
would you fear? with whom would you be at peace?

FURTHER: The sacrifice of Jesus was a voluntary one. The Messiah, having a
body prepared for him, "gave himself an offering and sacrifice to God, and put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Lo, I come -- I delight to do thy will, O
my God. There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who
gave himself a ransom for all." How wonderful his friendship! "Though he was
rich, for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich.
Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. But "when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of
his son."

CONSIDER how great HE was who undertook our redemption, and you cannot doubt
but he was able to heal the breach the apostasy had made. Call to mind on this
occasion the character given of him in prophecy. "Unto us a child is born, unto
us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulders: And his name
shall be called, WONDERFUL, COUNSELOR, THE MIGHTY GOD, THE EVERLASTING FATHER,
THE PRINCE OF PEACE." He who was "set up from everlasting, by whom all things
were made and consist," whose "glory was that of the only begotten of the
Father, HE was made flesh. The word, who was God," became incarnate: God was
manifest in the flesh -- This is a plain declaration of his divinity and
humanity. Thus the prophet who foretold his miraculous conception: "Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name EMMANUEL." If
such is the character of our redeemer, who will question but he is mighty to
save?

FURTHER: The peace here proclaimed includes peace and good will among men. The
example of our heavenly Father instructs us to love our enemies, bless them
that curse us, and do good to them that hate us. Our own forgiveness is
expressly suspended on our imitation of the divine example. As a motive to such
imitation, a comparison is made of our offenses against God with those of our
fellow-men against us. The former are said to be to the latter as ten thousand
talents to an hundred pence. The example of the author of our faith is a
further motive to the exercise of forgiveness. These are examples which can
never be paralleled. Were we "followers of God as dear children;" did we "walk
in love as Christ has loved us," we should "put away all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, with all malice, and be kind
one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another." The peculiar
characteristics of the wisdom from above are these: "First, pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality and without hypocrisy." Those whom the Savior pronounces
blessed, are, the poor in spirit, the meek, the merciful, the peacemakers,
such as can bear to be reviled and persecuted for righteousness' sake; such as
forgive injuries to seventy times seven; -- who do not wait till the injurious
ask reconciliation, but prevent them by unsolicited proposals of it, in
imitation of the divine example. Did the principles and maxims of benevolence,
inculcated by our religion, rule in men's hearts, all unworthy emulations, all
animosities and bitterness would cease. The members of a family, neighborhood,
civil or religious community would be of one heart and soul. The spirit of
Christianity "bears, hops, believes all things, thinks no evil, seeks
not her own, envieth not, vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up." It works no
ill to its neighbor; does good to all as it has opportunity; and, if
possible, lives peaceably with all men.

This may be impossible. For some men would wrest from others the liberty of
judging and acting for themselves, in a matter wherein every one must stand or
fall to his own master, being accountable only to the searcher of hearts. When
men make their own sentiments the terms of salvation, it may be impossible to
be on good terms with them, and yet have peace with God and their own
consciences.

THERE doubtless are real Christians in all communions, whether different
communions acknowledge it, or not. In the exercse of Christian charity the
question is not to what class of professors a person belongs, but whether he is
a real member of that kingdom which is righteousness and peace. Professors may
agree by love to serve one another, and unite their interest for the
advancement of the kingdom of their common master, while they are best edified
by a diversity of forms, have different views of some revealed truths, and
different apprehensions as to some of the ways whereby Christianity may be best
advanced. If, on account of such differences, or any of a like nature, they
separate each other from the body of Christ, they know not what they do.

THE church of Christ, in its extensive boundaries, needs the gifts of all the
parts into which it is divided, and of every individual of each denomination,
as the natural body needs the concurrence of all its members, in order to its
beauty, health and growth. "For as the body is one, and has many members, and
all members have not the same office, so also is Christ." Hence it ill becomes
any denomination of Christians to assume the whole honor of supporting
Christianity, or the reformation, even suppose they may be viewed as eminent
defenders of both. And it would as ill become any denomination to suppose their
own weight and influence so inconsiderable, that it is of little consequence
how they demean themselves. Various denominations should consider themselves,
and treat each other, as severally and jointly subservient to the cause of the
same Lord. They should excite each other to a laudable emulation, that through
their united influence the gospel may have free course.

"LET every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Why do thou judge thy
brother?" Had this advice been followed, the religion of the prince of peace
would never have been improved as an instrument of discord and war. This was a
consequence, an undesigned consequence, of its establishment. As its author
foretold, it separated nearest friends, and proved an occasion of the sharpest
contests. This came to pass, however, through the ignorance, prejudices and
lusts of men: It was not the consequence of a right understanding of the
gospel, or of men's having the spirit it inculcates; but the reverse. Peace on
earth, good will among men, are the legitimate fruits of this religion. Under
its influence the state of this world would be that which we are taught to
expect when "the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the earth: They shall not
hurt nor destroy in all God's holy mountain."

RELIGION must be maintained under some form. This is indispensible to the
welfare of communities. In this view it will be the care of the magistrate who
seeks the good of his people: At the same time it is the unalienable right of
every individual to choose his own way of worship. Particular forms do not open
the kingdom of heaven to men, nor shut that kingdom against them. "If any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." Whoever has this spirit, is
an heir of salvation. Shame to the charity of such as will not allow it! --

WE have but one rule by which to judge whether men are Christians, viz. by
their fruits. And the fruits of Christianity are "love joy, peace,
long-suffering gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." Perfect
unity in sentiment among the professors of the same religion is impossible.
They may yet be one in affection -- may "keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace," as the disciples of one Lord, who are called in one hope.

THOSE who have such confidence in their own construction of the scriptures as
to make it necessary to all Christians, have much occasion to consider our
Lord's words respecting such as said, "Lo, here is Christ; or lo, he is there;"
that is, here or there only. Our Lord said, "Go not after them; nor follow
them." Hence we infer, either that they had not his presence with them; or if
they had, they yet knew not what spirit they were of in denying his presence to
be with others: Herein at least they may not be imitated. This is a
distinguishing mark of the Romish church; and it is doubtful whether
infallibility itself can support the exclusive claim. For if her infallibility
be not proved and known to others as well as herself, are others obliged to
admit her faith? What effect has it on that peace and good will which
Christianity inculcates? on brotherly kindness and charity? Compare Saul of
Tarsus, making havoc of the church, with Paul the meek and humble apostle of
Jesus, going every where in the fullness of the blessing of the gospel of peace.
Thus the gospel, through divine operation, takes from men the spirit of
self-sufficiency, and gives them a better mind.

OUR Lord rebuked the spirit of the disciples who would have called for fire
from heaven on the Samaritan village. The Samaritans would not receive him,
because he was going to Jerusalem. The disciples wished that the Samaritans
might be instantly consumed. In both there was doubtless a mixture of an old
national enmity. But Jesus came not to destroy, but to save. Nor may his
disciples consign one another over to the divine wrath, because they have not
attained to think alike. By sentiments of mutual respect, by imitating the
virtues of their master, they would adorn the doctrine of our Savior.

IT must give one who has the spirit of Christianity an exalted pleasure to be
able to reflect, that his best endeavors have been used to promote the great
end of the incarnation of Christ. Compare the pleasures of Christian
benevolence, which thinks and hopes the best of all men, is kindly affectioned,
and, with brotherly love, in honor prefers others, while all within its
reach are the better for it -- compare the satisfaction such an one has in
himself, with the spirit of bigotry and suspicion -- the spirit which absolves
or retains men's sins according as they do or do not conform to us -- the
spirit which loves, and does good to those only of one denomination. The former
are perfect as our Father in Heaven. The latter, whatever they imagine, have
much reason to ask, whether (...) love is any thing more than the interest of a
party. Their (...) assurance, their trusting in themselves, and despising
others, is (...) circumstance in their favor. Error has usually more confident
and zealous advocates than the truth. The disciple of Jesus "receives the
Kingdom of God as a little child."

LASTLY, the peace our subject mentions includes peace in our consciences. The
disciple of Jesus has "joy and peace in believing, and abounded in hope by the
power of the Holy Ghost." This is called "the love of God shed abroad in the
heart" -- "the witness of the spirit of God with theirs, that they the are
children of God" -- "the earnest of the spirit in their hearts." Hence their
"fellowship is with the Father and Son." This "peace which passes
understanding," is doubtless comprehended in the peace for which the angelic
hosts celebrated the praise of the MOST HIGH at the nativity of Christ.
"Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father." To accomplish the end of his death, Jesus sent
the Spirit after his return to heaven, for the conviction and conversion of
unbelievers, and the confirmation and joy of believers unto life, that they
might go on to perfection. The design of the dispensation of grace through a
Mediator is thus expressed: "The loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the
haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall be exalted in
that day." When this design is effected, through the power of the Spirit with
the word, the alienation of the sinner is destroyed. He commenceth an object of
the special love of God, an heir of salvation. He "has put off the old, and
put on the new man." In the eternal counsel of peace it pleased the Father to
reconcile all things to himself by Jesus Christ. The covenant of peace was
between them. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. God now cond^^^^nds
to beseech sinners to accept reconciliation in Christ. The sum of our ministry
is this: "Be ye reconciled to God." Angels minister to men for this end. And
the eternal Spirit operates with the means of grace. Hence "the weapons of our
warfare are mighty to the pulling down of strong holds." Not by human
exertions; "but by my Spirit, says the Lord." The excellency of the power is
of God, that no flesh should glory in his presence. What is man, that thou art
mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?"

WE proceed to remark, SECONDLY, the foundation laid, by the advent of a
Savior, for the united acknowledgments of men and angels.

THE subject of the united adoration and gratitude of the heavenly host at the
nativity of Christ was this: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward men. Let earth join with heaven in this acclamation. Join in
it this day, ye who observe the present solemnity in commemoration of the birth
of Christ. Ye who believe it to be the birthday of your eternal hopes. So
illustrious a personage was never born into our world -- one so worthy to be
remembered -- one whom all men are commanded to honor, even as they honor the
Father.

WHETHER other worlds have fallen, and had a Redeemer provided? or how far the
angelic host, who here celebrate the birth of the Redeemer of mankind, are
interested in his redemption? are questions which do not affect the present
subject, nor do at all belong to us. It is sufficient that we know there is
peace on earth through the interposition of the Savior, Christ the Lord --
that superior intelligences give glory to God in the highest for this, and
interest themselves in what so nearly concerns us. They were never alienated
from God. They have always done his will with alacrity and zeal. Perfect
harmony and love have reigned among them. They rejoice that peace is proclaimed
to our fallen race, and desire to look into the scheme of man's redemption: It
is the subject of their adoration. There is joy among these benevolent spirits
at the conversion of every sinner on earth. They cheerfully minister for this
purpose, that rebels may be reclaimed, and recovered sinners trained up to join
them in the exercises and enjoyments of the world of perfect purity and love.

SHALL heaven be full of joy and praise, that God has sent his Son to our
redemption? and shall rebels and apostates be indifferent to the proclamation
of pardon, peace and glory? Is God propitious? Will he accept repentance? Has
he laid help on one that is mighty? Are the glad tidings published to us? Does
the offended majesty of heaven offer us full pardon unsolicited; and even
entreat us to lay down our weapons of rebellion? Is he long-suffering, not
willing that any should perish? Is the proclamation of peace unlimited, so that
whosoever will may share in it? What shall we say? "Bless the Lord, O our
souls! and all that is within us, bless his holy name." For he has remembered
us in our low estate. "The day spring from on high has visited us, and the sun
of righteousness risen upon us, to guide our feet in the way of peace. Sing, O
ye heavens, for the Lord has done it; shout ye lower parts of the earth: break
forth into singing ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the Lord
has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel, Blessed are the people
who know the joyful sound: They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy
countenance. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day; and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted."

BUT redemption should be imprinted on our hearts, as well as celebrated with
our tongues. What would be our obligations for deliverance from formidable
outward enemies; from slavery, prison and death; and restoration to freedom and
eligible circumstances? From the abundance of our hearts we should seek
opportunities to testify our gratitude to our deliverer, and endeavor, by
every means to secure his friendship. Are our obligations less for deliverance
from the slavery of sin, from the hosts and prison of hell; restoration to the
glorious liberty of the sons of God? Are our obligations less for eternal
redemption? Had not messages of salvation been brought from heaven to earth by
the Son of God in our nature, must we not have joined with sinning angels,
"Farthest from God is best." How beautiful, then, upon the mountains are the
feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings
good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that faith upon Zion, thy God
reigns."

IF it be asked, What evidence have we that there was such a person as Jesus
born in the city of David, at the time we suppose; who taught lived, and
performed such works as never man did, died on the cross, and rose to immortal
life? Our answer is the same evidence as we have for the existence of any
conspicuous characters in ancient history. Yea, more, if possible: For besides
the testimonies of Christian, Jewish and Pagan historians to the life of Jesus,
the accomplishment of his prophecies in all ages since, and before the face of
all people, undeniably proves, not only that there was such an illustrious
character at that time, but also that he was sent of God.

THE temple and city of Jerusalem were laid in ruins about seventeen hundred
years ago, and have never been rebuilt, though Jews and heathen have united
their efforts to defeat the prophecy of this desolation. The chosen people have
ever since been scattered over the face of the earth, and yet preserved as a
distinct people; alike distinguished by universal approbrium, and by their
malignity to the author of Christianity. Consider their state at present, and
ever since their desolation. Were these things foretold, and have they come to
pass, without the determinate counsel and providence of God? Has this
unexampled chastisement befallen them, because they added to their other crimes
this above all, that they crucified the LORD OF GLORY? Let such in the present
age as deny the Lord that bought them, be warned. Let them seek refuge in that
Savior whom they have pierced by their infidelity and other crimes. For there
is no more sacrifice for sin.

IF the whole history of Jesus is denied, let them show in what age, in what
country, and by whom his religion was first introduced -- and by what means it
was established.

THIRDLY, It was proposed to recommend the benevolent spirit of Christianity,
the prevalence of which would be most happy for mankind on earth, and bring
glory to God on high.

ST. PAUL inculcates Christian union on the primitive converts by such
considerations as these Romans XIV. passim, and chap. XV. 1 -- 7.
. All professions are alike entitled to, and bound to exercise, private
judgment. Those who have the most improved knowledge in Christianity should
bear with the prejudices of such as are less informed, and not please
themselves. All being accountable at the tribunal of God, all should beware
left they invade his prerogative, by excluding their fellow-disciplies from his
mercy, because of different opinions on unimportant points. A convention for
forms should never be so maintained as to bring into neglect and reproach
things commendable, and even essential to all christians. For the most specious
professors are nothing, if they have not charity, Hence a regard to the common
cause of Christianity, the purity and extension of it, the union and
edification of its disciples, should govern all who assume the profession. For
no man lives to himself. By such considerations as these does the apostle
exhort to brotherly love -- to peace with all men, and holiness. On what other
terms can we enjoy the God of peace, or the society above who are made perfect
in love.

THE unexampled instance of humility and charity exhibited by the Lord of
glory, when he took our nature upon him, inculcates on all his followers the
most unseigned and fervent love to one another, and to mankind of every nation.
This spirit renders the righteous man more excellent than his neighbor. Those
especially have engaged to cultivate and display it, who have fellowship in
breaking of bread and prayer, in that institution which is the body and blood
of Christ. Different denominations of professors, under the influence of this
spirit, will unite their endeavors for the purity and extension of the
Christian religion, rejoicing in each other's gifts, and in the peace of the
church.

IS this mind in us? Then our good wishes and earnest prayers embrace men of
every communion, nation and character; at the same time we feel a peculiar
complacence in such as appear to have the spirit of Christ, whether they are of
our persuasion or not; whether near or remote; our own countrymen or
foreigners. With all such we shall most cheerfully unite in the propagation of
the gospel.

St. Paul has given us a particular description of charity, 1 Cor. XIII. This
is the more excellent way mentioned at the conclusion of chapter XII. Whoever
compares the two chapters will plainly see, that schism is the opposite to
charity. The schismatic divides the body of Christ: The spirit of charity
unites it. Schismatics establish this rule for the excision of members: -- We
ourselves are always right: They who differ from us are wrong; and therefore to
be excluded from the communion of saints.

OUR Lord forewarned his disciples, that they would meet with like treatment as
he had, and by his own behavior taught them a proper temper under it. "Who did
no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: Who when he was reviled, reviled
not again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him
that judges righteously. Leaving us an example, that ye should follow his
steps. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye
are not of the world, therefore the world hates you," The Christian therefore
must lay his account to suffer wrongfully from the world. He forfeits his
character, if he does not arm himself with the same mind as was in Christ
Jesus, who endured the contradiction of sinners. A true disciple will show much
condescension for the gospel's sake, that others may partake of its blessings
with him. He will be patient in tribulation. He will walk in wisdom toward
them that are without. He will take care that there be no occasion of stumbling
in him. Is this attended to by those who are pertinacious and obstinate about
meat and drink -- the peculiarities of any one denomination; while
righteousness and peace, the essentials of Christianity, are sacrificed?

THE Christian will indeed obey God rather than men, though men should
persecute him for obeying the dictates of his conscience. At the same time he
will endeavor to recommend his profession to all men, by showing them, that
LOVE, divine and social, is more than whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices --
that faith works by love. Under the commanding influence of this spirit, a
fondness for discriminating terms would be forgotten in a common concern for
Christianity, and a common exertion against its foes. Thus our Lord prayed for
his disciples. "That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in
thee; that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou
have sent me." There would be no jar in families, no schism in churches, no
tumults in the state, were the spirit of Christianity imbibed. Domestic
tranquillity and love would bless every house, alleviating every care, consoling
under every sorrow, giving a relish to every enjoyment. Kindred would be knit
together, as David and Jonathan. Neighbors would be as brethren. It would be
with kingdoms as in the natural body, in which "the members have the same care
one of another." Numerous as they are, and however various their office, "the
eye does not say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the feet,
I have no need of you. Those members which seem to be more feeble are
necessary." Under the influence of this spirit, nations would learn war no
more. All would be content with their own rights, and fulfill their duty to
others. Whatever different apprehensions there might be, any ill effects
therefrom would be prevented. Yea, these would but display the Christian spirit
to better advantage. The earth would be like heaven. What glory would be
brought to God on high from the universal prevalence of this spirit! What shall
we say more to recommend it?

How much then is it to be lamented, that the spirit of Christianity has been
departed from in all times and places, by those who have professed a zeal for
it? What cause have we to lay our hand upon our heart, and be deeply humbled
that we are so prone to animadvert with severity on every mistake and trespass
of our brethren; while God in Christ is ever ready to bury in eternal oblivion
our numberless and aggravated offenses, and proclaims peace to all mankind?
Dare we indulge hatred against another, while we glory in this, that the Son of
the blessed was born into our world, and endured the cross, to make
reconciliation for our iniquities? Shall we look for mercy from God, and yet
suffer one sun after another to go down upon our wrath against our brother?
yea, one year after another to roll over, and our resentment to continue
unabated? Those of whom this may be said, do not surely give the best evidence
that they themselves are reconciled to God. In the day of judgment we shall all
have infinite need of mercy. Our hope that we shall then find it, depends much
on our loving mercy. The merciful shall obtain mercy. Why then has peace been
taken from the church and world, under pretense of contending for the faith?
The consequence of obedience to the faith would be, as we have seen, peace on
earth, and good will among men. To this end Christ was born and came into the
world. To this end he both died and revived.

Many rejoiced at the birth of John, because he prepared the way of the Lord.
But the birth of Christ is matter of highest joy to all people. For all the
blessings of time and eternity are the purchase of his being made flesh, and
placing his delights with the sons of men. "Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that
excel in strength; ye ministers of his that do his pleasure" -- But why call on
the angels? They cease not day and night from celebrating the Redeemer. Unto
you, therefore, O men! I call; and my voice is unto the sons of men. With God
there is plenteous redemption He that is mighty has done great things for our
ruined race. He has not withheld his own Son from us. The Son of the blessed
"is our peace, having reconciled Jews and Gentiles unto God by the cross,
having slain the enmity thereby. Through him we have access by one Spirit unto
the Father." Joy to the world that Jesus reigns! May each of our hearts be his
throne. We his ambassadors pray you in his stead, be ye reconciled to God.

EVERY intelligent and serious Christian will distinguish between a religious
commemoration of the birth of Christ, and such excesses as have been common on
this occasion. The Christian's joy in outward things is regulated by the rules
of morality, and the superior rules of sobriety and heavenly-mindedness
inculcated by the precepts and life of Jesus. He has not forbid us to rejoice
with our friends -- to take our portion. But to rejoice in his salvation is to
see our own necessities and his fullness; and to come to him as he inviteth all
that labor and are heavy-laden, that we may find rest to our souls. In him we
shall have peace, if we take his yoke upon us and learn of him. May no light or
extavagant joy stain the joy of this day.

WERE his religion well understood and universally practiced, all nations would
be blessed in abundance of peace. Would we be useful to society or ornaments in
the church, would we enjoy ourselves and have peace with God, let us cordially
embrace the faith of Christ, and live by it. So shall we rejoice and be glad
all our days. It comes recommended to all ages, and to all orders. It is alike
adapted to public and private stations, to high and low, rich and poor. Under
its influence men will be faithful in little, and much; will possess the
confidence of each other, the approbation of their own minds, and of him with
whom they have to do. It ends in glory honor and immorality. Would to God that
such sentiments, and correspondent resolutions, might be taken up on the
present occasion by old and young, and middleaged.

How few the years of man's rapid race! We are hastening to the grave. Our
fathers where are they? Yea, where are many of our co temporaries? How many
that were younger than we, are gone to the house appointed for all living? In
the year past some of us have been bereaved of tender connections. It is not
with me as it once was The autho^^ ^oungest son, Mr. ELEUTHEROS DANA, died July
10, 1788, aetat. 27.
--

INSTEAD of presuming on years to come, let us determine to improve the present
to the glory of God on high, and the good of men. Let us lay up in store a good
foundation against the time to come, by abiding in our callings, walking as God
has variously distributed to us. He that teaches, let him attend continually
on this thing. He that rules, let it be with diligence, and as the minister of
God for good. And let not those who occupy a lower room, say, Because I am not
the eye or the head, I am not of the body. Let love be without dissimulation.
Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord.

When the devout Simeon, who waited for the consolation of Israel, saw the
infant Savior, he said, "Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace."
It will be the consolation of every dark hour through life, and especially of our
last moments, if we love the Savior whom we have not seen -- if we can
assuredly say, I know whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep what I
have committed to him against that day, when he shall come in his kingdom.

Substance of a PRAYER offered up after Sermon, December 25, 1788. Published by
particular Desire.
ALMIGHTY GOD, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named! Angels
and men have one Father. We joy in thee as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. With the host of heaven we give glory to the most high God, that thou
have raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of thy servant David.
Great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory. The glad tidings of great joy to all people,
proclaimed at the Savior's birth, have reached our ears, through the tender
mercy of our God. Blessed are the people who know the joyful sound.

IMPRESS on our minds what we have heard concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Prince of Peace, through whom pardon, grace and glory are published to a world
of apostates. All the angels of God worship him. They are employed by him as
ministering spirits for the heirs of salvation. We would honor him even as we
honor the Father.

MAY professors of different denominations unite in their endeavors to advance
that kingdom which is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. To this end may they be like-minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus; that with one mind and one mouth they may glorify
God. Christ is not divided. There is one body, and one spirit, even as we are
called in one hope. We have all one Father, even God; and one master, even
Christ; and all we are brethren. May ministers and churches of every
denomination adorn the doctrine of our Savior by a conversation becoming the
gospel, not seeking their own things, but those of Jesus Christ; above all
things putting on charity, which is the bond of perfectness; rejoicing in the
gifts, and contributing to the proficiency and usefulness of one another, and
to the edification of the universal Church. By caring for each other as members
of one body, by keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and a
common concern for the honor of the great head of the church, may they fulfill
their duty to him, and one another, and the whole church, that there may be no
schism in the body. The faith of our Lord Jesus, the Lord of glory, is without
respect to persons, or forms of profession. Grant, O Father, that all in every
place, who call on his name, may stand fast in one spirit, with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the gospel. According to the Savior's
prayer for his disciples, may they all be one -- that the world may know that
thou have sent him.

REVIVE the languishing spirit of Christianity among all who make profession of
it, and make known thy saving health to all nations. Root out of thy church
every plant which thou our heavenly Father have not planted.

MAY grace and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, be
multiplied to the flock of God who usually worship in this Sanctuary. May they
remember how they have received the messages of salvation from their late
worthy pastor The Rev. SAMUEL ANDREWS, missionary at Wallingford, from the
society for the propagation of the gospel, twenty-five years; removed to St.
Andrews, New-Brunswick, A. D. 1787.
, and hold fast, and repent. We commend him and his family to the grace of God.
Grant him more perfect and confirmed health. Protract his life and usefulness.
May the wilderness and solitary place be glad for the good tidings he may
bring; and welcome him, saying, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the
Lord. Send laborers into that part of thine harvest, who may go forth in the
fullness of the blessing of the gospel of peace.

MAY the rules of Christian sobriety regulate the joy of this day, in this
place and elsewhere. May nothing take place unbecoming the occasion.

TEACH us to rejoice in the Lord always. May our moderation be known to all men.
The Lord is at hand. May the peace of God which passes all understanding, keep
our hearts and minds through Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and Holy
Ghost be glory from all on earth and in heaveaven for evermore. AMEN.


