THE MODES OF Presbyterian Church-Worship VINDICATED: IN A LETTER TO THE
BLACKSMITH.

BY A PRESBYTER OF IRELAND.

FOURTH EDITION.

Prove all things -- hold fast that which is Good. -- Speak every Man Truth
with his Neighbor, for we are Members one of another. NEW TESTAMENT. LONDON
Printed. NEWBURY-PORT Reprinted BY JOHN MYCALL, for the Subscribers.
MDCCLXXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THOUGH the Pamphlet, to which the following LETTER is an ANSWER, is pretended
to have been originally designed only for the Church of Scotland, uncommon
Pains have been taken to spread it through this Kingdom Ireland.
, and especially in the Northern Parts of it, among the Presbyterians there.
The whole of it is written with so virulent a Spirit, and with so little regard
to truth and candor, that it is hard to believe, what is confidently reported,
that it has received great countenance from persons of distinguished eminence
and authority, in the Church. But whether this be so or not, it continues to be
industriously propagated, and great use has been, and still is made of it, for
exposing the Presbyterians and their worship. It is not therefore to be
wondered at, if, after having long borne these insults with patience, One of
that Denomination thinks himself obliged to take some notice of a performance,
which, because it has hitherto been neglected, is pretended to be unanswerable.
If any thing is said in a way of necessary defense, which may be disagreeable
to some persons, it must be laid to their charge, who, unprovoked, have
endeavored to insult and expose those, who were willing to be at peace with
them. THE editor of this American impression presumes that the above apology
for troubling the public with an answer to the Blacksmith, will now apply to
this country with as much propriety, as the author believed it would to Ireland
when it was first published.

PRESBYTERIANS have generally lived with Episcopalians here in peace and good
humor. A full equality of liberty with themselves they heartily wished these
their brethren to enjoy, unmolested; and could not but hope for the same candid
disposition from them. It is with pain they receive the conviction of their
disappointment, from the extraordinary zeal with which the disciples of that
communion have labored to publish and to circulate the false and scurrilous
libel here noticed.

THE modesty and good sense of this writer could not descend to bedaub his
antagonist or his party with colors correspondent to the dirt thrown by his
pen.

SO far, however, as reason and truth can have any weight with the blacksmith
and his friends, it is not doubted they will find a sufficient answer in the
following pages.

IF, indeed, they are pleased to plume themselves on their author's superiority
in ribaldry and abuse; that is an honor of which we envy them not the
unrivalled possession. -- But if they should appear to judge that this is the
best time, for exposing to public ridicule the supposed defects in their
neighboring churches -- M. Twogood and De Launc are not the only writers now
ready to answer a fool according to his folly.




A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
THOUGH I do not belong to the Right Reverend and Right Honorable class of Men
you have addressed, who seem, by their utter Negligence of your Epistle, to be
far above your instructions, or ridicule; yet, as I am a lover of Truth, and a
friend to Liberty, and the Press being as free to me as to any hammer-man in
the British dominions, I shall, without further ceremony, set about answering
your letter, so far as it deserves any serious notice; preserving that spirit
of meekness and decency which will not, I hope, be without its use, in freeing
a very respectable part of the community from that dust of your manufactory,
Mr. Blacksmith, with which you have so liberally besmeared them.

THE whole of your charge against the church of Scotland and its adherents, may
be summed up in four particulars.

THE first, relates to the public reading of the scriptures.

THE second, to psalmody.

THE third, to the indecencies that attend the administration of the Lord's
Supper.

AND the fourth, to extemporary prayer.

UPON each of these heads, you have collected what you think exceptionable,
inconvenient, and defective; and I hope with impartiality to follow you in your
remarks, and to obviate your charge.

You first Blacksmith's Letter, pages 7th and 8th, Newbury-port Edition.
submit it to the serious consideration of the gentlemen of the church of
Scotland, "whether a larger portion of the scriptures should not be read, every
Lord's day, in their public assemblies," and you are, or pretend to be, "at a
loss whether to ascribe the negligence of this essential part of their service
to the pride of the clergy, or the perverseness of the people," etc.

I ANSWER, that according to the constitution of that church, it is provided,
that the canonical books of the scriptures should be read over in order; but
such as minister in holy things, are not tied down to a certain portion of
them, in exclusion to the rest, nor are they obliged to substitute apocryphal,
instead of canonical writings, in their public service; but it is left to their
prudence and free arbitration what, and how much, of the inspired books shall
be read. Upon this account the custom varies in almost every church; some read
whole chapters without any comment; others make a few pertinent remarks,
according as passages are more or less difficult; others who are at more pains,
proceed in a regular course of explaining a certain number of verses, 'till in
this manner they go through all the sacred writings. I am inclinable to pay
this compliment, Sir, to your knowledge of antiquity, as to believe you are not
ignorant, that this method of instruction took its rise very early in the
christian church; We have reason to believe our Lord himself used it, as is
pretty plain from (Luke iv. 1s.) And in his discourse with the two Disciples
going to Emmaus, Luke xxiv. 27. And if we may judge of the manner of teaching
used by some of the Fathers, (See the works of Origin, Basil, and Augustine) by
those discourses that remain, it was chiefly expounding the Scriptures.
and where it has been observed since the reformation, as pretty generally it
is among that people, and their adherents, who are censured so severely by you,
it must be allowed that it has tended exceedingly to the use of edifying; and
it is quite natural that it should have this effect, as it gives the audience a
very clear view of what is read to them, and impresseth sacred truths more
deeply upon the mind.

AND to the honor of the laity of the church of Scotland, I shall mention it,
as Paul commended the Bereans; they are more universally acquainted with the
scriptures, than the laity of any other church whatsoever. If, therefore, from
the methods used among them, the happiest consequences have been and are
produced; and if they are countenanced likewise by the best antiquity, what
avails your ridicule on the pride of the clergy and Perverseness of the people?

AS to your manner of reasoning, Sir, against pulpit expositions, that by them
"the understandings of the laity are put too much in the power of the clergy,
and the simple and ignorant are exposed to be seduced by the party principles
and whimsical opinions of the preacher," etc. I shall only observe that it
holds equally good against sermonizing of every kind, and all comments upon the
scriptures whatsoever.

YOUR next charge against the church of Scotland respects its psalmody
Blacksmith's Letter, page 11, etc.
. "As to praise, you say, they seem to study to give this part of their worship
as much the air of rusticity and contempt of God as possible -- Nothing to
engage or elevate the heart -- the words obsolete and low -- the versification
mean and barbarous -- the music harsh and ill performed -- and the posture most
indecent."

AS to the first part of this severe accusation, wherein you assume what
belongs only to the Searcher of hearts, and characterize this solemn service as
a direct contempt of God, between you and Him whose province is usurped, let it
rest. I hope you will be brought to think more seriously and justly of this
important matter, and to acknowledge that where there is not a word uttered, or
a sound heard, there yet may be melody harmonious and acceptable.

THE words, some of them, may be obsolete and low The Version this Writer
refers to, as commonly made use of in Scotland, has no^ more obs^lete words,
nor indeed so many, as that of Sternhold and Hopkins, which, for a long time,
was generally made use of in the churches both of England, and Ireland, and
still is used in many places: Nor is there any better version yet appointed by
the public authority to be universally used. And if persons are at Liberty to
use other versions in the one Church, they are so in the other: and it ought to
be known, that a version against which this objection will not lie, collected,
not only from the Psalms, but from ma^^ other select passages both of the old
Testament and the new, has been compiled by the General Assembly for the use of
the church of Scotland; and that of Dr. Watts is generally used in America.
, but those you condemn, are under no necessity of using these. Without the
least censure, others may be, and by some are substituted in the room of them;
and if we may judge of the elevation of the heart, from the united voices of
the performers, the church of Scotland and its adherents must secure our
charitable approbation. As psalmody makes up a very considerable part of the
christians' devotions, there are very few, of that denomination, who think it
beneath them to sing the praises of the Almighty; and, excepting in some remote
country congregations, the music is far from being ill performed.

AS to the posture; where such a number join in singing, it would perhaps tend
more to discord than to harmony, if they should all perform standing. When the
posture is therefore of no importance, what adds to the harmony must be
principally attended to. But if any of the Presbyterian communion in Scotland,
or any protestant dissenter in England or Ireland, or wherever this persuasion
is embraced, choose standing, or even kneeling in this service, he is at his
liberty, and may, unreproved, use the manner most agreeable to himself. I shall
only add, that in the few passages where this service is mentioned in the New
Testament, there is as much countenance given to the sitting as to an erect or
any other posture: thus, while our blessed Savior sat with his disciples
administering and instituting the solemn sacrament of the supper, before they
separated, we are told Mat. xxvi. 30. and Mark xiv. 26.
and we have reason to believe it was before they rose from the table, (for
there is no mention made of their changing their posture) they sung an hymn or
psalm. If the Blacksmith's Quintilian were to fall into some of the established
churches of England, it is presumed he would not be less struck with ^^lecisms
in gesture, if he should find the whole assembly fitting dumb, till the clerk
alone had sung out the Psalm; dictating it in the mean time to an unmeaning
organ which is his only fellow-singer; and as soon as he has done with the
inspired words of the Psalmist, the whole congregation standing up till he
sings over the uninspired doxology.


BUT your principal outcry Blacksmith's letter, p. 12, etc.
, Mr. Blacksmith, is, against "the indecencies and follies that attend the
administration of our Lord's supper. You defy Italy, with all its superstition,
to produce a scene better fitted to raise pity and regret in a religious,
humane and understanding heart; or to afford an ampler field for ridicule to
the careless and profane, than what they call a field-preaching upon one of
those occasions." -- And, in which of these classes you have ranked yourself,
it requires no great sagacity to discover. For here it is that your ridicule
puts on its keenest edge; and your wit and invention equally vie with each
other.

I WILL not say that the charge you bring in every part is injurious and
unjust: but this may confidently be affirmed, that, as it is general and
indiscriminate, and as far as it strikes at the constitution of the church of
Scotland, it must come under this censure. The Blacksmith's low pun on the word
occasion, seems designed to insinuate that the church of Scotland called the
Lord^s supper by that name. This is one among many instances of his designedly
sacrificing truth to s^^ir^; if ever that word is applied to that subject, it
is me^rt to be understood only as in other cases -- to mean an opportunity, for
administering and receivi^g that sacrament: and I can see no more ground for
ridicule, in saying, on an occasion of this kind, than on occasion of a fast --
a thanksgiving -- an election, or an ordination, or any other public occasion
whatever.


FOR the benefit of those who are in a great measure strangers to the usages of
this church, respecting the sacrament of the Lord's supper, it is necessary to
observe, that, ever since the reformation, communicants in it have been very
numerous: this, which is neither a fault nor an indecency, necessarily
occasions a labor extraordinary, to which no one man's abilities can be
supposed equal. The neighboring ministers, therefore, whose assistance is
required, sometimes draw after them a number from their respective churches,
who may choose to put themselves to a little trouble, rather than to enjoy at
home a silent sabbath, or perhaps be obliged to attend ministrations from which
they could not expect such profit. But it is worthy of our notice, that if any
of the sober part from the neighboring parishes attend, with a design to join
in the participation of the memorials of our Savior's Passion, they cannot be
admitted, unless properly attested from the ministers or officers of the
churches to which they belong. This is not indecent, but desireably regular: if
they are spectators only, and do not communicate, this can be no detriment, but
an incitement rather, to the devotion of those who are more solemnly engaged.

AND it may be justly said, that the whole work, as far as it regards the
regular members, is conducted with as much decency and as little share of
confusion, as could well be expected, where such numbers have a right to be
admitted, and cannot, merely to avoid a little inconveniency, be excluded.

BUT it must be allowed, that while some, from the best and purest motives, are
led to such ordinances, others of the meaner class, and who seldom act from any
worthy principle, assemble with them likewise; many of these are hardened
wretches, who instead of being affected with the solemn gravity around them,
seem to rejoice in such opportunities of showing themselves ten times more the
servants of the Devil.

IF then, Sir, there have been indecencies observeable in any particular
churches, among those you would censure, they were, without doubt, principally
occasioned by the indiscretions of unworthy spectators, who crowd to such
solemnities, and who cannot be restrained from doing so, unless, Mr.
Blacksmith, you who seem to have the good of that church greatly at heart,
would please to solicit for letters patent to make bolts and fetters to bind at
home the irregular rabble. But while a mixed multitude is permitted, where many
convene of various denominations, who neither fear God, nor honor the
legislative power, it is not to be expected but that there should be instances
of folly and impiety to cast a melancholy shade over such solemnities.

THIS, however, I dare affirm, that of all the reformed churches, there are
none more careful, with respect to their regular members, than that which your
satire would bring a reproach on. No persons can be admitted to its privileges,
without giving sufficient evidence both of their knowledge as to the principles
of christianity, and of their moral character: if the least stain has invaded
this latter, they are obliged to give the fellow members of their community
full satisfaction, either of their innocence or of their repentance, before
they are permitted to receive the sacrament of the Lord's supper. And in truth,
such care is taken to preserve a pure church, by continual inspection and
enquiry, as deserves the applause and imitation of all who lay claim to the
character of reformed If I were disposed, like this writer, to cast
indiscriminate reflections on large churches and bodies of men, how easy would
it be to recriminate, and to produce the testimony of his own church, on many
accounts very respectable, which yet acknowledges and laments the want of a
Godly Discipline! But the Church of Scotland stands in no need of being
commended at the expense of any other. Sober and learned foreigners, in all
Protestant nations, have admired the order and decent solemnity, of the
^dministration of sacraments in this church, although they do not see her join
with her half-sister on the otherside of the Tweed, in kneeling at an altar in
compliance with the decree of Pope H^norius, anno. 1214, who appointed this as
a posture of adoration, because his predecessor, Innocent III, had decreed the
transubstantiation of the bread and wine, into the real flesh and blood of
JESUS CHRIST.
. Some may have fallen away from their religious profession, and in certain
places, the strictness of discipline may be relaxed; but among all
denominations of christians, there is nothing new or singular in this; and
would it not be very wrong to bring an odium upon a body of men for the
indiscretions of individuals? Just as the caviller at our most noble
constitution would deserve to be despised, whose malevolence would shade its
luster, because miscreants have attempted to disturb its tranquillity.

BUT, Mr. Blacksmith, if all the wicked of the earth should join together, and
be aided with all that your vilifying genius could suggest, to render a sacred
solemnity ridiculous, this must not, and with the solid reasoners and just
thinkers among our readers, will not, bring any reproach upon the sober and
serious part, who form the body, as in truth they are by far the majority, of
Presbyterians or Protestant Dissenters. Those who have in the least incurred
your censure, will, I hope, be taught by you, (for we may take a hint even from
an enemy) for the future to enter into such prudential schemes as may secure
them from every thing indecent or irregular. And it is the peculiar happiness
of the church of Scotland and its adherents, that this can be effected without
the interposition of Synod, Assembly, or Convocation.

IT is difficult, Sir, for the friends of piety to comprehend what you mean by
'our idle days, in Scotland, Blacksmith's Letter, pages 14, 15, etc.
and your discourse equally idle about them, and calculations upon them. But if
by these are meant days of solemn humiliation or thanksgiving, your invectives
are not only unjust, but impious. All the serious part of your readers will
allow very readily, that these kinds of appointments are not ^ver frequent, in
Scotland, or among Protestant Dissenters; nor could they be (...) frequent,
without injuring the cause of true religion. Christianity requires that a man
should examine himself before he eat of that bread, or drink of that cup; but
if no previous o^portunity be allowed for this purpose, how shall it be
performed? You have showed by your arithmetical capacity, what an immense sum
these days, few as they are, must cost Scotland through the year The Blacksmith
did not consider, that if there was any thing in these Invectives, they would
bear much harder upon the churches of England and Ireland, than on that of
Scotland, since the number of days prescribed to be religiously observed, are
vastly more numerous in the former than in the latter; and every one of them
taken out of the Popish rubric, and dedicated to the religious honor of some
canonized saint -- except the 30th of January, which is consecrated to saint
Charles I, the noted martyr of their own produce.
; but with as much propriety you might have proceeded in your calculation, and
have struck at once at the root of all piety, by reasoning in this manner;
"Every man whose regards to religion and its exercises are sincere, and who
wishes that his soul may prosper, employs, we shall only say, one half hour
every day in the service of his Maker, in prayer or meditation; this, in the
annual revolution, to each individual who thus employs himself, amounts to no
less than seven days, fourteen hours, and an half. Considered in a political
light, how hurtful therefore must private piety be! We shall suppose that of
the millions, who are subjects of Great Britain, only ten thousand, one with
another, do devote so much time every day to sacred purposes; this will amount
to seventy-six thousand and forty-one days, sixteen hours; and supposing each
of them could earn at the rate of sixpence a day, this will cost the nation,
at least, one thousand nine hundred and one pounds and sixpence, sterling, a
year; an immense sum, you will say, for the service of God! and what profit is
there, if we how the knee before him?" The reasoning, Sir, is quite parallel;
the interests of God and religion are equally concerned in both cases, only in
this latter the impiety is more apparent.

As for the order and oratory so much ridiculed, I shall only observe, that
they have hitherto been the subjects of admiration, not of contempt; and that
while the greatest have reaped the most considerable advantages, the meanest
have not gone empty away. Persons of almost every persuasion can bear testimony
to this. An eminent prelate, Archbishop Usher.
the most eminent of his time, confessed himself so struck with the solemnity
and decency of such administrations, that he desired communion, and was
admitted by the celebrated Doctor Owen. From page 12 to 22 the Blacksmith has
let loose his reigning passions of malice and spleen -- and exerted his chief
talents -- those of raillery and abuse, in venting them. By these helps he had
drawn a picture whose true original was never realized by any spectator at the
sacrament in Scotland, besides himself. Thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands, throughout that nation, are witnesses every year of the impudent and
barefaced falsehoods with which he has so curiously stuffed the ten pages of
his pamphlet abovecited. The friends of that church, however, need be in no
pain for any dishonor she may receive from his pen -- as his ridicule is
pointed more keenly against the gra^ious and powerful work of the SPIRIT of GOD
in the conversion of sinners, than the mock-miracles of popery -- his
scurrility is more severe against the most serious and zealous preaching of the
word of light, than the vilest scenes of midnight debauchery, for which he
plainly boasts that himself and his associates sought their opportunities at
those solemn seasons of divine worship. Nor will the authority of such a writer
ever be able to fix on the clergy of that Church, the scandalous character with
which his slanderous pen attempts to asperse them; while all the Protestant
world will own, that a more venerable body of Divines -- a body more learned,
or more eminent for piety and virtue -- or one that has longer, or more firmly
stood up as a barrier against Popery, and a bulwark of the great doctrines of
the reformation -- has never been seen in any nation, than the church of
Scotland has furnished.


THE next and last labor Blacksmith's Letter, pages 22, 23, etc.
of your ridicule is pointed at public prayer, as performed in the church of
Scotland; "The purity and peace of which church, you allege, would be greatly
promoted by the composition and establishment of some devout liturgy, or form
of prayer for public worship." And in favor of these stated forms, you roundly
assert, that "the professors of all religions under the sun, have used this
manner of worship, Greeks and Romans, the Magi and Mahometans, Jews and
Christians, have all agreed in this practice." Particularly you affirm very
confidently "That the Christian church universally used it 'till the fifteenth
century: The Author of the Blacksmith's Letter, in this, and several other
instances, has showed little regard to the rules of Decorum in writing. For
though he does the Blacksmiths in Scotland the honor to supp^se them to have
more learning than the Blacksmiths of other nations, yet I think it is too much
to suppose them, as he does, well acquainted with the customs and modes of
worship, of the ancient Greeks and Romans, and of the Magi and Mahometans, of
the Christian Church in all ages, and of the professors of all religions under
the Sun. This certainly requires a more universal reading and knowledge than a
Seldom or a Grotius could boast of. And to introduce a Blacksmith pronouncing
so confidently concerning all nations and religions, is completely ridiculous;
unless it be intended to insinuate that this Blacksmith has an uncommon share
of that confidence which is generally an attendant on ignorance.
" and you allege, "That if the universal consent and opinion of mankind is a
conclusive argument, when applied to the first and greatest article of
religion, the existence of God, it must be so too with respect to the best and
fittest way of worshipping him."

BEFORE I enter into the merits of this argument, I must beg to be heard a
little, as to my own private opinion of prayer, and its requisites. If we
understand the nature of prayer, disputes about the manner of offering up our
addresses, will be the more easily adjusted.

THE nature of this solemn duty, I apprehend, may be expressed in few words. It
is a lifting up of the mind toward God, the Fountain of all good, with humble
requests for such things as we want or stand in need of, and are agreeable to
the will of God; who, by all that profess themselves Christians, is to be
addressed in the name of the Lord Jesus, with a general or particular
confession of sins, and thankful acknowledgments for the continual and merciful
supplies of his providence and grace; showing the sense of our minds either in
the language of the heart, or in the expression of this language by proper
words.

THIS, I think, is a just description of prayer; and if we apply the debates
about the manner of worship to any part of it, I think they must appear very
frivolous. Who dare say, that stated forms, are so absolutely and essentially
necessary to the due performance of this duty, as that without them there can
be no acceptance? And on the other hand, would it be less presumption, to
exclude from the favorable regards of the Deity, all stated forms of devotion?
Upon this account we should be very cautious of condemning those of either
party, who differ from us in this matter; for it must be granted, that though
we may disagree in the manner of offering up our addresses, yet the spirit of
devotion may not be wanting in which ever way we choose.

THE experiences of many valuable and sincere Christians on both sides of the
question, prove the truth of this; while they evidently show the rashness and
folly of the blind censurer. What are forms or modes of worship, when compared
with the graces of faith, love, humility, sincerity, contrition, resignation,
and those holy desires, and devout affections, which are the life and soul of
prayer? As for those, therefore, who join with you, Mr. Blacksmith, in speaking
disrespectfully of the manner used by the church of Scotland, and it is
adherents, calling it cant, jargon, blasphemous effusions, Presbyterian
inspiration, and the like, let all who would desire to act as Christians, pity
and pray for you; but let them beware of imitating a rudeness, so inconsistent
with all the rules of religion and charity, as well as good manners.

I SHALL now enter upon this disagreeable argument, but it shall be in the
spirit of meekness, and so as not, designedly, to give offense to any, who in
their worship, make use of precomposed forms; and as what I write is intended
to be of general service to all who can think or judge of this subject, my
remarks shall be brief, and plain as possible.

YOUR first argument, as already laid down, is taken from the universal consent
and practice of mankind, which, as you allege, "If it be fitly applied to the
proof of the first and greatest article of religion, the existence of God, must
be equally con^^usive, with respect to the best and fittest way of wor^^^^^ing
him." I answer, that though the universal conse^^^^^ nations, even the most
barbarous, is a strong presumptive evidence, in favor of this proposition, that
there is a God, yet their idolatrous or superstitious manner of worshipping
him, can never be brought in as a proper model for our services; who are, in
the dispensation of the gospel of his Son, taught to worship him in spirit and
in truth. In this matter, therefore, the practices of the Greeks and Romans,
the Magi and Mahometans, cannot be of the least advantage to the arguments for
stated forms.

BUT you allege Letter, p. 23.
that "God himself prescribed this way of worship to the Jews, that our Savior
honored and sanctified it by his presence and practice, and authorized it by
his command."

IF these things are so, those who pray without stated forms, are wrong indeed;
but they must be made appear, before we yield up our liberty in the free way of
worship. With respect to the Jews, it would help speedily to determine the
debate, if the books or chapters of the Old Testament were pointed out that
contained the Jewish or Hebrew liturgy. But though Josephus, their eminent
historian, has given us an account of that which was composed by Ezra, who was
the first of the order of the Scribes, and though the learned and laborious
Doctor Lightfoot, has happily retrieved one for us out of the Jewish Rabbis;
yet as I do not find them in my Bible, nor countenanced by the sure word of
prophecy, I must, as to my own opinion, be greatly influenced by the
declaration of him, who particularly addressing the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were more than ordinary zealous for the traditions of the fathers, said unto
them, In vain do ye worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

IT is granted that in some particular cases, and under certain circumstances,
petitions and ackowledgments to this or the other purpose, or perhaps a form of
blessing were prescribed, which extended to individuals in these circumstances:
but it cannot in the least affect our argument, unless an universal, invariable
form, such as was to suit persons of every age, and of every state; and such as
was used by all the great and good men under the Old Testament dispensation, in
their public worship can be pointed out; the abettors of liturgies do nothing
to the purpose, unless something like this be produced.

WE need only consult the history of the Old Testament worthies, to conclude,
that they all walked by faith, and served God in their own way. As to our first
parents, they prayed, it is certain, but it would be a ridiculous fancy to say,
that it was by form.

Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their orisons, each morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced or sung Unmeditated. Milton.

By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, God
testifying of his gifts. Enoch walked with God, and had this testimony that he
pleased him; in his days, and probably influenced by his example, Men began to
call upon the name of the Lord; or to be called by the name of the Lord; to be
distinguished as men of piety.

Noah preserving his integrity, and the worship of God in its purity, when the
old world was condemned, found grace in the eyes of the Lord.

Abraham looking for a city, which has foundations, whose builder and maker is
God, obtained the character of the friend of God, and Father of the faithful.
Wherever he pitched his tent, there he built an altar and called on the name of
the Lord.

Isaac, in the fields, poured forth his ardent wishes; while the servant of his
father is no less importunate at the side of a well.

Jacob, like a prince, wrestled with God, and prevailed.

BUT to suppose, that these Patriarchs, or any of them, worshipped God by form,
or wrestled with him in the darkness of the night, and till the dawning of the
morning, out of a precomposed liturgy, would be an affront to common sense. And
thus we see from the earliest history of God's church, how groundless that
assertion is, "That the present extempore way of worship used by Presbyters and
others, is contrary to the practice and opinion of all mankind, in all ages
Blacksmith's Letter, p. 22.
;" and how little, Sir, we are to depend upon your candor and ingenuity, who
can assert such things.

IF we continue our enquiries, and consider the character and practices of
Melchizedec, Job, Moses, Joshua, David, Daniel, and of all who, in fervent
prayer, have stood before God, we shall find them preserving the same method of
address, pouring forth their hearts in free prayer, such as the spirit of God,
and their various circumstances dictated. We do not find Joshua, for example,
making use of the words of Moses, though their situation was in many respects
parallel; and though we might reasonably expect, that this great follower of so
great a Master, if it had been most agreeable to the divine will, would have
done so. Nor do we find David fettered by any form in his devotions; nor Daniel
and the prophets confined to the devotional exercises of David.

Moses is often represented to us as a powerful intercessor for the people of
Israel; and one particular instance is mentioned, wherein his hands were
stretched forth in earnest prayer, upheld by Aaron and Hur, through a bloody
day, 'till the going down of the sun. We have likewise the prophet Elijah,
speedily deciding the controversy between him and the priests of Baal, by
extempore prayer. We have him restoring the widow's son of Zarephath to life in
the same manner. A like instance is recorded of Elisha his eminent successor.

WE have the most noble and generous interposition of David for his people,
when the destroying angel was making such alarming and dreadful devastations.

WE have the record of Hezekiah's success against the formidable Assyrian
invasion, by the same means; and of his deliverance from a private affliction,
when he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord, and he had this
comfortable and speedy answer, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears,
behold I will hear thee.

WE have an instance no less striking in Manasseh, who humbled himself greatly
in his affliction, and the Lord was entreated of him. The same may be observed
of Jonah and the Mariners, they neither had nor used a form; which, in that
Prophet's particular situation, would be absurd to think of.

AFTER the establishment of the Temple worship, it cannot be said, any more
than of the period preceding, that free prayer was restrained: We have many
instances to the contrary; and the very prayer of Solomon, at the dedication of
it, throws so much light upon this argument, that it is worthy of our strictest
notice. Such a variety of cases are put, wherein it is proper for men to offer
up their free and unprescribed addresses, that all, who duly consider it, must
be satisfied in this matter. If any man, says he, trespass against his
neighbor, then hear thou in Heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning
the wicked to bring his way upon his head, and justifying the righteous, to
give him according to his righteousness. When thy people Israel be smitten down
before the enemy, and confess thy name and pray -- then hear thou in Heaven,
and forgive the sin of thy people Israel. -- When Heaven is shut up, and there
is no rain, if they pray toward this place, -- then hear thou in Heaven, and
forgive the sin of thy servants. -- If there be in the land famine; if there be
pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust; or if there be caterpillar; if their
enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever
sickness there be; what prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or
by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own
heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house; then hear thou in Heaven
thy dwelling place, and forgive and do, and give to every man according to his
ways, whose heart thou know.

How generous and unlimited is this solemn dedication! Not precluding any from
the public services of the Temple, who know the plague of their own hearts, or
who spread forth their hands thither. Many do we find making use of this
privilege, and reaping the advantage of it. The Temple was, in truth, what our
Savior calls it, an House of Prayer, as well as a place of Sacrifice; and
whatever other oblations were offered, these were always accompanied, either
with the private addresses to God of the party offering, or of the Priests for
them, as their particular circumstances required.

THIS, Sir, is the history of prayer from the accounts we have of it in the Old
Testament; what more authentic records of early time you may have discovered, I
cannot tell. Some such, it is to be supposed, you must have discovered, to bear
you out in that assertion, "that the present extemporary way of worship, is
contrary to the practice and opinion of all Mankind, in all ages, and of all
religions." But whatever your reasons are for maintaining this strange
proposition, I will venture to affirm that they are not scriptural. Neither are
they countenanced by profane writers of the best repute.

OF the Pagan devotions, whether Greeks or Barbarians, Homer is the most
ancient and authentic witness; his heroes are often introduced praying; but
their addresses are such as their present circumstances suggested, and he never
gives the least hint of their using any form; on the contrary, he introduces
Phoenix remonstrating to Achilles.

KAI GAR TE LITAI EISI DIOS KOURAI MEGALOIO. ILIAD. 9. l. 498. Present want of
Greek Types (a difficulty which will soon be remedied) makes it necessary to
substitute Roman in their stead.
Prayers are the daughters of almighty Jove.

UPON which Madame Dacier comments thus, "For it is God inspires prayers, and
teaches men to pray."

WHAT the mystical rites of the Magi were, I will not indeed say; nor will I at
present enquire into the modes of Mohammedan Worship; but if we are to be
influenced by the practice of those who have composed the church of God in all
ages; and if, in our enquiry into this matter, we pay any deference to the
accounts we have in the volumes of inspiration, we must believe that good men
have always enjoyed the liberty of unfettered devotion.

THE Old Testament has witnessed already to this truth: and can it be thought,
that this part of scripture, which is so very minute in observing the smallest
matters relating to the tabernacle, and every fringe, or plate in the priest's
vestments, would have omitted the form of words to be used in the daily
service, if such had been prescribed? If we proceed to search the records of
the New, we shall find neither precept nor example for the use of stated
invariable forms in the service of God; never indeed were they introduced into
the christian church, 'till the ages, Mr. Blacksmith, began to be of your
complexion The Epistles and Gospels, as used in the Church of England were
instituted by Pope Damasus, Anno. 384, vid. Platin. and. Pol. Virgil. The Form
of Service commonly called the Mass, with many ceremonies, were added by Pope
Gregory, and by his Minister Austin in the English Church, in the seventh
Century.

In the English Liturgy at present, the Collects are generally taken out of the
Popish Breviary, and many of the Prayers in the standing Offices, out of the
Missal and Ritual. Durandus. liturgia cap. 21. The Litany was invented by Pope
Gregory, as were also responses, and gradual, the singing service -- the Lord
have mercy, etc. the prescribed Psalms, and lessons, the feasts and fasts were
appointed by Pope Clement, except the Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays, by
Pope Boniface.

Here the Blacksmith would do well to reflect on the politeness of his
strictures on the reading of the Scriptures, which employed his pen down top. 6.

It is well known to be the practice of very many Presbyterian Churches in
places of public resort, to read the scriptures in course, agreeably to the
recommendation of their Directory; and if others prefer a different method,
adapting the portions read daily, to the subjects to be discussed, and the
present necessities of the people; it cannot be proved, that the edification of
the Church was ever marred by this variation.

We may venture to engage, however, to the Blacksmith, that Presbyterians and
other Protestant Dissenters, from the church of England, will fully satisfy
him, by an entire conformity to that church in this matter, whenever he shall
be pleased to convince them that she has the divine warrant for rejecting the
sacred text as it stands in the Bible, and taking up the vulgar Latin with all
its known errors in its stead; for mangling and curtailing what they call
Epistles and Gospels, so as to ruin the scope and connection of the places --
and often to destroy or material^e alter the sense -- for omitting in the whole
course of the public service, so great a part of the canonical scriptures, as
the most of Leviticus, Ruth, Chronicles, Nehemiah, Esther, Canticles,
Lamentations, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Nahum, Zephaniah, Haggai, the second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, the second and third Epistles of John, and the
greatest part of the Revelations -- and instead of these, reading, as sacred
oracles, the fabulous stories of Tobit and his dog -- of Bell and the dragon --
Judith -- Baruch, and other parts of the Apocrypha; which are to be read
through entirely in the morning and evening service for two months every year
-- for chopping up the scriptures in short sentences for dialogue: between the
priest and the people -- for sitting at the reading of the Epistles, and
standing up, bowing and responding at the reading of Gospels, etc. etc.




K. Edward ingenuously acknowledges this in his Declaration to the Devonshire
Rebels "Though" says be, "it seems to you a new Service, yet indeed it is no
other but the old; the self same words in English, that were in Latin: For
nothing is altered, but to speak with Knowledge, that which was spoken with
ignorance, only a few things taken out, so fond, that it had been a shame to
have heard them in English." Holinshed's Hist. vol. iii. p. 1005.


The first Reformers, by thus endeavoring to gain over the Papists, it must be
acknowledged, acted a prudent part; but to persist in not throwing out what is
still exceptionable to many of their own worthy Members, and particularly
offensive to Dissenters, I cannot help thinking, seems to show a greater regard
to the Popish than to the Reformed Interest.


, and ignorance, superstition and darkness that was truly felt, covered almost
the face of the whole earth. You have laid me under the disagreeable necessity
of proving this.

"OUR Savior," you say, p. 23.
"honored this worship, with his presence, for the worship of the synagogues
was by a form or prayer." And was it then the design of our Savior, by his
presence in those places, to recommend either the matter or the manner of the
synagogue Worship? If you say the manner only; where have you learned this? For
I do not find in my testament, the least hint to countenance such an
imagination. That our Savior frequently took the opportunity of such
assemblies, sharply to reprove the Scribes and Pharisees, for their inventions
and impositions in the worship of God; and likewise to instruct them in the
true and spiritual meaning of the law of Moses; the sense of which, by their
corrupt glosses, they had dreadfully perverted, is readily granted. But can any
heart conceive that he meant to sanctify what he so sharply reproves; or to
establish a form of worship that was upon the point of expiring? His own
practice teaches us the contrary of this; the seaside, mountains, and desert
places, night, as well as day, were witnesses to the decency, spirituality and
fervor of his devotions; and by this we are instructed, that, in every place,
he who worshipeth God in spirit and in truth, shall be accepted of him, for the
Father seeks such to worship him. It is almost unnecessary to prove it, the
thing is so very plain, that, now, under the purity of that religion which our
blessed Savior has established, all outward ceremonies, modes and
circumstances of worship are commanded to give place to the sanctity of the
heart, and the inward devotion of spirit. That the time is now come, when
neither at Jerusalem, nor at this, or the other mount, with faces toward the
temple, but in every place, the true worshippers of the Father, are to worship
him, not turning over leaves, but lifting up holy hands, without wrath or
doubting.

DID the humble publican, though in the temple, read his prayers? Or where had
the proud pharisee his vaunting form?

BESIDES, Sir, since you have so ingeniously used our Savior's attendance on
Synagogue-Worship, as an argument for adopting their manner, why not their
matter also? Or will you pretend to say that our Savior, in his attendance
upon the Jewish service, paid more deference to the form than to the matter? I
am persuaded, Sir, that though it be the natural consequence of your reasoning,
you did not mean to involve yourself in this shocking dilemma.

IN support of what you recommend, you further affirm, that our Savior
sanctified forms of prayer by his practice: "for in his agony in the garden, he
rose up, awakened and rebuked the disciples, returned to the same place, and
repeated the same form of words three times over."

IF the evangelists had said that our Savior exactly repeated the same
expressions three times over, nothing could be concluded from thence for stated
invariable forms of prayer in public worship. Our Lord's circumstances were
then of a peculiar nature, and the petitions he offered, turned upon one point:
and he who would argue, that we ought always to repeat the same words in
prayer, because Jesus Christ in these peculiar circumstances did so, would show
himself a pitiable reasoner; but the truth is, the fact itself is
misrepresented, and the evangelists themselves witness against you.

THE words of St. Matthew are these, [see Mat. xvi. 36, etc.] Then comes Jesus
with them, unto a place called Gethsemane, and says unto the disciples, sit ye
here, while I go and pray yonder. -- And he went a little further, and fell on
his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from me, nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

THIS, Sir, is what you are pleased to call the form, and to assert that our
Savior repeated it three times over; but in the evangelist's account there is
a remarkable variation in our Lord's second prayer. For he tells us, that after
modestly chiding his disciples, and at the same time apologizing for their
weakness, he went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father,
if this cup may not pass from me except I drink it, thy will be done.

IN the account of the evangelist St. Mark, Mark xiv. 36.
there is still a greater variation. Luke xxii. 44.
And St. Luke tells us, that being in agony, he prayed more earnestly; which we
may justly suppose the evangelist relates of his third prayer, for he says that
after returning to, and exhorting his disciples, while he yet spoke, a
multitude, and Judas with them, came to apprehend him. But perhaps because it
is said, in St. Matthew and St. Mark according to our translation, that he
prayed saying the same words. (Matt. xxvi. 44. Mark xiv. 39.) the meaning must
be, that he used precisely the same Expressions. A man of learning, as you, Mr.
Blacksmith, take upon you to be, ought to know, however, that the passage in
the original, in both Evangelists, runs thus, TON AUTON LOGON EIPOON, LOGOS is
not expressed in the plural number, and therefore is improperly rendered Words,
as it might have been, if REMATA had been made use of. It is well known that
LOGOS admits of various Significations, and is variously rendered by our
Translators. In Luke xx. 3. they translate it Thing. In Acts viii. 21. as also
Acts xv. 6 and Acts xix. 28. it is translated Matter. In Romans ix. 28. it is
rendered Work. And in Act x. 29. it is rendered Intent, and might be rendered
Purpose. That passage, therefore, in St. Matthew and St. Mark, might have been
properly rendered, speaking the same Thing or Matter. Or if the original had it
that he spoke the same REMATA, though this also is used to signify Things as
well as Words, it must necessarily be understood thus, that he spoke words to
the same Purpose; except we make the Evangelists contradict themselves; since,
as has been already showed, the Words, as recorded by them, are not precisely
the same Expressions, though to the same Sense.


THIS then, Sir, makes nothing in your favor: And all that can be gathered from
it is, that our Savior being under a particular pressure, from the full
prospect of his approaching sufferings, returned thrice to the same subject --
not barely saying the same words -- but as his mind dwelt upon this matter, so
his devotion ran upon it, and his words were to one effect.

IF, however, we consider, the season of the night, the admonition of our Lord
to his Disciples to watch and pray, or his own example -- we must conclude,
from this passage, that free prayer is not without the strongest arguments to
enforce it.

AS another recommendation of stated forms, you assert that our Savior "Before
he expired on the cross, offered up his devotions in the words of the
twenty-second Psalm."

I ANSWER, that, therefore, any man in imitation of Christ's example, may
freely choose out and apply to his own case, or the case of others, such
scriptural expressions as shall be most suitable to them. For our Lord, upon
this mournful occasion, does not make use of the prayers he had formerly
offered, nor that form or pattern which he had given to his Disciples; but
finding his case to be then very singular, he movingly expostulates, not in the
language of the whole Psalm, but in part of the words of the first verse. My
God! my God! why have thou forsaken me? I shall be judged by the unprejudiced,
if the abettors of free prayer could wish for a stronger plea in their favor.

YOUR next assertion is, that the Son of God has "authorized stated forms of
prayer by his command." The place indeed is not mentioned where this command is
given, and I must own I do not recollect it; but as our Lord's comprehensive
prayer is immediately referred to, it is probable, that it relates to the
manner in which one of the Evangelists introduces it.

THIS prayer is indeed the best, the most full and perfect that ever was
composed in the world; and if ever any form was intended to have been
invariably used in the Christian church, this was it: I will not presume to
issue the controversy, whether the Blessed Author of it intended that we
should, in our devotions, word for word, abide by this Formula. I shall only
offer a few things relating to this question, leaving it to the judgment of the
reader to determine as he pleases.

THAT it was only designed as a divine rule or model of prayer, not as a
precise form, seems to appear from this consideration:

THAT our Blessed Savior himself, as far as we can find, never so much as once
used it, upon all those various occasions which he afterward had of praying,
to the Father; though it is very observable, and I have often remarked it with
pleasure, that the petitions he offered up, various as they were, are all of
them reducible, to one or other of those, which are contained in his most
excellent summary.

AND as our Savior did not, so we have no account that ever his apostles
joined in the use of this prayer in their assemblies, or that they so much as
once used it, though for themselves and the church of God, the petitions they
offered, were likewise conformable to this divine pattern, which, in his
excellent sermon on the Mount, our Lord had showed them.

BESIDES, had it been the intention of our Savior, to bind his followers to
the use of these words invariably, is it not probable that the Evangelists
would have recorded them without the least variation? But this is not the case.
In the fourth petition, St. Matthew has it thus: Mat. vi. 11.
give us this day our daily bread; St. Luke, Luke xi. 3.
Give us day by day our daily bread. The fifth petition is likewise differently
worded. With the one Evangelist it stands thus: Mat. vi. 1^.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. The other has it thus:
Luke xi. 4.
And forgive our sins, for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
The English liturgy varies from both, thus: Forgive us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us. And which is yet more considerable, the
whole conclusion is omitted by St. Luke, which the other Evangelist has in
these words, Mat. vi. 13.
For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever, Amen. In the
former editions the te^ts are here set down in the original Greek, which, for
the reason beforementioned, are here omitted.


FROM which comparison it is a reasonable presumption, that our blessed Lord in
this prayer, intended no more than to give his disciples, and all faithful
Christians to the end of the world, a divine directory -- not an invariable
form of devotion. Thus Augustine Aug. de Magistro, Cap. 1.

One of the most judicious Critics is of the mind, that these clauses, which
art in Heaven, and thy will be done, as in Heaven so in earth, and deliver us
from evil, were not originally in St. Luke's gospel; but crept into i^ out of
St. Matthew's. And he gives this reason for it, that the first clause, which
art in Heaven, is neither extant in the old Latin, nor in some of the Greek
copies. And he alleges the same of the second clause. Grot.


expressly declares, that " Christ in the delivery of these petitions, did not
teach his disciples how they should speak, or what words they should use in
prayer; but to whom they were to pray, and what things they were to pray for,
when engaged in the exercise of secret or mental prayer." And therefore while
in o^^ of the Evangelists it is said, when ye pray, say, etc. The other has
it, after this manner pray ye. If we take this as an express command of our
Lord, whenever we pray, to use this form, it will prove that we ought never to
use any other expressions in our addresses to God, than those in this prayer.
Nor should we ask a blessing to our victuals, or give thanks, without it. This
would destroy the use of all other forms whatsoever.

BESIDES, there are some men of learning, who hold that this prayer of our Lord
was not designed for the perpetual use of the church, but only for a temporary
form: To this purpose they observe, that the three first petitions, hallowed be
thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, etc seem to be calculated chiefly
for the dawn of the Christian Church; for that period, when according to the
doctrine of Christ and his forerunner, and to the expectation of the pious
Jews, the kingdom of God was at hand. They observe farther, that in the
petition for forgiveness of sins, there is not the least mention made of the
sacrifice, the death, or blood of Christ, in virtue whereof we must now sue for
pardon; whereas our Savior, after his resurrection and ascension, is every
where proposed, as our High Priest, Mediator, Intercessor and Advocate, of
which there is no notice taken in this form. And therefore they suppose that,
upon this account, a considerable time after it is delivery, our Lord tells his
disciples, hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall receive.
They observe likewise that the Doxologies mentioned in Scripture after our
Savior's ascension, lead us directly and expressly, to ascribe our praises to
God by Christ, or in his name, of which there is not the least hint in our
Lord's prayer. These are the observations of men who hold it as a form, suited
chiefly to the state of the Disciples, while under our Savior's personal
ministry. I submit them to the ingenuity of the reader.

As to my own sentiments, I concur with the learned Grotius Non enim praecipit
Christus verba recitari, quod nec legimus apostol^s fecisse, quanquam id fieri
cum fructu potest, sed Materiam Precum hinc promere. Vid. Grot. Comment. in
Matt. vi. ^.
that neither Christ, nor his Apostles, as far as we can learn, have commanded
the very words of this prayer to be used, though this may be done with profit;
but the original design seems to be, that the matter of our prayers, should be
deduced from thence.

I SHALL now, Sir, pursue the history of prayer through the subsequent periods
of the Church, that it may appear how groundless, how inconsistent with all
truth your assertion is, "that the present extemporary way of worship, is
contrary to the practice and opininion of all mankind in all ages, etc. until
it was introduced amidst the ferment and confusion of the fifteenth century."

IN all the accounts we have of the ardent devotions of the Apostles and pious
Martyrs, whether for themselves or their fellow sufferers, none of them are
recorded in the same words, nor any of them in the express phrases of our
Lord's prayer, or of the prayers used by such as were before them in the same
circumstances.

AFTER our Lord's ascension, it was the constant and laudable practice of the
Church, to assemble for the solemn acts of devotion, and to eat and to drink in
remembrance of his passion. But where do we find the Christian liturgy? In what
book or chapter of the New Testament? The substance of many devotional
exercises are recorded, but not a syllable to countenance the opinion that they
prayed by a prescribed form. The most eminent names of the three first
centuries might here be mentioned as a perfect illustration of this truth.
These primitive professors of the Christian faith, under the most cruel
tortures, ceased not the highest acts of devotion and charity, offering up
their several prayers for the suffering church, and even for their tormentors
and enemies; but never servilely followed, nor presumptuously prescribed to
others, in an Exercise wherein their own hearts, and the particular
circumstances of their separate communities were principally concerned.

AS for the apostles of our Lord, though they have perfected the sum of
Christian doctrine, and though they had undoubtedly the best right to prescribe
a stated invariable form of worship, which at all times would suit the church
and the individuals of it, yet they have left this matter free and
undetermined. And as for the liturgies which bear the names of St. James and
St. Mark, and some other of the Evangelists, it is very well known, and
acknowledged by the greatest friends of established forms, that they are false
and spurious See Echard's Ecclesiastical History.

Notwithstanding this, I am sorry to find an eminent Divine, and Dignitary of
the church of England, mentioning these scandalous forgeries, as if they were
of the most undoubted authority. See the Preface to the Christian Liturgy,
pages, 5, 6, 7.


.

IF it be said, that the Apostles were inspired, and therefore did not stand in
need of any form, I answer, that their qualifications by Inspiration, rendered
them the fitter to prescribe and impose a Liturgy for the future use of the
Christian Church, if they had thought this necessary.

BUT industrious as they were, to promote the cause of Christianity, we do not
find that ever they attempted to enslave men's minds in any yoke of bondage. We
have each of them in his own words offering up his own requests, and none of
them tied down to any form; as might be instanced in the prayer that was put up
by the Church, after the Disciples, Peter and John, had been imprisoned,
examined, threatened and dismissed by the Jewish Sanhedrim. After this we have
likewise an account of Stephen's persecution, of his most rational defense,
pious and devout behavior, and patient martyrdom; but his petitions being
conceived in other words than those of the abovementioned prayer, and such as
his peculiar circumstances, and truly Christian spirit dictated, we may be
fully assured, that he had no notion of any preconceived form; and if he had
thought that even the recital of our Lord's prayer was absolutely necessary, he
would not have omitted it, and gone to death, offering up only his own
petitions. The same may be observed of the devout addresses of the apostles
Peter and Paul, suited to the state of the several churches they wrote to, and
conceived in their own language. Two very plain evidences of this conduct in
the first followers of our Lord, we have on record. The one is, when they were
about to choose on apostle to succeed in the room of Judas, when they prayed
and said, Thou, Lord, which know the hearts of all men, show whether of the
two thou have chosen: the other at the choosing of the Deacons.

In the first of these instances, we have the very prayer recorded which the
apostles used, and which is not the Lord's Prayer, but one particularly suited
to the occasion. And the same may reasonably be supposed concerning the second,
though the prayer they used is not distinctly mentioned.




ECCLESIASTICAL history furnishes us with like instances in the prayers of
James, surnamed the just, of St. Ignatius after he was condemned, and before
his martyrdom; but particularly of Polycarp, whose prayer is recorded more at
large, and of which we may remark, as of all the rest, that as he paid no
deference to the forms of others that went before him to reap the same heavenly
crown; so those that immediately succeeded him in the roll of martyrs, did not
think fit to abide by his, though a better, perhaps, upon a like occasion,
could not be composed.

Justin, the Martyr, fully shows the manner of the Christian service in his
time, when he tells us, Just. Martyr. Apol. 2, page 98. ^OSE DUNAMIS AUTO^.
"That he who instructed the people, prayed according to his ability." To this
witness of the second century, succeeds Tertullian in the third; "We look up to
heaven, Tertul. Apol. 9 Chapter 30. Ep. 121.
says he, with our hands stretched forth, as not being ashamed to make our
prayers (sine monitore quia de pectore) without a monitor or prompter, because
from the heart." Clemens Alexandrinus, concludes his last book of Pedagogy,
with a prayer which neither begins nor ends with the Lord's prayer.

Origin, in his book on prayer, tells us, that it would be impossible for him,
without the assistance of heaven, to explain how we ought to pray, what we
ought to say when we pray, and what are the most proper times of prayer. He had
not the advantage, Sir, of a rubric or liturgy.

HE distinguishes four kinds of prayer; the first (DEOESIS) supplication, which
is to ask any good of which we stand in need. The second (PROSEUCHOE) implies a
request that is made in any danger, with assurance of obtaining what we desire.
The third (ENTE^XIS) is put by a person who has great confidence that he shall
obtain what he asks, he being much in God's favor. The last is giving thanks
for the benefits which we have received: And he gives examples, not from any
liturgy, but from the holy scriptures, of each of these kinds of prayer.

THE Emperor Constantine, on his coins and medals, is represented in a praying
posture, not as reading, but with eyes lift up to Heaven. He who would see a
full answer to what has been alleged to show that public prescribed Liturgies
were of early Antiquity in the Christian Church, may consult the learned Mr.
Clarkson's discourse concerning Liturgies: And Mr. Robinson's Review of
Liturgies in answer to Dr. Bennet.


THUS, Sir, I have traced the history of prayer, from the earliest account of
time, which we certainly have in the records of the bible; and I flatter myself
that from the days of Adam, 'till the commencement of christianity, and from
that during the apostolic and purest ages of the Christian church, it will
appear, that we have many examples of free prayer; but not one instance of a
liturgy acknowledged as authentic, or warranted by divine authority, can be
produced. And I would hope, Sir, that were not your countenance too deeply
sooted over, it would betray at this discovery of your shameful partiality,
some symptoms of modest sensibility.

INDEED every honest enquirer after truth must be fully satisfied, that the
method of addressing the Supreme Being, used by the church of Scotland and its
adherents, had an earlier and surer foundation than what you are pleased to
ascribe it to, "the ferment and confusion of the fifteenth century."

BUT pray, Sir, what was this ferment and confusion? Where was it? And how did
it serve to introduce the present extemporary way of worship? This, Sir, is
gratifying your remarkable genius; for I am persuaded that the historians of
that age will leave it solely to your own invention, to make out proper answers
to these questions. And, if we may judge from your past labors, it is not to be
doubted, but you will yet convince the world, that the Blacksmith can never be
at a loss for forgeries.

IT is plain, Sir, that in talking of "the ferment and confusion of the
fifteenth century," you intend to cast a slur upon the reformation in Scotland,
and so far you serve the Popish cause; though you are out in your chronology;
for it was not 'till about the middle of the sixteenth century that the
reformation took place there. And if there was any ferment or confusion at that
time, which was principally owing to the opposition of the Popish faction, and
the cruel and perfidious methods they made use of, as this did not hinder the
church of Scotland from throwing off the errors and corruptions of Popery, so
it did not hinder them from settling their doctrine and worship in that manner
which they judged most conformable to the first and purest times of the
Christian church.

IT appears from what has been offered, that the most primitive and scriptural
method of address, when we approach the Supreme Being, is by what is commonly
called extempore or free prayer.

IF it is duly considered, this also will be found the most natural way. All
divine acceptable prayer, it is allowed, should take its rise from the heart,
and should receive its first formation there. But when words are prescribed,
the natural order is inverted; the affections are brought to the words, instead
of the words flowing from the affections. Something of this is experienced by
persons truly devout: they are often prostrate before God, pouring forth their
hearts with an overflowing and indulgence of expression, which exceeds all the
ornaments of oratory. These are not "rude and shocking scenes, blasphemous
petitions," as you, Sir, Blacksmith's Letter, p. 46.
are pleased overhastily to call them, when you tell us, that you have "often
trembled to see the ignorant, proud Enthusiast approach his Maker, with as
great familiarity as he would his neighbor, and kneel down with his family to
his extemporary worship." There is no doubt, but that the ignorance and
weakness of some, may need the assistance of set forms; especially when they
pray with others; and therefore such helps are allowed and recommended to them.
But after all, we must observe, that the rules of grammar and oratory, are none
of the essential parts of prayer. The spirit of God may be sent forth to help
the infirmities of his children, and to enable them to pray; it may soften the
heart, warm the affections, and teach them to cry, Abba Father! But we do not
say, that it will teach them the beauties of rhetoric, or an easy flowing
style; for as these are too mean to have any stress laid upon them by wise or
good men, much less by the Almighty. Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,
of weak and illiterate Christians, he can perfect his own praise.

GOD sees not as man sees; he has not those views of what entertains our
senses, nor those affections and desires toward them which we have. We may be
delighted with the elegancy of a form; with devotion pompous and magnificent;
with curious sculptures, nice paintings, and the melody of sounds; but to think
thus of Him, who dwells not in temples made with hands, is no less sensual,
gross and irrational in us, than unworthy of Him who is an infinitely pure
spirit.

THE language in which he is addressed, may be broken and uncouth, but such
pity as a father shows unto his children, such pity shows the Lord to them
that fear Him; and he that utters the truth in his heart, though his words
are not the most accurate, yet they are not the least acceptable. Even among
men, an affectionate tender parent, will not despise the just and dutiful
requests of his child, though the words are but half pronounced. And if we that
are evil, know how to treat our offspring in this manner; who dare say what
that address is, which shall be rejected by the Almighty? But especially, who
dare say, that the prayer which proceeds from upright intentions, and a broken
sensible heart, though it be but lamely uttered, shall not find acceptance?

I ALLOW that it is necessary and commendable in us to endeavor that our wants
and desires should be expressed by suitable words: Sometimes the most improved
Christians may labor under a present deadness of spirit, and indisposedness for
any exercise, that may require much attention. In such disagreeable
circumstances, that they may aptly and pertinently express themselves, it is
very necessary that the matter, as well as the order of their addresses, should
for some time before they engage in this duty, be much thought upon. Then, he
who has made any tolerable proficiency in religion, who has been conversant
with the holy scriptures, and with divine subjects; but especially who has
studied his own heart, and its various frames; will, through that grace which
is ever conferred upon him who asks it aright, easily surmount all present
languor, and gain divine enlargement in this duty.

OTHERS who have their minds furnished very poorly with ideas, or who through
disuse may have contracted an utter inability for this service, may perhaps
find their thoughts better expressed in precomposed forms, and may receive
considerable benefits from them. That this is agreeable to the sentiments of
the Church of Scotland, may be seen, if the reader will give himself the
trouble of consulting the Assembly's Directory -- page 9. Direct. 9. London
Edition.
But for more improved Christians to confine themselves to such forms, would be
(to use the words of the learned Bishop Wilkins Wilkins Gift of Prayer.
) "As if a man, who had once need of crutches, should always afterward make
use of them, and so necessitate himself to a continual impotency."

THOSE who cannot go without them, may make use of them; but a little assiduity
in the exercise of prayer, and some farther acquaintance with God and their own
hearts, will, in time, furnish, even weak Christians, both with matter and
words, without such assistances.

THE occurrences, for instance, of every day, as the mercies, trials,
temptations, and deliverances of it, will furnish matter for prayer. In the
morning, the view and prospect of what is before us, or may befall us, will
lead our addresses; and in the evening, if we have received signal favors, or
have escaped imminent dangers, or have felt the prevalency of temptations, our
devotion will favor of these things. In a word, as our hearts are usually
formed according to our occasions and circumstances, these are so very
variable, that our prayers cannot be always the same, without being, to say no
worse, less natural and pertinent.

WHEN we are reduced to great extremity, and know not where to flee for relief,
how natural is it to seek shelter under the shadow of the Divine wings? When,
with the disciples, we are in danger of shipwreck; or, with Paul for our
rebelliousness, to be struck down to the earth; how apt are we to be instant
and earnest in our applications for mercy and salvation? It cannot be said of
the former, that their earnest address, help, Lord, else we perish; or of the
latter, whose first petition was, Lord, what will thou have me to do? I say, it
cannot be affirmed, that these were the result of study or premeditation; or
that they were parts of precomposed collects: Yet the prayer-hearing God did
not reject these " extempore effusions;" hereby inviting us always to consider
his providence, and to suit our petitions accordingly."

BUT besides these extraordinary occurrences, there may be other cases, wherein
it would be very improper that our devotion should be fettered with form. A
well-prepared mind, that has a perfect comprehension of its own state, as well
as of what relates to the church of God, or to the civil community, of which he
is a member; and has been long exercised, sometimes with much enlargement and
success, in this duty of prayer, cannot be diverted from it, 'till he is
authorized by law and form to begin it. Though all men should be silent, he
will take with him words, and, as the case requires, supplicate the supreme
Over-ruler.

I CANNOT better express my sentiments upon this point, than in the language of
the excellent Prelate Bishop Wilkins' Gift of Prayer, p. 12.
, before referred to. "What one says of counsel to be had from books, may be
fitly applied," says he, "to this prayer by book: That it is commonly, of
itself, something flat and dead; floating, for the most part, too much in
generalities, and not particular enough for each several occasion. There is not
that life and vigor in it to engage the affections, as when it proceeds
immediately from the soul itself, and is the natural expression of those
particulars whereof we are most sensible. And if it be a fault, not to strive
and labor after this gift, much more is it to jeer and despise it, by the name
of extempore prayer, and praying by the spirit; which expressions, as they are
frequently used by some men, by way of reproach, are, for the most part, the
sign of a profane heart, and such as are altogether strangers to the power and
comfort of this duty."

HERE, Sir, by the Pen of an impartial Writer, you are plainly characterized:
For the Agency of the Spirit, in this solemn Service, is what you are pleased,
boldly, to ridicule Blacksmith's Letter, p. 47, 48.
. "In the Name of God," you say, "do you believe that you are inspired? And,
again, "have you so little regard to the honor of God, and the Interests of
religion, as to ascribe your extemporary effusions to the Holy Spirit?" And,
again, if the matter of them be inspired, your Prayers are of equal authority
with the Scriptures themselves, and should be entered into the Canon."

IN answer to which, I shall observe, that the defenders of free prayer always
distinguish between the spirit and the gift of prayer. By the spirit of prayer,
they understand those inward holy desires and devout affections which the Holy
Spirit forms and excites in the minds of good men, and which are the Life and
soul of our external services. By the gift of prayer, they understand, an
ability of choosing suitable matter, and offering it up to God, in expressions
fit to represent our inward pious desires on all emergencies. The gift may be
the effect of pains, application, and frequent exercise in this duty; and may
be possessed by those who are destitute of the Spirit of Prayer. Where the Gift
is wanting, which, in any Christian, is a very great defect, Forms are
allowable, and the Holy Spirit may be assisting, in such cases, as well as
where such helps are not used. But those who are blessed with the Gift, may
have, also, the assistances of the Spirit, exciting their devout affections,
enlightening their minds to understand their spiritual necessities, and
directing them in the matter of their prayers, by bringing the promises of God
to their remembrance; strengthening and elevating their natural powers to a
more vigorous exercise, and helping them against their manifold infirmities.

THIS much seems to be included in what the scriptures declare concerning the
Spirit's agency in this duty. Thus Romans viii. 26. -- Likewise the Spirit also
helps our Infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought;
but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot
be uttered. "The Spirit of God," says Dr. Whitly, "is said to intercede for
us, not as an Advocate or Mediator betwixt God and us, that being the office of
our Great High Priest; but as an Exciter or Director of us in our addresses to
God, to render them, for matter, according to the will of God; and, for manner,
fervent and effectual." " Christ only," says the pious Bishop Wilkins Gift of
Prayer, p. 45.
, "in respect of his merits and Sufferings, does make intercession for us: But,
because the Spirit of God does excite our hearts to pray, and infuse in us holy
desires; stirring us up to, and instructing us in, our duty; therefore he is
said to intercede for us."

THIS is all that, on this head, is maintained by the reformed churches, who
plead for free prayer.

YOU allege, Sir Blacksmith's Letter, p. 53.
, that "the only inspiration promised in scripture, that is necessary, or that
can be useful, is, that the Holy Spirit will inspire the hearts of the faithful
with affections proper for this important duty; such as shame and sorrow in
confession, an humble Christian hope of obtaining what we ask in our petitions,
gratitude and love in our Thanksgivings, and such other affections as are
suitable to the several parts of Prayer." And I would only observe upon it,
that he who is blessed with the frame for praying, and whose affections are, in
this manner, enlivened and quickened, will not want a form. Upon this account
(as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication) the Holy Ghost is promised to the
Church.

So Gal. iv. 6. -- Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his
Son into your hearts, crying abba, Father. And Ephesians. v. 18. -- Be filled with
the spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord; giving thanks always for
all things unto God and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
Chap. vi. 18. -- Praying always, with all prayer and supplication, in the
spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all
saints. So the Apostle Jude, in his general epistle, at the 20th verse. But ye,
beloved, building up yourselves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

I AM well aware that some interpret these texts so as to leave the present
church little or no interest in them; placing all that is here promised among
the CHARISMATA, or extraordinary gifts of the spirit, conferred on the first
Christian^, and that they were not to extend beyond the age of inspiration. But
such interpreters have, and will have, the misfortune of the happy experience
of Christians in every age against them. I confess, (says a late ingenious
author) Dr. Watts. See his Guide to Prayer, p. 175.
"that the Holy Spirit has been, in a great measure, so long departed from his
churches, that we are tempted to think all his promised operations, peculiar to
the first ages of Christianity; and it was from this absence of the spirit,
that men proceeded to invent various methods to supply the want of him in
prayer; as by Pater Nosters, beads, litanies, and other forms, some good, some
bad; to which, that they might keep up a form of worship, and the attention of
the people, the churches were confined."

I WOULD not be thought to insinuate that the Divine Spirit does never afford
his assistance in the use of forms; I am only accounting for that disrespect
which men are apt to show at the doctrine of the assistances of the spirit; and
what I would be understood to mean is, that the promises of the gospel, with
respect to these assistances, may be hoped for and experienced by all true
Christians to the end of the world.

AND here, let it be further observed, that among all the extraordinary gifts
of the spirit Joel ii. 28.
prophesied by Joel, prayer is not mentioned; the words are, I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters shall prophesy, your old men
shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions; and also upon the
servants, and upon the handmaids, in these days will I pour out my Spirit, etc.
And in the second chapter of the Acts of the apostles, where this prophesy is
recited, as having its accomplishment, prayer is not mentioned as any of those
extraordinary or miraculous powers which were then shed forth by the influences
of the spirit. Neither is it so mentioned in any part of the New Testament,
except in one place See St. Paul's Enumeration, 1 Cor. xii.
, where the gift of tongues, in that they were able to express themselves in
languages they had never learned, seems to be referred to, rather than the gift
of prayer. If, then, it is not to be found among the extraordinary or
miraculous, it must belong to the ordinary or more common influences or
operations of the spirit; which were to extend to all the periods of the
church, and to all the individuals which compose Christ's mystical body to the
end of the world.

BY these sacred powers which are communicated to all sincere christians,
though there is nothing new revealed to them, or what might amount to
inspiration; yet the truths, the laws, and rules which were formerly revealed,
are brought to their remembrance. And to this purpose are several of the
promises relating to this blessed paraclete, which we read of in the New
Testament.

IF, then, the continuance of the ordinary operations of the spirit, is a thing
promised to, and to be expected by, the body of believing Christians, to the
end of time; the ridicule of inspiration must be, at least, senseless and
stupid; perhaps it may be, in some degree, impious.

HAVING thus collected and faithfully represented what the abettors of free
prayer maintain, respecting the Holy Spirit and its influences, I shall now
proceed to obviate such other complaints as you have offered against this
manner of worship.

"IN our congregations, you say Blacksmith's Letter, p. 24.
, the mouth runs before the mind, and speaks, without giving us any opportunity
of thinking what we ought to speak, and often says things that we should
certainly reject, and sometimes offers petitions that we should absolutely
abhor, had we time calmly to examine them: Our mouth leads us into the gross
blunder of presenting our addresses to the Deity first, and next judging
whether they be proper addresses, after they are offered, when we cannot mend
what is wrong, or alter what is improper." You even make it a question
Blacksmith's Letter, p. 33 and 56.
, "Whether the laity can join at all in our public prayers; for we must either
suppose that they go along with the minister, offering every word as he utters
it, or wait until he has finished the sentence, and then examine it, and give
their assent."

To call this cavilling, rather than reasoning, is not improper. If a minister
has been regularly and duly called and appointed to his office, it is not
doubted, except with the atheistical herd, that he has a right, among other of
his sacred ministrations, to offer up prayers and supplications, with
thanksgivings, in behalf of those among whom he officiates. If this is the
case, then, that which is the most natural and scriptural manner of address,
has been already showed.

To say, that in this kind of public worship, "The mouth runs before the mind,
and offers petitions which should be rejected," is, at the best, but a
reflection, both on the laity and clergy, equally impolite and unjust. To the
laity, it denies that privilege in the worship of God, which is allowed them in
all other affairs, relative to reasonable beings. In our mutual conversation
and commerce, we find very few, except among those who are void of
understanding, but know perfectly well where to yield their assent, or dissent.
Even the most untutored ear can distinguish between harmony and discord; and it
needs no proof, that the action of the mind is equally quick, whatever it be
that demands its attention.

HOW would it hamper all conversation, and how should we be straitened in the
common offices of life, if we must first critically examine and nicely weigh
every sentence that is spoken to us, before we could give a suitable answer?
And how altogether vain and impertinent would all the labor of the pulpit, or
senate, or bar be, upon this supposition? If you do not understand what is
spoken to you, it is indeed to no purpose to address you: And this
distinguishing prerogative of speech, whereby man is capable of communicating
his thoughts, for the improvement or entertainment of his fellow creatures, is
no more than an empty name. Nay, it is worse, if we admit your manner of
reasoning, Sir; for it would tend more to perplex and to confound, than to
enlighten and improve.

TO say, that I cannot join in public service, or in offering up my prayers;
with the speaker, to the Almighty, because I must either, in doing so, go along
with him in every word that he utters, or wait till he has finished, and then
give my assent to the whole; is reasoning much of the same strength with that
of the philosopher, who ridiculously argued against motion, nearly in the same
style -- For, says he, "If I move, it must be either in the place where I am,
or where I am not, but no body can move in the place where it is; for if it is
there, it does not come out of it; nor in the place where it is not; for where
it is not, it cannot act." A certain Cynic, gravely answered, by turning upon
his heel, and walking to and fro through the apartment. The evidence of common
sense, Sir, is against your argument.

SHOULD a minister be told by one of his parishioners, "Sir, it is to no
purpose for me to attend your public ministrations; I am in no capacity to
improve by them; you speak, it is true, and it may be rationally enough; but if
I am to receive benefit by your discourses, my mind must either go along with
every word; or I must examine every sentence after it is spoken. The first
would be acting too implicitly; the latter is not in my power; for before I
have one sentence half examined, you have well nigh finished another, and the
mind of man is not able to attend to so many things at once." -- Would this
reasoning be admitted? and can the Preacher plead to be heard, and insist upon
it that he may be understood, when delivering a message from God to men, and
not when offering up prayers for men to God? Or shall the Laity be treated as
reasonable beings in the one case, and divested of all exercise of reason and
judgment, in the other? This must be looked upon, by the unprejudiced, as very
unfair.

IT may not be improper to observe further, upon this argument, that St. Paul,
in reasoning against prayers in an unknown tongue, (1 Cor. xiv.) goes upon this
supposition, that when a man prays in a known tongue, in the public Assembly,
it may be to the edification of the hearers. But according to your way of
arguing, Sir, it would be to no purpose for him to pray in public at all,
though in a known tongue, if it were not in a stated prescribed form; since
people could not be edified, or receive any benefit from it. And yet I believe
the greatest admirer of precomposed, prescribed forms, will scarce take upon
him to affirm, that the prayers, the apostle there speaks of, were of that kind.

AS for reflections upon those who offer up our prayers, that their
performances are "corrupted by the contrary petitions of contending parties;
mixed with the whimsical opinions and pernicious principles of libertines and
enthusiasts; rendered obscure and contemptible by the pedantry and affected
learning of the younger, or by the weaknesses of the mind and body of the older
ministers; interlaid with ill-timed compliments to the great, with politics
and private piques and quarrels, etc. Blacksmith's Letter, page 39, etc.
"

I WILL venture to affirm, Sir, that those who attend constantly upon public
worship, either in Scotland, or among protestant Dissenters elsewhere, know
that the accusation advanced by you, as if the abuses you mention were very
frequent and even general, is absolutely false. And I am sorry to say it, you
have shown too little regard to truth or decency to be believed upon your own
word. But I suppose you have been conversant in such authors as the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, whose calumnies and misrepresentations have been long
since detected and exposed. There are thousands of witnesses that the prayers
offered up in the public assemblies are generally such as all christians may
join in, scriptural, grave, and decent. But there is this remarkable difference
between those confined to Liturgies, and those that are not so; that, if any
thing be wrong in a free, unprescribed prayer, it is easily amended, and the
mischief cannot go very far, or be long continued; but in a public prescribed
liturgy, if either improper expressions, or false doctrines, or superstitious
and idolatrous ways of worship be introduced, they are bound down both upon
Ministers and People, and continue perhaps, to future ages.

I think it proper to give the reader the following quotation from Doctor
Bright, Dean of St. Asaph, his treatise on prayer. Having spoken of public
forms, he immediately adds, that "Sometimes they may be composed and
constituted in an ignorant, hypocritical, profane, cunningly tyrannical or
sensual age." And then he observes, "That there are many prayers constituted or
allowed of, by that no less boasting than corrupt church of Rome, which in
respect of their falsehood or uncertainty, their trivialness or uselessness,
their impertinency, disorder, and confusion, a man of ordinary examination and
understanding, would disdain to use himself, or appoint for the use of the
meanest and most ignorant, and I think, says he, I could instance in some, as
contemptible as any fanatical mechanic among us has blundered (...)
^^^^^^pore." -- He had before observed, as is worthy of our particular notice,
that "Whatever defects are in them, public f^rms, not only of prayers, but of
all other things, will have these defects longer continued than extempore ones."

Dr. Bright's Treatise of Prayer, p. 67, 68, London edition. 1678.


WE need go no further for instances of this, than the Romish Church. Her
Missals and Breviaries, and other forms of devotion, have been mainly
instrumental in propagating and establishing her false doctrines,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. and her idolatrous and superstitious
worship, such as that which is paid to saints and angels, to images, and to the
cross. And all the inconveniences that have ever arisen from the abuse of what
you call extempore effusions, have not done the thousandth part of the mischief
in the Christian church, that these prescribed Liturgies have done. And as to
improprieties of expression, if you, Mr. Blacksmith, were as well acquainted
with this controversy, as I presume you would be thought to be, you would know
that several improprieties have been observed even in that public liturgy,
which probably you most admire. But I spare the mention of them; for they that
so freely censure others, have often very tender ears when it comes to their
own case.

IT is almost unnecessary further to add, that there are various gifts and men
of different parts, in all christian communities; but it would be very cruel to
load the shoulders of the innocent, with the faults or failings of the guilty.
Should this unrighteous manner of censuring and condemning all, for the
weaknesses of a few, take place, what church upon earth could stand acquitted?

PETITIONS unseasonable or improper may by some be offered up; but it gives all
the real friends of true Christian liberty no small consolation, that they are
neither necessitated by any prescribed form to address themselves with
impropriety, nor to prefer petitions quite contrary to the real sentiments of
their hearts. They are neither hindered from what they should say, nor obliged,
by the use of a defective form, to speak what they should not say.

YOU allege, Sir, that "all dangers might be prevented, and all deficiencies
supplied, by composing and establishing a pious form of prayer." -- But if it
be true, what has been proved, that unconstrained free prayer, is the most
natural, primitive and scriptural manner of address to our Maker; then to pray
by form, to avoid improprieties, is the greatest blunder we could commit.

BESIDES, an unexceptionable form of human composure, has never yet appeared
in the christian church; and if any such thing should appear, it would be no
security against blunders. In our neighbor church, though many of their
prayers are the best that are extant in any public established liturgy, yet
there are some of them not without their faults. Bishop Stillingfleet,
mentioning several things in the book of common prayer, excepted against by the
Dissenters, heartily acknowledges, that if they were reviewed, explained or
amended, it would be so far from (...) a dishonor to that church, that it might
add to the glory of it.

Stillingfleet's preface to the unreasonableness of separation. See also --
Candid Disquisitions, where many things are laid before the Governors of the
church, which well deserve their serious consideration; though the learned and
candid authors, some of whom are said to be of eminent note in the church of
England, instead of being attended to, have not with opposition and reproach --
And this is one instance, among many, that might be brought to show how
difficult it is, when once a public liturgy is established by authority, to get
any alterations made in it, however requisite, and only intended to render it
more perfect and unexceptionable.


And in the reading of the very best, considerable mistakes have happened, and
may every day happen, owing to inattention, or some worse cause. I could give
undoubted instances to this purpose, if I chose to imitate, Sir, your genteel
manner of writing.

BUT what is still more considerable, the composing, establishing and imposing
of a Form of Prayer, though more unexceptionable than has hitherto appeared,
would yet be an unjustifiable infringement on the liberty of christians. There
is not one text in all the Bible which impowers any man, or set of men, to
prescribe to me the very words which at all times, and in all circumstances, I
am to offer up to God. The apostles, though under the conduct of the Divine
Spirit, never attempted such a thing, as has been already proved. They offered
up their addresses, suitable to their own conceptions. And since they have not
prescribed to the church, in this instance, for uninspired men to do it, must,
I think, border upon presumption.

IF, therefore, there neither is, nor can in truth be, any such thing as a
perfect, invariable form of human composure; if such a form, could it be
devised, would not prevent mistakes; but above all, if the imposing of it,
would be inconsistent with the rights of Christians; there is no reason why it
should be complied with: And the remedy you propose, Sir, would be of more
dangerous consequence than the evil complained of.

IF it is alleged that, in the natural order of things, the congregation
should first be satisfied, that the prayers to be offered in their name are
proper and just, and such as they can with freedom join in; otherwise they
cannot pray in faith. -- I answer, that we are required to hear, as well as to
pray in faith; but according to this way of reasoning, before a Sermon is
delivered, it should always undergo the previous examination of those that are
to hear it, otherwise it cannot be profitable. If it be said, that this is
carrying the matter too far; I answer, that the understandings of men are
employed, and their rational assent required, no more in the one case than in
the other.

IN support of your argument you say Blacksmith's Letter, page 25.
, that "should the ablest member of the House of Commons propose to offer an
address to his Majesty, in the name of the house, without communicating it to
the members, the impropriety would be immediately perceived." I answer, that if
a member of any community be properly authorized to officiate for that
community, either in matters civil or sacred, there is no impropriety in his
executing, to the best of his ability, his commission.

BUT I shall put the case a little stronger, and more to the purpose: supposing
a set of men, whose skill in politics was very deep, should (without any
authority from the sovereign for so doing) take upon them to draw up a form or
forms of address, which should always be presented to him in the same words,
let the nature of government, or the exigencies of corporations and kingdoms
vary as they please; would not the impropriety then be very striking? Would not
the imposition (...) glaring? The meanest incorporated society, I dare ^^y,
would not willingly be fettered with this political y^^^; especially if the
constituent laws of the kingdom ^^d not warrant such prescriptions, but rather
provi^^d for the contrary.

YOU allow, Sir Blacksmith's Letter, page 60.
, that in extraordinary cases, as in war, famine or pestilence, you might have
added, in peace, health, and plenty, proper forms may be provided. And we see
that in the church where forms are authorized, they are in such cases provided.
Now, Sir, I beseech you, be a righteous judge in this matter: What do the
people in general, who, upon public Fast or Thanksgiving days, offer up their
prayers or praises by form, know beforehand of what shall be prescribed them?
Some few perhaps in the Metropolis, where they are published, may have examined
and considered, before they joined in them; but in country places, very few,
but the ministers of parishes, know any thing of them, 'till they hear them
when they are offered. Yet would it not be very uncharitable to say, that those
who are not previously acquainted with them, or who have not maturely examined
them, cannot with propriety join in such addresses?

IN scripture we have frequent instances of public prayer; but that the people
were unacquainted with them, was not, neither can it be, a prejudice to true
devotion. I must beg leave once more to refer to the opinion of the worthy
prelate Wilkins' Gift of Prayer, page 12.
before mentioned, upon this head; "whereas it is commonly objected by some,
that they cannot so well join in an unknown form (so he calls free prayer in
respect of th^se that hear it) with which they are not beforehand acquainted; I
answer, that is an inconsiderable objection, and does oppose all kind of forms
that are not publicly prescribed. As a man may, in his judgment, assent unto
any divine truth delivered in a sermon which he never heard before, so may he
join in his affections to a holy desire in a prayer he never heard before. If
he, who is the mouth of the rest, deliver, through imprudence, what we cannot
approve of, God does not look upon it as our prayer, if our desires do not say
AMEN to it." -- The sense of this good man thus expressed, if seriously
considered, Sir, will appear a sufficient answer to many of your cavils.

I SHALL observe further, that the matter of prayer is so very plain, as not to
stand in need of that nice minute enquiry which you speak of. The humble
Christian who has made it the business and delight of his soul to attend public
worship, is not unacquainted with the proper order and method, as well as with
the matter of prayer. He knows, for instance, his sins, wants, and mercies,
as soon as they are named; and though these things are put into words that he
has not been accustomed to hear, yet this does not require any time to
deliberate whether the confessions, petitions, or thanksgivings suited to the
common infirmities, desires, and enjoyments of all, are proper to be offered up
to the Almighty; he heartily joins in them, and reaps the benefit.

BUT his comfort and benefit are doubled, if he is so happy as to hear his own
particular ^ase laid before the Almighty, which, perhaps, he had in confidence
unfolded to his minister, earnestly requesting his prayers and those of the
church upon it; or which he, whose business it is to watch over the flock, had
by some other means attained to the knowledge of. A privilege and pleasure
this, from which, by stated forms, he must have been for ever excluded.

YOUR argument is still further urged by alleging Blacksmith's Letter, pages
63, 64.
, that "if forms are unlawful, we are unlawfully baptized, for that is done by
a form. -- We administer the Lord's supper in an unlawful manner, for we do it
by a form, I mean the words of the first institution: We are dismissed every
Lord's day with an unlawful blessing; for one of the solemn forms with which
the apostles conclude their epistles, is always used upon that occasion.
Further, if forms of prayer be not acceptable to God, and an useful way of
worship for ourselves, we grossly offend every time we meet in church; for it
is impossible to sing eighteen or twenty lines of a psalm, but we offer some
important petition by a form."

I ANSWER, that for all these matters we have divine authority and example. And
no conclusion can be drawn from those parts of our solemn public services, thus
warranted, to enforce forms which are destitute of such warrant or authority.
Otherwise all the Ave Marias, beads, and trumpery of the church of Rome, may
plead for admission upon the same footing, and with equal show of reason.

YOU allege further Blacksmith's Letter, page 65.
, that "if our laity pray in the same words of the minister, they are as much
confined to a form, as any other people; for if the minister says, Most
gracious God, forgive us our sins, preserve us from danger, and provide for our
necessities: if the people repeat these words, either in their minds, or with
their mouths, or both; it is evident that they pray as much by a form, as if
the prayer had been composed a thousand years ago." -- But, Sir, can that be a
form to any, which is not so in itself, nor to him that pronounces it? Let any
man of common sense ask himself, what is meant by a form? Whether it does not
include in it the constant use of the same method, manner and words; and then
this quibble of yours, will appear very vain and frivolous.

IF it be found that any minister, as far as your censure reaches, satisfies
himself with a form, let it be remembered that this form is not imposed upon
other churches; and even, among those where it is used, it is subject to the
same disgust which those human composures give, that are over and over
repeated. This would not be endured at the Theater, or at the Bar; and we have
as good a right to look for variety, and to expect to meet with men of parts,
among those that are of sacred character. For my own part, I shall honestly
declare it as my private opinion, that such as are incapable of using free
prayer, without apparent hazard of rendering it contemptible by their indecent
manner of performing it, should not be admitted to the ministry. In this last
part of his piece, the Blacksmith has raved like his friend in Bedlam, and with
equal phrenzy too, for 50 pages together without a pause, against the duty of
prayer and all who attempt to perform it in public, or private; unless by a
prescribed form. His invectives are avowedly pointed at the ministers of the
Church of Scotland; but they are really no less applicable to all Protestant
Dissenters from the Church of England; and the whole body of the Reformed
Church in all parts of the globe: for they all are guilty of the same
unpardonable crime of praying to GOD extempore. In this answer it was thought
proper to establish the divine warrant for that kind of prayer. And it is now
presumed that it is done in a manner that none of its opponents will ever be
able to refute. All the tinkling din^ which our author makes upon this subject,
is, therefore, to be considered only as idle strokes of his hammer on his own
anvil. If he would only condescend to expunge his numberless repetitions and
battologies -- which return upon his reader over and over in every pag^ -- if
he would scratch out every low pun vainly palmed on his readers for an argument
-- and if he would erase every downright falsehood, and misrepresentation of
truth contained in this part of his essay -- his fifty pages would scarcely
fill up one -- and half a page would suffice, to answer and refute all the
arguments which that one would contain.

His hue and cry about the dangers to which the people are exposed from public
prayers offered without some prescribed form -- seeks all its support from the
mean and malicious arts of slander and abuse: -- by which he struggles, with
all his might, to hold up the whole body of the Presbyterian Clergy, as a
banditti of abandoned and unprincipled known: -- whose chief qualifications are
gross ignorance -- impudent effrontry -- overweening pride -- unhallowed
passions -- low malice -- party rage -- and mad enthusiasm. The poor man has
been very unhappy in the choice of his subject: The character of that body of
men is too long, and too publicly known, to be hurt by the impotent weapons of
the Blacksmith: -- And to those, who may yet be strangers to the men, it will
be a sufficient answer to his calumnies, to know, that in no church on earth,
are greater pains taken to prepare man for the office of the Ministry, than in
the Church of Scotland; Besides the usual time spent in the course of
philosophical Studies, etc. in the University, -- the public rule requires six
years to be employed in the Divinity-hall; under the instruction of an approved
public Professor: -- after this, their course of trials before the Presbytery
can rarely be finished in six months, before they can be licenced to preach. --
Then do they continue to exercise their talents, only at the direction of the
Presbytery, until they have received calls to settle in particular charges: --
when that takes place, they have to pass as many trials before the Presbytery,
as at their being first licenced, -- and after their ordination, they are still
liable to be called to account for every thing complained of, either in their
public performances, or private walk in life: -- and a single Presbytery can
depose them from office, whenever found unworthy of it.

This is the church government under which the Blacksmith thinks the people are
in more danger, than under that of Rome itself! with all these guards of the
pulpit-door, he is sure no man enters it, who is fit to be entrusted to make
one prayer in public! If he does, it is at the hazard of their souls for the
people to join him! Nor can they be safe by withholding their consent when they
hear a wrong petition offered -- since the Deity will be likely to mistake it
still for theirs, and charge it to their account! Sad case indeed! A case
which, it seems, admits no remedy but a Liturgy; with all the responses,
Collects, Ave-Marias, Kyrie eleeison, Antiphones, Litanies; bowings to altars,
etc. etc. so wisely decreed by so many infallible successors of PETER -- and
all interlarded with pater-nosters, three or four times repeated in every
service; and 12 times a day in every cathedral church. Mat. vi, 7.




THUS, Sir, in the spirit of the gospel, it will appear, I hope, that all your
objections against the modes of Presbyterian church worship, as far as they but
seemed to have the face of reason, are fully answered. -- And therefore, after
assuring you, that this labor was undertaken from no sinister or unchristian
motives, but purely with an intention to justify practices which are agreeable
to scripture and the best antiquity, and to preserve the ignorant or careless,
from the pernicious effects of groundless prejudices, I shall bid you (as is
not unusual with those who have been combating each other) a friendly Adieu.

FINIS.

