

LITTLE STORIES FOR LITTLE FOLKS IN EASY LESSONS OF One, Two, and Three
Sylla^^^^

BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, at 53^ Cornhill.

Little Stories for Little Folks.
LESSON I.
A LITTLE boy, whose papa was so kind as to give him a real watch, which would
go, and tell what o'clock it was, wanted to see the inside of it, and find out
what it was that made it tick. So he opened it, and then he could no more tell
the cause of its making that noise than he could before. He then (...) so silly
as to think there was something (...) it; so he pulled out all the wheels,
(...) it to pieces. But though he stopped the ticking noise, he could find no
live creature in it. He was very sorry he had spoiled his watch and tried to
mend it; but he could not do that; for little boys know not how to make
watches. He then took it to his papa, and asked him to be so good as to mend it
for him; but it was so much broke, that his papa could not mend it. The little
boy, when he found that he had quite ^^oiled his watch, began to cry; but his
papa told him not to cry: for, said he, if you do, I shall be very angry, and
punish you. Many people would beat you for breaking your watch, but I shall not
do that: I shall only take it all away from you, and not let you have any more
watches till you grow bigger, and know better how to use them. But leave off
crying, and do not let me see any more tears, I beg of you.

LESSON II.
AS two little puppies were one day playing and frisking in the road, one of
them fell into a muddy ditch, and made himself as black as soot. When he got
out again, he found that he was not hurt, and wanted (...) go to play with his
brother as he had (...) doing before. But the other was so (...) afraid of his
black dirty face and paw (...) he ran away from him, and would (...) but the
little dirty dog ran after him (...) he could, and at last caught hold of (...)
put his two fore paws round his neck, (...) do when they are at play. The (...)
screamed out as if he had been hurt; but (...) people saw he was not, and only
made suc^ (...) noise because he did not like the dirt, (...) could not help
laughing at him, and a boy who had a bag of soot in his hand, poured it all
over the two dogs as they lay in the road, and made the clean one as black as
the other. Throwing the soot upon them, put them both in a sad fright, and they
left off playing, and jumped up as fast as they could, and every body ran away
from them both then; as the clean one had from the dirty one; for they were
afraid the dogs would spoil their clothes, if they came near them, and so they
did spoil ^he gause stocks of the two Miss Neats, who (...) to school to learn
to dance; for they rubbed themselves against them, two or three times; and made
their frocks look almost as black as their own backs did: At last the two dogs
got home, and they were obliged to be put into a tub of water and washed, to
make them look clean; and then they were put on a mat, and laid before the fire
to dry; and when they were dry, their master did not let them go out in the
road to play any more.

LESSON III.
A CHILD who would not mind when she was spoke to, used to fill her mouth so
full when she eat, that it looked very ugly, and her mouth and cheeks stuck out
like a babboon's. She was very often told not to do so; but she would not mind,
and went on in her own way.

At last she crammed so much in at one time, that she could not bite it as she
ought to have done, and was almost choked; for she got a great bit down her
throat, and coughed so much that all her friends thought she would have been
killed. But though she did not die, yet it made her head ache very bad, and her
throat so sore, that she did not know how to ^^t or drink any thing for a great
while: and it swelled so much, that she never could swallow more than as small
a bit as a baby might have, as long as she lived. It was a sad thing not to be
able to eat or drink without so much pain and trouble; but it was her own
fault, for not minding what was said to her, and doing as she was bid.

LESSON IV.
SALLY STING was a child no one was fond of, for she was a cross girl, and took
great pleasure in hurting any thing that was less than herself. She had a
little kitten, and a very pretty one it was too, it had a black spot at the tip
of its tail, and one on its back, and a yellow one by the side of its right
ear; and close by its left eye, it had a black one, which looked like a patch
when you were not quite close to it. But this nice little cat Sally used to
tease very much: Sometimes she would hold it tight in her hand, when the poor
thing wanted to get from her, and then it cried. Mew, mew. Sally was so silly
as to call it naughty for crying, and beat it for doing so. But I am sure, she
was much more naughty herself, and deserved to be beat more than the cat did,
for that had no other way to tell when it was hurt but by crying. But Sally had
sense to know what was right, and she knew it was wrong to hurt any thing. Her
mamma used often to tell her so; and one day she made her stand in the corner,
with her hands tied behind her, for as she made so bad an use of them, it was
not fit she should be let to have them. After she had stood in that sad way for
some time, she told her mamma she would be good, and not do so any more. But
she did not keep her word, for as soon as her mamma had untied her hands, she
went ^^d beat the cat, because for its sake, she had been put in the corner;
and she threw stones at some ducks that were swimming in a pond. A boy who was
going by saw her, and he did not like to have the poor ducks hurt, so he took
up a great stone, and threw (...), which hit her upon her head, and knock^^
(...) down. He then ran to her, and helped (...) ^p. I did not mean, said he,
to knock you down; but pray how do you like to be hit with stones? And the
ducks feel just as much as you do, though they cannot say so, and do not scream
and cry so loud; so if you do not like to be hurt yourself, pray never hurt any
thing else. Now to be sure the (...) not to have thrown a stone (...) that was
not right; but as he (...) ducks, and said he would not do (...) his father
forgave him, and did (...) ^^^ing to him.

LESSON V.
IN the (...) lesson you read about a sad naughty child, whom nobody could like
because (...) was so cruel; and when she grew to be a woman, she did just the
same; and used to beat and whip her children for nothing, as when she was young
she did her cat. For those who when they are young, will be cross and naughty,
seldom are good or kind when they are grown up: for this reason, all little
boys and girls who wish to be happy and have their friends love them, should
take great pains to be good whilst they are little, or else may be they will
never be good as long as they live. Dolly Pink was wise enough to think so, and
she knew the only way to make her papa and mamma, and all her friends love her,
was to be good, and do as she was bid. So she always tried to please them, and
did not cause them to speak to her more than once for the same thing. If they
told her to hold up her head, she did it, and looked pleased at their being so
kind as to tell her of her faults. Or if she climbed up into the windows or
chairs, and they said, Get down, Dolly, don't do so, my love; she got down as
fast as she could, and did not clamber any more. She never pouted or looked
cross when she was bid to do what she did not like: for, like a wise and good
child, she thought her friends knew what was right better than she did. I am
but a little girl, she would say, how should I know what is right or what is
wrong, if I am not taught by my papa and mamma, and friends who are older, and
so kind as to take the pains to tell me. I am sure I am much obliged to them
for it, and I will try and do what they say is right, for they know much the
best. In this way she used to think and talk, and so every body loved her
dearly, and tried all they could to please and make her happy. And when she was
a woman, she was a very wise and good one, and knew how to teach and make her
own little boys and girls good; and every body that saw her loved her, and
would do any thing they could to please her. What a nice thing it is to behave
like Dolly Pink, and like her be loved and admired by all good people.

LESSON VI.
DOLLY PINK was not the only good child that ever was in the world, for George
Franks her cousin, was as good as she was. George was the only boy his papa and
mamma had; but he had three sisters, of whom he was very fond, and though he
was the youngest of all, he took so much pains with himself, and minded so much
all that was taught him, that he was soon as wise as any of them, (for they
were not much older than he was.) He was very fond of fruit and cakes, (as most
children are) but if any body ever gave him any, he would never eat one
mouthful till he had given some to all his sisters; and if they did not choose
any when he was going to eat it, he saved some for them, till some time when
they would like it better. He was very fond of dogs, and cats, and birds;
horses too he liked much; but he was too little to have an horse, or ever to go
into the stable, unless his papa took him in his arms. One day a man gave him a
pretty little dog with long ears; and he was much pleased with it. As soon as
he took it home, one of his sisters ( Betsy I think it was) said, O! what a
sweet dog you have got, George! I wish I had such a one. Then, my dear sister,
said he, I beg you will take this, for I am sure I shall be more pleased to see
you with it, if you like it, than to keep it myself. Betsy thanked him, and
said, she would not rob him of it. But he said so much to her, to desire her to
have it, that at last she took it. And George was very happy that he had been
able to give her such a nice dog. All little boys would not have done so to be
sure; but then they would not have been so kind as George was, nor would people
have loved them so well; for every body loved George Franks dearly, and that
made him happy, and merry, and cheerful all day.

LESSON VII.
TWO little birds once before they were strong enough to fly, got upon the edge
of the nest, and tumbled from the top of an high tree down to the ground. A
little boy who was walking with his mamma saw them fall, and asked her if he
might have them? Yes, my dear, said she, though I think it is cross to rob a
bird of her young ones, yet as these have fallen down, and cannot get into
their nest again, you may pick them up, and carry them home, and take great
care of them. Little James, as soon as he had leave, ran to them and picked
them both up very softly, that he might not hurt them. When he got home, he put
them into a cage, and fed them very often with bread, and rape, and hemp feeds.
But I suppose they had not been used to such food, and it made them sick; (for
nobody can feed young birds so well as their own mothers) and after three days
one of them died. James was sorry that it was dead, but he still took great
care of the other; and after he had had it two or three weeks, it began to feed
itself; it was a goldfinch, and grew so tame, that it would set upon his finger
and sing, and hop to him when he called Dick! Dick! Dick! It eat out of his
hand, and used to sit upon his shoulder and the top of his head; indeed it
never seemed to be so well pleased, as when standing or sitting upon little
James: and he was so kind to it, that it had great reason to be fond of him. He
used often to leave the cage door open, that Dick might hop about the room when
he pleased; and when he had been out as long as he liked, he flew into his cage
again; and then James used to shut the door to keep him safe. But one day he
went to play with some boys, and forgot to shut the door, and while he was
gone, the cat got into the room where the cage hung; and the bird did not know
the cat would hurt him, and flew out to the ground. But puss did not let it
long stay there, for she ran to it as soon as she saw it, and eat it up in a
minute. When poor James came back from play, he went to give his bird some
bread; and when he did not see it in the cage, he.looked all round the room for
it, and called Dick! Dick! all the time. He was much surprised that Dick did
not come to him when he called: at last under one of the chairs, he saw some of
its feathers; so he stooped down to look at them, and there he saw the cat
licking her lips, and some feathers sticking round her mouth; then he guessed
what was become of his dear bird, and he could not help crying. He ran up
stairs and told his mamma of his loss. I am very sorry, said she, for it was a
nice, good, and tame bird; and pleased you much, and I am always glad that you
should be pleased: besides, it must have hurt the poor thing sadly to be pulled
to bits, and be eat up by a cat. How could you be so careless as to leave the
cage door open when you went out of the room? It is you that have been the
cause of its death; for had you taken care and done as you should do, it could
not have got out, nor could the cat have killed it. James said, he was very
sorry for what he had done, and at his being the cause of its death; but, said
he, I did not think about it. Then, said his mamma, you should have thought
(...) people should always think of what is right; and if they do not, they
will be sure sometime or other to suffer for it, as you now do.

LESSON VIII.
THERE was a little boy, who was so silly as to be afraid of dogs; and if he
met one as he was walking, he would run away, and scream as if he had been much
hurt. One day he was taking a walk with his brother; who was two or three years
older than himself, and met a black dog. As soon as (...) was the little one's
name) saw it, he ran back, as fast as he could. The dog thinking he was at play
with him, ran after him, and caught hold of the flap of his coat, and shook it
about, yelping and making that growling noise dogs do when they are at play.
This frightened Joe so much, that he did not know what he was about, or where
he was going, but screaming as loud as he could shriek, he ran, not seeing
where he went, into a pond. His brother Charles, all the time he ran, called
after him to stop. Pray Joe, said he, stop! the dog will not hurt you! indeed he
will not! he is only in play, pray stop till I can come to you! But Joe either did
not hear, or would not mind, and so did not stop till he fell into the pond.
When Charles saw him fall, he was as much distressed as Joe had been by the
dog, and ran to him as fast as he could, to try to get him out. But when he
came to the pond, he found he could give him no help; for the water did not
come up to the edge of the ground he stood upon, but was down a great way, so
that he was quite out of Charles's reach, and was almost sunk out of sight.
Poor Charles did not know what to do. If he staid with him, he could not help
him, and if he went, he feared he would be drowned before he could fetch any
body to him. At last he thought he would jump into the water, and try what he
could do to get him out: and just as he had pulled off his coat to go in, a man
came by, and asked him what he was going to do? O! said he, (crying so the man
could scarce make out what he said) my brother! my brother Joe has fallen into
the pond, and I am going to try to help him! Pough! said the man, you cannot
help him, child; you will both be drowned, you may be sure, if you go in. I
will fetch him out for you, so pray stand still and let me try what I can do.
He then very kindly jumped in, and soon brought him out in his arms, but he had
been so long in the water, that he had lost all his senses, and was almost
dead. The man took him to the house which Charles showed him; who walked home
by the side of him, crying all the way. When they got there, their father
thanked the man a great many times for being so kind, and gave him some money
for his trouble. Joe was put into a warm bed, and a doctor sent for, who gave
him something to do him good. At last he moved, and came to himself again; but
it was a long while before he was quite well. So he had cause to remember
running from a dog that would not have hurt him if he had been quiet; or if it
had bit him, it would not have done so much harm as his fright, and fall, and
laying in the water did: but dogs do not bite people if they do not hurt and
teaze them. Children should not teaze dogs; but it is very foolish to be afraid
of them. They need not touch strange dogs they meet in the streets; but to run
from them is very silly indeed.

LESSON IX.
ONCE there was a little boy who had a nice wheel-barrow, and his sister Sophy
had a very pretty doll. They used to like to play in the garden, and sometimes
they called the wheel-barrow a coach, and put the doll in it to ride. One day
as they were running rather too fast, their coach tumbled over, and the poor
doll fell down and broke her nose and face sadly. The little girl was so silly
as to cry a great deal, and said he threw it down on purpose. Her mamma hearing
the noise, went out to see what was the matter, for she thought one of the
children must have been hurt very much, or she would not have heard such a
screaming; but when she found what the truth was, she was quite surprised, as
she did not think her little girl would have been so naughty as to cry, and be
out of humor, because while playing with her brother, the doll happened to be
broken, without his meaning to let it fall out of his wheel-barrow. "I am quite
ashamed of you, said her mamma, and shall take the doll away, and not let you
play with it again; and if you do not leave off crying directly, shall not let
you stay in the garden to play with your brother any longer." "No, indeed,
Ma'am, replied Charles, I did not intend to spoil my sister's doll; and as she
was running as fast as I was, I did not.know she did not choose the coach should
go so fast: besides, she said her child liked to gallop along, and she wished
we could make more haste; but when the doll fell out, she said I went a great
deal too fast, and that I wanted to break her play-things. I am sure I did not
want to spoil any of her dolls, and am very sorry this one is broken, for it
was a very pretty one, and when I am a man and have money, I will buy her
another; but I wish she would come and play, and be merry again now." Little
Sophy was still so silly as to cry and be cross because her doll was broken,
though it was as much her own fault as her brother's; so when her mamma found
she would not be good-humoured, though her brother tried to persuade her to
play, she would not let her play in the garden, but took her in doors, and put
her with her face in the corner of the room, till she left off crying, grew
good-humoured, and told her brother she was sorry she had been so unkind to
him, and would never behave so again, if he would play with her. So they went
to play again; but her mamma told her, she must not expect to be treated as if
she had been good all day, and theref^re she should not let her read any pretty
story till the next day, and not then, if she was not good; but she told the
little boy, he might have the pleasure of reading, as he had been very good,
and did not wish to teaze his ^^ster at all. So when Sophy found how much
better it was to be good than naughty, she was very sorry she had been silly,
and always after played in very good humor with her brother, or whoever would
be so kind as to play with her.

LESSON X.
THERE were two little girls who once lived near each other, and used often to
play together. They went to the same school, and always came home at the same
time. It is rather strange they were so fond of each other, for they were not
at all alike in their tempers, or way of behavior; for Polly Perkins was a sad
little idle girl, she never minded her work, or book, but liked nothing but
play; she was five years old, and could not read at all, she could hardly spell
a word of three letters without a book; nay, one day when she had a book, she
called T, O, P, bob, and R, O, T, she called rat, and so, many words she called
wrong, because she would take no pains to do better. Her mamma bought her many
pretty books, to try to make her read them; but instead of striving to do that,
she only tore them to-pieces, and cut out the pictures, without caring what
they were about. Her work too she did sadly, and made it so dirty it was not
fit to be seen. She was stitching a pocket with blue silk, but she did it in so
bad a manner, and so unneat, that it was quite ugly to look at; and I believe
she was almost a year about it. But her friend Mary True did all her work quite
in another manner; she stitched so clean and neat, that when she had done her
pocket, the silk looked as bright as when it first came out of the paper, there
were some pinks and roses upon it, and it was very pretty. Mary could hem and
sew as well as stitch, and she was but five years old, though so much better a
child than Polly Perkins. Her father and mother were not quite so rich as Mr.
and Mrs. Perkins, so they could not afford to buy her so many books; but those
she had, she read vastly well indeed, for she took pains to speak plain and
slow, so that every body could hear her, and know what she said at once,
without asking her to repeat it over again. O! she was a charming girl! and
loved by every body who knew her; she always did as she was bid at first,
without crying or fretting, and went to-bed the moment she was called, after
having made a handsome curtesy and wished every body good night. If ever she
fell down, or hurt herself, she did not squall and scream as some boys and
girls do. Every body took notice how good she was, and admired and loved her.

LESSON XI.
A MAN who had a large garden full of all sorts of fruit and good things to be
eaten, lived by himself; so that he could not use half a quarter of them; and
yet was so cross that he would not give any away; but kept them 'till they were
quite spoiled; and then he used to open the gate, and let some hogs and asses
go in and eat them up. Only think how cross it was! not to give what would have
been of so much use to other people. His being so, made all his neighbors
dislike him; and they used to call him the Cross Man, and Mr. Greedy; and the
boys in the town, who had never been taught better, used to pelt him with dirt
and bean-shells. It was not pretty for them to do so, though to be sure he
deserved it. The reason he behaved so when a man, was because when he was a boy
he liked to eat all his cake himself, and never give away any thing, or lend
his playthings; but chose to keep all himself, and not help or please any of
his play-mates. He ought to have been punished for doing so; but his parents
did not like to hurt him; and hoped when he grew older, he would be wiser. But
instead of that, he behaved the same, and so was very unhappy and wretched, for
nobody loved him, or chose to be with so cross a man.

MY dears who now this book have read,
I hope will mind all it has said;
And never speak a word that is wrong,
But heed the advice of this my song,
And always do as you are bid,
Then you will not, I Am sure, be chid;
But be admired by all who see,
How good and cheerful you can be.
Be wise and good, and you will secure
Esteem, which always shall endure.
BOOKS sold by S. HALL, in Boston
1. THE Royal Alphabet; or, Child^^ best Instructor. To which is added, the
History of a little Boy found under a Haycock. 2. The Father's Gift; or the Way
to be wise and happy. 3. Jackey Dandy's Delight; or the History of Birds and
Beasts. 4. The Death and Burial of Cock-Robin; with the tragical Death of A,
Apple Pie: The whole taken from the original manuscript in the possession of
Master Meanwell. 5. The History of Master Jackey and Miss Harriot. Dedicated to
the good Children of the United States of America. 6. The History of Little
Goody TwoShoes; otherwise called Mrs. Margery TwoShoes, with the means by which
she acquired her Learning and Wisdom, and in consequence thereof her Estate. 7.
The School of Good Manners; composed for the help of Parents in teaching their
Children during their minority. Also, a great other books for children.

