THE FIRST TRIAL of A. Morhouse, FOR ^^^GERY. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

(...) YORK. (...)

An accurate Description of the Trial between the People of the State of New
York and Abraham Morhouse, at the Supreme Court, holden at the Exchange, in the
City of New York, on Tuesday the 20th January, 1789, and continued by
Adjournments until Saturday the 3^st of said Month and Year. The Honorable
Judge MORRIS on the Bench.
ON Monday the 26th of January, 1789, the said Morhouse was called down and
arraigned before the Court, and there charged by indictment with forging a bond
in the name of Richard Mulherrain, and purporting to be given by the said
Mulherrain to Zebulon Ross, jun. on the second of December and year 1779,
witnessed by Israel Young and Jacob Ott; conditioned for the payment of One
Thousand Pounds New York currency. To which indictments he plead not guilty,
and put himself upon the country for trial, and informed the Court he should be
ready to answer to his Indictments on Wednesday the 28th of January; which day
being agreed to, he was re committed to Prison. On Tuesday the 27th January,
the said Morhouse was again called down, and charged by two indictments: The
one with having been concerned in the forgery of the aforesaid bond, and the
other for uttering the bond knowing it to be forged. To both which indictments
he plead not guilty; and after putting himself upon his country for trial, he
prayed the Honorable Court to inform him upon which indictment he should first
be tried, so that he may prepare himself to answer it, as he made use of no
Counsel; but the Court refused to inform him. He was then ordered back to
prison, and the next day he was brought down again, also the said Israel Young,
one of the subscribing witnesses aforesaid to the (...) bond, also Samuel
Walters, who were both arrainged and charged by indictments with being
concerned (...) the forgery of the aforesaid bond. The said (...) was then
brought to trial, for being concerned (...) the forgery of the said bond; and
the Jurymen (...) then called, to several of which the said Morhouse objected,
and appeared to judge by the phisognomy of their countenances whom he chose and
who not, as he was a perfect stranger to them all. After the Jury were sworn,
they then proceeded to examine the witnesses for the People. The first of which
was Peter R. Livingston, Attorney, who being sworn, declared, "Tthat some time
in the fore part of August last he received a card from one John Wilson,
desiring him to call up to the prison, and in consequence of which he called
up, and there for the first time saw Mr. Wilson, the prisoner now upon his
trial at the bar: That he appeared to be a person of address, and informed him,
the deponant, that he was consined upon suspicion of counterfeiting money, and
he thought very unjustly, and desired me to endeavor to extricate him from his
imprisonment, which I engaged to do, but was not able to effect it. About two
or three weeks thereafter, I was at the goal, and there saw Mr. Wilson again,
who informed me, that he had received a bond in judgment from a gentleman in
the country against a Richard Mulherrain, merchant, in this city, with orders
to prosecute it, and he wanted my advice upon the subject, which I gave him. He
then took me into a room, and showed me his letters of attorney from Zebulon
Ross, who was the man, he said, that sent him the bond, and to whom the bond
was given. He then disclosed to me that his name was Abraham Morhouse, which,
for particular reasons, he had concealed under the name of Wilson. He then
desired me to take the bond, and put it into prosecution, to which I agreed,
and receipted him for the bond in the name of Abraham Morhouse; but as I did
not then take the letters of attorney, which authorized him to prosecute. I
called up the next day and got them. I then called upon Jacob Ott, one of the
witnesses to the bond, and questioned him about (...) and he declared he saw
the bond legally executed. I desired him to call the next day, to go before the
(...) which he promised he would: But in the mean time Mr. Mulherrain came to
me, and convinced me that the bond was forged; with that I went and delivered
it to Judge Morris, together with the letter of attorney, and was determined he
should be prosecuted for them (the said bond and letters were produced) which
he swore were the same he had received of the said Morhouse"

Jacob Ott, as one of the subscribing witnesses beforementioned, was then
called and brought forward to be sworn; but the said Morhouse objected against
him as being an evidence, as he had killed a man in Nova Scolia, for which he
was convicted and burnt in the hand, upon which he was turned aside, and
Richard Mulherrain was called and sworn, and declared That he never gave the
bond now in question, and that he had never any dealings with Zebulon Ross,
jun. except to the amount of twenty-seven pounds which he had supplied his
family with, and for which the said Ross owed him; and that some time in the
month of September, the aforesaid Jacob Ott came to him and informed him that
there were some men in gaol who were about forging a bond against him to a
large amount, and wanted to engage him the said Ott, to be a witness to the
said bond, but that he would not do it without letting him know of it; and
further the said Mulherrain declared that he did not at first credit the said
Ott; but after several informations of the same kind, he was induced to believe
him, and for fear that the bond might be withdrawn from Mr. R. Livingston's
hands, and so the rogues escape punishment, he at length agreed to have Ott go
and witness the bond. (Upon which one of the Jurymen, a very observing young
man, arose and desired to know, how Ott could go and witness the bond after it
was in the Attorney's hands? At which question the said Mulherrain appeared
very much disconcerted, and made no immediate reply -- whereupon the Honorable
Judge (...) got up and informed the gentlemen of the Ju^^; that the said
Mulherrain was only mistaken (...) point of time, and put the story to rights
himself, after the said Mulherrain had recollected himself. He the said
Mulherrain again declared, "That according to his advice he believed that Ott
went and became a witness to the said bond, and that he had applied to Mr. R.
Livingston the Attorney, and influenced him to give up the said bond to the
Honorable Judge Morris, which he did" Then the said Mulherrain produced a
letter, said to be wrote from the said Zebulon Ross, jun. to him, Mulherrain,
desiring him not to put him to trouble for the small sum of money he owed him,
for that it should be settled as soon as possible.

Mulherrain's clerk was then brought forward, and affirmed (being a Quaker)
"That some time ago he had filed the aforementioned letter among Mulherrain's
papers" The said Mulherrain declared, "That he had seen the prisoner at the bar
before, but never knew him by any other name but that of Wilson."

Jacob Ott was again called* and the said Morhouse making the same objection as
before* the Court overruled it, and declared that Ott should be sworn, unless
the records of his conviction could be produced. The said Morhouse observed
that they could not be produced, but offered to prove his conviction by very
responsible witnesses but the Judge would not admit him to prove it, as he said
it tended to particulars. Accordingly Ott being sworn, and declared, "That in
the fore part of September last he was at the goal, when Mr. Wilson, the
prisoner at the bar, asked him to be a witness to a bond, against a Richard
Mulherrain, and offered him the sum of fifty pounds to do it, upon which he
agreed to it at the same time telling Mr. Wilson he would do any thing for
money; but he did not do it then but first went and informed the said
Mulherrain of what he was asked to do; and that after some conversation the
said Mulherrain agreed for him to do it. He then went up to the goal and told
Mr. Wilson he was (...) to witness the bond. Upon (...) Mr. Wilson, Capt.
(...), and Mr. Walters, the three persons now at the bar, and himself, went all
up stairs together, where he witnessed the said bond, and Mr Wilson gave him a
note for fifty pounds, payable in a few days for the same; where upon the note
was produced, and the bond, both of which he swore to be the same."

Some evidences were then called who gave Mr. Mulherrain a very good character.

The witnesses for the people being got through with, the evidences for the
prisoner were then called, Peter Learman being first called and sworn, declared
'That some time in the year 1779, he sold to Zebulon Ross jun. a gold watch, a
silver watch, and locket, upon credit; that some time toward Christmas, in the
same year, he was at John Romers' house by the Fly Market and there saw Ross,
who informed him he was making a settlement in the next room with Richard
Mulherrain, and that if he could get any money of Mulherrain, he would then pay
him, and accordingly asked him into the other room, with that he went into the
other room, and there saw Mulherrain and several others; that Ross then asked
Mulherrain if he could let him have any money to pay Mr. Learman, Mulherrain
answered ha had none with him, and beside, as the same was equal, and as the
bond was drawn, it would not be worth while to alter it; with that the deponent
made answer that he was not then in want of money, and that Mr. Ross might pay
him some other time. Mr. Mulherrain then sat down and signed a bond in
judgment, which was read, and mentioned one thousand pounds in the condition
payable in one year from that date. Mr Ross asked Capt. Young to witness the
bond, which he did capt. Ross then asked me to be the other witness, but Mr.
Mulherrain answered that they need not trouble him for this man would do
pointing to Jacob Ott, who accordingly sat down and was the other witness The
said deponent again saw Capt. Ross at Woodbury on the fall of 1787. and Capt.
Ross then paid him honorably what he owed him, and then asked Mr. Ross about
Mr. Mulherrains' circumstance, and told the deponant that he had not paid him
the bond yet. Capt Ross then took out the bond and showed it to the deponant,
and said he believed he should send it down by some friend to put in
prosecution, as he was in want of the money.

The bond was then produced, which Mr. Learman declared to the best of his
knowledge to be the same which he had seen executed by Mr. Mulherrain, and the
same which Capt. Ross had shown him in 1787.'

Thomas Barrett was then sworn and declared. 'That in 1783 he was acquainted
with Capt. Ross at Charleston, No. 4; that Capt. Ross then showed a bond signed
Richard Mulherrain, and one of the witnesses he remembered to be Israel Young,
but the other witness's name he could not remember; that he took particular
notice of the bond, as it was a bond in judgment, and he had never seen any of
that kind before that Capt. Ross talked of exchanging the bond for lands. The
bond was produced and Mr. Barrett swore to the best of his knowledge it was the
same bond he saw at Charleston. The letters of attorney from Zebulon Ross, jun.
which authorized the said Morhouse to put the said bond in prosecution, were
then produced, and Mr. Barrett declared them, according to the best of his
knowledge, to be the handwriting of the aforesaid Zebulon Ross.'

Christopher Tobias being sworn and declared 'That in the month of May last, he
received a ten shilling bill in the Fly Market of a man who was a stranger to
him; that offering to pass the bill again the next day, it was declared a
counterfeit, and he was taken before Alderman Wool, who was going to commit
him; but he prevailed upon him to take bail for his appearance the next day, as
he could then prove how he received the bill; upon this says the deponent and
went to Jacob Ott, remembering he was by when I took the bill, and Mr Ott went
with the deponant to the Alderman's and declared he saw the deponant receive a
ten shilling bill, and described it by a corner being (...) off, but as he did
not know the number of the (...), the Alderman said (...) would be
insufficient, and accordingly wrote my mittimus and sent me to gaol, where I
was close shut up. That after I was a prisoner Mr. Ott used to come and see me
often, and appeared to pity my situation, as he said he knew I did not deserve
it; and one day he told me if I would give him a coat I had, and which he was
much in want of, he would bring in tools for me to break prison, which I agreed
to, and gave him my coat; but same days afterward he came and told me that as
the tools would cost considerable, and the risk was very great, he would not do
it for the coat, but that if I with the others in the room, would make up fifty
pounds for him, he would bring in tools sufficient to break the prison, and
likewise a set of keys that would unlock all the doors of the gaol, so that if
we were detected in breaking out, the keys would then answer to let us out by
the doors. I told him it was impossible for us to raise so much money then. He
then told me that if I could get Mr. Wilson to give his note for the money, he
would take it. I told him I would try. Accordingly the next day happening to
get the liberty of the Hall, I told Mr. Wilson, if he would give his note to
Mr. Ott, for Fifty Pounds that he would get me out, and as soon as I was out I
would settle the matter with him, which he by my persuasion consented to do,
and Mr. Ott, coming there that day, we then, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Ott, and myself,
went up stairs together, and Mr. Wilson gave Mr. Ott a note for Fifty Pounds,
payable in a few days, but how many I do not remember; Mr. Ott the next day
brought me a rope, a chisel and three gimblets, but never brought any keys. We
broke the room with the tools, and myself and five more went out, Mr. Wilson
was then confined in the room, with us but would not go out. The note was then
produced, and Mr. Tobias declared it to the best of his knowledge, to be the
same that Mr. Wilson the prisoner at the bar, and called now by the name of
Abraham Morhouse, gave Jacob Ott for him.'

John Ketcham was then sworn, and declared, "That a few evenings ago he was in
a public house, and that Jacob Ott and several others were there, and that he
heard Ott say that he was waiting for Mr. Mulherrain to come home, that he
wanted to get some money from him; and that Ott further said, that he could get
money of Mulherrain when he wanted it, and he could get 50 or 60l. of him, if
he wanted." The State's Attorney then asked Ott if he had ever said so, and he
said no. Mr. Ketcham, the deponant, was then asked what kind of character Ott
had in general. Mr. Ketcham said, if he must speak plain, that he bore a very
bad character: That none of the butchers would trust him; and that he heard
several times of his stealing, and was generally accounted a thief"

After all the evidences were got through with, Mr. Morhouse desired leave of
the Court to speak for himself, as he intended to make no use of an Attorney;
which privilege being granted, he addressed the Jury as follows. --

Gentlemen,
"I find myself here arraigned before this Honorable Court, and you. Gentlemen
are to be the Judges whether I shall live or die: and having obtained leave of
the HONORABLE COURT. I shall therefore speak for myself, tho very incapable of
the important Task for you must know Gentlemen I am neither Orator, Lawyer, or
Scholar; but can speak the truth as well as any man and being conscious of my
own innocence of the present charge I believe there is nothing but the truth
necessary to be told, therefore I undertake the task myself Your first enqury.
Gentlemen, will be what reason I had for altering my name from Morhouse to
Wilson, to which I answer: Gentlemen, at a very early period of my life I
quitted my father with his consent, and commenced business on my own bottom,
bought a store near Clavarick, and drove on a large trade between that and this
city, my credit being firmly established which enabled me to trade largely, and
at the same time with a considerable profit to myself; but being young and
unexperienced in the world, I did not take that precaution and care as might be
expected from one further advanced in years, and ripened by experience: being
naturally of an easy and benevolent temper, I was induced by solicitations to
give large credits, and when the day of payment came, by their pleading up
scarcity of money and their inability to pay, my easy nature would never permit
me to distress them or their families, and by that means payments were put off
from time to time, and many of them remain unpaid to this day In less than a
year after I commenced business, by a calculation of my affairs, I imagined I
had made as much money as I should ever want, and at that time having a great
inclination to travel I equipped myself with a considerable degree of splendour,
and set out to explore the southern states, having first put my affairs which I
was obliged to leave behind into the hands of a friend, with express orders for
him to collect as much money as would pay my debts and to obtain as speedy as
possible a discharge from all my creditors. I then commenced my journey, which
continued through various parts of the world for four years successively during
which I experienced as many vicissitudes of fortune as perhaps any man ever did
in that length of time. But returning last spring, and finding myself heartily
tired of rambling. I then seriously came to a resolution of settling myself,
and to quit a roving life; with these sentiments I applied to my friend (whom I
at my departure had left my business with) and desired to know what progress he
had made in my affairs. But to my surprise I soon discovered that he had paid
so much attention to his own business, that he had entirely neglected mine, and
I therefore saw very little difference in my affairs, but found they remained
nearly in the same situation as I left them, which caused me to draw my
property immediately out of his hands and resolved to trust no one, but settle
my own business myself As soon as I came to take a view of my affairs, they
afforded a very disagreeable prospect, and I found myself reduced in a
labyrinth of perplexities and troubles; for although I had much more owing me
than I owed, yet the scarcity of money and the situation of many of my debtors,
I soon saw would make it very difficult to collect money enough to pay my
debts; and being at the same time jealous that were my creditors acquainted
with my return, they would immediately fall upon me unprepared for their money,
and so cast me into prison, which you are all sensible, Gentlemen, is a very
poor place for a man to settle his business in. This idea, Gentlemen, brought
me to a resolution of embracing my free moments, to bring my creditors to a
favorable composition. But not knowing who to trust, I thought no one would be
so proper to transact the business as myself; and well knowing that from my
long absence and the great alteration made in my person, my most intimate
friends would not know me by sight. I therefore called my name John M. Wilson,
and as it were under this invisible disguise, I could with ease and pleasure
settle the business for Abraham Morhouse, and my acquaintance with all the
circumstances, and disguised as a friend, would enable me to do justice on all
sides, both to myself and my creditors, and I make no doubt, Gentlemen, but you
will consider the stratagem as a very innocent one, as you plainly discover
that it was laid to injure no man, but to contribute to the general good. With
these intentions, Gentlemen, I came to this city and put up at a genteel house,
avoided company or connection, and confined myself wholly to the prosecution of
my favorite plan, and had already visited several of my creditors, and under my
disguise conversed with them freely upon affairs between them and Abraham
Morhouse, without their having the least mistrust that they were then
conversing with him, and should have brought on a compromise in a few days that
would have proved highly beneficial to both parties. But fortune, not yet tired
of persecuting an innocent victim, thought proper to cut of my favorite hopes,
and plunged me again into a sea of troubles, for this purpose they seemed to
infuse suspicion into the heads of some constables who were in search of
persons they first suspected of counterfeiting money, that I was one likewise,
that it would be proper for them to take up, they in consequence took me before
Alderman Wool, who seemed to have catched the disorder, and that so strongly,
that he immediately without ceremony, sent me to gaol, but for what I never
could learn from that time until this. I indeed heard a flying report that I
was committed for passing counterfeit money, but this I knew to be a mistake,
as I had not passed a paper bill for eight months before, but being in gaol I
was to make the best of it, and being in want of money, I wrote to Capt. Ross
who owed me a considerable sum, that he wrote me back, which my letters of
attorney here plainly show, that he had no money, but sent me a bond in
judgment against Richard Mulherrain for L.1000 and desired me to collect said
bond, pay myself out of the money, and return him the overplus. This bond when
I received it I gave it to Peter R Livingston to collect. Now, Gentlemen,
please to mark how heartily I transacted the business, for although I was then
known by no other name but Wilson but the moment that I found myself obliged to
do business, I despised doing it under a borrowed name, but immediately
disclosed my true name, as this receipt will demonstrate where he acknowledges
to have received of Abraham Morhouse the above mentioned bond to put in suit,
which plainly shows that all I did and meant was honest and square, and that I
never changed my name to defraud any man. Gentlemen, I made this observation to
convince you of the candor of my story, and I make no doubt but your good sense
will discover that every sentence I have spoken, is founded on absolute facts
and without the least evasion from the truth Now, Gentlemen, the bond that Mr.
Ross sent me to collect, and the bond which I put into Livingston's hands, and
which he receipted me for in the name of Abraham Morhouse; this is the same
bond, Gentlemen, that I am now to be tried for being concerned in the forgery
of, and as you are informed by Ott's evidence in the gaol too; Now Gentlemen,
as the matter may appear something strange to you how I could receive a bond
from Ross who at the time he sent it me was at 100 miles distance and within a
few days after forge that bond in prison? the two declarations are
diametrically opposite to each other, and therefore one must be false and the
other true, I make no doubt but you will without hesitation, from the
examination of the witnesses, declare me innocent of the charge; but to show
you how conscious I am of my own integrity, and at the sametime show you the
opinion I have of the conduct of my adversaries, I shall make a few
observations on the subject, to which Gentlemen I beg your attention.

"You here behold, Gentlemen, a bond signed by Richard Mulherrain, witnessed by
Israel Young and Jacob Ott. Two witnesses to an obligation of this nature is as
much as the law requires, and therefore this bond is not deficient in that
point, but you may say the witnesses do not agree; for here is Ott, one of the
witnesses declares that the bond is forged, and that he was to receive Fifty
Pounds to become a witness, and has here the note for the money to produce, and
likewise Mr. Mulherrain swears he never gave such a bond. It is true.
Gentlemen, they have sworn so, and by that means the grand jury was induced to
indict Mr. Young, which has deprived me of the privilege of his evidence, but
with what justice I will leave it to you to judge. You see, Gentlemen, Mr.
Mulherrain is called upon in this case to be an evidence, in which he has two
alternatives, by taking the one he absolutely swears about Sixteen Hundred
Pounds out of his pocket, and by taking the other, swears as much in, and I
think, Gentlemen you will readily judge which his choice is: the Honorable
Court says, that the law makes him a good witness, but pray Gentlemen, does any
law human or divine, (except in a Court of Concience) oblige a man to bear
testimony against himself? I believe not, if so, then why should a man be
permitted to be an evidence in his own favor, it appears to be unconnected with
reason and reason is held as the foundation of law. I acknowledge, Gentlemen,
that in some cases it corroborates with reason and justice, that a man should
be an evidence on his own behalf, for instance, where a man has property stolen
from him, and no other evidence but his own can be procured to prove the
property his, in such and the like cases, it is reasonable that his evidence
should be admitted on his own behalf, but then he should be examined with the
utmost caution, and no more weight should be laid upon his testimony than could
be justified by circumstances, the situation of the case considered. It is
true, Mulherrain produces a letter as a circumstance to prove the truth of his
evidence, but as there is no proof its ever being wrote by Ross, I don't see,
Gentlemen, that you can take any notice of it, especially as there are several
weighty circumstances against him, which greatly overbalances the introduction
of this pretended letter and which only serves to make Mulherrain's fraud
appear more conspicuous, as will shortly be explained. Secondly, Gentlemen here
is Ott swears that I engaged him to be a witness to this bond some time in the
fore part of Septemper last, and gave him a note for Fifty Pounds to do it, do
you believe this, Gentlemen, to be a fact? If you do, you must discredit
several very substantial witnesses, who are not only witnesses of good
reputation, but witnesses that every circumstance serves to prove the validity
of their testimonies; therefore you cannot nor will not believe any thing that
Ott informs you. Now, admitting Ott's evidence to be false, which is most
positively the case, we shall naturally draw this plain and equitable
inference, that is, Mulherrain being informed (as easily he might) that Ross
had sent me the bond to collect, and knowing it to be for a large sum of money,
and finding in himself an inability or disinclination to pay it, he immediately
falls upon a scheme to quit himself of the demand, and as the most expeditious
way he applies to Ott, whom we find as long ago as when the bond was given, to
be his favorite witness, as he then refused having any other but him to be a
second witness to the bond and from this we must naturally suppose, that
Mulherrain knew his man, and and at that moment intended to cheat Ross out of
his property and laid his plans accordingly: in consequence of which
determination he goes to Ott as soon as he found the bond coming against him,
and agrees to give him a certain sum of money to swear that the bond was a
forgery this Gentlemen, you must positively believe as you find by Mr.
Ketcham's testimony, that Ott declared that he was only waiting for Mr.
Mulherrain to come home and he could get money enough, that he got money of
Mulherrain whenever he wanted it, and to the amount of Fifty or Sixty Pounds,
which money. Gentlemen, Mulherrain could never give Ott for any other thing,
but for him to swear the bond was not a forgery, as we find in both of their
testimonies; they deny ever having any dealings or connexions together In this
manner he secured Ott, and engaged him to declare the bond a forgery; but being
assured that Ott's evidence would be no more than Mr. Young's, and conscious
that Mr. Young's integrity could not be corrupted by a golden fee, he formed
another project, the execution of which he supposed, and that with some reason,
would be a strong circumstance in his favor, and serve to prejudice the minds
of the people on his behalf, he therefore orders Ott who had become his
emissary to go to the prison, and under the pretense of assisting the prisoners
to break gaol, to procure some kind of property or obligation from me, with
which he proposed working miracles. Ott, according to his orders, came up, but
finding I had no inclination to quit my consinement in that manner, secretly
applies to some of the (...), and with fair promises and hopes of a speedy
enjoyment of precious and much coveted liberty, (...) them in his plan, but
then the difficulty was started how they should pay him, for he had taken care
to ask such a price as he was sure they could not immediately comply with
without assistance, he therefore immediately offers to take my note, and help
them to what they so eagerly desired. Mr. Tobias with whom I was some
acquainted, thought the offer advantageous, and readily agreed to solicit me to
become his sponsor for the Fifty Pounds, he succeeded; I gave my note as you
see fully demonstrated by Mr. Tobias's testimony, as soon as he had got the
note, with eager transport he hastens to Mulherrain, informs him of his
progress, who exults with him at the success of their stratagem. Being now
secure in their own minds, no sooner did Mulherrain find the bond in Peter R.
Livingston, the attorney's hands, but he applies to him, and with the benign
influence of his purse, engages him to go and deliver the bond to the Honorable
Judge Morris, who by appearances was induced to believe the bond was a forgery,
and that I was at the bottom of it, and immediately orders me to be treated
accordingly, which orders I have very severely experienced. Gentlemen, as to
what the State's. Attorney has offered to your consideration concerning the
bonds mentioning State of New York, which he says he thinks the custom was at
that time to mention province of New York, and urges the difference as a proof
that the bond is forged, but that nice observation of his can have no weight
with you Gentlemen, when you consider, that New York was then an independent
State, and the British being possessed of this small corner could not affect
its title, beside Mr. Ross was from the country where it was universally called
a State, and he without doubt, chose to make use of a term which was not only
more legal than any other but one that he had been familiarly conversant with.
The State's Attorney likewise informs you, Gentlemen, that there is a letter
difference between Mulherrain's name as spelt in signing the bond, and the
manner he now writes it; this also he produces as the bond's being forged: but
you will immediately perceive, Gentlemen, that he could not produce a stronger
circumstance of the bond's being a good one; for you (...), Gentlemen, he
produces no proof that Mulherrain did not write his name in 1777, as it is here
signed to the bond, but produces a paper which Mulherrain has wrote on purpose,
and no other proof of its being his common method of writing, but his own oath,
which how far ought to be credited. I shall leave it to you to judge; but
supposing it to be really the case, that Mulherrain's name to the bond is
misspelt, you must and will suppose, Gentlemen, that Mulherrain made the
mistake himself, and that wilfully; for you cannot surely imagine, that any man
would be so great an idiot, as to undertake to counterfeit another man's name
(and especially in a matter of this consequence) unless he had the man's name
and hand writing, so intended to be forged present, and to view with great care
and circumspection, so that both of these circumstances are weighty additional
proofs to what has already been clearly demonstrated; which is this, that
Mulherrain, at the time he gave this obligation, laid his plans to defraud Ross
of his property, and evade the payment of the bond, and has proceeded
accordingly. For Gentlemen, I make no doubt but you are fully convinced, that
Ott swore false, and that Mulherrain hired him to do so, and if his ambition
would carry him so far as to subborn a witness to deprive a man of his just
due, and take the lives of three innocent men, and plunge them into eternity,
for no other reason but that they want obstacles to his avarice. To crown the
scene of baneful fraud, he would swallow an oath himself, especially as it was
likely to contribute so largely to his own interest. Gentlemen, you will be
obliging enough to consider every circumstance seriously. In me you behold a
man oppressed with the heavy hand of tyranny, and loaded with affliction, more
than six long months have passed since I was confined and close shut up from
all conversation of friends and acquaintance, and effectually deprived of doing
any business or even transmitting what might procure persons who were some way
acquainted with the circumstances of this affair to come forth and declare the
truth in support of my innocence, while my adversary. an opulent merchant,
roamed at large, and spared neither time or money to secure his advantage and
obtain my conviction, by which method only he could secure his ill covered
wealth: but conscious of my own innocence, and the reward due to virtue, I am
regardless of his machinations; I have chosen you, Gentlemen, to be my
guardians, and placed my life in your hands fully believing that you will
consider the important trust; for not only the lives of three individuals
depends upon your verdict, but you, Gentlemen, are to decide the most important
affair that perhaps ever was left to the judgment of twelve men; you now
command the attention of your country, and the eyes of every person are upon
you, eagerly awaiting the award of your judgment; you, Gentlemen, are to
determine whether all public faith is to be broken, and all private contracts
made void; whether all deeds, conveyances, bonds, notes, and receipts, etc.
etc. are from this hour to cease, and no covenants or agreements to be made,
but by the word of mouth from man to man; or whether they may with reason,
justice and safety be continued in their usual and ancient form; for if you
find me guilty, no person that ever hears of the circumstance of my
condemnation, will ever be so fool hardy as to receive an obligation from any
man, as it puts it (...) of his debtor (...) him out of both his (...) property
he (...) certainly prefer taking the man's word, and so only run the risque of
losing his money, than to take his bond and leave his life in jeopardy.
Gentlemen, you are all sensible that as social beings and members of society,
it is our duty to embrace every opportunity to serve our fellow creatures; how
often Gentlemen, have many of you and perhaps all of you been called upon by
strangers, to be a witness to their contracts, and have readily complied with
their demands, without ever considering (...) consequence; but how must your
feelings be if that bond or contract should afterward, by the oath of the
oblige^ be proved to be a forgery, and you arraigned and condemned for
assisting in the forgery; your name was signed as a witness to the bond, and
therefore you must be concerned; in vain would the poor unfortunate obligee cry
out that his bond was a good one, and call upon you to declare it such. which
you are ready to do, but are not allowed; therefore you are both convicted,
condemned, and obliged to suffer a shameful death, and your memory branded with
eternal infamy; say, Gentlemen, which of you; to ^^rve neighbor, acquaintance,
or a stranger, will ever ^are to be a witness to an obligation, when, perhaps,
at the very moment you are attempting to oblige them, you are signing your own
death warrant? Therefore, as there can be no witness with safety, there can be
no obligations; and of course all contracts by writing must stop, and the art
of writing become useless: And still farther, Gentlemen, which of you will ever
dare to receive an assignment of an obligation from a friend or a debtor,
against any man, since you see me arraigned and tried for my life, for no other
cause than receiving a bond from a debtor to prosecute? And you see I am
charged with assisting in the forgery of the bond, although I have produced my
letters of attorney, which authorizes me to put the bond in suit, and have
proved the letters geuuine, and proved the bond to be legally given by
Mulherrain, and proved the bond to be offered years ago for sale by Ross?
Neither is there any proof against the legality of the bond, but Mulherrain's
own evidence, which is sufficiently bore down by disinterested witnesses, which
renders sufficiently conspicuous the authenticity of the obligation, as well as
my innocence of the present charge. -- I think, Gentlemen, I have plainly shown
the present case to be a very important one; but some attoruies may say, that I
have not laid (...) the case according to law. but I believe I have said it
down according to reason, and I can assure you, Gentlemen, that if you give a
verdict that is founded upon reason and justice, the law will never censure
you; for although by the laws being so numerous, and lawyers frequently
wresting them to their advantage construing passages to suit their own
particular cases, without paying attention to their real meaning, by which
means it renders them difficult for common capacities to understand; yet we
find all laws founded upon the law of natural reason, and as Justinian
observes, are reduced to three general heads, viz deal justly with all* hurt
nobody* and render every one his due.

"And your finding me guilty upon the evidence offered in this case, would in
fact be complying with no one of those important law maxims. You will likewise
Gentlemen, take notice, that I had a very fair opportunity to make my escape
from prison, and could have secured my liberty with the greatest ease and
safety. Had I been guilty of this charge, I should have embraced the
opportunity, and with the others, quitted my unhospitable mansion, to enjoy the
pleasing and delicious sweets of liberty; for wisdom teaches you that a guilty
mind is ever tormented with disagreeable fears and apprehensions, and more
especially so, when in the hands of justice, which they so cruelly dread, for
then they expect to receive a punishment equitable to their crimes: but
Gentlemen, no one of those fears tormented my breast; but conscious of my own
innocence, I disregarded the self interested malice and cruel persecutions of
my adversary, but with humble resignation. I put my trust in that Almighty
Being, whose assistance I have often experienced in my hours of calamity, and
remained in full belief, that his all-seeing spirit would assist me to declare
my innocence to the world, and to convince the public of my injuries: this
belief made me forego the opportunity of relieving me then from unutterable
distress to enjoy the blessings of freedom, but with my free and voluntary will
now appear before you, and confide in you to publish my innocence, Gentlemen,
favors I ask none, for could I be sensible that my mind was ever so depraved as
to forge a bond, and to hire two men to become witnesses to prove it, my
aversion now to so horrid a deed, and the love I bear my country would make me
sincerely wish to be annihilated, that I might not live a monument of shame and
self remorse, and a baneful pest to society. But I can positively assure you,
Gentlemen, that so far from ever committing such an action, you may rely upon
it that the deed never once existed in idea: but Gentlemen fully relying upon
your integrity, I humbly submit this important case to your candid consideration

ABRAHAM MORHOUSE."

Mr Benson, the States Attorney, then got up and made a few observations to the
Jury; but was very short and concise in his remarks.

The Honorable Judge then rose up and gave a charge to the Jury, which was very
unfavourable to the prisoner, for he appeared to consider the bond as a
forgery, and that Jacob Ott had spoken the truth, in giving in his testimony.
The Jury then went out, and in three fourths of an hour returned, all agreed,
and pronounced the prisoner at the bar, not guilty, which words were no sooner
spoken than the numerous body of spectators, made the whole house resound with
a universal acclamation, which plainly testified their joy at Mr Morhouse's
success in not falling a victim to selfinterested motives.

Mr. Morhouse then desired to know of the Honorable Court, if they ever
intended to bring him to Trial, on the other Indictment; the Court answered in
the arffimative, be then desired to be brought down to answer them the next
day, as some of the witnesses were from a distance, and upon expenses which
made it difficult for them to tarry, but he received no answer, but was ordered
back to prison without being admitted to bail or trial until the next setting
of the Court.

The end of the first Trial.
VERSES ON ABRAHAM MORHOUSE,
By a Friend to the Distressed.
NEAR Hudson's lucid stream, all on a rock alone,
Columbia's genius sat, and pensive made her moan;
The briny tear ran trickling down amain,
Her heaving breast expressed her inward pain;
The laurel wreath her sapient temples bound,
With rage she tore, and dashed it on the ground:
At length I saw her raise her streaming eyes,
To Heaven, with lifted hands, the Goddess cries:
I see my country's fate once happy land
Where truth and justice once went hand in hand:
My children's rights was guarded by good laws,
Mercy give judgment -- truth first tried the cause;
It never was known a man condemned to die
On groundless evidence for forgery;
Laws should be founded on -- true equity:
No life fell victim -- to a Judas' tribe,
Who'd sell his brother for a paltry bribe.
By such base means -- behold! with pitying eye,
One of my sons, unhappy youth! must die.
Young Morhouse, whom a Judas did betray,
A murdering witness swore his life away:
A villain, who poor Purdy's In Digby, Nova Scotia, for which he was branded as
a villain.
blood did shed,
Branded by justice, from Nova Scotia fled.
Fly, villain fly! thou never can have rest,
Corrosive guilt lies cank'ring in thy breast;
Lamented youth, adieu I mourn thy fall,
May Heaven the dreadful sentence yet recall;
May justice give to each their due reward,
May Morehouse live -- may virtue be his guard,
To use that life aright -- if once bestowed,
May Ott, The person named Ott, whose real name is Otten^^^mer, is known by the
author to be the man who basels, and without any provacation, shot the above
named Purdy.
detested, tread the Tyburn road.
This is my wish, oh Heaven! in mercy hear,
Columbia cried and shed the friendly tear.

