Mr. Robbins's Election Sermon. A. D. 1789.

The Empires and Dominions of this World, made subservient to the Kingdom of
CHRIST; who rules over all.

A SERMON, DELIVERED IN PRESENCE OF HIS EXCELLENCY SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, ESQUIRE.
L.L.D. GOVERNOR, And the Honorable the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the STATE of
CONNECTICUT, Convened at HARTFORD, on the Day of the ANNIVERSARY ELECTION. MAY
14th, 1789.

BY AMMI R. ROBBINS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN NORFOLK.

"And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom, under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the Most High,
whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey
him." Dan. vii. 27. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A. D. 1789.
ORDERED, That Dudley Humphry and Giles Pettibone, Esquires, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Reverend Ammi R. Robbins, for his Sermon delivered at
the General Election, on the 14th Day of May, A. D. 1789, and request a Copy
thereof that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by George Wyllys, Sec.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
DANIEL, ii. 44. In the days of these Kings, shall the GOD of Heaven set up a
kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and the kingdom shall not be left to
other people; but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these kingdoms, and
it shall stand forever.
WHEN our LORD JESUS was about to ascend from earth to heaven, having finished
the glorious work for which he came, he gave in charge to his immediate
followers, to go forth and disciple all nations. This commission he was pleased
to preface with these words: All power in heaven and in earth, is given unto me.

THIS same divine person many ages before, appeared to Moses, the Hebrew
lawgiver, and spoke from the burning bush, when he gave him commission to go
for the redemption of his people from their severe bondage, by the name of "I
AM THAT I AM:" And told him to say "I AM" has sent me. It was HE also who,
many years after, appeared to Joshua, the commander in chief of the Hebrew
bands, by the name of the "Captain of the Lord's host."

IN the Proverbs of king Solomon, divinely dictated, under the name of Wisdom,
this same divine Being makes no hesitation to declare, By ME kings reign and
princes decree justice; by ME princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of
the earth.

HIS holy apostle declares that God has exalted him far above all principality
and power, and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come: that all things are put under
his feet, and that he is given to be head over all things to the church.

FROM all which we safely conclude, that absolute DOMINION belongs to the LORD
JESUS CHRIST. And that all the limited authority, dominion and power, to be
found among men, is, either mediately or immediately derived from him.

THE power of those who are exalted to seats of government, said a venerable
father on a like occasion, almost a century past Rev. Mr. Bulkley's Election
Sermon.
is from HIM. Whatever the particular instruments or means of conveying this
power, and vesting it in these and those particular persons, may be: yet the
power itself is from GOD, a ray of His. In elective states where persons are
advanced by the suffrages of others, to places of rule, and vested with civil
power; the persons choosing, give not the power, but GOD. They are but the
instruments of conveyance, and do but design, i. e. nominate, the persons that
shall receive it from Him.

HENCE it is HE, who in his holy providence, puts down one, and sets up
another. HE exalted even heathen princes -- raised up a Pharaoh, called
Nebuchadnezzar his servant, and Cyrus his shepherd and his anointed.

THIS divine IMMANUEL was pleased, in the visions of the night, to give to an
heathen despot, some intimations of the glory and success of HIS KINGDOM on
earth.

IT is hoped it will not be thought unseasonable, if the speaker humbly invite
the attention of this very respectable auditory for a few minutes, to that KING
and KINGDOM which has no end. Especially when it is remembered that it is his
duty and business, to study its laws and maxims, to endeavor to proclaim its
beauties, and to persuade his fellow-men, to seek first its righteousness,
prosperity and glory.

THE context, it is presumed, is so well remembered by all who consult the
sacred pages, that it precludes the necessity of any rehearsal. The image that
appeared to stand before the astonished prince, is so particularly described
and so minutely interpreted, as renders a repetition needless. Great numbers in
this auditory have, no doubt, received profitable instruction, as well as
pleasing entertainment, in reading in ancient history, a more full account of
the prophet's prediction, of which this chapter contains only the out-lines.

WE may observe therefore, from the text, that a glorious kingdom is to be set
up; and that it is to be set up, in the midst of the changes and overturnings
of earthly dominion and greatness. Agreeably to the prophet Ezekiel, who was
contemporary with the one who gave us our text. "I will overturn, overturn,
overturn it, i. e. dominion, and it shall be no more."

THUS the Chaldean dominion was transferred into the hands of the Persians;
thence into the hands of the Grecian conqueror, and from the Greeks to the
Romans. This last empire arriving at the highest pinnacle of earthly glory: HE,
whose right it is, even the LORD from heaven -- the LORD JESUS appeared to lay
the foundation of this kingdom spoken of in our text.

BE pleased further to observe, that this kingdom shall never be destroyed.
While the formidable empires and mighty kingdoms of this world, in their turn,
rise and fall, yea, become extinct and forgotten; this kingdom shall abide and
remain -- shall out live and be an attendant on the funeral of all the
short-lived dominions of the earth. Moreover, that it shall brake in pieces and
consume all those that are in opposition to it; or bring into it, crowns and
sceptres -- absorb all earthly powers, and make them contribute to its
progress, advancement and glory.

I HAVE now to ask your attention, to the supreme RULER in this kingdom -- The
nature of its laws and maxims -- and the character of its subjects.

THE supreme ruler in this kingdom is none other than the LORD JESUS CHRIST. He
who made all things, and by whom all things consist. He who thought it not
robbery to be equal with GOD: but made himself of no reputation, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. And this, that he might erect
a kingdom on earth, and with such subjects as a lapsed world is composed of;
even sinners and transgressors against their GOD.

FOR this, it was necessary that he should purchase and redeem them, and that
with the price of his own BLOOD -- That he should assert the rectitude of the
divine administration, the equity and goodness of his LAW; which could not be,
but by his obedience and sacrifice. This therefore he cheerfully undertook.
Behold I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O
GOD. In order for the accomplishment of which, he appeared meek and lowly;
submitted to the reproaches and indignities of wicked men -- to be accounted
mean and contemptible, and when he was reviled, reviled not again. He was full
of philanthropy, went about doing good, and was emphatically the sinner's
friend.

HIS obedience in his threefold character, as a Man, a Jew and a Redeemer, was
perfect and persevering; his sufferings and death meritorious, and his
resurrection and ascension, certain and triumphant.

THIS divine Ruler is possessed of every perfection suited to be the great head
of this kingdom. He is now continually operating in the course of his
all-governing providence, with such wisdom, power and goodness, as to make all
things subservient to his grand design, in bringing glory to GOD, and happiness
to the system of intelligence. He makes his angels spirits, and his ministers
a flame of fire. He conducts the affairs of this world in such a manner, as is
best calculated to promote, and most wisely adapted to advance, the interests
of this kingdom on earth. When the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain
thing: He sits in the heavens and laugheth at their folly. When the kings
and potentates of the earth take counsel together, and set themselves against
him; He dasheth them in pieces like a potter's vessel.

FROM the earliest ages, He has so ordered the events of time, that the rise
and fall of nations -- the revolutions and changes which have come to pass,
among the generations of men; have all contributed to bring forward the
mediatorial plan, and will, in issue, produce a large revenue of glory to the
LORD JESUS CHRIST.

NOR is this kingdom propagated by fire and sword, or by the arts and
stratagems of war; by which indeed most of the kingdoms of this world have been
set up and established: but by the still small voice of the divine spirit -- by
heavenly influence on the minds of men; without noise, pomp and magnificence:
For this kingdom comes not with observation.

THIS supreme King of Zion, not only disappoints and confounds the devices of
those who are in opposition to his kingdom; but rules in the hearts of his
people by love. As his administrations are all wise, just and good; so the
laws, precepts and maxims by which he governs, are excellent and divine. To
these then in the next place, I am to ask your attention.

THIS is the only absolute monarchy we know of, that is without its faults.
Monarchical government, we may, perhaps, be allowed to say, is the best in the
universe, provided the monarch be wise, just and good. But such are the
imperfections and corruptions attendant on lapsed degenerate men, that it is
exceedingly dangerous to erect such a government in our world; lest oppression
and violence should stalk uncontrouled, and misery and wretchedness be still
more accumulated among the children of men.

THE history of past ages exhibits a hideous portrait of the dismal effects of
absolute despotic government. What mighty blessings to mankind, remarks a
worthy divine Rev. Dr. Williams, of Lebanon.
on a similar occasion, were the famous Ninus, Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, yea
even Caesar, and later heroes of that sort; who have been celebrated in the
records of fame? What did they ever do, but butcher mankind? ravage, rob and
plunder millions better than themselves? And to what other end, but to serve
their own lawless and unbridled lusts? What were their most celebrated virtues,
but the wonderful generosity of giving those riches, honors and privileges to
some of their slaves, which they had first unrighteously gotton into their
power, and taken from others?

BUT in the government we are contemplating, although it is absolute monarchy,
it is, nevertheless, the most wise, equitable and mild. The laws in this
kingdom are, indeed, calculated to bring glory and dignity to the prince -- to
exalt the sovereign: yet also to secure the liberty and felicity of the subject.

A FUNDAMENTAL law in this kingdom is LOVE. Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD
with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. On this, all the rules,
statutes and maxims of this kingdom are founded.

As the glorious Ruler himself was full of love to GOD, and benevolence to
mankind, so he requires the exercise of this capital virtue, in all his
subjects. This constitutes order and peace, and lays a foundation for a most
agreeable and happy society.

JUSTICE, integrity and uprightness, are urged, as most essential requisites
for the conduct of all the subjects of this kingdom. It is a most important
maxim given and insisted on, by the glorious Legislator, As ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. This is that which the LORD
requires, "to do justly and love mercy."

IT is an important direction in this kingdom to render to all their dues.
Various are the relations and different the offices to be sustained in social
connection, whether in civil or religious life. And hence different duties and
obligations arise; according to the various stations among men, in which, by
divine Providence, they are placed. Hence rules are prescribed. He that rules
is required to rule with diligence. And to be just, ruling in the fear of GOD.
To be a terror to evildoers, and a praise to such as do well. He is to
consider himself as "GOD's minister," attending continually on this very thing.

OF subjects it is also required, that they "submit to the ordinances of men"
-- and be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. And of him
that teaches, it is required "that he wait on teaching" -- and give himself
wholly to these things, that his profiting may appear. In a word, the rule is,
let every man abide in the calling wherein he is called -- and render to all
their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, honor to whom honor, and fear to
whom fear.

BENEFICENCE is also required of the subjects of CHRIST'S kingdom. Not only
that benevolent affection be exercised; but that it be expressed in beneficent
actions and conduct toward our fellow-men. The rule adopted is, look not every
man at his own things, but every man also, at the things of others. In
opposition to that narrow and contracted selfishness, which is so incompatible
with all moral and social virtue.

TRUTH and sincerity, in opposition to hypocrisy, and artful dissimulation is
strongly urged, as a necessary regulation for the conduct of the subjects of
this dominion. An open and honest frankness in communication, with yea, yea,
nay, nay, inasmuch as whatsoever is more than this, comes of evil. To these
may be added, sobriety, temperance and charity, as distinguishing ornaments of
those who belong to a kingdom which is never to have an end.

I ONLY add here, that cheerful, uniform and persevering obedience to these,
and all the commands of CHRIST JESUS, is strictly enjoined: For it is "he that
endures to the end, that shall be saved." But the bare mention of all the laws
and maxims of this kingdom, would be to copy a considerable part of the
New Testament. Give me leave to suggest one thought more, under this head of
discourse and it shall be dismissed: and that is, that as the laws in this
kingdom are all founded in consummate wisdom; so they are not too many, nor too
few -- they need no amendments, nor do they ever require any repeal. Such is
the imperfection that attends the human-kind, that the wisest constitution that
can be formed by men, and laws and statutes thence arising, may, and often are,
attended with mischievous and unhappy effects. Nor is it possible to foresee,
with precision, their operation, so as to prevent them. Hence arises the
necessity of alteration and change, in legislation, and consequently in
administering upon it. But instability in government, ever disposes to
discontent and faction. These things are in a greater or less degree, necessary
attendants on this imperfect state -- such is the situation of our world. But
in the kingdom of the REDEEMER, the constitution is perfect -- the laws and
rules consummately wise, and the administration, of consequence, perfectly
equitable and just.

I HAVE now in the last place, to request your attention to the character of
the subjects of this dominion, of which we have been speaking. And if in doing
this, we find the principal outlines of the truly virtuous and godly man -- the
chief characteristics of the real christian; it is hoped, it will not be deemed
a mispending the time. For I may presume to assert, that it is our highest
honor, and will be our greatest felicity to be truly religious -- to be real
christians; whatever be our stations and employments in this uncertain world.
The speaker would be understood therefore, by delineating the character, humbly
to recommend it.

THE subjects of this kingdom partake of the same spirit and temper of their
glorious Ruler and Lord -- and they walk in some measure even as he walked.
They are endued with a principle of real virtue, being born from above. This
lays a foundation for virtuous conduct, and holy practice, both toward GOD,
themselves, and mankind. They exercise Repentance toward GOD, and Faith in the
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Sensible they are sinners, and of consequence, under a
forfeiture of the divine favor: they look to the free mercy of GOD, through
the atonement of CHRIST, for pardon and acceptance unto eternal life. They are
(acting in character, and in this view it is intended to consider them)
strongly attached to their Prince. They are voluntary in his service -- are not
subjects by constraint; but find that in being obedient, and in keeping his
commands there is a great reward -- and that "his yoke is easy and his burden
light."

SUCH is their love and attachment to their Sovereign and Lord, that they have
a tender concern for his honor and interest, and his glory ever lies near their
hearts: For when they behold the transgressors they are grieved. As they love
GOD, so they love mankind -- they are disposed, as they have opportunity, to do
good to all. They love not only their friends, but their enemies. Their
benevolent affection is not bounded by their peculiar connections, nor
circumscribed with their own community or nation: but their philanthropy
extends to all mankind.

ANOTHER characteristic of the subjects of this kingdom is, they are solicitous
to approve themselves faithful in their stations. Agreeably to the rule given:
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he is called. And are diligent
in improving the talents committed to them, be they more or less; feeling the
weight of that charge, "Occupy until I come." -- They keep in mind, that they
are amenable to their glorious LORD, for the privileges they enjoy, and
betrustments committed to them. They fear the doom of the slothful servant, and
are anxious to obtain the blessed Euge pronounced on the faithful ones.

MOREOVER the subjects of this kingdom are quiet and peaceable members of the
community, to which the providence of GOD has joined them. They are disposed
not to be factious, turbulent and boisterous; but rather to feel the influence
and obligation of true patriotism -- to seek the real prosperity and good of
their country. Hence they feel bound by the precepts and example of their Lord,
to discharge the duties they owe to their country, and in whose protection they
share a part. From this consideration they will not murmur, much less refuse,
to contribute their proportion for its security and defense: remembering that
their blessed LORD, even after he had proved an exemption, yet wrought a
miracle to pay his poll-tax.

I ADD, the subjects of this kingdom are men of prayer; and entertain a sacred
regard for the christian institutions. Whether in more exalted, or in humbler
stations, they are not ashamed of JESUS and the cross of CHRIST. They love his
sabbaths, they attend on his worship and ordinances, and set a greater estimate
on the light of his countenance and the communications of his grace and love,
than they do on gold, yea than much fine gold.

IN fine, they endeavor to keep a conscience void of offense, both toward GOD,
and toward man. They are influenced, from a sacred regard to their GOD and
their SAVIOR, to live "soberly, righteously and godly in the world" -- And in
their habitual conduct, they are disposed to act as in sight of the solemn
judgment to come -- and with a serious view to the glorious and awful
retributions of eternity.

THUS having an unshaken trust and confidence in GOD, and abiding under the
shadow of his wings; they can be calm and sedate, in the midst of the
boisterous tumults, and shaking perplexities of a tempestuous world -- soar
above its frowns -- despise its flatteries -- look with becoming indifference
on its sublunary vanities -- wait for a comfortable dismission from its
vexations and evils -- and hope and look, through grace, for the approbation of
their LORD, and an open and abundant entrance into his kingdom of glory.

WITH pleasing contemplation we remark; how glorious is the King of Zion. Who
will not fear, who will not love, this supreme Ruler. How glorious his person,
how exalted his kingdom, how excellent his laws -- how wise his
administrations, and how happy his subjects. Is all power in heaven and earth
given unto Him? Is it by Him, kings reign and princes decree justice? By Him,
do princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth -- and does his
kingdom extend over and absorb all others? -- Then it is easy and natural to
conclude, that all authority and power, short of Him, when viewed on a large
scale, is only executive. By Him, and under Him they rule and govern, are
executing his purposes, and bringing about the infinitely benevolent designs of
his heart.

THE christian ruler, the really virtuous, who are in authority, will rejoice
to subserve the interests of his kingdom. They will contribute all in their
power, to promote the greatest good -- the honor of the REDEEMER and the best
good of mankind. They will feel that it is a privilege, as well as an honor, to
be by Him furnished with superior abilities, and placed in circumstances, to
imitate their divine LORD in doing good -- in seeking to diffuse happiness
around them. And thus the LORD JESUS makes them happy instruments to promote
his glorious purposes.

AND indeed, this divine Ruler, in the course of his wise providence, does so
dispose and order events, that those who are not virtuous rulers, not friendly
to his kingdom; but rather seek to oppose and hinder its progress, shall yet be
under his control; so that they shall subserve his pleasure. For the wrath of
man shall praise him, and the remainder of wrath will he restrain.

NOT the most bloody tyrant that ever swayed a scepter, or disgraced a diadem,
can go a step beyond his divine permission: nor a wicked Hazael be king over
Syria, but by his designation. How animating the thought that the LORD JESUS
reigns -- that he has a kingdom which shall know no end -- and that he is
gathering subjects into it, all around our world!

NOTWITHSTANDING all the opposition that has taken place, and the many efforts
which have been made to overthrow this kingdom, it still abides. It has
withstood the shock of its enemies for ages, and will still withstand them.

GREAT indeed, has been the opposition to this kingdom in the world. Besides
the pagan darkness which has, for ages, brooded over the greater part of the
earth -- besides the awful delusion of that grand Impostor, the false prophet
in the East -- besides the tyranny and superstitions of the Roman Pontiff and
his zealous votaries: there have been swarms of errors, wild enthusiasm and
superstition, with a kind of religious phrensy and madness, which have
prevailed in

AND when we see men impatient under proper government, disposed to discontent
and faction, to disseminate a spirit of contention -- to "speak evil of
dignities," and despise their rulers: if the character of the subjects of
CHRIST's kingdom has been justly drawn; it is indeed difficult, if not
impossible to reconcile this character, with that of a real christian; let
their professions and pretensions be what they may.

"TYRANNY and anarchy," said another of our fathers, many years past, Rev. Mr.
Hobart, in his Election Sermon.
like fire and frost, though contrary in their natures, are, in many instances,
much alike in their effects. A factious and ungovernable disposition in the
people, does as effectually destroy the public happiness, as tyranny in the
rulers. And a man has no more security of his life, or any of the enjoyments of
it, when the execution of the laws is prevented by a mutinous temper of the
people; than he would have if the laws were suspended by the arbitrary will of
tyrannical governors.

THE maxims of the religion of JESUS, abundantly teach and inculcate, nay
strictly enjoin, cheerful and ready subjection to civil government; and under
its happy influence and protection they may hope and expect to lead quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

IN a view of the glory of the kingdom of the REDEEMER, and the certainty of
its spread and progress in the world; permit me once more to remark -- The
importance of this new and extended dominion to which we belong -- and which
covers no inconsiderable part of this western continent.

MAY we not anticipate the joy that shall arise in every truly virtuous and
pious mind, from a consideration that this shall be the Theater on which,
angels and men, shall behold the displays of the REDEEMER's grace, and the
glorious enlargement of his kingdom?

IT is a just remark of a truly great man, that the visible kingdom of CHRIST,
from its first rise, is making its progress toward the West. A vast, an
immense, yea in great part, an unknown territory lies before us in that
direction. And, so far as it has been explored, for fruitfulness of soil,
mildness of climate, and superior advantages of inland navigation, equals, if
not surpasses any other part of the globe. Hitherto it has been occupied, by
little more than savage beasts and savage men. Shall this be all; until it
shall be consumed with the rest of the burning world? Surely not.

THE special agency of Heaven was so visibly manifest, in the late American
Revolution, as forced the acknowledgment of it, even from the inattentive as
well as the attentive mind -- from the profane and impious, as well as the
virtuous and sober.

THE Supreme Ruler, whose province it is, to tread out empires, and give them
birth; has, in his holy providence, laid the foundation of this new and
extended empire. Nor is his hand less conspicuous, in opening such a fruitful
world before us; sufficient for the support of many millions of inhabitants;
than also in inspiring such a remarkable spirit of emigration to the west. And
this, not only from amongst us on the eastern shore of this continent: But also
from various parts of the other. Hardy adventrous souls, quitting the narrow
and barren limits that gave them birth, to go and dwell in a more goodly land.
And thus lay the foundations for immense population and increase; and open the
way for the progress of this kingdom, and spread the praises of the great
Redeemer, in that land of darkness and shadow of death.

HE must be very contracted in his views, who imagines that all these
preparations, in Providence, are only for men to act over the busy scenes of a
short life, in pleasure, voluptuousness and sensuality: or that earthly parade
and show, is all that is intended. No, surely. It Is no enthusiasm, it is no
utopian chimera, to hope and believe, that this kingdom shall there spread and
prevail, and the LORD JESUS get to himself a name and a praise in those ends of
the earth.

BUT I may not dwell, any longer on the pleasing contemplation. The important
business of the day forbids; and requires that the discourse be shut up with
the usual addresses.

I CONGRATULATE my friends, and brethren of this Commonwealth, on the joyful
return of this pleasing anniversary. Great and distinguishing have been the
mercies of the GOD of heaven to our nation and infant empire. And when we were
in imminent danger of such internal convulsions and divisions, as, had they not
been checked, portended our overthrow and speedy ruin; and this notwithstanding
the infinite expense of toil, treasure and blood: Behold it has pleased HIM,
by whose special providence, our empire was founded, to unite a great people,
in strengthening the bands of union, in forming and adopting a Constitution, in
a manner unequalled by, nay without a precedent among the nations of the earth.

WITH ineffable pleasure, the citizens of the United States, may once more
behold HIM who who is justly esteemed the Father of his country, and, under
GOD, the Savior of a great people; from the toils of war, tasting the sweets
of his beloved retirement and domestic tranquillity for a short season -- at the
united solicitations of a grateful and feeling people; again step forth, and
though reluctant, take the Presidents' Chair: to head, not the gallant heroes
and veteran soldiers in the field; but the sage councillors in the cabinet --
the august legislature of America.

WITH equal satisfaction, we also view that distinguished Patriot, whose
invincible attachment to his country from early life, has called forth his
great exertions, not only by his instructive pen; but also in person, from
Court to Court, as our Ambassador abroad: now, as a tribute of gratitude from
his country, at their call, is pleased to take the Chair of Vice-Presient.

WITH no less joy we view the venerable Senators and Representatives of our
nation, in general Congress assembled; with deliberation and firmness, unitedly
exerting their wisdom, integrity and zeal, to heal the wounds, and cure the
disorders of their distressed country, and render their fellow citizens both
happy at home, and respectable abroad. Was the revolution and the establishment
of our Independence, the "LORD's doings?" -- Surely this not less.

GREAT and distinguishing have been the mercies of GOD to this State in
particular: and this day is a witness, of the patience and goodness of the God
of our Fathers, toward us their children; in continuing to us, our civil and
religious privileges of such inestimable worth. -- We behold our fathers and
brethren, who are constituted by the suffrages of a free people, the pillars
and supporters of this state -- the guardians of our precious immunities. And
when in General Assembly met, as soon as formed, we view them resorting
together, to the house of GOD, unitedly to look up to the great Fountain of
Wisdom, "the Father of Lights," and to implore his presence and direction with
them. The weighty concerns before them call for it, and the prayers, and best
wishes, of all good and virtuous citizens, will attend them.

NOR is it a small part of the joy that appears in the countenances of this
numerous throng, -- May it please your Excellency; for to you, Sir, I beg
leave, with filial confidence, yet humble deference, more particularly to
direct my discourse. -- It is not one of the least felicities of this people,
to behold you, Sir, at the head of your numerous brethren and citizens of this
commonwealth. Especially when we consider you as one born and educated among us
-- as one who has given early and continued assurances of your steady
attachment to the best interests of your citizens, by a long series of public
and unremitting labors both at home and abroad.

SHALL we repeat our expressions of gratitude, for the eminent services you
have rendered to this State, and to the United States? Although this may be
acceptable, yet a consciousness of your own integrity and fidelity in your
various important offices, I know, must afford you much greater satisfaction.
You will permit me, Sir, as one of the ministers of the LORD JESUS, to request
you often to reflect, that the eyes of GOD, and this people, are upon you --
that as your office is high and honorable, so the duties of it are arduous and
difficult. That you are accountable to Him, by whose providence, you are raised
to your exalted station: and that "where much is given much is also required."

You will often contemplate, with divine pleasure, the glory and importance of
that King and Kingdom, which has been the theme of the foregoing discourse.
Nor will you be ashamed to be, and continue to be, a faithful subject of the
Prince of Peace. To Him you will still repair, and on his grace you will rely,
in all your trials, whether official or personal -- even to Him who has said,
"My grace is sufficient for you."

A BECOMING sense of your own insufficiency without divine aid -- the sweets of
an approving conscience, and the approbation of your Judge at last; will often
bring you, with a spirit of humble dependence, to the throne of grace, with
that petition which proceeded from one King Solomon.
who presided over a greater people than your Excellency now does. -- Give,
therefore, thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people, that I may
discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great people.

YOUR Excellency, will suffer me to remind you, that as the LORD JESUS, who is
the head of all power, has, in his holy providence, furnished you with
ability, and placed you in circumstances, to be eminently useful; so He will,
one day, call you to render an account to Him your glorious Master. -- Before
whose tribunal, shall you and we stand, divested of every official distinction
and titles of honor, which are peculiar to this world.

AND now, That your Excellency may still possess the fullest confidence, and
the warmest affection of a grateful people -- a long and successful
administration -- the testimony of an approving conscience -- the supports of
religion through life -- the consolations of divine grace at death -- and the
final approbation of your Supreme Judge; is our devout wish and ardent prayer.

SUCH, my indulgent auditors, is the imperfection that attends the wisest and
best men, that they may sometimes, even in the great affairs of legislation,
and in the appointment of executive authority, do that, which on further
inspection, they are convinced is not wisest and best. For it is a received
maxim, Humanum est errare. Therefore we find by experience that two different
boards in the great representation of the people, is exceedingly useful and
necessary: For he that is first in his own cause seems just; but his neighbor
comes and searches him -- And two are better than one.

IN such a government as ours, that there should be a check upon the great body
in General Assembly, is found to be peculiarly salutary and beneficial.

THE upper board of this great representation, in conjunction with his
Excellency, and his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, we consider as the
representation of the people at large: and being promoted to that dignified
station by the suffrages of the people through all parts of the State; they
will, of course, be free from partial and local feelings, and consider
themselves equally concerned for the whole body of their constituents.

YOU will suffer me then, May it please your Honor, and you Honorable
Counselors, just to remind you that, great is the confidence this people
repose in you, when you are selected out from the many thousands in this
commonwealth, to compose the circle around the council board. Peculiar
deference, esteem and honor is due from us to you, in your high stations: as
also fatherly care, love and faithful exertion from you, honored Gentlemen, to
us. The many proofs you have given of your ready discernment of, and regard for
the real interests of the people, are not altogether unknown or wholly
unnoticed. We request your Honors, still to exert your patriotic zeal and
abilities for our good, and wish you at all times that wisdom which is
profitable to direct.

YOU will indulge the freedom of a christian minister, when he exhorts you
among all the weighty concerns to which you are called; also to attend to that
King and Kingdom of which we have been speaking. By His providence, you are
raised to places of distinguished honor and trust. By Him you "Nobles and
Judges rule," as well as "all the Judges of the earth."

YOU will remember, venerable Fathers, that you have not only to be, and do,
that which is right in the sight of men; but especially to see that you approve
yourselves to your own consciences and to the LORD JESUS, to whom you are
accountable. And that it is your highest honor, and will be your greatest
felicity, to be found at last, the faithful subjects of that kingdom which
shall outlive all others. Cultivating the spirit and temper with which that
Supreme Ruler was possessed; will expand your hearts with philanthropy, and
dispose you to exert yourselves in the improvement of the talents which, by
your accomplishments and situations, GOD has committed to you. Nor will the
dazzle of earthly honors make you forget, that though you are styled God's on
earth, you must die like men; and be called to render an account of your
stewardship.

AND the weight of this serious truth, you will the more sensibly feel, when
you reflect that one of your number has been called away from your Board and
from our world, the year past. Although for a series of years, he adorned his
seat at the Council Board -- he was not suffered to continue by reason of death.

HIS ability, integrity and zeal, for his country's welfare -- his fidelity and
perseverance, in the duties of his civil, social and religious life, could not
prevent the Honorable JOSEPH SPENCER, Esquire, from a dismission from his
useful offices and employments here: but having served his generation, "he is
gathered to his fathers."

BUT that I be not tedious, we wish you, honored Senators, and those Gentlemen,
who may, this day, be invited, by the providence of GOD and the voice of the
freemen, to join your circle, and supply the place of him who has slept in
death; and any or all, the seats of those worthy members of your body who are
called away to attend on the interesting concerns of the foederal government in
our national Congress: We wish you, revered Fathers, heavenly wisdom and
understanding in all your consultations and decrees. And that you may be so
happy as that having served your generation faithfully by the will of GOD, you
may be gathered to your fathers in peace, meet the approbation of your own
consciences and of your final Judge; and by Him, through grace, be admitted to
the rewards of the faithful.

HOW great is the privilege, my candid hearers, that when our numbers and local
circumstances will not admit of the great body of the people to meet together,
to consult the general good, and give themselves law, or enact statutes by
which to be governed: that we may detach a number of our brethren from every
part of the community, to represent us in General Assembly. That they should
here convene, and mutually communicate and receive, the feelings, the wants,
the maladies and complaints of the great whole. But alas, how difficult, how
arduous, how embarrassed often times and perplexed, is their situation? Though
their stations are respectable, and demand our esteem and reverence; yet their
situation requires our prayers, our best wishes and every friendly aid.

IT is not one of the least of our precious privileges, Gentlemen Fathers and
Representatives of this whole Corporation, that you, and such as from time to
time sustain your offices, may meet twice a year, and oftener if the public
exigencies require; to look over every part of the community and carefully to
see; not only ne quid Respublica detrimenti caperet as the Roman phrase was;
not only, lest the commonwealth receive any detriment; but also studiously to
exert yourselves, as fathers of the people you represent, to build them up --
promote their tranquillity -- cement their union, and do all in your power, to
advance the public weal.

It belongs not to me, Gentlemen, to dictate to you how to rule -- what must be
done, or what not be done, in your legislative or executive departments. Ye
yourselves know what are the exigencies of, and what the necessary provisions
for the commonwealth, and to you, a particular attention to this duty belongs.
You will therefore make the general welfare your grand object, in all your
consultations and resolves.

INDULGE me, honored Gentlemen, the freedom to entreat you all to become the
willing subjects of that kingdom, which shall flourish when all earthly power
and authority, shall no more be needed. And to make the laws and maxims of that
Supreme Ruler, whose character we have described, the measure of your conduct,
in your political as well as private capacities. I may not doubt, honored Sirs,
you will bear in mind, that you are accountable to him, and that his eye is
ever upon you.

YOU are, when in Assembly met, acting in a legislative capacity, and many, if
not most of you, when dispersed, are called to act in judicial and executive
departments. In each and in every character you sustain; if you "fear GOD" like
Joseph of old, you will indeed be pillars and supporters of our republic.
Should you keep in mind that you are, not only amenable to the public; but that
you must give an account to that Supreme Judge, whose eye beholds the secret
springs and motives of every heart; and let this be uppermost in your minds;
you will then hardly do amiss: But, destitute of benevolence and virtuous
principle, as the great Pole Star to influence and guide you; although your
knowledge and abilities may be great; you will be in danger of ship-wreck -- of
bringing ruin on yourselves and those who are embarked with you.

WORTHY Gentlemen, we ardently desire and devoutly wish you the divine
guidance, the gracious presence, and blessing of the Supreme Ruler -- the LORD
JESUS CHRIST -- and that by wise and judicious precept, and faithful
correspondent example, you may be great blessings in life, and, through grace,
accepted at death, and made happy when your places shall no more be found in
this uncertain world.

ALTHOUGH the business of the day does not call for the special attention of
the Ministers of the Gospel, any farther than that they show themselves
friendly and solicitous to promote in their line, the general good; and meet in
convention to cultivate harmony, and strengthen and assist one another, in the
important business in which they are called to act: yet the subject of the
foregoing discourse, exhibiting the nature and importance of that divine and
glorious kingdom, in which they are called more immediately to labor; will
allow a word from one who esteems it a privilege to be accounted one of their
brethren.

THE consideration, My Reverend Fathers and dear Brethren, that the kingdom of
the divine REDEEMER shall survive all others, and that by His providence,
others shall be made subservient to its interests -- The consideration also, of
the utility and importance of civil government to promote the interests of this
kingdom; should fill our hearts with joy and gladness, and animate us to a
diligent and laborious attention to the work, whereunto we are called.

To us, blessed be GOD, even to us, is this grace given, to preach among our
fellow-men, our fellow-sinners, the unsearchable riches of CHRIST. -- To
exhibit the character of the REDEEMER -- to unfold, explain, and enforce the
laws and maxims of his kingdom, and to beseech lapsed men in CHRIST's stead, to
be reconciled to GOD.

IF this employment as the ancient divines used to say, is formidable to the
shoulders of angels; what must it be in our view, when we consider ourselves,
equally involved in the apostasy, guilt and ruin of our fellow-men?

SHOULD we not ever entertain an abiding sense of our own insufficiency, and
continually look to JESUS our divine Master, for needful grace and aid, to
enable us to the faithful discharge of our important trusts. And while we are
favored with the protection and countenance of our civil fathers, we are under
better advantages to do good among our people for both worlds. They will
readily tell us, that by faithfully attending, to the duties of our office --
by public and private precept and exhortation, enforced by proper and becoming
example; we may do much toward the peace and order of society, and good of the
commonwealth. This, then should be a powerful stimulus to faithful and
laborious exertion in our profession. But when we reflect on the exalted glory
of the REDEEMER -- the infinite importance of the spread of his kingdom -- the
glorious things spoken for the city of our GOD -- the perishing condition
mankind are in by sin -- the door of mercy opened in the gospel, and the solemn
account we shall soon be required to render of our ministry. When we reflect on
these things, surely we shall be humble, prayerful, watchful, zealous and
engaged in every branch of our arduous work. We shall strive together in love
for the faith of the gospel, and the promotion of that dear cause which we have
espoused. We shall abound in love to our common LORD, in love to one another,
and tender benevolence to mankind. And when one and another of our fathers and
brethren are summoned off, from the wall of our Jerusalem, calling on us as
they go; to make haste -- to finish our ministry and follow them; shall we not
hear -- shall we not feel! -- shall we not be all attention, and look and wait
for the coming of our LORD? -- Blessed is that servant whom, his Lord when he
comes, shall find so doing.

I WILL detain this numerous auditory no longer, than only to beseech your
attention, My Brethren and Fellow-Citizens, to that glorious Ruler and that
blessed Kingdom, which has been briefly described. Suffer me to ask you, my
friends, what think you of CHRIST -- what think you of his kingdom -- what
think you of the final happy condition of his subjects? Permit me to exhort and
charge you all, to become the faithful and loyal subjects of this Prince of
Peace. -- In his own words, to seek first the kingdom of GOD. Your peace and
quiet in this world; but especially your comfort in death, and your happiness
in the world to come, depends on your speedy compliance with this, his
exhortation.

THE day and age in which we live is evil. The preachers have been wont on
these most public occasions, to show to our Israel their transgressions. And
may not he who now speaks be allowed to bear a testimony against the
prevailing evils which threaten our ruin -- which presage the awful displays of
divine indignation, and call for the uplifting hand of a sin-revenging GOD.
When he dares to make mention of them, he feels the more undaunted, from a
conscious persuasion that he has the favor and countenance, not only of his
Excellency who has commanded him to speak this day, and the honorable
legislative body -- together with the concurrence of his brethren of the sacred
character and all serious men: but also the approbation of his GOD. He dares
then to say, O Connecticut, how art thou fallen! Once famous for benevolence,
righteousness and the fear of GOD -- for the belief and practice of religion --
even the religion of JESUS, which alone brings sinners to heaven. Now abounding
with impenitence, infidelity and all manner of impieties. -- The precious word
of GOD disregarded. -- The holy sabbath treated with growing neglect. -- The
sacred institutions of the LORD JESUS, by many despised. -- Family Prayer
awfully out of fashion. And of consequence, all manner of violations of the
duties we owe to one another. Injustice, fraud, violence, profaness,
debauchery, intemperance, deceit, falsehood, and covetousness -- these and many
more evils which are the genuine offspring of these; too much mark our towns
and communities. Meanwhile the God of our Fathers in anger withdrawn, and the
necessary influences of the blessed spirit withheld! -- Is it not time to stop
in our career, and enquire -- where are we -- and what must we expect? Has not
the Most High given us a gentle rebuke in cutting short, both the harvests in
the year past, and thereby caused the cries of the poor to be more than usually
heard for bread.

WE have heretofore, felt the rod of the Almighty, in the desolations of war,
and in the destructions of the pestilence that walks in darkness: but have,
as yet, GOD be thanked, been strangers to the horrors of famine. Have we not
reason to tremble, and be afraid of his righteous judgments? General and open
impieties, are followed with public and sore judgments. Let us open our eyes
and see -- receive conviction, repent and reform.

BRETHREN, the time is short. Religion is a reality. Gospel truths
all-important. The concerns of eternity weighty and momentous. The retributions
of the last great day, glorious and awful. To leave the paths of sin -- to
forsake the ways of the destroyer -- to become friends to the LORD JESUS, and
lovers of mankind: this will secure the favor of GOD -- will make us a happy
people. This will make us good citizens and good subjects. This will make it
easy to rule, and to be ruled; each one attending to the duties of his own
proper station. Then shall we strive together to promote the general good. So
shall we behold our Jerusalem built up -- this, a land of light, liberty and
religion -- our country grow and increase -- our empire enlarge and extend --
and that divine kingdom, which shall absorb all others, spread and prevail,
till the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the glory of the LORD. Then
violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting and destruction within thy
borders: But thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise.


