MEDICAL INQUIRIES AND OBSERVATIONS.

MEDICAL INQUIRIES AND OBSERVATIONS. BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF
CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET NEAR
FRONT STREET. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO JOHN REDMAN, M. D.
TWO reasons have determined me to inscribe to you, the following Inquiries and
Observations. They are the fruits of studies which began under your direction;
and they require the protection of a respectable medical name.

TO whom can they look up for that protection with so much propriety, as to the
PRESIDENT OF THE COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS OF PHILADELPHIA?

WITH sincere wishes that your old age may long continue to be as honorable,
as your life has been useful,

I am, With great respect, Your affectionate friend, BENJAMIN RUSH.
1st January, 1789.
I. AN inquiry into the natural history of medicine among the Indians of
North America, and a comparative view of their diseases and remedies with those
of civilized nations. Page 9. II. An account of the climate of Pennsylvania,
and its influence upon the human body. Page 57. III. An account of the bilious
remitting fever, as it appeared in Philadelphia, in the summer and autumn of
the year 1780. Page 89. IV. An account of the scarlatina anginosa, as it
appeared in Philadelphia, in the years 1783 and 1784. Page 101. V. Additional
observations upon the scarlatina anginosa. Page 109. VI. An inquiry into the
cause and cure of the cholera infantum. Page 112. VII. Observations on the
cynanche trachealis. Page 120. VIII. An account of the effects of blisters and
bleeding in the cure of obstinate intermitting fevers. Page 126. IX. An account
of the disorder occasioned by drinking cold water in warm weather, and the
method of curing it. Page 129. X. An account of the efficacy of common salt in
the cure of haemoptysis. Page 133. XI. Free thoughts upon the cause and cure of
the pulmonary consumption. Page 137. XII. Observations upon worms in the
alimentary canal, and upon anthelmintic medicines. Page 150. XIII. An account
of the external use of arsenic in the cure of cancers. Page 153. XIV.
Observations upon the cause and cure of the teta^^^. Page 169. XV. Additional
observations on the tetanus and hydrophobia. Page 177. XVI. The result of
observations made upon the diseases which occurred in the military hospitals of
the United States, during the late war. Page 180. XVII. An account of the
influence of the military and political events of the American revolution upon
the human body. Page 186. XVIII. An inquiry into the relation of tastes and
aliments to each other; and into the influence of this relation upon health and
pleasure. Page 197.
The Reader is requested to correct the following Errata -- In page ^^, line
28, instead of its width, read, the width of the river. p. 62, 1. 18 and 19,
instead of difference of sensation between youth and old age, with respect to
heat and cold, read, the difference of clothing and sensation between old age
and youth in winter and summer. p. 65, l. 29, after till, read, the water,
instead of it. p. 94, l. 18. instead of spoonfuls, read, spoonsful p. 110, l.
26, instead of (...) few (...), read, a few hours. p. 122, l, 11, instead of
paroxysms, read, continuance. In the same p. l. 12, instead of They are, read,
The spasmodic is. p. 130, l. 19, instead of asphyxi, read, asphyxia. p. 138, l.
9, dele by: and in l. 1^, add a comma instead of a period; after courts, read
all, instead of (...). p. 192, l. 11, instead of destroying, read, distressing;
and in l. 16, (...) occasioned, add, in part (...), in some of the (...),
instead of (...), read, lie.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MEDICINE AMONG THE INDIANS OF
NORTH AMERICA, AND A COMPARATIVE VIEW OF THEIR DISEASES AND REMEDIES, WITH
THOSE OF CIVILIZED NATIONS. Read before the AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY,
held at PHILADELPHIA, on the 4th of February, 1774.
GENTLEMEN This INQUIRY was the subject of an Anniversary Oration. The style of
an oration is therefore preserved in many parts of it.

I RISE with peculiar diffidence to address you upon this occasion, when I
reflect upon the entertainment you proposed to yourselves from the eloquence of
that learned member, Mr. CHARLES THOMPSON, whom your suffrages appointed to
this honor after the delivery of the last anniversary oration. Unhappily for
the interests of literature, his want of health has not permitted him to comply
with your appointment. I beg therefore that you would forget for a while, the
abilities necessary to execute this task with propriety, and listen with candor
to the efforts of a member, whose attachment to the society, was the only
qualification that entitled him to the honor of your choice.

THE subject I have chosen for this evening's entertainment, is An inquiry into
the natural history of medicine among the Indians in North America, and a
comparative view of their diseases and remedies, with those of civilized
nations. You will readily anticipate the difficulty of doing justice to this
subject. How shall we distinguish between the original diseases of the Indians
and those contracted from their intercourse with the Europeans? By what arts
shall we persuade them to discover their remedies? And lastly, how shall we
come at the knowledge of facts in that cloud of errors in which the credulity
of the Europeans, and the superstition of the Indians, have involved both their
diseases and remedies? These difficulties serve to increase the importance of
our subject. If I should not be able to solve them, perhaps I may lead the way
to more successful endeavors for that purpose.

I SHALL first limit the tribes of Indians who are to be the objects of this
inquiry, to those who inhabit that part of North America which extends from the
30th to the 60th degree of latitude. When we exclude the Esquimaux, who inhabit
the shores of Hudson's bay, we shall find a general resemblance in the color,
manners, and state of society, among all the tribes of Indians who inhabit that
extensive tract of country.

CIVILIANS have divided nations into savage, barbarous, and civilized. The
savage, live by fishing and hunting. The barbarous, by pasturage or cattle; and
the civilized by agriculture. Each of these is connected together in such a
manner that the whole appear to form different parts of a circle. Even the
manners of the most civilized nations partake of those of the savage. It would
seem as if liberty and indolence were the highest pursuits of man; and these
are enjoyed in their greatest perfection by savages, or in the practice of
customs which resemble those of savages.

THE Indians of North America partake chiefly of the manners of savages. In the
earliest accounts we have of them, we find them cultivating a spot of ground.
The maize is an original grain among them. The different dishes of it which are
in use among the white people still retain Indian names.

IT will be unnecessary to show that the Indians live in a state of society
adapted to all the exigencies of their mode of life. Those who look for the
simplicity and perfection of the state of nature, must seek it in systems, as
absurd in philosophy, as they are delightful in poetry.

BEFORE we attempt to ascertain the number or history of the diseases of the
Indians, it will be necessary to inquire into those customs among them which we
know influence diseases. For this purpose I shall, First, Mention a few facts
which relate to the birth and treatment of their children. Secondly, I shall
speak of their diet. Thirdly, Of the customs peculiar to each of the sexes.
And, Fourthly, Of those customs which are common to them both Many of the facts
contained in the Natural History of Medicine among the Indians in this Inquiry,
are taken from La Hontan and Charlevoix's histories of Canada; but the most
material of them are taken from persons who had lived, or traveled among the
Indians. The author acknowledges himself indebted in a particular manner to Mr.
Edward Hand, surgeon in the 18th regiment, afterward brigadier-general in the
army of the United States, who during several years residence at Fort Pit,
directed his inquiries into their customs, diseases, and remedies, with a
success that does equal honor to his ingenuity and diligence.
.


I. Of the birth and treatment of their children.

MUCH of the future health of the body depends upon its original stamina. A
child born of healthy parents always brings into the world a system formed by
nature to resist the causes of diseases. The treatment of children among the
Indians, tends to secure this hereditary firmness of constitution. Their first
food is their mother's milk. To harden them against the action of heat and cold
(the natural enemies of health and life among the Indians) they are plunged
every day in cold water. In order to facilitate their being moved from place to
place, and at the same time, to preserve their shape, they are tied to a board,
where they lie on their backs for six, ten, or eighteen months. A child
generally sucks its mother till it is two years old, and sometimes longer. It
is easy to conceive how much vigor their bodies must acquire from this simple,
but wholesome nourishment. The appetite we sometimes observe in children for
flesh, is altogether artificial. The peculiar irritability of the system in
infancy, forbids stimulating aliment of all kinds. Nature never calls for
animal food till she has provided the child with those teeth which are
necessary to divide it. I shall not undertake to determine how far the
wholesome quality of the mother's milk is increased by her refusing the
embraces of her husband, during the time of giving suck.

II. THE diet of the Indians is of a mixed nature, being partly animal and
partly vegetable; their animals are wild, and therefore easy of digestion. As
the Indians are naturally more disposed to the indolent employment of fishing
than hunting in summer, so we find them living more upon fish than land
animals, in that season of the year. Their vegetables consist of roots and
fruits, mild in themselves, or capable of being made so by the action of fire.
Although the interior parts of our continent abound with salt springs, yet I
cannot find that the Indians used salt in their diet, till they were instructed
to do so by the Europeans. The small quantity of fixed alkali contained in the
ashes on which they roasted their meat, could not add much to its stimulating
quality. They preserve their meat from putrefaction, by cutting it into small
pieces, and exposing it in summer to the sun, and in winter to the frost. In
the one case its moisture is dissipated, and in the other so frozen, that it
cannot undergo the putrefactive process. In dressing their meat, they are
careful to preserve its juices. They generally prefer it in the form of soups.
Hence we find, that among them, the use of the spoon preceded that of the knife
and fork. They take the same pains to preserve the juice of their meat when
they roast it, by turning it often. The efficacy of this animal juice in
dissolving meat in the stomach, has not been equalled by any of those sauces or
liquors, which modern luxury has mixed with it for that purpose.

THE Indians have no set time for eating, but obey the gentle appetites of
nature as often as they call them. After whole days spent in the chase or in
war, they often commit those excesses in eating, to which long abstinence
cannot fail of prompting them. It is common to see them spend three or four
hours in satisfying their hunger. This is occasioned not more by the quantity
they eat, than by the pains they take in masticating it.

III. WE come now to speak of those customs which are peculiar to the sexes.
And, first, of those which belong to the WOMEN. They are doomed by their
husbands to such domestic labor as gives a firmness to their bodies, bordering
upon the masculine. Their menses seldom being to flow before they are eighteen
or twenty years of age, and generally cease before they are forty. They have
them in small quantities, but at regular intervals. They seldom marry till they
are above twenty. The constitution has now acquired a vigor, which enables it
the better to support the convulsions of childbearing. This custom likewise
guards against a premature old age. Doctor Bancroft ascribes the haggard looks
-- the loose hanging breasts -- and the prominent bellies of the Indian women
at Guiana, entirely to their bearing children too early Natural history of
Guiana.
. Where marriages are unfruitful (which is seldom the case) a separation is
obtained by means of an easy divorce; so that they are unacquainted with the
disquietudes which sometimes arise from barrenness. During pregnancy, the women
are exempted from the more laborious parts of their duty: hence miscarriages
rarely happen among them. Nature is their only midwife. Their labors are short,
and accompanied with little pain. Each woman is delivered in a private cabin,
without so much as one of her own sex to attend her. After washing herself in
cold water, she returns in a few days to her usual employments; so that she
knows nothing of those accidents which arise from the carelessness or ill
management of midwives, or those weaknesses which arise from a month's
confinement in a warm room. It is remarkable that there is hardly a period in
the interval between the eruption and the ceasing of the menses, in which they
are not pregnant, or giving suck. This is the most natural state of the
constitution during that interval; and hence we often find it connected with
the best state of health in the women of civilized nations.

THE customs peculiar to the Indian MEN, consist chiefly in those employments
which are necessary to preserve animal life, and to defend their nation. These
employments are hunting and war, each of which is conducted in a manner that
tends to call forth every fiber into exercise, and to ensure them the
possession of the utmost possible health. In times of plenty and peace, we see
them sometimes rising from their beloved indolence, and shaking off its
influence by the salutary exercises of dancing and swimming. The Indian men
seldom marry before they are thirty years of age: They no doubt derive
considerable vigor from this custom; for while they are secured by it from the
enervating effects of the premature dalliance of love, they may ensure more
certain fruitfulness to their wives, and entail more certain health upon their
children. Tacitus describes the same custom among the Germans, and attributes
to it the same good effects. Sera juvenum venus, eoque inexhausta pubertas; nec
virgins festinantur; eadem juventa, similis proceritas, pares validique
miscentur; ac robora parentum liberi referunt Caesar, in his history of the
Gallic war, gives the same account of the ancient Germans. His words are: "Qui
diutissime impuberes permanserunt, maximam inter suos ferunt laudem: hoc ali
staturam, ali vires, nervosque confirmari putant." Lib. vi. xxi.
.

AMONG the Indian men, it is deemed a mark of heroism to bear the most
exquisite pain without complaining; upon this account they early inure
themselves to burning part of their bodies with fire, or cutting them with
sharp instruments. No young man can be admitted to the honors of manhood or
war, who has not acquitted himself well in these trials of patience and
fortitude. It is easy to conceive how much this contributes to give a tone to
the nervous system, which renders it less subject to the occasional causes of
diseases.

IV. WE come now to speak of those customs which are common to both sexes:
These are PAINTING, and the use of the COLD BATH. The practice of anointing the
body with oil is common to the savages of all countries; in warm climates it is
said to promote longevity, by checking excessive perspiration. The Indians
generally use bears grease mixed with a clay, which bears the greatest
resemblance to the color of their skins. This pigment serves to lessen the
sensibility of the extremities of the nerves; it moreover fortifies them
against the action of those exhalations, which we shall mention hereafter, as a
considerable source of their diseases. The COLD BATH likewise fortifies the
body, and renders it less subject to those diseases which arise from the
extremes and vicissitudes of heat and cold. We shall speak hereafter of the
Indian manner of using it.

THE state of society among the Indians excludes the influence of most of those
passions which disorder the body. The turbulent effects of anger are concealed
in deep and lasting resentments. Envy and ambition are excluded by their
equality of power and property. Nor is it necessary that the perfections of the
whole sex should be ascribed to one, to induce them to marry. The weakness of
love (says Doctor Adam Smith) which is so much indulged in ages of humanity and
politeness, is regarded among savages as the most unpardonable effeminacy. A
young man would think himself disgraced forever, if he showed the least
preference of one woman above another, or did not express the most complete
indifference, both about the time when, and the person to whom he was to be
married. Theory of moral sentiments.
Thus are they exempted from those violent or lasting diseases, which accompany
the several stages of such passions in both sexes among civilized nations.

IT is remarkable that there are no deformed Indians. Some have suspected from
this circumstance, that they put their deformed children to death; but nature
here acts the part of an unnatural mother. The severity of the Indian manners
destroys them Since the intercourse of the white people with the Indians, we
find some of them deformed in their limbs. This deformity, upon inquiry,
appears to be produced by those accidents, quarrels, etc. which have been
introduced among them by spirituous liquors.
.

FROM a review of the customs of the Indians, we need not be surprised at the
stateliness, regularity of features, and dignity of aspect by which they are
characterized. Where we observe these among ourselves, there is always a
presumption of their being accompanied with health, and a strong constitution.

HAVING finished our inquiry into the physical customs of the Indians, we shall
proceed now to inquire into their diseases.

A CELEBRATED professor of anatomy has asserted, that we could not tell by
reasoning a priori, that the body was mortal, so intimately woven with its
texture are the principles of life. Lord Bacon declares, that the only cause of
death which is natural to man, is that from old age; and complains of the
imperfection of physic, in not being able to guard the principle of life, until
the whole of the oil that feeds it is consumed. We cannot admit of this
proposition of our noble philosopher. In the inventory of the grave in every
country, we find more of the spoils of youth and manhood than of age. This must
be attributed to moral as well as physical causes.

WE need only recollect the custom among the Indians, of sleeping in the open
air in a variable climate -- the alternate actions of heat and cold upon their
bodies, to which the warmth of their cabbins exposes them -- their long marches
-- their excessive exercise -- their intemperance in eating, to which their
long fasting, and their public feasts naturally prompt them; and, lastly, the
vicinity of their habitations to the banks of rivers, in order to discover the
empire of diseases among them in every stage of their lives. They have in vain
attempted to elude the general laws of mortality, while their mode of life
subjects them to these remote, but certain causes of diseases.

FROM what we know of the action of these potentiae nocentes upon the human
body, it will hardly be necessary to appeal to facts to determine that FEVERS
constitute the only diseases among the Indians. These fevers are occasioned by
the sensible and insensible qualities of the air. Those which are produced by
cold, are of the inflammatory kind, such as pleurisies, peripneumonies, and
rheumatisms. Those which are produced by the insensible qualities of the air,
or by putrid exhalations, are intermitting, putrid, and inflammatory, according
as the exhalations are combined with more or less heat or cold. The DYSENTERY
(which is an Indian disease) comes under the class of fevers. It is the febris
introversa of Dr. Sydenham.

THE Indians are subject to ANIMAL and VEGETABLE POISONS. The effects of these
upon the body, are in some degree analogous to the exhalations we have
mentioned. When they do not bring on sudden death, they produce, according to
their malignity, either an inflammatory or putrid fever.

THE SMALL POX and the VENEREAL DISEASE were communicated to the Indians in
North America by the Europeans. Nor can I find that they were ever subject to
the SCURVY. Whether this was obviated by their method of preserving their
flesh, or by their mixing it at all times with vegetables, I shall not
undertake to determine. Doctor Maclurg ascribes to fresh meat an antiseptic
quality Experiments on the bile, and reflections on the biliary secretion.
. The peculiar customs and manners of life among the Indians, seem to have
exempted them from these, as well as all other diseases of the fluids. The
leprosy, elephantiasis, scurvy, and venereal disease, appear to be different
modifications of the same primary disorder. The same causes produce them in
every age and country. They are diversified like plants by climate and
nourishment. They all sprung originally from a moist atmosphere and unwholesome
diet: hence we read of their prevailing so much in the middle centuries, when
the principal parts of Europe were overflowed with water, and the inhabitants
lived entirely on fish, and a few unwholesome vegetables. The abolition of the
feudal system in Europe by introducing freedom, introduced at the same time
agriculture; which by multiplying the fruits of the earth, lessened the
consumption of animal food, and thus put a stop to these disorders. The
elephantiasis is almost unknown in Europe. The leprosy is confined chiefly to
the low countries of Africa. The plica polonica once so common in Poland, is to
be found only in books of medicine. The venereal disease will probably in a few
years cease to be a tax upon unlawful embraces. The small pox is no longer a
fatal disorder, when the body is prepared for its reception by a vegetable
regimen. Even the plague itself is losing its sting. It is hardly dreaded at
this time in Turkey; and its very existence is preserved there by the doctrine
of fatalism, which prevails among the inhabitants of that country. It may serve
as a new and powerful motive against political slavery to perceive, that it is
connected with those diseases which most deform and debase the human body. It
may likewise serve to enhance the blessings of liberty, to trace its effects,
in eradicating such loathsome and destructive disorders Muratori, in his
antiquities of Italy in the middle ages, describes the greatest part of Europe
as overflowed with water. The writings of the historians of those ages are full
of the physical and political miseries which prevailed during those centuries.
The whole of the diseases we have mentioned, raged at one time in all the
countries of Europe. In the ninth century there were 19,000 hospitals for
lepers only, in Christendom. Lewis VIII. king of France, in the year 1227,
bequeathed legacies to 2000 leprous hospitals in his own kingdom. The same
diet, and the same dampness of soil and air, produced the same effects in
South-America. The venereal disease probably made its appearance at the same
time, in South-America and Naples. Precis de l'histoire physique des tems, par
M. Raymond. The leprosy and scurvy still prevail in the northern parts of
Europe, where the manner of living, among the inhabitants, still bears some
resemblance to that which prevailed in the middle centuries. Pontoppidan's
natural history of Norway. Between the years 1006 and 1680, we read of the
plague being epidemic fifty-two times throughout all Europe. The situation of
Europe is well known during the fourteenth century: every country was in arms;
agriculture was neglected; nourishment of all kinds was scanty and unwholesome;
no wonder, therefore, that we read of the plague being fourteen times epidemic
in Europe during that period. In proportion as the nations of Europe have
become civilized, and cultivated the earth, together with the arts of peace,
this disorder has gradually mitigated. It prevailed only six times in the
sixteenth, and five times in the seventeenth centuries. It made its last
general appearance in the year 1680. It has occasionally visited several cities
in Europe within the last century, but has raged with much less violence than
formerly. It is highly probable its very existence would be destroyed, could
the inhabitants of Turkey (where it is at all times endemic) be prevailed upon
to use the same precautions to prevent its spreading, which have been found
successful in other parts of Europe. The British, and other foreigners, who
reside at Constantinople, escape the plague more by avoiding all intercourse
with persons, houses, clothes, etc. infected with the disorder, than by any
peculiarities in their diet or manners. That the use of wine alone does not
preserve them from the infection, we learn from the history of the Armenians,
who drink large quantities of wine; and yet, from their belief in the doctrine
of fatalism, perish in the same proportion as the Turks.
.

I HAVE heard of two or three cases of the GOUT among the Indians, but it was
only among those who had learned the use of rum from the white people. A
question naturally occurs here, and that is; why does not the gout appear more
frequently among that class of people, who consume the greatest quantity of rum
among ourselves? To this I answer, that the effects of this liquor upon those
enfeebled people, are too sudden and violent, to admit of their being thrown
upon the extremities; as we know them to be among the Indians. They appear only
in visceral obstructions, and a complicated train of chronic diseases. Thus
putrid miasmata are sometimes too strong to bring on a fever, but produce
instant debility and death. The gout is seldom heard of in Russia, Denmark, or
Poland. Is this occasioned by the vigor of constitution peculiar to the
inhabitants of those northern countries? or is it caused by their excessive use
of spirituous liquors, which produce the same chronic complaints among them,
which we said were common among the lower class of people in this country? The
similarity of their diseases makes the last of these suppositions the most
probable. The effects of wine, like tyranny in a well formed government, are
felt first in the extremities; while spirits, like a bold invader, seize at
once upon the vitals of the constitution.

AFTER much inquiry, I have not been able to find a single instance of MADNESS,
MELANCHOLY, or FATUITY among the Indians; nor can I find any accounts of
diseases from WORMS among them. Worms are common to most animals; they produce
diseases only in weak, or increase them in strong constitutions Indian children
are not exempted from worms. It is common with the Indians, when a fever in
their children is ascribed by the white people to worms, (from their being
discharged occasionally in their stools) to say the fever makes the worms come,
and not the worms the fever.
. Hence they have no place in the nosological systems of physic. Nor does
DENTITION appear to be a disorder among the Indians. The facility with which
the healthy children of healthy parents cut their teeth, among civilized
nations, gives us reason to conclude that the Indian children never suffer from
this quarter.

THE Indians appear moreover to be strangers to diseases and pains in the teeth.

THE employments of the Indians subject them to many accidents; hence we
sometimes read of WOUNDS, FRACTURES, and LUXATIONS among them.

HAVING thus pointed out the natural diseases of the Indians, and shown what
disorders are foreign to them; we may venture to conclude, that FEVERS, OLD
AGE, CASUALTIES and WAR are the only natural outlets of human life. War is
nothing but a distemper; it is founded in the imperfection of political bodies,
just as fevers are founded on the weakness of the animal body. -- Providence in
these diseases seems to act like a mild legislature, which mitigates the
severity of death, by inflicting it in a manner the least painful upon the
whole, to the patient and the survivors.

LET us now inquire into the REMEDIES of the Indians. These, like their
diseases, are simple, and few in number. Among the first of them we shall
mention the POWERS of NATURE. Fevers we said formerly, constituted the chief of
the diseases among the Indians; they are likewise, in the hands of nature, the
principal instruments to remove the evils which threaten her dissolution; but
the event of these efforts of nature, no doubt, soon convinced the Indians of
the danger of trusting her in all cases; and hence in the earliest accounts we
have of their manners, we read of persons who were entrusted with the office of
physicians.

IT will be difficult to find out the exact order in which the Indian remedies
were suggested by nature, or discovered by art; nor will it be easy to arrange
them in proper order. I shall however attempt it, by reducing them to NATURAL
and ARTIFICIAL.

To the class of NATURAL REMEDIES belongs the Indian practice, of abstracting
from their patients all kinds of stimulating aliment. The compliance of the
Indians with this dictate of nature, in the early stage of a disorder, no
doubt, prevents in many cases, their being obliged to use any other remedy.
They follow nature still closer, in allowing their patients to drink
plentifully of cold water; this being the only liquor a patient calls for in a
fever.

SWEATING is likewise a natural remedy. It was probably suggested by observing
fevers to be terminated by it. I shall not inquire how far these sweats are
essential to the crisis of a fever. The Indian mode of procuring this
evacuation is as follows: the patient is confined in a close tent, or wigwam,
over a hole in the earth, in which a red hot stone is placed; a quantity of
water is thrown upon this stone, which instantly involves the patient in a
cloud of vapor and sweat; in this situation he rushes out, and plunges himself
into a river; from whence he retires to his bed. If the remedy has been used
with success, he rises from his bed in four and twenty hours, perfectly
recovered from his indisposition. This remedy is used not only to cure fevers,
but to remove that uneasiness which arises from fatigue of body.

A THIRD natural remedy among the Indians, is PURGING. The fruits of the earth,
the flesh of birds, and other animals feeding upon particular vegetables, and
above all, the spontaneous efforts of nature, early led the Indians to perceive
the necessity and advantages of this evacuation.

VOMITS constitute their fourth natural remedy. They were probably like the
former, suggested by nature, and accident. The ipecacuana is one of the many
roots they employ for this purpose.

THE ARTIFICIAL REMEDIES made use of by the Indians, are BLEEDING, CAUSTICS,
and ASTRINGENT medicines. They confine bleeding entirely to the part affected.
To know that opening a vein in the arm, or foot, would relieve a pain in the
head, or side, supposes some knowledge of the animal economy, and therefore
marks an advanced period in the history of medicine.

SHARP stones and thorns are the instruments they use to procure a discharge of
blood.

WE have an account of the Indians using something like a POTENTIAL CAUSTIC, in
obstinate pains. It consists of a piece of rotten wood called punk, which they
place upon the part affected, and afterward set it on fire; the fire gradually
consumes the wood, and its ashes burn a hole in the flesh.

THE undue efforts of nature, in those fevers which are connected with a
diarrhoea, or dysentery, together with those haemorrhages to which their mode
of life exposed them, necessarily led them to an early discovery of some
ASTRINGENT VEGETABLES. I am uncertain whether the Indians rely upon astringent,
or any other vegetables, for the cure of the intermitting fever. This disease
among them probably requires no other remedies than the cold bath, or cold air.
Its greater obstinacy, as well as frequency among ourselves, must be sought for
in the greater feebleness of our constitutions; and in that change which our
country has undergone, from meadows, mill-dams, and the cutting down of woods,
whereby morbid exhalations have been multiplied, and their passage rendered
more free, through every part of the country.

THIS is a short account of the remedies of the Indians. If they are simple,
they are like their eloquence, full of strength; if they are few in number,
they are accommodated, as their languages are to their ideas, to the whole of
their diseases.

WE said formerly that the Indians were subject to ACCIDENTS, such as wounds,
fractures, and the like. In these cases, nature performs the office of a
surgeon. We may judge of her qualifications for this office, by observing the
marks of wounds, and fractures, which are sometimes discovered on wild animals.
But further, what is the practice of our modern surgeons in these cases? Is it
not to lay aside plasters and ointments, and trust the whole to nature? Those
ulcers which require the assistance of mercury, bark, and a particular regimen,
are unknown to the Indians.

THE HAEMORRHAGES which sometimes follow their wounds, are restrained, by
plunging themselves into cold water, and thereby producing a constriction upon
the bleeding vessels.

THEIR practice of attempting to recover DROWNED PEOPLE, is irrational and
unsuccessful. It consists in suspending the patient by the heels, in order that
the water may flow from his mouth. This practice is founded on a belief, that
the patient dies from swallowing an excessive quantity of water. But modern
observation teaches us, that drowned people die from another cause. This
discovery has suggested a method of cure, directly opposite to that in use
among the Indians; and has shown us that the practice of suspending by the
heels, is hurtful.

I DO not find that the Indians ever suffer in their limbs from the action of
COLD upon them. Their mokasons Indian shoes.
, by allowing their feet to move freely, and thereby promoting the circulation
of the blood, defend their lower extremities in the day time, and their
practice of sleeping with their feet near a fire defends them from the morbid
effects of cold at night. In those cases where the motion of their feet in
their mokasons is not sufficient to keep them warm, they break the ice and
restore their warmth by exposing them for a short time to the stimulus of cold
water. It was remarked in Canada, in the winter of the year 1759, during the
war before last, that none of those soldiers who wore mokasons were
frost-bitten, while few of those escaped that were much exposed to the cold,
who wore shoes.


WE have heard much of their specific antidotes to the VENEREAL DISEASE. In the
accounts of these antivenereal medicines, some abatement should be made for
that love of the mavelous, and of novelty, which are apt to creep into the
writings of travelers and physicians. How many medicines which were once
thought infallible in this disorder, are now rejected from the materia medica!
I have found upon inquiry, that the Indians always assist their medicines in
this disease, by a regimen which promotes perspiration. Should we allow that
mercury acts as a specific in destroying this disorder, it does not follow that
it is proof against the efficacy of medicines which act more mechanically upon
the body. I cannot help suspecting the antivenereal qualities of the lobelia,
ceanothus and ranunculus, spoken of by Mr. Kalm, in the memoirs of the Swedish
academy. Mr. Hand informed me, that the Indians rely chiefly upon a plentiful
use of the decoctions of the pine-trees, against the venereal disease. He added
moreover, that he had often known this disease prove fatal to them.


THERE cannot be a stronger mark of the imperfect state of knowledge in
medicine among the Indians, than their method of treating the SMALL POX. We are
told that they plunge themselves in cold water in the beginning of the
disorder, and that it generally proves fatal to them.

TRAVELERS speak in high terms of the Indian ANTIDOTES to POISONS. We must
remember, that many things have been thought poisonous, which later experience
has proved to possess no unwholesome quality. Moreover, the uncertainty and
variety in the operation of poisons, render it extremely difficult to fix the
certainty of their antidotes, to them. How many specifics have derived their
credit for preventing the hydrophobia, from persons being wounded by animals,
who were not in a situation to produce that disorder! IF we may judge of all
the Indian antidotes to poisons, by those which have fallen into our hands, we
have little reason to ascribe much to them in any cases whatever.

I HAVE heard of their performing several remarkable cures upon STIFF JOINTS,
by an infusion of certain herbs in water. The mixture of several herbs together
in this infusion calls in question the specific efficacy of each of them. I
cannot help attributing the whole success of this remedy to the great heat of
the water in which the herbs were boiled, and to its being applied for a long
time to the part affected. We find the same medicine to vary frequently in its
success, according to its strength, or to the continuance of its application.
De Haen attributes the good effects of electricity, entirely to its being used
for several months.

I HAVE met with one case upon record of their aiding nature in PARTURITION.
Captain Carver gives us an account of an Indian woman in a difficult labor,
being suddenly delivered in consequence of a general convulsion induced upon
her system, by stopping for a short time her mouth and nose, so as to obstruct
her breathing.

WE are sometimes amused with accounts of Indian remedies for the DROPSY,
EPILEPSY, COLIC, GRAVEL and GOUT. If, with all the advantages which modern
physicians derive from their knowledge in ANATOMY, CHEMISTRY, BOTANY and
PHILOSOPHY; If, with the benefit of discoveries communicated from abroad, as
well as handed down from our ancestors, by more certain methods than tradition,
we are still ignorant of certain remedies for these diseases; what can we
expect from the Indians, who are not only deprived of these advantages, but
want our chief motive, the sense of the pain and danger of those disorders to
prompt them to seek for such remedies to relieve them? There cannot be a
stronger proof of their ignorance of proper remedies for new or difficult
diseases, than their having recourse to enchantment. But to be more particular;
I have taken pains to inquire into the success of some of these Indian
specifics, and have never heard of one well attested case of their efficacy. I
believe they derive all their credit from our being ignorant of their
composition. The influence of secrecy is well known in establishing the credit
of a medicine. The sal seignette was an infallible medicine for the
intermitting fever, while the manufactory of it was confined to an apothecary
at Rochelle; but it lost its virtues as soon as it was found to be composed of
the acid of tartar and a fossil alkali. Dr. Ward's famous pill and drop ceased
to do wonders in scrophulous cases, as soon as he bequeathed to the world his
receipts for making them.

I FORESEE an objection to what has been said concerning the remedies of the
Indians, drawn from that knowledge which experience gives to a mind intent upon
one subject. We have heard much of the perfection of their senses of seeing and
hearing. An Indian, we are told, will discover not only a particular tribe of
Indians by their footsteps, but the distance of time in which they were made.
In those branches of knowledge which relate to hunting and war, the Indians
have acquired a degree of perfection that has not been equalled by civilized
nations. But we must remember, that medicine among them does not enjoy the like
advantage with the arts of war and hunting, of being the chief object of their
attention. The phycian and the warrior are united in one character; to render
him as able in the former, as he is in the latter profession, would require an
entire abstraction from every other employment, and a familiarity with external
objects, which are incompatible with the wandering life of savages.

THUS have we finished our inquiry into the diseases and remedies of the
Indians in North America. We come now to inquire into the diseases and remedies
of civilized nations.

NATIONS differ in their degrees of civilization. We shall select one for the
subject of our inquiries which is most familiar to us; I mean the British
nation. Here we behold subordination and classes of mankind established by
government, commerce, manufactures, and certain customs common to most of the
civilized nations of Europe. We shall trace the origin of their diseases
through their customs, in the same manner as we did those of the Indians.

I. IT will be sufficient to name the degrees of heat, the improper aliment,
the light dresses, and the premature studies children are exposed to, in order
to show the ample scope for diseases, which is added to the original defect of
stamina they derive from their ancestors.

II. CIVILIZATION rises in its demands upon the health of women. Their
fashions; their dress and diet; their eager pursuits and ardent enjoyment of
pleasure; their indolence and undue evacuations in pregnancy; their cordials,
hot regimen and neglect or use of art, in childbirth, are all so many inlets
to diseases.

HUMANITY would fain be silent, while philosophy calls upon us to mention the
effects of interested marriages, and of disappointments in love, increased by
that concealment which the tyranny of custom has imposed upon the sex "Married
women are more healthy and long-lived than single women. The registers,
examined by Mr. Muret, confirm this observation; and show particularly, that of
equal numbers of single and married women between fifteen and twenty-five years
of age, more of the former died than of the latter, in the proportion of two to
one: the consequence, therefore, of following nature, must be favorable to
health among the female sex." Supplement to Price's Observations on
Reversionary Payments. p. 357.
. Each of these exaggerates the natural, and increases the number of artificial
diseases among women.

III. THE diseases introduced by civilization extend themselves through every
class and profession among men. How fatal are the effects of idleness and
intemperance among the rich, and of hard labor and penury among the poor! What
pallid looks are contracted by the votaries of science from hanging over the
"sickly taper!" How many diseases are entailed upon manufacturers, by the
materials in which they work, and the posture of their bodies! What monkish
diseases do we observe from monkish continence, and monkish vices! We pass over
the increase of accidents from building, sailing, riding, and the like. War, as
if too slow in destroying the human species, calls in a train of diseases
peculiar to civilized nations. What havoc have the corruption and monopoly of
provisions, a damp soil, and an unwholesome sky, made in a few days in an army!
The achievements of British valor at the Havannah, in the last war, were
obtained at the expense of 9,000 men, 7,000 of whom perished with the
West India fever The modern writers upon the diseases of armies, wonder that
the Greek and Roman physicians have left us nothing upon that subject. But may
not most of the diseases of armies be produced by the different manner in which
wars are carried on by modern nations? The discoveries in geography, by
extending the field of war, expose soldiers to many diseases from long voyages,
and a sudden change of climate; which were unknown to the armies of former
ages. Moreover, the form of the weapons, and the variety in the military
exercises of the Grecian and Roman armies, gave a vigor to the constitution,
which can never be acquired by the use of muskets and artillery.
. Even our modern discoveries in geography, by extending the empire of
commerce, have likewise extended the empire of diseases. What desolation have
the East and West Indies made of British subjects! It has been found upon a
nice calculation, that only ten of an hundred Europeans, live above seven years
after they arrive in the island of Jamaica.

IV. IT would take up too much of our time to point out all the customs both
physical and moral, which influence diseases among both sexes. The former have
engendered the feeds of diseases in the human body itself; hence the origin of
catarrhs, jail and miliary fevers, with a long train of contagious disorders,
which compose so great a part of our books of medicine. The latter likewise
have a large share in producing diseases. I am not one of those modern
philosophers, who derive the vices of mankind from the influence of
civilization; but I am safe in asserting, that their number and malignity
increase with the refinements of polished life. To prove this, we need only
survey a scene too familiar to affect us: it is a bedlam; which injustice,
inhumanity, avarice, pride, vanity, and ambition, have filled with inhabitants.

THUS have we briefly pointed out the customs which influence the diseases of
civilized nations. It remains now that we take notice of their diseases.
Without naming the many new fevers, fluxes, haemorrhages, swellings from water,
wind, flesh, fat, pus and blood; foulnesses on the skin from cancers, leprosy,
yaws, poxes, and itch; and lastly, the gout, the hysteria, and the
hypochondriasis, in all their variety of known and unknown shapes; I shall sum
up all that is necessary upon this subject, by adding, that the number of
diseases which belong to civilized nations, according to Doctor Cullen's
nosology, amounts to 1387; the single class of nervous diseases form 612 of
this number.

BEFORE we proceed to speak of the remedies of civilized nations, we shall
examine into the abilities of NATURE in curing their diseases. We found her
active and successful in curing the diseases of the Indians. Is her strength,
wisdom, or benignty, equal to the increase of those dangers which threaten her
dissolution among civilized nations? In order to answer this question, it will
be necessary to explain the meaning of the term nature.

BY NATURE, in the present case, I understand nothing but physical necessity.
This at once excludes every thing like intelligence from her operations: these
are all performed in obedience to the same laws which govern vegetation in
plants and the intestine motions of fossils. They are as truly mechanical as
the laws of gravitation, electricity, or magnetism. A ship when laid on her
broadside by a wave, or a sudden blast of wind, rises by the simple laws of her
mechanism; but suppose this ship to be attacked by fire, or a water-spout, we
are not to call in question the skill of the ship-builder, if she is consumed
by the one, or sunk by the other. In like manner, the Author of nature has
furnished the body with powers to preserve itself from its natural enemies; but
when it is attacked by those civil foes which are bred by the peculiar customs
of civilization, it resembles a company of Indians, armed with bows and arrows,
against the complicated and deadly machinery of firearms. To place this
subject in a proper light, we shall deliver a history of the operations of
nature in a few of the diseases of civilized nations.

I. THERE are cases in which nature is still successful in curing diseases.

IN fevers she still deprives us of our appetite for animal food, and imparts
to us a desire for cool air and cold water.

IN haemorrhages she produces a faintiness, which occasions a coagulum in the
open vessels; so that the further passage of blood through them is obstructed.

IN wounds of the flesh and bones, she discharges foreign matter by exciting an
inflammation, and supplies the waste of both with new flesh and bone.

II. THERE are cases where the efforts of nature are too feeble to do service,
as in putrid and nervous fevers.

III. THERE are cases where the efforts of nature are over-proportioned to the
strength of the disease, as in the cholera morbus and dysentery.

IV. THERE are cases where nature is idle, as in the atonic stages of the gout,
the cancer, the epilepsy, the mania, the venereal disease, the apoplexy, and
the tetanus. Hoffman de hypothesium medicarum damno, sect. xv.
.

V. THERE are cases in which nature does mischief. She wastes herself with an
unnecessary fever in a dropsy and consumption. She throws a plethora upon the
brain and lungs. She ends a pleurisy and peripneumony in a vomica, or empyema.
She creates an unnatural appetite for food in the hypochondriac disorder. And
lastly, she drives the melancholy patient to solitude, where, by brooding over
the subject of his infanity, he increases his disease.

WE are accustomed to hear of the salutary kindness of nature in alarming us
with pain, to prompt us to seek for a remedy. But,

VI. THERE are cases in which she refuses to send this harbinger of the evils
which threaten her, as in the aneurism, scirrhus, and stone in the bladder.

VII. THERE are cases where the pain is not proportioned to the danger, as in
the tetanus, consumption, and dropsy of the head. And,

VIII. THERE are cases where the pain is over-proportioned to the danger, as in
the paronychia and toothache.

THIS is a short account of the operations of nature, in the diseases of
civilized nations. A lunatic might as well plead against the sequestration of
his estate, because he once enjoyed the full exercise of his reason, or because
he still had lucid intervals, as nature be exempted from the charges we have
brought against her.

BUT this subject will receive strength from considering the REMEDIES of
civilized nations. All the products of the vegetable, fossil, and animal
kingdoms, tortured by heat and mixture into an almost infinite variety of
forms; bleeding, cupping, artificial drains by setons, issues and blisters;
exercise, active and passive; voyages and journies; baths, warm and cold;
waters saline, aerial and mineral; food by weight and measure; the royal touch;
enchantment; miracles; in a word, the combined discoveries of natural history
and philosophy, united into a system of materia medica, all show, that although
physicians are in speculation the servants, yet in practice they are the
masters of nature. The whole of their remedies seem contrived on purpose to
arouse, assist, restrain, and control her operations.

THERE are some truths like certain liquors, which require strong heads to bear
them. I feel myself protected from the prejudices of vulgar minds, when I
reflect that I am delivering these sentiments in a society of philosophers.

LET us now take a COMPARATIVE VIEW of the diseases and remedies of the
Indians, with those of civilized nations. We shall begin with their diseases.

IN our account of the diseases of the Indians we beheld death executing his
commission, it is true; but then his dart was hid in a mantle, under which he
concealed his shape. But among civilized nations we behold him multiplying his
weapons in proportion to the number of organs and functions in the body; and
pointing each of them in such a manner, as to render his messengers more
terrible than himself.

WE said formerly that fevers constituted the chief diseases of the Indians.
According to Doctor Sydenham's computation, above 66,000 out of 100,000 died of
fevers in London about 100 years ago; but fevers now constitute but a little
more than one-tenth part of the diseases of that city. Out of 21,780 persons
who died in London between December 1770 and December 1771, only 2273 died of
simple fevers. I have more than once heard Doctor Huck complain, that he could
find no marks of epidemic fevers in London as described by Doctor Sydenham.
London has undergone a revolution in its manners and customs since Doctor
Sydenham's time. New diseases, the offspring of luxury, have supplanted fevers;
and the few that are left, appear so complicated with other diseases, that
their connection can no longer be discovered with an epidemic constitution of
the year. The pleurisy and peripneumony, those inflammatory fevers of strong
constitutions, are now lost in catarrhs, or colds; which instead of challenging
the powers of nature or art to a fair combat, insensibly undermine the
constitution, and bring on an incurable consumption. Out of 22,434 who died
between December 1769 and the same month in 1770, 4594 perished with that
British disorder. Our countryman, Doctor Maclurg, has ventured to foretell that
the gout will be lost in a few years, in a train of hypochondriac, hysteric and
bilious disorders. In like manner, may we not look for a season when fevers,
the natural diseases of the human body, will be lost in an inundation of
artificial diseases, brought on by the modish practices of modern civilization?

IT may not be improper to compare the PROGNOSIS of the Indians, in diseases,
with that of civilized nations, before we take a comparative view of their
remedies.

THE Indians are said to be successful in predicting the events of diseases.
While diseases are simple, the marks which distinguish them, or characterize
their several stages, are generally uniform and obvious to the most indifferent
observer. These marks afford so much certainty, that the Indians sometimes kill
their physicians for a false prognosis, charging the death of the patient to
their carelessness, or ignorance. They estimate the danger of their patients by
their degrees of appetite; while an Indian is able to eat, he is looked upon as
free from danger. But when we consider the number and variety in the signs of
diseases, among civilized nations, together with the shortness of life, the
fallacy of memory, and the uncertainty of observation: where shall we find a
physician willing to risk his reputation, much less his life, upon the
prediction of the event of our acute diseases? We can derive no advantage from
the simple sign, by which the Indians estimate the danger of their patients;
for we daily see a want of appetite for food in diseases which are attended
with no danger; and we sometimes observe an unusual degree of this appetite to
precede the agonies of death. I honor the name of HIPPOCRATES: But forgive me
ye votaries of antiquity, if I attempt to pluck a few gray hairs from his
venerable head. I was once an idolater at his altar, nor did I turn apostate
from his worship, till I was taught, that not a tenth part of his prognostics
corresponded with modern experience, or observation. The pulse Doctor Cullen
used to inform his pupils, that after forty years experience, he could find no
relation between his observations on the pulse, and those made by Doctor
Solano. The climate and customs of the people in Spain being so different from
the climate and customs of the present inhabitants of Britain, may account for
the diversity of their observations. Doctor Heberden's remarks upon the pulse,
in the second volume of the Medical Transactions, are calculated to show how
little the issue of diseases can be learned from it.
, urine, and sweats, from which the principal signs of life and death have been
taken, are so variable in most of the acute diseases of civilized nations, that
the wisest physicians have in some measure excluded the prognosis from being a
part of their profession.

I AM here insensibly led to make an apology for the instability of the
theories and practice of physic. The theory of physic is founded upon the laws
of the animal economy. These (unlike the laws of the mind, or the common laws
of matter) do not appear at once, but are gradually brought to light by the
phenomenon of diseases. The success of nature, in curing the simple diseases of
Saxony, laid the foundation for the ANIMA MEDICA of Doctor STAHL. The endemics
of Holland "The scurvy is very frequent in Holland; and draws its origin partly
from their strong food, seafish, and smoaked flesh, and partly from their
dense and moist air, together with their bad water." Hoffman on Endemial
Distempers.

"We are now in North-Holland; and I have never seen, among so few people, so
many infected with the leprosy as here. They say the reason is, because they
eat so much fish." Howell's Familiar Letters.


led Doctor BOERHAAVE to seek for the causes of all diseases in the FLUIDS. And
the universal prevalence of the diseases of the NERVES, in Great Britain, led
Doctor CULLEN to discover their peculiar laws, and to found a SYSTEM upon them;
a system, which will probably last till some new diseases are let loose upon
the human species, which shall unfold other laws of the animal economy.

IT is in consequence of this fluctuation in the principles and practice of
physic, being so necessarily connected with the changes in the customs of
civilized nations, that old and young physicians so often disagree in their
opinions and practices. And it is by attending to the constant changes in these
customs of civilized nations, that those physicians have generally become the
most eminent, who have soonest emancipated themselves from the tyranny of the
schools of physic; and have occasionally accommodated their principles and
practice to the changes in diseases We may learn from these observations, the
great impropriety of those Egyptian laws which oblige physicians to adopt, in
all cases, the prescriptions which had been collected, and approved of, by the
physicians of former ages. Every change in the customs of civilized nations,
produces a change in their diseases, which calls for a change in their
remedies. What havoc would plentiful bleeding, purging, and small beer,
formerly used with so much success by Dr. Sydenham in the cure of fevers, now
make upon the enfeebled citizens of London! The fevers of the same, and of more
southern latitudes, still admit of such antiphlogistic remedies. In the room of
these, bark, wine, and other cordial medicines, are prescribed in London in
almost every kind of fever
. This variety in diseases, which is produced by the changes in the customs of
civilized nations, will enable us to account for many of the contradictions
which are to be found in authors of equal candor and abilities, who have
written upon the materia medica.

IN forming a comparative view of the REMEDIES of the Indians, with those of
civilized nations, we shall remark, that the want of success in a medicine is
occasioned by one of the following causes.

FIRST, our ignorance of the disorder. Secondly, an ignorance of a suitable
remedy. Thirdly, a want of efficacy in the remedy.

CONSIDERING the violence of the diseases of the Indians, it is probable their
want of success is always occasioned by a want of efficacy in their medicines.
But the case is very different among civilized nations. Dissections daily
convince us of our ignorance of the seats of diseases, and cause us to blush at
our prescriptions. What certain or equal remedies have we found for the gout,
the epilepsy, apoplexy, palsy, dropsy of the brain, cancer and consumption? How
often are we disappointed in our expectations from the most certain and
powerful of our remedies, by the negligence or obstinacy of our patients! What
mischief have we not done under the belief of false facts (if I may be allowed
the expression) and false theories! We have assisted in multiplying diseases.
-- We have done more -- we have increased their mortality.

I SHALL not pause to beg pardon of the faculty, for acknowledging in this
public manner the weaknesses of our profession. I am pursuing truth, and while
I can keep my eye fixed upon my guide, I am indifferent whither I am led,
provided she is my leader.

BUT further, the Indian submits to his disease, without one fearful emotion
from his doubtfulness of its event; and at last meets his fate without an
anxious wish for futurity; except it is of being admitted to an "equal sky,"
where His faithful dog shall bear him company.
But among civilized nations, the influence of a false religion in good, and of
a true religion in bad men, has converted even the fear of death into a
disease. It is this original distemper of the imagination which renders the
plague most fatal, upon its first appearance in a country.

UNDER all these disadvantages in the state of medicine, among civilized
nations, do more in proportion die of the diseases peculiar to them, than of
fevers, casualties and old age, among the Indians? If we take our account from
the city of London, we shall find this to be the case. Near a twentieth part of
its inhabitants perish one year with another. Nor does the natural increase of
inhabitants supply this yearly waste. If we judge from the bills of mortality,
the city of London contains fewer inhabitants, by several thousands, than it
did forty years ago. It appears from this fact, and many others of a like
nature, which might be adduced, that although the difficulty of supporting
children, together with some peculiar customs of the Indians, which we
mentioned, limit their number, yet they multiply faster, and die in a smaller
proportion than civilized nations, under the circumstances we have described.
The Indians, we are told, were numerous in this country before the Europeans
settled among them. Travelers agree likewise in describing numbers of both
sexes who exhibited all the marks of extreme old age. It is remarkable that age
seldom impairs the faculties of their minds.

THE mortality peculiar to those Indian tribes who have mingled with the white
people, must be ascribed to the extensive mischief of spirituous liquors. When
these have not acted, they have suffered from having accommodated themselves
too suddenly to the European diet, dress, and manners. It does not become us to
pry too much into futurity; but if we may judge from the fate of the original
natives of Hispaniola, Jamaica, and the provinces on the continent, we may
venture to foretell, that, in proportion as the white people multiply, the
Indians will diminish; so that in a few centuries they will probably be
entirely extirpated Even the influence of CHRISTIAN principles has not been
able to put a stop to the mortality introduced among the Indians, by their
intercourse with the Europeans. Dr. Cotton Mather, in a letter to Sir William
Ashurst, printed in Boston in the year 1705, says, "That about five years
before, there were about thirty Indian congregrations in the southern parts of
the province of Massachusetts Bay." The same author, in his history of
New England, says, "That in the islands of Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard
there were 3000 adult Indians, 1600 of whom professed the christian religion."
At present there is but one Indian congregation in the whole Massachusetts
province.

It may serve to extend our knowledge of diseases, to remark, that epidemics
were often observed to prevail among the Indians in Nantucket, without
affecting the white people.


.

IT may be said, that health among the Indians, like insensibility to cold and
hunger, is proportioned to their need of it; and that the less degrees, or
entire want of health, are no interruption to the ordinary business of
civilized life.

TO obviate this supposition, we shall first attend to the effects of a single
distemper in those people who are the principal wheels in the machine of civil
society. Justice has stopped its current, victories have been lost, wars have
been prolonged, and embassies delayed, by the principal actors in these
departments of government being suddenly laid up with a fit of the gout. How
many offenses are daily committed against the rules of good breeding, by the
tedious histories of our disorders, which compose so great a part of modern
conversation! What sums of money have been lavished in foreign countries in
pursuit of health! It is said, there are seldom less than 20,000 British
subjects in France and Italy; one half of whom reside or travel in those
countries upon the account of their health.
Families have been ruined by the unavoidable expenses of medicines, and
watering places. In a word, the swarms of beggars which infest so many of the
European countries, urge their petitions for charity chiefly by arguments
derived from real or counterfeit diseases, which render them incapable of
supporting themselves Templeman computes, that Scotland contains 1,500,000
inhabitants; 100,000 of whom, according to Mr. Fletcher, are supported at the
public expense. The proportion of poor people is much greater in England,
Ireland, France, and Italy.
.

BUT may not civilization, while it abates the violence of natural diseases,
increase the lenity of those that are artificial, in the same manner that it
lessens the strength of natural vices by multiplying them? To answer this
question, it will only be necessary to ask another: Who would exchange the
heat, thirst and uneasiness of a fever, for one fit of the cholic or stone?

THE history of the number, combination and fashions of the remedies we have
given, may serve to humble the pride of philosophy; and to convince us that
with all the advantages of the whole circle of sciences, we are still ignorant
of antidotes to many of the diseases of civilized nations. We sometimes sooth
our ignorance by reproaching our idleness in not investigating the remedies
peculiar to this country. We are taught to believe that every herb that grows
in our woods is possessed of some medicinal virtue, and that heaven would be
wanting in benignity if our country did not produce remedies for all the
different diseases of its inhabitants. It would be arrogating too much to
suppose, that man was the only creature in our world for whom vegetables grow.
The beasts, birds and insects, derive their sustenance either directly, or
indirectly from them; while many of them were probably intended from their
variety in figure, foliage and color, only to serve as ornaments for our globe.
It would seem strange that the Author of nature should furnish every spot of
ground with medicines adapted to the diseases of its inhabitants, and at the
same time deny it the more necessary articles of food and clothing. I know not
whether heaven has provided every country with antidotes even to the natural
diseases of its inhabitants. The intermitting fever is common in almost every
corner of the globe; but a sovereign remedy for it has been discovered only in
South-America. The combination of bitter and astringent substances which serve
as a succedaneum to the Peruvian bark, is as much a preparation of art, as
calomel, or tartar emetic. Societies stand in need of each other as much as
individuals: and the goodness of the Deity remains unimpeached when we suppose,
that he intended medicines to serve (with other articles) to promote that
knowledge, humanity and politeness among the inhabitants of the earth, which
have been so justly attributed to commerce.

WE have no discoveries in the materia medica to hope for from the Indians in
North America. It would be a reproach to our schools of physic, if modern
physicians were not more successful than the Indians, even in the treatment of
their own diseases.

DO the blessings of civilization compensate for the sacrifice we make of
natural health, as well as of natural liberty? This question must be answered
under some limitations. When natural liberty is given up for laws which enslave
instead of protecting us, we are immense losers by the exchange. Thus, if we
arm the whole elements against our health, and render every pore in the body an
avenue for a disease, we pay too high a price for the blessings of civilization.

IN governments which have departed entirely from their simplicity, partial
evils are to be cured by nothing but an entire renovation of their
constitution. Let the world bear with the professions of law, physic, and
divinity; and let the lawyer, physician and divine yet learn to bear with each
other. They are all necessary, in the present state of society. In like manner,
let the woman of fashion forget the delicacy of her sex, and submit to be
delivered by a man-midwife In the enervated age of Athens, a law was passed
which confined the practice of midwifery only to the men. It was, however,
repealed, upon a woman's dying in childbirth, rather than be delivered by a
man-midwife. It appears from the bills of mortality in London and Dublin, that
about one in seventy of those women die in childbirth, who are in the hands of
midwives; but from the accounts of the lying-in hospitals in those cities,
which are under the care of man-midwives, only one in an hundred and forty
perishes in childbirth.
. Let her snatch her offspring from her breast, and send it to repair the
weakness of its stamina, with the milk of a ruddy cottager There has been much
commonplace declamation against the custom among the great, of not suckling
their children. Nurses were common in Rome, in the declension of the empire:
hence we find Cornelia commended as a rare example of maternal virtue, as much
for suckling her sons, as for teaching them eloquence. That nurses were common
in Egypt, is probable from the contract which Pharaoh's daughter made with the
unknown mother of Moses, to allow her wages for suckling her own child. The
same degrees of civilization require the same customs. A woman whose times for
eating, sleeping, etc. are constantly interrupted by the calls of enervating
pleasures, must always afford milk of an unwholesome nature. It may truly be
said of a child doomed to live on this aliment, that as soon as it receives its
-- breath,
It sucks in the lurking principles of death.

. Let art supply the place of nature in the preparation and digestion of all
our aliment. Let our fine ladies keep up their color with carmine, and their
spirits with ratafia; and let our fine gentlemen defend themselves from the
excesses of heat and cold, with lavender and hartshorn. These customs have
become necessary in the corrupt stages of society. We must imitate, in these
cases, the practice of those physicians who consult the appetite only, in
diseases which do not admit of a remedy.

THE state of a country in point of population, temperance and industry, is so
connected with its diseases, that a tolerable idea may be formed of it, by
looking over its bills of mortality. HOSPITALS, with all their boasted
advantages, exhibit at the same time monuments of the charity and depravity of
a people "Aurengzebe, emperor of Persia, being asked, Why he did not build
hospitals? said, I will make my empire so rich, that there shall be no need of
hospitals. He ought to have said, I will begin by rendering my subjects rich,
and then I will build hospitals.

"At Rome, the hospitals place every one at his ease, except those who labor,
those who are industrious, those who have lands, and those who are engaged in
trade.

"I have observed, that wealthy nations have need of hospitals, because fortune
subjects them to a thousand accidents; but it is plain, that transient
assistances are better than perpetual foundations. The evil is momentary; it is
necessary, therefore, that the succor should be of the same nature, and that it
be applied to particular accidents."

Spirit of laws, b. xxiii. chapter 29.

It was reserved for the present generation to substitute in the room of public
hospitals private DISPENSARIES for the relief of the sick. Philosophy and
christianity alike concur in deriving praise and benefit from these excellent
institutions. They exhibit something like an application of the mechanical
powers to the purposes of benevolence; for in what other charitable
institutions do we perceive so great a quantity of distress relieved by so
small an expense?


. The opulence of physicians, and the divisions of their offices, into those of
surgery, pharmacy and midwifery, are likewise proofs of the declining state of
a country. In the infancy of the Roman empire, the priest performed the office
of a physician; so simple were the principles and practice of physic. It was
only in the declension of the empire that physicians vied with the emperors of
Rome in magnificence and splendour The first regular practitioners of physic in
Rome, were women and slaves. The profession was confined to them above six
hundred years. The Romans during this period lived chiefly upon vegetables,
particularly upon PULSE; and hence they were called, by their neighbors,
PULTIFAGI. They were likewise early inured to the healthy employments of war
and husbandry. Their diseases, of course, were too few and simple to render the
cure of them an object of a liberal profession. When their diseases became more
numerous and complicated, their investigation and cure required the aids of
philosophy. The profession from this time became liberal; and maintained a rank
with the other professions which are founded upon the imperfection and
depravity of human institutions. Physicians are as necessary in the advanced
stages of society as surgeons, although their office is less ancient and
certain. There are many artificial diseases, in which they give certain relief;
and even where their art fails, their prescriptions are still necessary, in
order to smooth the avenues of death.
.

I AM sorry to add in this place, that the number of patients in the HOSPITAL,
and incurables in the ALMSHOUSE of this city, show, that we are treading in the
enervated steps of our fellow subjects in Britain. Our bills of mortality
likewise show the encroachments of British diseases upon us. The NERVOUS FEVER
has become so familiar to us, that we look upon it as a natural disease. Dr.
Sydenham, so faithful in his history of fevers, takes no notice of it. Dr.
Cadwallader informed me, that it made its first appearance in this city about
five and twenty years ago. It will be impossible to name the CONSUMPTION
without recalling to our minds the memory of some friend or relation, who has
perished within these few years by that disorder. Its rapid progress among us
has been unjustly attributed to the growing resemblance of our climate to that
of Great Britain. The HYSTERIC and HYPOCHONDRIAC DISORDERS, once peculiar to
the chambers of the great, are now to be found in our kitchens and workshops.
All these diseases have been produced by our having deserted the simple diet,
and manners, of our ancestors.

THE blessings of literature, commerce, and religion, were not originally
purchased at the expense of health. The complete enjoyment of health is as
compatible with civilization, as the enjoyment of civil liberty. We read of
countries, rich in every thing that can form national happiness and national
grandeur, the diseases of which are nearly as few and simple as those of the
Indians. We hear of no diseases among the Jews, while they were under their
democratical form of government, except such as were inflicted by a
supernatural power The principal employments of the Jews, like those of the
Romans in their simple ages, consisted in war and husbandry. Their diet was
plain, consisting chiefly of vegetables. Their only remedies were plasters and
ointments; which were calculated for those diseases which are produced by
accidents. In proportion as they receded from their simple customs, we find
artificial diseases prevail among them. The leprosy made its appearance in
their journey through the wilderness. King Asa's pains in his feet, were
probably brought on by a fit of the gout. Saul and Nebuchadnezzar were
afflicted with a melancholy. In the time of our Savior, we find an account of
all those diseases in Judea, which mark the declension of a people; such as,
the palsy, epilepsy, mania, blindness, haemorrhagia uterina, etc. It is
unnecessary to suppose, that they were let loose at this juncture, on purpose
to give our Savior an opportunity of making them the chief subject of his
miracles. They had been produced from natural causes, by the gradual depravity
of their manners. It is remarkable, that our Savior chose those artificial
diseases for the subject of his miracles, in preference to natural diseases.
The efforts of nature, and the operation of medicines, are too slow and
uncertain in these cases to detract in the least from the validity of the
miracle. He cured Peter's mother-in-law, it is true, of a fever; but to show
that the cure was miraculous, the sacred historian adds, (contrary to what is
common after a fever) that "she arose immediately and ministered unto them."
. We should be tempted to doubt the accounts given of the populousness of that
people, did we not see the practice of their simple customs producing nearly
the same populousness in Egypt, Rome, and other countries of antiquity. The
empire of China, it is said, contains more inhabitants than the whole of
Europe. The political institutions of that country have exempted its
inhabitants from a large share of the diseases of other civilized nations. The
inhabitants of Swisserland, Denmark, Norway In the city of Bergen, which
consists of 30,000 inhabitants, there is but one physician; who is supported at
the expense of the public. Pontoppidan's Not. Hist. of Norway.
and Sweden, enjoy the chief advantages of civilization without having
surrendered for them the blessings of natural health. But it is unnecessary to
appeal to ancient or remote nations to prove, that health is not incompatible
with civilization. The inhabitants of many parts of New England, particularly
the province of Connecticut, are strangers to artificial diseases. Some of you
may remember the time, and our fathers have told those of us who do not, when
the diseases of PENNSYLVANIA were as few and as simple as those of the Indians.
The food of the inhabitants was then simple; their only drink was water; their
appetites were restrained by labor; religion excluded the influence of
sickening passions; private hospitality supplied the want of a public hospital;
nature was their only nurse, temperance their principal physician. But I must
not dwell upon this retrospect of primaeval manners; and I am too strongly
impressed with a hope of a revival of such happy days, to pronounce them the
golden age of our province.

OUR esteem for the customs of our savage neighbors will be lessened, when we
add, that civilization does not preclude the honors of old age. The proportion
of old people is much greater among civilized, than among savage nations. It
would be easy to decide this assertion in our favor, by appealing to facts in
the natural histories of Britain, Norway, Sweden, North America It has been
urged against the state of longevity in America, that the Europeans, who settle
among us, generally arrive to a greater age than the Americans. This is not
occasioned so much by a peculiar firmness in their stamina, as by an increase
of vigor, which the constitution acquires by a change of climate. A Frenchman
(caeteris paribus) outlives an Englishman in his own country. An Hollander
prolongs his life by removing to the cape of Good Hope. A Portugueze gains
fifteen or twenty years by removing to Brazil. And there are good reasons to
believe, that a North-American would derive the same advantages, in point of
health and longevity, by removing to Europe, which an European derives from
coming to this country.

From a calculation made by an ingenious foreigner, it appears, that a greater
proportion of old people are to be found in Connecticut, than in any colony in
North America. This colony contains 180,000 inhabitants. They have no public
hospitals or poor houses; nor is a beggar to be seen among them. There cannot
be more striking proofs than these facts, of the simplicity of their manners.


, and several of the West India islands

THE laws of decency and nature, are not necessarily abolished by the customs
of civilized nations. In many of these, we read of women among whom nature
alone still performs the office of a midwife Parturition, in the simple ages of
all countries, is performed by nature. The Israelitish women were delivered
even without the help of the Egyptian midwives. We read of but two women who
died in childbirth in the whole history of the Jews. Dr. Bancroft says, that
childbearing is attended with so little pain in Guiana, that the women seem to
be exempted from the curse inflicted upon Eve. These easy births are not
confined to warm climates. They are equally safe and easy in Norway and
Iceland, according to Pontoppidan and Anderson's histories of those countries.
, and who feel the obligations of suckling their children, to be equally
binding with the common obligations of morality.

CIVILIZATION does not render us less fit for the necessary hardships of war.
We read of armies of civilized nations, who have endured degrees of cold,
hunger and fatigue, which have not been exceeded by the savages of any country
Civilized nations have, in the end, always conquered savages as much by their
ability to bear hardships, as by their superior military skill. Soldiers are
not to be chosen indiscriminately. The greatest generals have looked upon sound
constitutions to be as essential to soldiers, as bravery or military
discipline. Count Saxe refused soldiers born and bred in large cities; and
sought for such only as were bred in mountainous countries. The king of Prussia
calls young soldiers only to the dangers and honors of the field in his elegant
poem, Sur l'Art de la Guerre, chant. 1. Old soldiers generally lose the
advantages of their veteranism, by their habits of idleness and debauchery. An
able general, and experienced officers, will always supply the defects of age
in young soldiers.
.

CIVILIZATION does not always multiply the avenues of death. It appears from
the bills of mortality, of many countries, that fewer in proportion die among
civilized, than among savage nations.

EVEN the charms of beauty are heightened by civilization. We read of
stateliness, proportion, and fine teeth Bad teeth are observed chiefly in
middle latitudes, which are subject to alternate heats and colds. The
inhabitants of Norway and Russia are as remarkable for their fine teeth, as the
inhabitants of Africa. We observe fine teeth to be universal likewise among the
inhabitants of France, who live in a variable climate. These have been ascribed
to their protecting their heads from the action of the night air by means of
woolen night-caps, and to their extraordinary attention to the teeth of their
children. These precautions secure good teeth; and are absolutely necessary in
all variable climates where people do not adopt all the customs of the savage
life.
and complexions in both sexes, forming the principal outlines of national
characters.

THE danger of many diseases, is not proportioned to their violence, but to
their duration. America has advanced but a few paces in luxury and effeminacy.
There is yet strength enough in her vitals, to give life to those parts which
are decayed. She may recall her steps. For this purpose,

I. LET our children be educated in a manner more agreeable to nature.

II. LET the common people (who constitute the wealth and strength of our
country) be preserved from the effects of spirituous liquors. Had I a double
portion of all that eloquence which has been employed in describing the
political evils that lately threatened our country, it would be too little to
set forth the numerous and complicated physical and moral evils which these
liquors have introduced among us. To encounter this hydra requires an arm
accustomed like that of Hercules, to vanquish monsters. Sir William Temple
tells us, that in Spain no man can be admitted as an evidence in a court, who
has once been convicted of drunkenness. I do not call for so severe a law in
this country. Let us first try the force of severe manners. Lycurgus governed
more by these, than by his laws. "Boni mores non bonae leges," according to
Tacitus, were the bulwarks of virtue among the ancient Germans.

III. I DESPAIR of being able to call the votaries of Bacchus from their
bottle, and shall therefore leave them to be roused by the more eloquent
twinges of the gout.

IV. LET us be cautious what kind of manufactures we admit among us. The
rickets made their first appearance in the manufacturing towns in England.
Doctor Fothergill informed me, that he had often observed, when a pupil, that
the greatest part of the chronic patients in the London Hospital were
Spittal-field weavers. I would not be understood, from these facts, to
discourage those manufactures which employ women and children: these suffer few
inconveniences from a sedentary life: nor do I mean to offer the least
restraint to those manufactories among men, which admit of free air, and the
exercise of all their limbs. Perhaps the abstraction of spirituous liquors, and
a pure air, might render sedentary employments less unhealthy in America even
among men, than in the populous towns of Great Britain.

THE population of a country is not to be accomplished by rewards and
punishments. And it is happy for America, that the universal prevalence of the
protestant religion, the checks lately given to negro slavery, the general
unwillingness among us to acknowledge the usurpations of primogeniture, the
universal practice of inoculation for the smallpox, and the absence of the
plague, render the interposition of government for that purpose unnecessary.

THESE advantages can only be secured to our country by AGRICULTURE. This is
the true basis of national health, riches and populousness. Nations, like
individuals, never rise higher than when they are ignorant whither they are
tending. It is impossible to tell from history, what will be the effects of
agriculture, industry, temperance and commerce, urged on by the competition of
colonies, united in the same general pursuits, in a country, which for extent,
variety of soil, climate, and number of navigable rivers, has never been
equalled in any quarter of the globe. America is the theater where human nature
will probably receive her last and principal literary, civil and military
honors.

BUT I recall myself from the ages of futurity. The province of Pennsylvania
has already shown to her sister colonies, the influence of agriculture and
commerce upon the number and happiness of a people. It is scarcely an hundred
years since our illustrious legislator, with an handful of men, landed upon
these shores. Although the perfection of our government, the healthiness of our
climate, and the fertility of our soil, seemed to ensure a rapid settlement of
the province; yet it would have required a prescience bordering upon divine, to
have foretold, that in such a short space of time, the province would contain
above 300,000 inhabitants; and that near 30,000 of this number should compose a
city, which should be the third, if not the second in commerce in the British
empire. The pursuits of literature, require leisure and a total recess from
clearing forests, planting, building, and all the common toils of settling a
new country: But before these arduous works were accomplished, the SCIENCES,
ever fond of the company of liberty and industry, chose this spot for the seat
of their empire in this new world. Our COLLEGE, so catholic in its foundation,
and extensive in its objects, already sees her sons executing offices in the
highest departments of society. I have now the honor of speaking in the
presence of a most respectable number of philosophers, physicians, astronomers,
botanists, patriots, and legislators; many of whom have already seized the
prizes of honor, which their ancestors had allotted to a much later posterity.
Our first offering had scarcely found its way into the temple of same, when the
oldest societies in Europe turned their eyes upon us, expecting with impatience
to see the mighty fabric of science, which like a well built arch, can only
rest upon the whole of its materials, completely finished from the treasures of
this unexplored quarter of the globe.

IT reflects equal honor upon our society and the honorable assembly of our
province, to acknowledge, that we have always found the latter willing to
encourage by their patronage, and reward by their liberality, all our schemes
for promoting useful knowledge. What may we not expect from this harmony
between the sciences and government! Methinks I see canals cut, rivers once
impassable, rendered navigable, bridges erected, and roads improved, to
facilitate the exportation of grain. I see the banks of our rivers vying in
fruitfulness with the banks of the river of Egypt. I behold our farmers,
nobles; our merchants, princes. But I forbear -- Imagination cannot swell with
the subject.

I BEG leave to conclude, by deriving an argument from our connection with the
legislature, to remind my auditors of the duty they owe to the society.
Patriotism and literature are here connected together; and a man cannot neglect
the one, without being destitute of the other. Nature and our ancestors have
completed their works among us; and have left us nothing to do, but to enlarge
and perpetuate our own happiness.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE CLIMATE OF PENNSYLVANIA, AND ITS INFLUENCE UPON THE HUMAN
BODY.
IN order to render the observations upon the epidemic diseases which compose a
part of this volume more useful, it will be necessary to prefix to them a short
account of the climate of Pennsylvania, and its influence upon the human body.
This account may perhaps serve further, to lead to future discoveries, and more
extensive observations, upon this subject.

THE state of Pennsylvania lies between 39 43 25, and 42 north latitude,
including, of course, 2 16 35, equal to 157 miles from its southern to its
northern boundary. The western extremity of the state is in the longitude of 5
23 40, and the eastern, in that of 27 from the meridian of Philadelphia,
comprehending in a due west course 311 miles, exclusive of the territory lately
purchased by Pennsylvania from the United States, of which as yet no accurate
surveys have been obtained. The state is bounded on the south by part of the
state of Delaware, by the whole state of Maryland, and by Virginia to her
western extremity. The last named state, the territory lately ceded to
Connecticut, and Lake Erie, (part of which is included in Pennsylvania) form
the western and northwestern boundaries of the state. Part of New York and the
territory lately ceded to Pennsylvania, with a part of Lake Erie, compose the
northern, and another part of New York, with a large extent of New Jersey
(separated from Pennsylvania by the river Delaware) compose the eastern
boundaries of the state. The lands which form these boundaries (except a part
of the states of Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey) are in a state of nature.
A large tract of the western and north-eastern parts of Pennsylvania are nearly
in the same uncultivated situation.

THE state of Pennsylvania is intersected and diversified with numerous rivers,
and mountains. To describe, or even to name them all, would far exceed the
limits I have proposed to this account of our climate. It will be sufficient
only to remark, that one of these rivers, viz. the Susquehannah, begins at the
northern boundary of the state twelve miles from the river Delaware, and
winding several hundred miles through a variegated country, enters the state of
Maryland on the southern line, fifty-eight miles westward of Philadelphia; that
each of these rivers is supplied by numerous streams of various sizes; that
tides flow in parts of two of them, viz. in the Delaware and Schuylkill; that
the rest rise and fall alternately in wet and dry weather; and that they
descend with great rapidity, over prominent beds of rocks in many places, until
they empty themselves into the bays of Delaware and Chesapeak on the east, and
into the Ohio on the western parts of the state.

THE mountains form a considerable part of the state of Pennsylvania. Many of
them appear to be reserved as perpetual marks of the original empire of nature
in this country. The Allegany, which crosses the state about two hundred miles
from Philadelphia, in a north inclining to an east course, is the most
considerable and extensive of these mountains. It is called by the Indians the
backbone of the continent. Its height in different places is supposed to be
about 1300 feet from the adjacent plains. The author is happy in being able to
inform the public, that a correct view of these mountains and rivers, with
their heights, distances and courses, will be published in a few months by Mr.
Reading Howell, of the city of Philadelphia, in a large map of Pennsylvania.


THE soil of Pennsylvania is diversified by its vicinity to mountains and
rivers. The valleys and bottoms consist of a black mould, which extends from a
foot to four feet in depth. But in general a deep clay forms the surface of the
earth. Immense beds of limestone lie beneath this clay in many parts of the
state. This account of the soil of Pennsylvania is confined wholly to the lands
on the east side of the Allegany mountain. The soil on the west side of this
mountain shall be described in another place.

THE city of Philadelphia lies in the latitude of 39 57, in longitude 75 8 from
Greenwich, and fifty-five miles west from the Atlantic ocean.

IT is situated about four miles due north from the conflux of the rivers
Delaware and Schuylkill. The buildings, which consist chiefly of brick, extend
nearly three miles north and south along the Delaware, and above half a mile
due west toward the Schuylkill, to which river the limits of the city extend;
the whole including a distance of two miles from the Delaware. The land near
the rivers, between the city and the conflux of the rivers, is in general low,
moist, and subject to be overflowed. The greatest part of it is meadow ground.
The land to the northward and westward, in the vicinity of the city, is high,
and in general well cultivated. Before the year 1778 the ground between the
present improvements of the city, and the river Schuylkill, was covered with
woods. These, together with large tracts of wood to the northward of the city,
were cut down during the winter the British army had possession of
Philadelphia. I shall hereafter mention the influence which the cutting down of
these woods, and the subsequent cultivation of the grounds in the neighborhood
of the city, have had upon the health of its inhabitants.

THE mean height of the ground on which the city stands, is about forty feet
above the river Delaware. One of the longest and most populous streets in the
city, rises only a few feet above the river. The air at the north is much purer
than at the south end of the city; hence the lamps exhibit a fainter flame in
its southern than its northern parts.

THE tide of the Delaware seldom rises more than six feet. It flows four miles
in an hour. Its width near the city is about a mile.

THE city, with the adjoining districts of South-wark and the Northern
Liberties, contain between 40 and 50,000 inhabitants.

FROM the accounts which have been handed down to us by our ancestors, there is
reason to believe that the climate of Pennsylvania has undergone a material
change. Thunder and lightning are less frequent, and the cold of our winters
and heat of our summers are less uniform, than they were forty or fifty years
ago. Nor is this all. The springs are much colder, and the autumns more
temperate than formerly, insomuch that cattle are not housed so soon by one
month as they were in former years. Within the last eight years, there have
been some exceptions to part of these observations. The winter of the year
1779, 80, was uniformly and uncommonly cold. The river Delaware was frozen near
three months during this winter, and public roads for wagons and sleighs
connected the city of Philadelphia in many places with the Jersey shore. The
thickness of the ice in the river near the city, was from sixteen to nineteen
inches, and the depth of the frost in the ground was from four to five feet,
according to the exposure of the ground and the quality of the soil. This
extraordinary depth of the frost in the earth, compared with its depth in more
northern and colder countries, is occasioned by the long delay of snow, which
leaves the earth without a covering during the last autumnal and the first
winter months. Many plants were destroyed by the intenseness of the cold during
this winter. The ears of horned cattle and the feet of hogs exposed to the air,
were frost-bitten; squirrels perished in their holes, and partridges were often
found dead in the neighborhood of farm-houses. The mercury in January stood
for several hours at 5 below 0, in Farenheit's thermometer; and during the
whole of this month, (except on one day) it never rose in the city of
Philadelphia to the freezing point.

THE cold in the winter of the year 1783, 4, was as intense but not so steady,
as it was in the winter that has been described. It differed from it materially
in one particular, viz. there was a thaw in the month of January which opened
all our rivers for a few days.

THE summer which succeeded the winter of 1779, 80, was uniformly warm. The
mercury in the thermometer, during this summer, stood on one day (the 15th of
August) at 95, and fluctuated between 93 and 80 for many weeks. The
thermometer, in every reference that has been, or shall be made to it, stood in
the shade in the open air.

I KNOW it has been said by many old people, that the winters in Pennsylvania
are less cold, and the summers less warm, than they were forty or fifty years
ago. The want of thermometrical observations before and during those years,
renders it difficult to decide this question. Perhaps the difference of
sensation between youth and old age, with respect to heat and cold, may have
laid the foundation of this opinion. I suspect the mean temperature of the air
in Pennsylvania has not altered, but that the principal change in our climate
consists in the heat and cold being less confined than formerly to their
natural seasons. I adopt the opinion of Doctor Williamson American
Philosophical Transactions, vol. I.
respecting the diminution of the cold in the southern, being occasioned by the
cultivation of the northern parts of Europe; but no such cultivation has taken
place in the countries which lie to the north-west of Pennsylvania, nor do the
partial and imperfect improvements which have been made in the north-west parts
of the state, appear to be sufficient to lessen the cold, even in the city of
Philadelphia. I have been able to collect no facts, which dispose me to believe
that the winters were colder before the year 1740, than they have been since.
In the memorable winter of 1739, 40, the Delaware was crossed on the ice in
sleighs on the 5th of March, old style, and did not open till the 13th of the
same month. The ground was covered during this winter with a deep snow, and the
rays of the sun were constantly obscured by a mist, which hung in the upper
regions of the air. In the winter of 1779, 80, the river was navigable on the
4th of March; the depth of the snow was moderate, and the gloominess of the
cold was sometimes suspended for a few days by a cheerful sun. From these
facts, it is probable the winter of 1739, 40, was colder than the winter of
1779, 80.

HAVING premised these general remarks, I proceed to observe, that there are
seldom more than twenty or thirty days in summer or winter in Pennsylvania in
which the mercury rises above 80 in the former, or falls below 30 in the latter
season. Some old people have remarked that the number of extremely cold and
warm days in successive summers and winters, bears an exact proportion to each
other. This was strictly true in the years 1787 and 1788.

THE warmest part of the day in summer is at two, in ordinary, and at three
o'clock in the afternoon in extremely warm weather. From these hours the heat
gradually diminishes till the ensuing morning. The coolest part of the four and
twenty hours is at the break of day. There are seldom more than three or four
nights in a summer, in which the heat of the air is nearly the same as in the
preceding day. After the warmest days, the evenings are generally agreeable,
and often delightful. The higher the mercury rises in the day time, the lower
it falls the succeeding night. The mercury at 80 generally falls to 68, while
it descends, when at 60 only to 56. This disproportion between the temperature
of the day and night, in summer, is always greatest in the month of August. The
dews at this time are heavy in proportion to the coolness of the evening. They
are sometimes so considerable as to wet the clothes; and there are instances in
which marsh-meadows, and even creeks which have been dry during the summer,
have been supplied with their usual waters from no other source than the dews
which have fallen in this month, or in the first weeks of September.

THERE is another circumstance connected with the one just mentioned, which
contributes very much to mitigate the heat of summer, and that is, it seldom
continues more than two or three days without being succeeded with showers of
rain, accompanied sometimes by thunder and lightning, and afterward by a
north-west wind, which produces a coolness in the air that is highly
invigorating and agreeable.

THE warmest weather is generally in the month of July. But intensely warm days
are often felt in May, June, August and September. In the annexed table of the
weather for the year 1787, there is an exception to the first of these remarks.
It shows that the mean heat of August was greater by a few degrees than that of
July.

THE transitions from heat to cold are often very sudden, and sometimes to very
distant degrees. After a day in which the mercury has stood at 86 and even 90,
it sometimes falls in the course of a single night to the 65th, and even to the
60th degree, insomuch that fires have been found necessary the ensuing morning,
especially if the change in the temperature of the air has been accompanied by
rain and a south-east wind. In a summer month in the year 1775, the mercury was
observed to fall 20 in an hour and an half. There are few summers in which
fires are not agreeable during some parts of them. My ingenious friend Mr.
David Rittenhouse, whose talent for accurate observation extends alike to all
subjects, informed me, that he had never passed a summer, during his residence
in the country, without discovering frost in every month of the year, except
July.

THE weather is equally variable in Pennsylvania during the greatest part of
the winter. The mercury fell from 37 to 4 below 0, in four and twenty hours,
between the fourth and fifth of February 1788. In this season nature seems to
play at cross-purposes. Heavy falls of snow are often succeeded in a few days
by a general thaw, which frequently in a short time leaves no vestige of the
snow. The rivers Delaware, Schuylkill and Susquehannah have sometimes been
frozen (so as to bear horses and carriages of all kinds) and thawed so as to be
passable in boats, two or three times in the course of the same winter. The ice
is formed for the most part in a gradual manner, and seldom till it has been
previously chilled by a fall of snow. Sometimes its production is more sudden.
On the 31st of December 1764, the Delaware was completely frozen over between
ten o'clock at night and eight the next morning, so as to bear the weight of a
man. An unusual vapor like a fog was seen to rise from the water, in its
passage from a fluid to a solid state.

THIS account of the variableness of the weather in winter, does not apply to
every part of Pennsylvania. There is a line, about the 41 of the state, beyond
which the winters are steady and regular, insomuch that the earth there is
seldom without a covering of snow during the three winter months. In this line
the climate of Pennsylvania forms a union with the climate of the eastern and
northern states.

THE time in which frost and ice begin to show themselves in the neighborhood
of Philadelphia, is generally about the latter end of October or the beginning
of November. But the intense cold seldom sets in till about the 20th or 25th of
December; hence the common saying, as the day lengthens the cold strengthens.
The coldest weather is commonly in January. The navigation of the river
Delaware, after being frozen, is seldom practicable for large vessels, before
the first week in March.

As in summer there are often days in which fires are agreeable, so there are
sometimes days in winter in which they are disagreeable. Vegetation has been
observed in all the winter months. Garlic was tasted in butter in January 1781.
The leaves of the willow, the blossoms of the peach tree, and the flowers of
the dandelion and the crocus, were all seen in February 1779; and I well
recollect, about thirty-two years ago, to have seen an apple-orchard in full
bloom, and small apples on many of the trees, in the month of December.

A COLD day in winter is often succeeded by a moderate evening. The coldest
part of the four and twenty hours is generally at the break of day.

IN the most intense cold which has been recorded in Philadelphia, within the
last twenty years, the mercury stood at 5 below 0. But it appears from the
accounts published by Messieurs Mason and Dixon, in the 58th volume of the
transactions of the Royal Society of London, that the mercury stood at 22 below
0 on the 2d of January 1767, at Brandywine, about thirty miles to the westward
of Philadelphia. They inform us, that on the first of the same month the
mercury stood at 20, and on the day before at 7 below 0. I have to lament that
I am not able to procure any record of the temperature of the air in the same
year in Philadelphia. From the variety in the height and quality of the soil,
and from the difference in the currents of winds and the quantity of rain and
snow which fall in different parts of the state, it is very probable this
excessive cold may not have extended thirty miles from the place where it was
perceived.

THE greatest degree of heat upon record in Philadelphia, is 95.

THE standard temperature of the air in the city of Philadelphia is 52, which
is the temperature of our deepest wells, as also the mean heat of our common
spring water.

THE spring in Pennsylvania is generally less pleasant, than in many other
countries. In March the weather is stormy, variable and cold. In April, and
sometimes in the beginning of May, it is moist, and accompanied by a degree of
cold which has been called rawness, and which from its disagreeable effects
upon the temper has been called the sirocco of this country. From the variable
nature of the weather in the spring, vegetation advances very differently in
different years. The colder the spring, the more favorable it proves to the
fruits of the earth. The hopes of the farmer from his fruit trees in a warm
spring are often blasted by a frost in April and May. A fall of snow is
remembered with regret by many of them on the night between the third and
fourth of May in the year 1774. The colder the winter, the greater delay we
observe in the return of the ensuing spring.

SOMETIMES the weather during the spring months is cloudy and damp, attended
occasionally with a gentle fall of rain resembling the spray from a cataract of
water. A day of this species of weather is called, from its resemblance to a
damp day in Great Britain, "an English day." This damp weather seldom continues
more than three or four days. The month of May 1786, will long be remembered,
for having furnished a very uncommon instance of the absence of the sun for
fourteen days, and of constant damp or rainy weather.

THE month of June is the only month in the year which resembles a spring month
in the southern countries of Europe. The weather is then generally temperate,
the sky is serene, and the verdure of the country is universal and delightful.

THE autumn is the most agreeable season in the year in Pennsylvania. The cool
evenings and mornings, which generally begin about the first week in September,
are succeeded by a moderate temperature of the air during the day. This species
of weather continues with an increase of cold scarcely perceptible, till the
middle of October, when the autumm is closed by rain, which sometimes falls in
such quantities as to produce destructive freshes in the rivers and creeks, and
sometimes descends in gentle showers, which continue with occasional
interruptions by a few fair days, for two or three weeks. These rains are the
harbingers of the winter, and the Indians have long ago taught the inhabitants
of Pennsylvania, that the degrees of cold during the winter, are in proportion
to the quantity of rain which falls during the autumn I cannot help agreeing
with Mr. Kirwan in one of his remarks upon the science of meteorology in the
preface to his estimate of the temperature of different latitudes. "This
science (says he) if brought to perfection, would enable us at least to foresee
those changes in the weather which we could not prevent. Great as is the
distance between such knowledge, and our own present seize, we have no
reason to think it above the level of the powers of the human mind. The motions
of the planets must have appeared as perplexed and intricate to those who first
contemplated them; yet by persevering industry, they are now known to the
utmost precision. The present is (as the great Leibnitz expresses it) in every
case pregnant with the future, and the connection must be found by long and
attentive observation."

The influence which the perfection of this science must have upon health,
agriculture, navigation and commerce, is too obvious to be mentioned.


.

FROM this account of the temperature of the air in Pennsylvania, it is evident
that there are seldom more than four months in which the weather is agreeable
without a fire.

IN winter, the winds generally come from the north-west in fair, and from the
north-east in wet weather. The north-west winds are uncommonly dry as well as
cold. It is in consequence of the violent action of these winds that trees have
uniformly a thicker and more compact bark on their northern, than on their
southern exposures. Even brick houses are affected by the force and dryness of
these north-west winds: hence it is much more difficult to demolish the
northern than the southern walls of an old brick house. This fact was
communicated to me by an eminent bricklayer in the city of Philadelphia.

THE winds in fair weather in the spring, and in warm weather in the summer,
blow from the south-west and from west-north-west. The raw air before
mentioned, comes from the north-east. The south-west winds likewise usually
bring with them those showers of rain in the spring and summer, which refresh
the earth. They moreover moderate the heat of the weather, provided they are
succeeded by a north-west wind. Now and then showers of rain come from the
west-north-west.

THERE is a common fact connected with the account of the usual winds in
Pennsylvania, which it may not be improper to mention in this place. While the
clouds are seen flying from the south-west, the scud, as it is called, or a
light vapor, is seen at the same time flying below the clouds from the
north-east.

THE moisture of the air is much greater than formerly, occasioned probably by
the exhalations which in former years fell in the form of snow, now descending
in the form of rain. The depth of the snow is sometimes between two and three
feet, but in general it seldom exceeds between six and nine inches.

HAIL frequently descends with snow in winter. Once in four or five years large
and heavy showers of hail fall in the spring and summer. They generally run in
narrow veins (as they are called) of thirty or forty miles in length, and two
or three miles in breadth. The heaviest shower of hail that is remembered in
Philadelphia, did not extend in breadth more than half a mile north and south.
Some of the stones weighed half an ounce. The windows of many houses were
broken by them. This shower fell in May 1783.

FROM sudden changes in the air, rain and snow often fall together, forming
what is commonly called sleet.

IN the uncultivated parts of the state, the snow sometimes lies on the ground
till the first week in April. The backwardness of the spring has been ascribed
to the passage of the air over the undissolved beds of snow and ice which
usually remain, after the winter months are past, on the north-west grounds and
waters of the state, and of the adjacent country.

THE dissolution of the ice and snow in the spring, is sometimes so sudden as
to swell the creeks and rivers in every part of the state to such a degree, as
not only to lay waste the hopes of the husbandman from the produce of his
lands, but in some instances to sweep his barns, stables, and even his dwelling
house into their currents The following account of the thaw of the river
Susquehannah, in the spring of 1784, was published by the author in the
Columbian Magazine for November 1786. It may serve to illustrate a fact related
formerly in the history of the winters in Pennsylvania, as well as to exhibit
an extraordinary instance of the destructive effects of a sudden thaw.

"THE winter of 1783, 4, was uncommonly cold, insomuch that the mercury in
Farenheit's thermometer stood several times at ^ degrees below 0. The snows
were frequent; and, in many places, from two to three feet deep, during the
greatest part of the winter. All the rivers in Pennsylvania were frozen, so as
to bear wagons and sleds with immense weight. In the month of January a thaw
came on suddenly, which opened our rivers so as to set the ice a-driving, to
use the phrase of the country. In the course of one night, during the thaw, the
wind shifted suddenly to the north-west, and the weather became intensely cold.
The ice, which had floated the day before, was suddenly obstructed; and in the
river Susquehannah, the obstructions were formed in those places where the
water was most shallow, or where it had been accustomed to fall. This river is
several hundred miles in length, and from half a mile to a mile and an half in
breadth, and winds through a hilly, and in many places a fertile and highly
cultivated country. It has as yet a most difficult communication with our bays
and the sea, occasioned by the number and height of the falls which occur near
the mouth of the river. The ice in many places, especially where there were
falls, formed a kind of dam, of a most stupendous height. About the middle of
March our weather moderated, and a thaw became general. The effects of it were
remarkable in all our rivers; but in none so much as in the river I have
mentioned. I shall therefore endeavor in a few words to describe them.
Unfortunately the dams of ice did not give way all at once, nor those which lay
nearest to the mouth of the river, first. While the upper dams were set a-float
by the warm weather, the lower ones, which were the largest, and in which, of
course, the ice was most impacted, remained fixed. In consequence of this, the
river rose in a few hours, in many places, above 30 feet; rolling upon its
surface large lumps of ice, from 10 to 40 cubic feet in size. The effects of
this sudden inundation were terrible. Whole farms were laid under water. Barns
-- stables -- horses -- cattle -- fences -- mills of every kind, and in one
instance, a large stone house, 40 by 30 feet, were carried down the stream.
Large trees were torn up by the roots -- several small islands covered with
woods, were swept away, and not a vestige of them was left behind. On the barns
which preserved their shape, in some instances, for many miles were to be seen
living fowls; and, in one dwelling, a candle was seen to burn for some time,
after it was swept from its foundation. Where the shore was level, the lumps of
ice, and the ruins of houses and farms, were thrown a quarter of a mile from
the ordinary height of the river. In some instances, farms were ruined by the
mould being swept from them by the cakes of ice, or by depositions of sand;
while others were enriched by large depositions of mud. The damage, upon the
whole, done to the state of Pennsylvania by this fresh, was very great. In most
places it happened in the day time, or the consequences must have been fatal to
many thousands.

"I know of but one use that can be derived from recording the history of this
inundation. In case of similiar obstructions of rivers, from causes such as
have been described, the terrible effects of their being set in motion by means
of a general thaw, may in part be obviated, by removing such things out of the
course of the water and ice, as are within our power; particularly cattle, hay,
grain, fences, and farming utensils of all kinds."


. The wind during a general thaw, comes from the south-west or south-east.

THE air, when dry in Pennsylvania, has a peculiar elasticity, which renders
the heat and cold less insupportable than the same degrees of both are in
moister countries. It is in those cases only when summer showers are not
succeeded by north-west winds, that the heat of the air becomes oppressive and
distressing, from being combined with moisture.

FROM tradition, as well as living observation, it is evident, that the waters
in many of the creeks in Pennsylvania have diminished considerably within the
last fifty years. Hence many mills, erected upon large and deep streams of
water, now stand idle in dry weather; and many creeks, once navigable in large
boats, are now impassable, even in canoes. This diminution of the waters has
been ascribed to the application of a part of them to the purpose of making
meadows.

THE mean elevation of the barometer in Philadelphia, is about 30 inches. The
variations in the barometer are very inconsiderable in the greatest changes of
the weather, which occur in the city of Philadelphia. During the violent and
destructive storm which blew from the south-west on the 11th of November 1788,
it suddenly fell from 30 to 29 3/10. Mr. Rittenhouse informs me, that long and
faithful observations have satisfied him, that the alterations in the height of
the mercury in the barometer do not precede but always succeed changes in the
weather. It falls with the south and south-west, and rises with the north and
north-west winds.

THE quantity of water which falls in rain and snow, one year with another,
amounts to from 24 to 36 inches. But to complete the account of variable
qualities in the climate, it will be necessary to add, that our summers and
autumns are sometimes marked by a deficiency, or by an excessive quantity of
rain. The summer and autumn of 1782 were uncommonly dry, Near two months
elapsed without a single shower of rain. There were only two showers in the
whole months of September and October. In consequence of this dry weather,
there was no second crop of hay. The Indian corn failed of its increase in many
places, and was cut down for food for cattle. Trees newly planted, died. The
pasture fields not only lost their verdure, but threw up small clouds of dust
when agitated by the feet of men, or beasts. Cattle in some instances were
driven many miles to be watered, every morning and evening It was remarked
during this dry weather, that the sheep were uncommonly fat, and their flesh
well tasted, while all the other domestic animals languished from the want of
grass and water.
. The earth became so inflammable in some places, as to burn above a foot below
its surface. A complete consumption of the turf by an accidental fire kindled
in the adjoining state of New Jersey, spread terror and distress through a
large tract of country. Crabs which never forsake salt or brackish water, were
caught more than a mile above the city of Philadelphia, in the river Delaware,
which is 60 miles above the places in which they are usually found. Springs of
water and large creeks were dried up in many parts of the state. Rocks appeared
in the river Schuylkill which had never been observed before, by the oldest
persons then alive. On one of them were cut the figures 1701. The atmosphere,
during part of this dry weather, was often filled, especially in the mornings,
with a thin mist A similar mist was observed in France by Doctor Franklin, in
the summer of 1782. The winter which succeeded it, was uncommonly cold in
France, as well as in Pennsylvania.
, which while it deceived with the expectation of rain, served the valuable
purpose of abating the heat of the sun. I am sorry that I am not able to
furnish the mean heat of each of the summer months. My notes of the weather
enable me to add nothing further upon this subject, than that the summer was
"uncommonly cool."

THE summer of the year 1788 afforded a remarkable instance of excess in the
quantity of rain, which sometimes falls in Pennsylvania. Thirteen days are
marked with rain in July in the records of the weather kept at Spring-Mill.
There fell on the 18th and 19th of August seven inches of rain in the city of
Philadelphia. The wheat suffered greatly by the constant rains of July in the
eastern and middle parts of the state. So unproductive a harvest in grain, from
wet weather, had not been known, it is said, in the course of the last 70
years. The heat of the air during these summer months was very moderate. Its
mean temperature at Spring-Mill was 67, 8 in June, 74, 7 in July, and only 70,
6 in August.

IT is some consolation to a citizen of Pennsylvania, in recording facts which
seem to militate against our climate, to reflect, that the difference of the
weather in different parts of the state at the same season, is happily
accommodated to promote an increase of the same objects of agriculture; and
hence a deficiency of crops has never been known in any one year throughout the
whole state.

THE aurora borealis and meteors are seen occasionally in Pennsylvania. In the
present imperfect state of our knowledge of their influence upon the human
body, it will be foreign to the design of this history of our climate to
describe them.

STORMS and hurricanes are not unknown in Pennsylvania. They occur once in four
or five years, but they are most frequent and destructive in the autumn. They
are generally accompanied by rain. Trees are torn up by the roots, and the
rivers and creeks are sometimes swelled so suddenly as to do considerable
damage to the adjoining farms. The wind, during these storms, generally blows
from the south-east and south-west. In the storms which occurred in September
1769, and in the same month of the year 1785, the wind veered round contrary to
its usual course, and blew from the north.

AFTER what has been said, the character of the climate of Pennsylvania may be
summed up in a few words. There are no two successive years alike. Even the
same successive seasons and months differ from each other every year. Perhaps
there is but one steady trait in the character of our climate, and that is, it
is uniformly variable.

TO furnish the reader with a succinct view of the weather in Pennsylvania,
that includes all the article that have been mentioned, I shall here subjoin a
table containing the result of meteorological observations made near the river
Schuylkill, for one year, in the neighborhood of Philadelphia, by an ingenious
French gentleman Mr. Legeaux.
, who divides his time between rural employments and useful philosophical
pursuits. This table is extracted from the Columbian magazine for February
1788. The height of Spring-Mill above the city of Philadelphia, is supposed to
be about 70 feet.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, made at SPRING-MILL, 13 Miles NNW of
Philadelphia. Result of the Year 1787.
MONTH. THERMOMETER. BAROMETER. PREVAILING WIND. DAYS WATER of RAIN and SNOW,
WEATHER. of Farenheit, mean degree de Reaumur, degres moyens mean height of
aur. boreal. of rain. of thunder. of snow. of tempest. D. 1/10 O D. 1/10 O in.
pts. 1/10 in. pts. 1/16 January 35 1 1 4 29 9 9 Variable still. 7 1 4 3 10 10
Fair, still, cold, and snow. February 33 8 8 29 9 9 NE 3 3 2 3 7 3 Fair,
overcast. March 45 1 5 8 29 9 7 W 6 3 2 4 2 Fair, windy. April 54 3 9 9 29 9 6
Still, SW 3 2 1 2 1 2 13 Fair, and very dry. May 61 2 13 29 9 2 Still, WSW 1 14
6 2 4 11 4 Foggy, cold and wet. June 70 7 17 2 29 8 2 WNW 9 1 1 10 4 Very fair
and growing weather. July 72 2 17 9 29 9 10 W. WSW vari. 1 5 2 3 1 11 Fair and
overcast. August 74 5 18 9 29 10 6 W 11 4 1 5 2 3 Very fair and cloudy.
September 64 7 14 5 29 10 4 WNW 6 1 1 2 7 8 Fair weather. October 51 1 8 5 29
11 9 WNW variable 1 4 7 10 Foggy, fair and dry weather. November 45 1 5 8 29 11
1 Still, variable 1 5 2 6 10 Very fair. December 34 0 29 7 7 WNW 1 1 9 Very
fair and very dry. RESULT. 10 Feb. greatest D. of cold. 10 Feb. D. du plus gr.
froid. 8 Mar. greatest elevation. WNW 4 73 17 12 9 32 8 14 TEMPERATURE OF THE
YEAR 1787, Very fair, dry, abundant in every thing, and healthy. 5 12 0 30 10 3
July greatest D. of heat. 3 July plus G. D. de chaud. 2 Febr. least elevation.
96 1 28 5 29 Variation. Variation. Variation. 91 1 40 5 1 10 Temperature.
Temperature. Mean elevat. 53 5 9 6 29 9 9

IT is worthy of notice, how near the mean heat of the year, and of the month
of April, in two successive years, are to each other in the same place. The
mean heat of April 1787 was 54 3, that of April 1788 was 52 2. By the table of
the mean heat of each month in the year, it appears that the mean heat of 1787
was 53 5 at Spring-Mill.

THE following accounts of the climates of Pekin and Madrid, which lie within a
few minutes of the same latitude as Philadelphia, may serve to show how much
climates are altered by local and relative circumstances. The account of the
temperature of the air at Pekin, will serve further to show, that with all the
advantages of the highest degrees of cultivation which have taken place in
China, the winters are colder, and the summers warmer there than in
Pennsylvania, principally from a cause which will probably operate upon the
winters of Pennsylvania for many centuries to come, viz. the vicinity of an
uncultivated north-west country.

"PEKIN, lat. 39 54, long. 116 29 W.

"BY five years observations its annual mean temperature was found to be 55, 5.

January 20, 75 February 32 March 48 April 59 May 72 June 83, 75 July 84, 8
August 83 September 63 October 52 November 41 December 27
"THE temperature of the Atlantic under this parallel is 62, but the standard
of this part of the globe is the North Pacific, which is here 4 or 5 degrees
colder than the Atlantic. The Yellow Sea is the nearest to Pekin, being about
200 miles distant from it; but it is itself cooled by the mountainous country
of Corea, which interposes between it and the ocean, for a considerable part of
its extent. Besides, all the northern parts of China (in which Pekin lies) must
be cooled by the vicinity of the mountains of Chinese Tartary, among which the
cold is said to be excessive.

"THE greatest cold usually experienced during this period, was 5, the greatest
heat, 98: on the 25th of July 1773, the heat arose to 108 and 110; a N. E. or
N. W. wind produces the greatest cold, a S. or S. W. or S. E. the greatest heat
"6 Mem. Scav. Etrang. p 528."
.

"MADRID, lat. 40 25 long. 3 20 E.

"THE usual heat in summer is said to be from 75 to 85; even at night it seldom
falls below 70; the mean height of the barometer is 27,96. It seems to be about
1900 feet above the level of the sea "Mem. Par. 1777, p. 146."
."

THE above accounts are extracted from Mr. Kirwan's useful and elaborate
estimate of the temperature of different latitudes.

THE history which has been given of the climate of Pennsylvania, is confined
chiefly to the country on the east side of the Allegany mountain. On the west
side of this mountain, the climate differs materially from that of the
south-eastern parts of the state in the temperature of the air, in the effects
of the winds upon the and in the quantity of rain and snow, which falls every
year. The winter seldom breaks up on the mountains before the 25th of March. A
fall of snow was once perceived upon it, which measured an inch and an half on
the 11th day of June. The trees which grow upon it are small, and Indian corn
is with difficulty brought to maturity even at the foot of the east side of it.
The south-west winds on the west side of the mountain are accompanied by cold
and rain. The soil is rich, consisting of near a foot in many places of black
mould. The roads in this country are muddy in winter, but seldom dusty in
summer. The arrangement of the strata of the earth on the west side, differs
materially from their arrangement on the east side of the mountain. The
country, (says Mr. Rittenhouse in a letter to a friend in Philadelphia
Columbian Magazine for October 1786.
) when viewed from the western ridge of the Allegany, appears to be one vast,
extended plain. All the various strata of stone seem to lie undisturbed in the
situation in which they were first formed, and the layers of stone, sand, clay,
and coal, are nearly horizontal.

THE temperature of the air on the west is seldom so hot, or so cold, as on the
east side of the mountain. By comparing the state of a thermometer examined by
Doctor Bedford at Pittsburgh, 284 miles from Philadelphia, it appears that the
weather was not so cold by twelve degrees in that town, as it was in
Philadelphia, on the 5th of February 1788.

TO show the difference between the weather at Spring-Mill and in Pittsburgh, I
shall here subjoin an account of it, in both places, the first taken by Mr.
Legeaux, and the other by Doctor Bedford. This account is unfortunately
confined only to the first fifteen days in April 1788; but it affords a good
specimen of the difference of the weather, on the two sides of the mountain, in
every month of the year. It is remarkable that in five days out of seven, the
rain which fell, was on the same days in both places.

METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, made at SPRING-MILL, 13 Miles NNW of
Philadelphia. Month of April, 1788. D. of the month. THERMOMETER. BAROMETER.
PREVAILING WIND. DAYS WATER of RAIN and SNOW, WEATHER. of Farenheit, mean
degree de Reaumur, degres moyens mean height of aur. boreal. of rain. of
thunder. of snow. of tempest. D. 1/10 O D. 1/10 O in. pts. 1/10 in. pts. 1/16 1
58 1 11 6 29 10 5 W Overcast, fair. 2 46 9 6 6 30 1 Calm. Overcast and windy. 3
40 3 3 7 30 3 Changeable. 1 1 15 Overcast, rainy. 4 51 3 8 6 29 11 7 SW
Overcast. 5 51 1 8 5 30 7 E Overcast, fair. 6 55 7 10 5 29 11 7 Calm. 1 1 3
Overcast, rainy. 7 51 3 8 6 30 2 N E 1 2 7 Overcast, rainy. 8 42 1 4 5 29 11 E
1 1 4 Rainy. 9 63 5 14 29 8 W Overcast, windy. 10 46 7 6 5 29 10 W Fair. 11 53
8 9 7 30 2 W Very fair. 12 44 5 5 5 29 10 Calm. 1 1 11 Overcast, rainy. 13 60 5
12 7 29 10 3 S W Very fair. 14 50 2 8 1 29 9 E 1 1 14 Fair, overcast, rainy. 15
58 1 11 6 29 7 7 S W 1 2 13 Foggy, rainy. METEOROLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS, made at
PITTSBURGH, 284 Miles from Philadelphia. Month of April, 1788. 1 46 S W 1
Cloudy. 2 42 N E b N Clear. 3 43 S E 1 Cloudy. 4 64 Calm. Clear. 5 80 S E b S 1
1 Cloudy. 6 52 S W 1 Cloudy. 7 48 N E b N Cloudy. 8 66 S E b S 1 1 Cloudy. 9 56
N W b N Cloudy. 10 60 S W Cloudy, with wind. 11 62 Calm. Clear. 12 67 S W
Cloudy, with wind. 13 (...) Calm. Clear.

FROM a review of all the facts which have been mentioned, it appears that the
climate of Pennsylvania is a compound of most of the climates in the world.
Here we have the moisture of Britain in the spring, the heat of Africa in
summer, the temperature of Italy in June, the sky of Egypt in the autumn, the
cold and snows of Norway, and the ice of Holland in the winter, the tempests
(in a certain degree) of the West Indies in every season, and the variable
winds and weather of Great Britain in every month of the year.

FROM this history of the climate of Pennsylvania, it is easy to ascertain what
degrees of health, and what diseases prevail in the state. As we have the
climates, so we have the health, and the acute diseases, of all the countries
that have been mentioned. Without attempting to enumerate the diseases, I shall
only add a few words upon the time and manner in which they are produced.

I. IT appears from the testimonies of many aged persons, that pleurisies and
inflammatory disorders of all kinds, are less frequent now than they were forty
and fifty years ago.

II. IT is a well known fact, that intermitting and bilious fevers have
increased in Pennsylvania in proportion as the country has been cleared of its
wood, in many parts of the state.

III. IT is equally certain that these fevers have lessened, or disappeared, in
proportion as the country has been cultivated.

IV. HEAVY rains and freshes in the spring seldom produce fevers, unless they
are succeeded by unseasonably warm weather.

V. HEAVY rains, or frost, in the autumn, alike check the progress of fevers in
Pennsylvania.

VI. THE same state of the atmosphere, whether cold or warm, moist or dry,
continued for a long time without any material changes, is always healthy.
Acute and inflammatory fevers were in vain looked for in the cold winter of
1779, 80. The dry summer of 1782, and the wet summer of 1788, were likewise
uncommonly healthy in the city of Philadelphia. These facts extend only to
those diseases which depend upon the sensible qualities of the air. Diseases
from miasmata and contagion, are less influenced by the uniformity of the
weather. The autumn of 1780 was very sickly in Philadelphia, from the peculiar
situation of the grounds in the neighborhood of the city, while the country
was uncommonly healthy. The dry summer and autumn of 1782 were uncommonly
sickly in the country, from the extensive sources of morbid exhalations which
were left by the diminution of the waters in the creeks and rivers. The city of
Philadelphia owed its peculiar healthiness during these two seasons, to its
being nearly surrounded by tide water.

VII. DISEASES are often generated in one season and produced in another. Hence
we frequently observe fevers of different kinds to follow every species of the
weather that was mentioned in the last observation.

VIII. THE fevers which accompany, or follow a warm summer, are bilious and
remitting. In proportion as the cool weather advances, they put on the type of
Doctor Cullen's typhus mitior. After a very cold winter, I have twice seen
pleurisies in the spring, accompanied by the symptoms of the bilious fever. In
one of those epidemics, the pulse, on the fifth day, in several cases, became
irregular, and stopped after every third or fourth stroke. This complication of
typhus with synocha, is not peculiar to Pennsylvania. I have been informed that
fevers of even a putrid kind frequently succeed long and cold winters in Russia
and Sweden. They have been ascribed, by a Russian physician, to extreme cold
producing the same sedative effects as extreme heat upon the human body.

IX. THE excessive heat in Pennsylvania has sometimes proved fatal to persons
who have been much exposed to it. Its morbid effects discover themselves by a
difficulty of breathing, a general langour, and in some instances, by a
numbness and an immobility of the extremities. The excessive cold in
Pennsylvania has more frequently proved fatal, but it has been chiefly to those
persons who have sought a defense from it, by large draughts of spirituous
liquors. Its operation in bringing on sleepiness previous to death, is well
known. On the 5th of February 1788, many people were affected by the cold. It
produced a pain in the head; and in one instance, a sickness at the stomach,
and a vomiting appeared to be the consequence of it. I have frequently observed
that a greater number of old people die, during the continuance of extreme
cold, and warm weather, than in the same number of days, in moderate weather.

X. MAY and June are usually the healthiest months in the year.

XI. THE influence of the winds upon health, depends very much upon the nature
of the country over which they pass. Winds which pass over mill-dams and
marshes in August and September, generally carry with them the seeds of fevers.

XII. THE country in the neighborhood of Philadelphia is much more sickly than
the central parts of the city, after the 20th of August.

XIII. THE night-air is always unwholesome from the 20th of August, especially
during the passive state of the system in sleep. The frequent and sudden
changes of the air from heat to cold, (exclusive of its insensible qualities)
render it unsafe at any time to sleep with open windows.

XIV. PHILADELPHIA became unusually sickly after the year 1778, during the late
war, in consequence of the meadows being overflowed to the southward of the
city, and of the cutting down of the trees by the British army, which formerly
sheltered the city from the exhalations of the grounds to the north and
north-west. From the repairs of the banks of the meadows, which exclude tides
and freshes; from the cultivation of the grounds to the westward of the city,
which were formerly covered with filth, or with stagnating waters; and lastly,
from the more regular cleaning of the streets, and the enclosure of a large and
offensive canal which crossed two of the principal streets near the center of
the city, Philadelphia, from having been formerly the most sickly, has become
one of the healthiest cities in the United States.

XV. VALETUDINARIANS always enjoy the most health in Pennsylvania in the summer
and winter months. The spring, in a particular manner, is very unfavourable to
them.

I SHALL conclude the account of the influence of the climate of Pennsylvania
upon the human body, with the following observations.

1. THE sensations of heat and cold are influenced so much by outward
circumstances, that we often mistake the degrees of them, by neglecting to use
such conveniences as are calculated to obviate the effects of their excess. A
native of Jamaica often complains less of the heat, and a native of Canada of
the cold, in their respective countries, than they do under certain
circumstances in Pennsylvania. Even a Pennsylvanian frequently complains less
of the heat in Jamaica, and of the cold in Canada, than in his native state.
The reason of this is plain. In countries where heat and cold are intense and
regular, the inhabitants guard themselves by accommodating their houses and
dresses to each of them. The instability and short duration of excessive heat
and cold in Pennsylvania, have unfortunately led its inhabitants, in many
instances, to neglect adopting customs, which are used in hot and cold
countries to guard against them. Where houses are built with a southern or
south-western front exposure, and where other accommodations to the climate are
observed in their construction, the disagreeable excesses of heat and cold are
rendered much less perceptible in Pennsylvania. Perhaps the application of the
principles of philosophy and taste to the construction of our houses within the
last thirty or forty years, may be another reason why some old people have
supposed that the degrees of heat and cold are less in Pennsylvania than they
were in former years.

2. THE number, height, and vegetable productions of the mountains in
Pennsylvania, afford a favorable prognosis of the future healthiness of the
state. Exclusive of the beneficial effects of these mountains in producing
salutary winds, and gentle rains, they will serve as a perpetual and
inexhaustible storehouse of that pure species of air, which has of late been
proved to constitute the vital part of common air.

3. THE variable nature of the climate of Pennsylvania does not render it
necessarily unhealthy. Doctor Huxham has taught us, that the healthiest seasons
in Great Britain have often been accompanied by the most variable weather. His
words upon this subject convey a reason for the fact. When the constitutions of
the year are frequently changing, so that by the contrast, a sort of
equilibrium is kept up, and health with it; and that especially if persons are
careful to guard themselves well against these sudden changes Observations on
the air and epidemic diseases, vol. I. p. 5.
. Perhaps no climate or country is unhealthy, where men acquire from
experience, or tradition, the arts of accommodating themselves to it. The
history of all the nations in the world, whether savage, barbarous, or
civilized, previous to a mixture of their manners by an intercourse with
strangers, seems to favor this opinion. The climate of China appears, in many
particulars, to resemble that of Pennsylvania. The Chinese wear loose garments
of different lengths, and increase or diminish the number of them, according to
the frequent and sudden changes of their weather; hence they have very few
acute diseases amongst them. Those inhabitants of Pennsylvania who have
acquired the arts of conforming to the changes and extremes of our weather in
dress, diet, and manners, escape most of those acute diseases which are
occasioned by the sensible qualities of the air; and faithful inquiries and
observations have proved, that they attain to as great ages as the same number
of people in any part of the world.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Bilious Remitting Fever, AS IT APPEARED IN PHILADELPHIA, IN
THE SUMMER AND AUTUMN OF THE YEAR 1780.
BEFORE I proceed to describe this fever, it will be necessary to give a short
account of the weather, and of the diseases which preceded it.

THE spring of 1780 was dry and cool. A catarrh appeared among children between
one year and seven years of age. It was accompanied by a defluxion from the
eyes and nose, and by a cough and dyspnoea, resembling, in some instances, the
cynanche trachealis, and in others, a peripneumony. In some cases it was
complicated with the symptoms of a bilious remitting, and intermitting fever.
The exacerbations of this fever were always attended by dyspnoea and cough. A
few patients expectorated blood. Some had swellings behind the ears, and others
were affected with small ulcers in the throat. I met with only one case of this
fever in which the pulse indicated bleeding. The rest yielded in a few days to
emetics, blisters, and the bark, assisted by the usual more simple remedies in
such disorders.

AN intermittent prevailed among adults in the month of May.

JULY and August were uncommonly warm. The mercury stood on the 6th of August
at 94 1/2, on the 15th of the same month at 95, and for several days afterward
at 90. Many laboring people perished during this month by the heat, and by
drinking, not only cold water, but cold liquors of several kinds, while they
were under the violent impressions of the heat.

THE vomiting and purging prevailed universally, during these two warm months,
among the children, and with uncommon degrees of mortality. Children from one
year to eight and nine years old were likewise very generally affected by
blotches and little boils, especially in their faces. An eruption on the skin,
called by the common people the prickly heat, was very common at this time
among persons of all ages. The winds during these months blew chiefly from the
south, and south-west. Of course they passed over the land which lies between
the city, and the conflux of the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill, the peculiar
situation of which, at that time, has been already described.

THE dock, and the streets of Philadelphia, supplied the winds at this season,
likewise, with a portion of their unwholesome exhalations The masquitoes were
uncommonly numerous during the autumn. A certain sign says Dr. Lind) of an
unwholesome atmosphere.
.

THE remitting fever made its first appearance in July and August, but its
symptoms were so mild, and its extent so confined, that it excited no
apprehensions of its subsequent more general prevalence throughout the city.

ON the 19th of August the air became suddenly very cool. Many hundred people
in the city complained, the next day, of different degrees of indisposition,
from a sense of lassitude, to a fever of the remitting type. This was the
signal of the epidemic. The weather continued cool during the remaining part of
the month, and during the whole month of September. From the exposure of the
district of Southwark (which is often distinguished by the name of the Hill) to
the south-west winds, the fever made its first appearance in that appendage of
the city. Scarcely a family, and in many families, scarcely a member of them,
escaped it. From the Hill it gradually traveled along the Second-street from
the Delaware, improperly called Front-street. For a while it was confined to
this street only, after it entered the city, and hence it was called by some
people the Front-street fever. It gradually spread through other parts of the
city, but with very different degrees of violence. It prevailed but little in
the Northern Liberties. It was scarcely known beyond Fourth-street from the
Delaware. Intemperance in eating or drinking, riding in the sun or rain,
watching, fatigue, or even a fright, but more frequently cold, all served to
excite the seeds of this fever into action, wherever they existed.

ALL ages, and both sexes were affected by this fever. Seven of the
practitioners of physic were confined by it nearly at the same time. The city,
during the prevalence of the fever, was filled with an unusual number of
strangers, many of whom, particularly of the Friends (whose yearly meeting was
held in the month of September) were affected by it.

THIS fever generally came on with rigor, but seldom with a regular chilly fit,
and often without any sensation of cold. In some persons it was introduced by a
slight sore throat, and in others, by a hoarseness which was mistaken for a
common cold. A giddiness in the head was the forerunner of the disease in some
people. This giddiness attacked so suddenly, as to produce, in several
instances, a faintiness, and even symptoms of apoplexy. It was remarkable that
all those persons who were affected in this violent manner, recovered in two or
three days.

I MET with one instance of this fever attacking with coma, and another with
convulsions, and with many instances in which it was introduced by a delirium.

THE pains which accompanied this fever were exquisitely severe in the head,
back, and limbs. The pains in the head were sometimes in the back parts of it,
and at other times they occupied only the eyeballs. In some people, the pains
were so acute in their backs and hips, that they could not lie in bed. In
others, the pains affected the neck and arms, so as to produce in one instance
a difficulty of moving the fingers of the right hand. They all complained more
or less of a soreness in the seats of these pains, particularly when they
occupied the head and eyeballs. A few complained of their flesh being sore to
the touch, in every part of the body. From these circumstances, the disease was
sometimes believed to be a rheumatism. But its more general name among all
classes of people was, the Break-bone fever.

I MET with one case of pain in the back, and another of an acute ear-ach, both
of which returned periodically every night, and without any fever.

A NAUSEA universally, and in some instances, a vomiting, accompanied by a
disagreeable taste in the mouth, attended this fever. The bowels were, in most
cases, regular, except where the disease fell with its whole force upon them,
producing a symptomatic dysentery A symptomatic dysentery frequently
accompanies the autumnal fevers in Pennsylvania. In the hilly parts of the
state, it has been remarked that it prevails chiefly on the high grounds; while
the remitting or intermitting fevers prevail in the neighborhood below them.
.

THE tongue was generally moist, and tinctured of a yellow color.

THE urine was high colored, and in its usual quantity in fevers.

THE skin was generally moist, especially where the disease terminated on the
third or fourth day.

THE pulse was quick and full, but never hard in a single patient that came
under my care, till the 28th of September.

IT was remarkable, that little, and in some instances, no thirst attended this
fever.

A SCREATUS, or constant hawking and spitting, attended in many cases through
the whole disease, and was a favorable symptom.

THERE were generally remissions in this fever every morning, and sometimes in
the evening. The exacerbations were more severe every other day, and two
exacerbations were often observed in one day.

A RASH often appeared on the third and fourth days, which proved favorable.
This rash was accompanied in some cases by a burning in the palms of the hands
and soles of the feet. Many people at this time, who were not confined to their
beds, and some, who had no fever, had an efflorescence on their skins.

IN several persons the force of the disease seemed to fall upon the face,
producing swellings under the jaw and in the ears, which in some instances
terminated in abscesses.

WHEN the fever did not terminate on the third or fourth day, it frequently ran
on to the eleventh, fourteenth, and even twentieth days, assuming in its
progress, according to its duration, the usual symptoms of the typhus gravior,
or mitior, of Doctor Cullen. In some cases, the discharge of a few spoonfuls of
blood from the nose accompanied a solution of the fever on the third or fourth
day; while in others, a profuse haemorrhage from the nose, mouth, and bowels,
on the tenth and eleventh days, preceded a fatal issue of the disease.

SEVERAL cases came under my care, in which the fever was succeeded by a
jaundice.

THE disease terminated in some cases without sweating, or a sediment in the
urine; nor did I find such patients more disposed to relapse than others,
provided they took a sufficient quantity of the bark.

ABOUT the beginning of October the weather became cool, accompanied by rain
and an easterly wind. This cool and wet weather continued for four days. The
mercury in the thermometer fell to 60, and fires became agreeable. From this
time the fever evidently declined, or was accompanied with inflammatory
symptoms. On the 16th of October, I met with a case of inflammatory angina; and
on the next day I visited a patient who had a complication of the bilious fever
with a pleurisy, and whose blood discovered strong marks of the presence of the
inflammatory diathesis. His stools were of a green and black color. On the
third day of his disorder the rash appeared on his skin, and on the fourth, in
consequence of a second bleeding, his fever terminated with the common symptoms
of a crisis.

DURING the latter end of October, and the first weeks in November, the mercury
in the thermometer fluctuated between 50 and 60. Pleurisies and inflammatory
diseases of all kinds now made their appearance. They were more numerous and
more acute, than in this stage of the autumn, in former years. I met with one
case of pleurisy in November, which did not yield to less than four plentiful
bleedings.

I SHALL now add a short account of the METHOD I pursued in the treatment of
this fever.

I GENERALLY began by giving a gentle vomit of tartar emetic. This medicine, if
given while the fever was in its forming state, frequently produced an
immediate cure; and if given after its formation, on the first day, seldom
sailed of producing a crisis on the third or fourth day. The vomit always
discharged more or less bile. If a nausea, or an ineffectual attempt to vomit
continued after the exhibition of the tartar emetic, I gave a second dose of
it, with the happiest effects.

IF the vomit failed of opening the bowels, I gave gentle doses of salts and
cream of tartar I have always found that cream of tartar renders the purging
neutral salts less disagreeable to the taste and stomach; but accident has
lately taught me, that the juice of two limes or of one lemon, with about half
an ounce of loaf sugar added to six drachms of glauber or epsom salt, in half a
pint of boiling water, from a mixture that is nearly as pleasant as strong
beveridge.
, or of the butter-nut pill This pill is made from an extract of a strong
decoction of the inner bark of the white walnut-tree.
, so as to procure two or three plentiful stools. The matter discharged from
the bowels was of a highly bilious nature. It was sometimes so acrid as to
excoriate the rectum, and so offensive, as to occasion, in some cases, sickness
and faintiness both in the patients and in their attendants. In every instance
the patients found relief by these evacuations, especially from the pains in
the head and limbs.

IN those cases, where the prejudices of the patients against an emetic, or
where an advanced state of pregnancy, or an habitual predisposition to
hoematemesis occurred, I discharged the bile entirely by means of the lenient
purges that have been mentioned. In this practice I had the example of Doctor
Cleghorn, who prescribed purges with great success in a fever of the same
species in Minorca, with that which has been described The (...) interpo^^ta
remissione tantum, of Dr. Cullen.
. Doctor Lining prescribed purges with equal success in an autumnal pleurisy in
South Carolina, which I take to be a species of a bilious remittent,
accompanied by an inflammatory affection of the breast.

AFTER evacuating the contents of the stomach and bowels, I gave small doses of
tartar emetic mixed with Glauber's salt. This medicine excited a general
perspiration. It likewise kept the bowels gently open, by which means the bile
was discharged as fast as it was accumulated.

I CONSTANTLY recommended to my patients, in this stage of the disorder, to lie
in bed. This favored the eruption of the rash, and the solution of the disease
by perspiration. Persons who struggled against the fever by sitting up, or who
attempted to shake it off by labor or exercise, either sunk under it, or had a
slow recovery.

A CLERGYMAN of a respectable character from the country, who was attacked by
the disease in the city, returned home, from a desire of being attended by his
own family, and died in a few days afterward. This is only one, of many cases,
in which I have observed traveling, even in the easiest carriages, to prove
fatal in fevers after they were formed, or after the first symptoms had shown
themselves. The quickest and most effectual way of conquering a fever, in most
cases, is, by an early submission to it.

THE drinks I recommended to my patients were sage and baum teas, apple That
apple-water is most agreeable which is made by pouring boiling water upon
slices of raw apples. It is more lively than that which is made by pouring the
water on roasted apples.
and tamarind water, weak punch, lemonade, and wine whey.

I FOUND obvious advantages in many cases, from the use of pediluvia, every
night.

IN every case, I found my patients refreshed and relieved, by frequent changes
of their linen.

ON the third or fourth day, in the forenoon; the pains in the head and back
generally abated, with a sweat which was diffused over the whole body. The
pulse at this time remained quick and weak. This was, however, no objection to
the use of the bark, a few doses of which immediately abated its quickness, and
prevented a return of the fever.

IF the fever continued beyond the third or fourth day without an intermission,
I always had recourse to blisters. Those which were applied to the neck, and
behind the ears, produced the most immediate good effects. They seldom failed
of producing an intermission in the fever, the day after they were applied.
Where delirium or coma attended, I applied the blister to the neck on the first
day of the disorder. A worthy family in this city will always ascribe the life
of a promising boy of ten years old, to the early application of a blister to
the neck, in this fever.

WHERE the fever did not yield to blisters, and assumed the symptoms of typhus
gravior or mitior, I gave the medicines usually exhibited in both the species
of that fever.

I TOOK notice in the history of this fever, that it was sometimes accompanied
by the symptoms of a dysentery. Where this disorder appeared, I prescribed
lenient purges and opiates. Where these failed of success, I gave the bark in
the intermissions of the pain in the bowels, and applied blisters to the
wrists. The good effects of these remedies led me to conclude, that the
dysentery was the febris introversa of Doctor Sydenham.

I AM happy in having an opportunity, in this place, of bearing a testimony in
favor of the usefulness of OPIUM in this disorder, after the necessary
evacuations had been made. I yielded, in prescribing it at first, to the
earnest solicitations of my patients for something to give them relief from
their insupportable pains, particularly when they were seated in the eyeballs
and head. Its salutary effects in procuring sweat, and a remission of the
fever, led me to prescribe it afterward in almost every case, and always with
the happiest effects. Those physicians enjoy but little pleasure in practicing
physic, who know not how much of the pain and anguish of fevers, of a certain
kind, may be lessened, by the judicious use of opium.

IN treating of the remedies used in this disorder, I have taken no notice of
blood-letting. Out of several hundred patients whom I visited in this fever, I
did not meet with a single case, before the 27th of September, in which the
state of the pulse indicated this evacuation. It is true, the pulse was full,
but never hard. I acknowledge that I was called to several patients who had
been bled without the advice of a physician, who recovered afterward on the
usual days of the solution of the fever. This can only be ascribed to that
disposition which Doctor Cleghorn attributes to fevers, to preserve their types
under every variety of treatment, as well as constitution. But I am bound to
declare further, that I heard of several cases, in which bleeding was followed
by a fatal termination of the disease.

IN this fever relapses were very frequent, from exposure to the rain, sun, or
night-air, and from an excess in eating or drinking.

THE CONVALESCENCE from this disease was marked with a number of extraordinary
symptoms, which rendered patients the subjects of medical attention for many
days after the pulse became perfectly regular, and after the crisis of the
disease.

A BITTER taste in the mouth, accompanied by a yellow color of the tongue,
continued for near a week.

MOST of those who recovered, complained of nausea and a total want of
appetite. A faintiness, especially upon sitting up in bed, or in a chair,
followed this fever. A weakness in the knees was universal. I met with two
patients, who were most sensible of this weakness in the right knee. An
inflammation in one eye, and in some instances in both eyes, occurred in
several patients after their recovery.

BUT the most remarkable symptom of the convalescence from this fever, was an
uncommon dejection of spirits. I attended two young ladies who shed tears while
they vented their complaints of their sickness and weakness. One of them very
aptly proposed to me, to change the name of the disorder, and to call it, in
its present stage, instead of the Break-bone, the Break-heart fever.

TO remove these symptoms, I gave the tincture of bark and elixir of vitriol in
frequent doses. I likewise recommended the plentiful use of ripe fruits; but I
saw the best effects from temperate meals of oysters, and a liberal use of
porter. To these (...) added, gentle exercise in the open air, which gradually
completed the cure.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Scarlatina Anginosa, AS IT APPEARED IN PHILADELPHIA, IN THE
YEARS 1783 AND 1784.
THE beginning of the month of July was unusually cool; insomuch that the
mercury in Farenheit's thermometer stood at 61 in the day time, and fires were
very comfortable, especially in the evening. In the last week but one, of this
month, the weather suddenly became so warm, that the mercury rose to 94 1/2, at
which it remained for three days. As this heat was accompanied by no breeze
from any quarter, the sense of it was extremely distressing to many people.
Upwards of twenty persons died in the course of these three days, from the
excess of the heat, and from drinking cold water. Three old people died
suddenly within this space of time. This extreme heat was succeeded by cool
weather, the mercury having fallen to 63, and the month closed with producing a
few intermitting and remitting fevers, together with several cases of
inflammatory angina.

THE weather in the month of August was extremely variable. The mercury, after
standing for several days at 92, suddenly fell so low, as not only to render
fires necessary, but in many places, to produce frost.

EVERY genus of fever made its appearance in this month. The synocha was so
acute, in several cases, as to require from three to four bleedings. The
remitting fever was accompanied by an uncommon degree of nausea and faintiness.
Several people died, after a few days illness, of the typhus gravior, of Doctor
Cullen. The intermittents had nothing peculiar in them, either as to their
symptoms or method of cure.

TOWARD the close of the month, the scarlatina anginosa made its appearance,
chiefly among children.

THE month of September was cool and dry, and the scarlatina anginosa became
epidemic among adults as well as young people. In most of the patients who were
affected by it, it came on with a chilliness and a sickness at the stomach, or
a vomiting; which last was so invariably present, that it was with me a
pathognomonic sign of the disease. The matter discharged from the stomach was
always bile. The swelling of the throat was, in some instances, so great, as to
produce a difficulty of speaking, swallowing, and breathing. In a few
instances, the speech was accompanied by a squeaking voice, resembling that
which attends the cynanche trachealis. The ulcers on the tonsils were deep, and
covered with white, and in some instances, with black sloughs. In several cases
there was a discharge of a thick mucus from the nose, from the beginning, but
it oftener occurred in the decline of the disease, which most frequently
happened on the fifth day. Sometimes the subsiding of the swelling of the
throat was followed by a swelling behind the ears.

AN eruption on the skin generally attended the symptoms which have been
described. But this symptom appeared with considerable variety. In some people
it preceded, and in others followed the ulcers and swelling of the throat. In
some, it appeared only on the outside of the throat and on the breast; in
others, it appeared chiefly on the limbs. In a few, it appeared on the second
or third day of the disorder, and never returned afterward. I saw two cases of
eruption without a single symptom of the sore throat. The face of one of those
patients was swelled, as in the erysipelas. In the other, a young girl of seven
years old, there was only a slight redness on the skin. She was seized with a
vomiting, and died delirious in fifty-four hours. Soon after her death, a livid
color appeared on the outside of her throat.

THE bowels, in this degree of the disorder, were in general, regular. I can
recollect but few cases which were attended by a diarrhoea.

THE fever which accompanied the disorder was generally the typhus mitior of
Doctor Cullen. In a few cases it assumed the symptoms of the typhus gravior.

THE disease frequently went off with a swelling of the hands and feet. I saw
one instance in a gentlewoman, in whom this swelling was absent, who complained
of very acute pains, in her limbs, resembling those of the rheumatism.

IN two cases which terminated fatally, there were large abscesses; the one on
the outside, and the other on the inside of the throat. The first of these
cases was accompanied by troublesome sores on the ends of the fingers. One of
these patients lived twenty-eight, and the other above thirty days, and both
appeared to die from the discharge which followed the opening of their
abscesses.

BETWEEN the degrees of the disease which I have described, there were many
intermediate degrees of indisposition which belonged to this disorder.

I SAW in several cases a discharge from behind the ears, and from the nose,
with a slight eruption, and no sore throat. All these patients were able to sit
up and walk about.

I SAW one instance of a discharge from the inside of one of the ears in a
child, who had ulcers in his throat and the squeaking voice.

IN some, a pain in the jaw, with swellings behind the ears and a slight fever,
constituted the whole of the disease.

IN one case, the disease came on with a coma, and in several patients it went
off with this symptom.

A FEW instances occurred of adults, who walked about, and even transacted
business until a few hours before they died.

THE intermitting fever, which made its appearance in August, was not lost
during this month. It continued to prevail, but with several peculiar symptoms.
In many persons it was accompanied by an eruption on the skin, and a swelling
of the hands and feet. In some, it was attended by a sore throat and pains
behind the ears. Indeed, such was the prevalence of the contagion which
produced the scarlatina anginosa, that many hundred people complained of sore
throats without any other symptom of indisposition. The slightest occasional or
exciting cause, and particularly cold, seldom failed of producing the disorder.

THE month of October was much cooler than September, and the disease
continued, but with less alarming symptoms. In several adults, who were seized
with it, the hardness of the pulse indicated blood-letting. The blood, in one
case, was covered with a buffy coat, but beneath its surface it was dissolved.

IN the month of November the disease assumed several inflammatory symptoms,
and was attended with much less danger than formerly. I visited one patient,
whose symptoms were so inflammatory as to require two bleedings. During the
decline of the disease, many people complained of troublesome sores on the ends
of their fingers. A number of children likewise had sore throats and fever,
with eruptions on their skins, which resembled the chicken-pox. I am disposed
to suspect that this eruption was the effect of the contagion of the scarlatina
anginosa, as several instances occurred of patients who had all the symptoms of
this disease, in whom an eruption of white blisters succeeded their recovery.
This form of the disease has been called by Sauvage, the scarlatina variolosa.

I SAW one case of sore throat, which was succeeded not only by swellings in
the abdomen and limbs, but by a catarrh, which brought on a fatal consumption.

A CONSIDERABLE shock of an earthquake was felt on the 29th of this month, at
ten o'clock at night, in the city of Philadelphia; but no change was perceived
in the disease, in consequence of it.

IN December, January, and February, the weather was intensely cold. There was
a thaw for a few days in January, which broke the ice of the Delaware, but it
was followed by cold so excessive as to close the river till the beginning of
March. The mercury on the 28th and 29th of February, stood below 0 in
Farenheit's thermometer.

FOR a few weeks in the beginning of December the disease disappeared in the
circle of my patients, but it broke out with great violence the latter end of
that month, and in the January following. Some of the worst cases that I met
with, (three of which proved fatal) were in those two months.

THE disease disappeared in the spring, but it spread afterward through the
neighboring states of New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland.

I SHALL now add an account of the remedies which I administered in this
disorder.

IN every case that I was called to, I began the cure by giving a vomit joined
with calomel. The vomit was either tartar emetic or ipecacuana, according to
the prejudices, habits, or constitutions of my patients. A quantity of bile was
generally discharged by this medicine. Besides evacuating the contents of the
stomach, it cleansed the throat in its passage downwards. To ensure this effect
from the calomel, I always directed it to be given mixed with syrup or sugar
and water, so as to diffuse it generally over every part of the throat. The
calomel seldom failed to produce two or three stools. In several cases I was
obliged, by the continuance of nausea, to repeat the emetics, and always with
immediate and obvious advantage. I gave the calomel in moderate doses in every
stage of the disorder. To restrain its purgative effects, I added to it a small
quantity of opium.

DURING the whole course of the disorder, where the calomel failed of opening
the bowels, I gave lenient purges, when a disposition to costiveness required
them.

THE throat was kept clean by detergent gargles. In several instances I saw
evident advantages from adding a few grains of calomel to them. In cases of
great difficulty of swallowing or breathing, the patients found relief from
receiving the steams of warm water mixed with a little vinegar, through a
funnel into the throat.

A PERSPIRATION kept up by gentle doses of antimonials, and diluting drinks,
impregnated with wine, always gave relief.

IN every case which did not yield to the above remedies on the third day, I
applied a blister behind each ear, or one to the neck, and I think, always with
good effects.

I MET with no cases in which the bark appeared to be indicated as an
antiseptic, except the three in which the disease proved fatal. Where the sore
throat was blended with the intermitting fever, the bark was given with
advantage. But in common cases it was unnecessary. Subsequent observations have
led me to believe, with Doctor Withering, that it is sometimes hurtful in this
disorder.

THIS disease proved fatal in many parts of the country, upon its first
appearance; but wherever the mode of treatment here delivered, was adopted, its
mortality was soon checked. The calomel was used very generally in New Jersey
and New York. In the Delaware state, a physician of character made it a
practice not only to give calomel, but to anoint the outside of the throat with
mercurial ointment.

Additional Observations UPON THE Scarlatina Anginosa.
THIS disease has prevailed in Philadelphia, at different seasons, ever since
the year 1783. It has blended itself occasionally with all our epidemics. Many
cases have come under my notice since its first appearance, in which dropsical
swellings have succeeded the fever. In some instances there appeared to be
effusions of water not only in the limbs and abdomen, but in the thorax. They
yielded, in every case that I attended, to purges of calomel and jalap. Where
these swellings were neglected, they sometimes proved fatal.

IN the winter of 1786, 7, the scarlatina anginosa was blended with the
cynanche parotidea, and in one instance with a typhus mitior. The last was in a
young girl of nine years of age. She was seized with a vomiting of bile and an
efflorescence on her breast, but discovered no other symptoms of the scarlatina
anginosa till the sixteenth day of her fever, when a swelling appeared on the
outside of her throat; and after her recovery, a pain and swelling in one of
her knees.

IN the month of July 1787, a number of people were affected by sudden
swellings of their lips and eyelids. These swellings generally came on in the
night, were attended with little or no pain, and went off in two or three days.
I met with only one case in which there was a different issue to these
symptoms. It was in a patient in the Pennsylvania hospital, in whom a swelling
in the lips ended in a suppuration, which, notwithstanding the liberal use of
bark and wine, proved fatal in the course of twelve days.

IN the months of June and July 1788, a number of people were affected by
sudden swellings, not only of the upper and lower lips, but of the cheeks and
throat. At the same time many persons were affected by an inflammation of the
eyes. The swellings were attended with more pain than they were the year
before, and some of them required one or two purges to remove them; but in
general they went off without medicine, in two or three days.

Is it proper to refer these complaints to the same contagion which produces
the scarlatina anginosa?

THE prevalence of the scarlatina anginosa at the same time in the city; its
disposition to produce swellings in different parts of the body; and the
analogy of the intermitting fever, which often conceals itself under symptoms
that are foreign to its usual type; all seem to render this conjecture
probable. In one of the cases of an inflammation of the eye, which came under
my notice, the patient was affected by a vomiting ua few horse before the
inflammation appeared, and complained of a sickness at his stomach for two or
three days afterward. Now a vomiting and nausea appear to be pathognomonic
symptoms of the scarlatina anginosa.

IN the autumn of 1788, the scarlatina anginosa appeared with different degrees
of violence in many parts of the city. In two instances it appeared with an
obstinate diarrhoea; but it was in young subjects, and not in adults, as
described by Doctor Withering. In both cases, the disease proved fatal; the one
on the third, the other on the fifth day.

IN the month of December of the same year, I saw one case in which a running
from one of the ears and a deafness came on, on the fifth day, immediately
after the discharge of mucus from the nose had ceased. This case terminated
favorably on the ninth day, but was succeeded for several days afterward by a
troublesome cough.

I SHALL conclude this essay by the following remarks.

1. CAMPHOR has often been suspended in a bag from the neck, as a preservative
against this disease. Repeated observations have taught me, that it possesses
little or no efficacy for this purpose. I have had reason to entertain a more
favorable opinion of the benefit of washing the hands and face with vinegar,
and of rinsing the mouth and throat with vinegar and water every morning, as a
means of preventing this disorder.

2. WHENEVER I have been called to a patient where the scarlatina appeared to
be in a forming state, a vomit of ipecacuana, or tartar emetic, mixed with a
few grains of calomel, has never failed of completely checking the disorder, or
of so far mitigating its violence, as to dispose it to a favorable issue in a
few days; and if these observations should serve no other purpose, than to
awaken the early attention of patients and physicians to this speedy and
effectual remedy, they will not have been recorded in vain.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE CAUSE AND CURE OF THE Cholera Infantum.
BY this name I mean to designate a disease, called, in Philadelphia, the
vomiting and purging of children. From the regularity of its appearance in the
summer months, it is likewise known by the name of "the disease of the season."
It prevails in most of the large towns in the United States. It is
distinguished in Charleston, in South Carolina, by the name of "the April and
May disorder," from making its first appearance in those two months. It seldom
appears in Philadelphia till the middle of June, or the beginning of July, and
generally continues till near the middle of September. Its frequency and danger
are always in proportion to the heat of the weather. It affects children from
the first or second week after their birth, till they are two years old. It
sometimes begins with a diarrhoea, which continues for several days without any
other symptom of indisposition; but it more frequently comes on with a violent
vomiting and purging and a high fever. The matter discharged from the stomach
and bowels is generally yellow or green, but the stools are sometimes slimy and
bloody, without any tincture of bile. In some instances they are nearly as
limpid as water. Worms are frequently discharged in each kind of the stools
that has been described. The children in this stage of the disorder, appear to
suffer a good deal of pain. They draw up their feet, and are never easy in one
posture. The pulse is quick and weak. The head is unusually warm, while the
extremities retain their natural heat, or incline to be cold. The fever is of
the remitting kind, and discovers evident exacerbations, especially in the
evenings. The disease affects the head so much, as in some instances to produce
symptoms not only of delirium, but of mania, insomuch that the children throw
their heads backwards and forwards, and sometimes make attempts to scratch, and
to bite, their parents or nurses. A swelling frequently occurs in the abdomen,
and in the face and limbs. An intense thirst attends every stage of the
disorder. The eyes appear languid and hollow, and the children generally sleep
with them half closed. Such is the insensibility of the system in some
instances in this disorder, that flies have been seen to alight upon the eyes
when opened, without exciting a motion in the eyelids to remove them. Sometimes
the vomiting continues without the purging, but more generally, the purging
continues without the vomiting, through the whole course of the disorder. The
stools are frequently large, and extremely foetid, but in some instances, they
are without smell, and resemble the drinks or aliment which had been taken into
the body. The disease is sometimes fatal in a few days. I once saw it carry off
a child in four and twenty hours. Its duration is varied by the season of the
year, and by the changes in the temperature of the weather. A cool day
frequently abates its violence, and disposes it to a favorable termination. It
often continues with occasional variations in its appearance, for six weeks or
two months. Where the disease has been of long continuance, the approach of
death is gradual, and attended by a number of distressing symptoms. An
emaciation of the body, to such a degree as that the bones come through the
skin, livid spots, a singultus, convulsions, a strongly marked hippocratic
countenance, and a sore mouth, generally precede the fatal termination of this
disorder. Few children ever recover, after the last symptoms which have been
mentioned make their appearance.

THIS disease has been ascribed to several causes; of each of which I shall
take notice in order.

I. IT has been attributed to dentition. To refute this opinion, it will be
necessary to observe, that it appears only in one season of the year. Dentition
I acknowledge sometimes aggravates the disorder; hence we find it is most
severe in that period of life, when the greatest number of teeth make their
appearance, which is generally about the tenth month. I think I have observed
more children to die of this disorder at that age, than at any other.

II. WORMS have likewise been suspected of being the cause of this disease. To
this opinion, I object the uncertainty of worms ever producing an idiopathic
fever, and the improbability of their combining in such a manner as to produce
an annual epidemic disease of any kind. But further, we often see the disorder
in all its force, before that age, in which worms usually produce diseases; we
likewise often see it resist the most powerful anthelmintic medicines; and
lastly, it appears from dissection, where the disease has proved fatal, that
not a single worm has been discovered in the bowels. It is true worms are in
some instances discharged in this disorder, but they are frequently discharged
in greater numbers in the hydrocephalus internus, and in the smallpox, and yet
who will assert either of those diseases to be produced by worms.

III. THE summer fruits have been accused of producing this disorder. To this
opinion, I object that the disease is but little known in country places, where
children eat much more fruit than in cities. As far as I have observed, I am
disposed to believe that the moderate use of ripe fruits, rather tends to
prevent, than to induce the disease.

FROM the discharge of bile which generally introduces the disease, from the
remissions and exacerbations of the fever which accompanies it, and from its
occurring nearly in the same season with the cholera and remitting fever in
adults, I am disposed to consider it as a modification of the same diseases.
Its appearance earlier in the season than the cholera and remitting fever in
adults, must be ascribed to the constitutions of children being more
predisposed from weakness to be acted upon, by the remote causes which produce
those disorders.

I SHALL now mention the remedies which are proper and useful in this disorder.

I. THE first indication of cure is to evacuate the bile from the stomach and
bowels. This should be done by gentle doses of ipecacuana, or tartar emetic.
The vomits should be repeated occasionally, if indicated, in every stage of the
disorder. The bowels should be opened by means of manna, castor oil, or
magnesia. I have generally found rhubarb improper for this purpose, while the
stomach was in a very irritable state. In those cases, where there is reason to
believe that the offending contents of the primae viae have been discharged by
nature, (which is often the case) the emetics and purges should by no means be
given; but, instead of them, recourse must be had to

II. OPIATES. A few drops of liquid laudanum, combined in a testaceous julep,
with pepper-mint or cinnamon water, seldom fail of composing the stomach and
bowels. In some instances, this medicine alone subdues the disease in two or
three days; but where it does not prove so successful, it produces a remission
of pain, and of other distressing symptoms, in every stage of the disorder.

III. DEMULCENT and DILUTING DRINKS have an agreeable effect in this disease.
Mint and mallows teas, or a tea made of blackberry roots infused in cold water,
together with a decoction of the shayings of hartshorn and gum arabic with
cinnamon, should all be given in their turns for this purpose.

IV. GLYSTERS made of flaxseed tea, or of mutton broth, or of starch dissolved
in water, with a few drops of liquid laudanum in them, give ease, and produce
other useful effects.

V. PLASTERS of venice treacle applied to the region of the stomach, and
flannels dipped in infusions of bitter and aromatic herbs in warm spirits, or
Madeira wine, and applied to the region of the abdomen, often afford
considerable relief.

VI. AS soon as the more violent symptoms of the disease are composed, TONIC
and CORDIAL MEDICINES should be given. The bark in decoction, or in substance,
(where it can be retained in that form) mixed with a little nutmeg, often
produce the most salutary effects Several of the physicians of the Philadelphia
Dispensary have assured me, that they have lately given in this disorder,
(after the usual evacuations) from one grain to two grains of alum every two
or three hours, as a tonic and an astringent, with great success.
. Port wine or claret mixed with water, are likewise proper in this stage of
the disorder. After the disease has continued for some time, we often see an
appetite suddenly awakened for articles of diet of a stimulating nature. I have
seen many children recover from being gratified in an inclination to eat salted
fish, or the different kinds of salted meat. In some instances they discover an
appetite for butter, and the richest gravies of roasted meats, and eat them
with obvious relief to all their symptoms. I once saw a child of sixteen months
old, perfectly restored, from the lowest stage of this disorder, by eating
large quantities of rancid English cheese, and drinking two or three glasses of
port wine every day. She would in no instance eat bread with the cheese, nor
taste the wine, if it was mixed with water.

WE sometimes see relief given by the use of the warm bath, in cases of
obstinate pain. The bath is more effectual, if warm wine is used, instead of
water.

I HAVE had but few opportunities of trying the effects of cold water applied
to the body in this disorder; but from the benefit which attended its use in
the cases in which it was prescribed, I am disposed to believe that it would do
great service, could we overcome the prejudices which subsist in the minds of
parents against it.

AFTER all that has been said in favor of the remedies that have been
mentioned, I am sorry to add, that I have very often seen them all administered
without effect. My principal dependence, therefore, for many years, has been
placed upon

VII. COUNTRY AIR. Out of many hundred children whom I have sent into the
country in every stage of this disorder, I have lost only three, two of whom
were sent, contrary to my advice, into that unhealthy part of the neighborhood
of Philadelphia called the Neck, which lies between the city and the conflux of
the rivers Delaware and Schuylkill. I have seen one cure performed by this
remedy, after convulsions had taken place. To derive the utmost benefit from
the country air, children should be carried out on horseback, or in a carriage,
every day; and they should be exposed to the open air as much as possible in
fair weather in the day time. Where the convenience of the constant benefit of
country air cannot be obtained, I have seen evident advantages from taking
children out of the city once or twice a day. It is extremely agreeable to see
the little sufferers revive, as soon as they escape from the city air, and
inspire the pure air of the country.

I SHALL conclude this inquiry, by recommending the following methods of
preventing this disorder, all of which have been found by experience to be
useful.

1. THE daily use of the cold bath.

2. A FAITHFUL and attentive accommodation of the dresses of children, to the
state and changes of the air.

3. A MODERATE quantity of salted meat taken occasionally in those months in
which this disease usually prevails. It is perhaps in part from the daily use
of salted meat in diet that the children of country people escape this disorder.

4. THE use of sound old wine in the summer months. From a tea-spoonful, to
half a wine glass full, according to the age of the child may be given every
day. It is remarkable, that the children of persons in easy circumstances, who
sip occasionally with their parents, the remains of a glass of wine after
dinner, are much less subject to this disorder, than the children of poor
people who are without the benefit of that article of diet.

5. CLEANLINESS both with respect to the skin and clothing of children.
Perhaps the neglect of this direction may be another reason why the children of
the poor are most subject to this disorder.

6. THE removal of children into the country before the approach of warm
weather. This advice is peculiarly necessary during the whole period of
dentition. I have never known but one instance of a child being affected by
this disorder, who had been carried into the country in order to avoid it.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE Cynanche Trachealis.
I TAKE great pleasure in thus publicly acknowledging a mistake, which I
committed in my letter to Doctor Millar, published by him in London in the year
1770, in supposing that there was but one species of this disorder, and that
that was spasmodic. I am now satisfied, from repeated observations, that there
is another species, which I shall take the liberty of calling the cynanche
trachealis humida.

I EXCLUDE, as a species of this disorder, the cynanche trachealis maligna.
Many of the symptoms of the cynanche trachealis occur in the malignant sore
throat, but they should by no means constitute the name, or a species of that
disease. I have seen the same symptoms in the scarlatina anginosa, and yet I
never thought of ranking a cynanche trachealis scarlatina among the species of
that disorder. I have likewise seen the cynanche trachealis in the last stage
of the secondary fever of the smallpox, without supposing that it ought to
derive a specific name from that disease. The species of diarrhoea would be
innumerable, if, every time it occurred as a symptom of other disorders, it was
to receive a specific name, and to be considered as an idiopathic disorder.

THE reasons which I offered in my letter to Doctor Millar, for believing that
the cynanche trachealis is frequently a spasmodic disorder, continue to operate
upon me with as much force as ever. But a number of dissections, related by
different authors, satisfy me, that the cynanche trachealis humida is a
distinct species from the spasmodic, and requires a different method of cure.

THE cynanche trachealis spasmodica is known,

1. BY coming on suddenly, and that generally in the night.

2. BY frequent and perfect intermissions of the symptoms for hours, and in
some instances for days, without the least sensible discharge from the trachea.
And,

3. BY yielding to antispasmodic remedies, particularly to the warm bath.

IF these facts had left any reason to doubt of a spasmodic species of this
disorder, I should have been confirmed in the opinion, by the dissection of a
child in the year 1770, who died by it, in whom no marks were to be found of a
membrane, or even of mucus in the trachea. The lungs and trachea appeared to be
in a sound state.

THE cynanche trachealis humida is known,

1. BY coming on gradually, and that most commonly in the day time.

2. BY its continuing or increasing for several days without any remarkable
remission, or even abatement of the symptoms.

3. BY the discharge of phlegm or mucus from the trachea, and the occasional
appearance of it in the stools. And,

4. BY not yielding to antispasmodic medicines.

MY opinion of the cause of the membrane which is formed in the trachea,
continues to be the same as expressed in my former publication The vessels of
the trachea and bronchiae always abound with a thin mucus, which is poured into
them in proportion as they are irritated by inflammation, or the action of the
external air. Children abound with a greater quantity of mucus in these parts
than adults; and when it is accumulated in the trachea or bronchiae in a
greater quantity than ordinary, they are unable, upon the account of their
weakness, to bring it up. It is easy to conceive in what manner it is converted
into a thin membrane, after its more fluid parts are dissipated. We have an
analogy of this in the nose. Were the passages of this organ less in our reach,
it is probable a membrane resembling that found in the trachea would be found
in it every four and twenty hours, especially when it was affected by a cold.
We always find the phlegm accumulated in proportion to the time the disorder
has continued. In all the cases of membrane mentioned by Doctor Home, the
patients never died before the third day, and in many cases, not before the
fourth and fifth days. Letter to Doctor Millar.
, with this difference, that I believe the membrane to be the effect of the
humid species only, and that it is not an accidental consequence of the
spasmodic, as I once supposed. During the paroxysms of the disorder, the
symptoms are nearly the same in both species. They are described by Doctor
Millar, in his observations on the asthma and hooping cough, in the following
words: Children (says he) at play were sometimes seized with it, but it
generally came on at night. A child who went to bed in perfect health, waked an
hour or two afterward in a fright, with his face much flushed, or sometimes of
a livid color; incapable of describing what he felt; breathing with much labor,
and with a convulsive motion in the belly; the returns of inspiration and
expiration quickly succeeding each other in that particular sonorous manner,
which is often observed in hysteric paroxysms. The child's terror sometimes
augmented the disorder. He clung to the nurse, and if he was not speedily
relieved by coughing, belching, sneezing, vomiting or purging, the suffocation
increased, and he died in the paroxysm.

TO this description of the cynanche trachealis, I beg leave to add the three
following observations.

1. THE noise which patients make in coughing in this disorder, resembles the
barking of a young dog. This symptom is so universally present, that I always
rely upon it as a pathognomonic sign of the disease before it is completely
formed. I have observed this barking cough, in one instance of cynanche
trachealis humida, to continue for several days after the patient was out of
danger.

2. DURING the continuance of the disease there is frequently an eruption of
little red blotches on the skin, which is accompanied by sensible relief to the
patient. This eruption sometimes appears and disappears two or three times in
the course of the disease.

3. THE disease is not confined wholly to children. I have seen two cases of
the spasmodic species in adults.

DOCTOR Cullen has given birth to a controversy respecting the inflammatory
nature of the cynanche trachealis. He has included it in the order of
phlegmasiae in his class of pyrexia. I acknowledge that I have generally seen
both the species that have been mentioned, without inflammatory symptoms, and
sometimes without fever, especially in the first stage of the disorder. When
either species has been attended by a hard pulse, it has been only in plethoric
habits, or when it has been complicated with symptoms of catarrh or
peripneumony.

PERHAPS it may appear improper, after such a declaration, to have adopted the
name given to this disorder by Doctor Cullen. I should have had no objection to
Doctor Michaelis's name of "angina polyposa," did it not exclude the spasmodic
species of this disease; nor should I hesitate in adopting the more generic
term of "suffocatio stridula" of Doctor Home, if the disease were not now so
generally known by the name given it by Doctor Cullen. The vulgar name of this
disease in Pennsylvania is the Hives. It appears to be a corruption of the word
"heaves," which took its rise from the manner in which the lungs heave in
respiration. The worst degrees of the disorder are called the "bowel-hives,"
from the great motion of the abdominal muscles in respiration.
.

THE remedies to be used in cynanche trachealis spasmodica, are, 1. Bleeding,
when it is connected with pneumonic symptoms; 2. Vomits; 3. Purges; and, 4.
Antispasmodic medicines, more especially the warm bath, opium, assafoetida and
blisters.

THE remedies which are proper in the cynanche trachealis humida, are the three
first which are mentioned for the cure of the spasmodic species, and CALOMEL.
Our principal dependence must be placed upon this last medicine. A large dose
of it should be given as soon as the disease discovers itself, and smaller
doses should be given every day, while any of its symptoms continue. The bark
is scarcely a more certain remedy for intermittents, than calomel, when thus
administered, is in this species of cynanche.

IN what manner does the calomel act in this disorder? Is it by increasing the
secretion of mucus in the numerous glands of the fauces, oesophagus, stomach
and bowels, and thereby lessening the excretion of it in the trachea? The
analogy of the secretions and excretions, in other parts of the body, whether
promoted by nature or art, seems to favor this conjecture.

I SHALL only add upon the subject of this disorder, that instances of its
mortality have been very rare in Philadelphia, since the general use of the
remedies which have been mentioned.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFECTS OF BLISTERS AND BLEEDING, IN THE CURE OF OBSTINATE
Intermitting Fevers.
THE efficacy of these remedies will probably be disputed by every regular-bred
physician, who has not been a witness of their utility in the above disorder;
but it becomes such physicians, before they decide upon this subject, to
remember, that many things are true in medicine, as well as in other branches
of philosophy, which are very improbable.

IN all those cases of autumnal intermittents, whether quotidian, tertian, or
quartan, in which the bark did not succeed after three or four days trial, I
have seldom found it fail after the application of blisters to the wrists.

BUT in those cases where blisters had been neglected, or applied without
effect, and where the disease had been protracted into the winter months, I
have generally cured it by means of one or two moderate bleedings.

THE pulse in those cases, is generally full, and sometimes a little hard, and
the blood when drawn, for the most part appears sizy.

THE bark is seldom necessary to prevent the return of the disorder. It is
always ineffectual, where bloodletting is indicated. I have known several
instances where pounds of this medicine have been taken without effect, in
which the loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood has immediately cured the
disorder.

HOW shall we reconcile the practice of bleeding in intermittents, with our
modern theories of fever?

MAY not the long continuance of an intermittent, by debilitating the system,
produce such an irritability in the arteries, as to dispose them to that
species of inflammatory diathesis which is founded on indirect debility? Or,

MAY not such congestions be formed in the viscera, as to produce the same
species of inflammatory diathesis that occurs in several other inflammatory
diseases?

DOCTOR Cullen has taught us, in his account of the chronic hepatatis, that
there may be topical affection and inflammatory diathesis, without much pain or
fever; and had I not witnessed several cases of this kind, I should have been
forced to have believed it possible, not only in this disorder, but in many
others, from the facts which were communicated to me by Doctor Michaelis in his
visit to Philadelphia in the year 1783.

I ONCE intended to have added to this account of the efficacy of blisters and
bleeding in curing obstinate intermittents, testimonies from a number of
medical gentlemen, of the success with which they have used them; but these
vouchers have become so numerous, that they would swell this essay far beyond
the limits I wish to prescribe to it.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE DISORDER OCCASIONED BY DRINKING COLD WATER IN WARM WEATHER,
AND THE METHOD OF CURING IT.
FEW summers elapse in Philadelphia, in which there are not instances of many
persons being affected by drinking cold water. In some seasons four or five
persons have died suddenly from this cause, in one day. This mortality falls
chiefly upon the laboring part of the community, who seek to allay their
thirst by drinking the water from the pumps in the streets, and who are too
impatient, or too ignorant, to use the necessary precautions for preventing its
morbid or deadly effects upon them. These accidents seldom happen, except when
the mercury rises above 85 in Farenheit's thermometer.

THREE circumstances generally concur to produce disease or death from drinking
cold water. 1. The patient is extremely warm. 2. The water is extremely cold.
And, 3. A large quantity of it is taken into the body. The danger from drinking
the cold water is always in proportion to the degrees of combination which
occur in the three circumstances that have been mentioned.

THE following symptoms generally follow, where cold water has been taken,
under the above circumstances, into the body.

IN a few minutes after the patient has swallowed the water, he is affected by
a dimness of sight, he staggers in attempting to walk, and unless supported,
falls to the ground; he breathes with difficulty; a rattling is heard in his
throat; his nostrils and cheeks expand and contract in every act of
respiration; his face appears suffused with blood, and of a livid color; his
extremities become cold, and his pulse imperceptible; and unless relief is
speedily obtained, the disorder terminates in death, in four or five minutes.

THIS description includes only the less common cases of the effects of
drinking a large quantity of cold water, when the body is preternaturally
heated. More frequently, patients are seized with acute spasms in the breast
and stomach. These spasms are so painful as to produce syncope, and even
asphyxi. They are sometimes of the tonic, but more frequently of the clonic
kind. In the intervals of the spasms the patient appears to be perfectly well.
The intervals between each spasm become longer or shorter, according as the
disease tends to life or death.

IT may not be improper to take notice, that punch, beer, and even toddy, when
drank under the same circumstances as cold water, have all been known to
produce the same morbid and fatal effects.

I KNOW of but one certain remedy for this disease, and that is LIQUID
LAUDANUM. The doses of it, as in other cases of spasm, should be proportioned
to the violence of the disease. From a tea-spoonful to near a table-spoonful
have been given in some instances, before relief has been obtained. Where the
powers of life appear to be suddenly suspended, the same remedies should be
used, which have been so successfully employed in recovering persons supposed
to be dead from drowning.

CARE should be taken in every case of disease, or apparent death, from
drinking cold water, to prevent the patient's suffering from being surrounded,
or even attended by too many people.

PERSONS who have been recovered from the immediate danger which attends this
disease, are sometimes affected after it, by inflammations and obstructions in
the breast or liver. They generally yield to the usual remedies which are
administered in those complaints, when they arise from other causes.

IF neither the voice of reason, nor the fatal examples of those who have
perished from this cause, are sufficient to produce restraint in drinking a
large quantity of cold liquors, when the body is preternaturally heated, then
let me advise to

1. GRASP the vessel, out of which you are about to drink, for a minute or
longer with both your hands. This will abstract a portion of heat from the
body, and impart it at the same time to the cold liquor, provided the vessel is
made of metal, glass, or earth; for heat follows the same laws, in many
instances, in passing through bodies, with regard to its relative velocity,
which we observe to take place in electricity.

2. IF you are not furnished with a cup, and are obliged to drink by bringing
your mouth in contact with the stream which issues from a pump, or a spring,
always wash your hands and face previously to your drinking, with a little of
the cold water. By receiving the shock of the water first upon those parts of
the body, a portion of its heat is conveyed away, and the vital parts are
thereby defended from the action of the cold.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EFFICACY OF COMMON SALT, IN THE CURE OF Haemoptysis.
FROM the present established opinions and practice respecting the cause and
cure of haemoptysis, the last medicine that would occur to a regular-bred
physician for the cure of it, is COMMON SALT; and yet I have seen and heard of
a great number of cases, in which it has been administered with success.

THE mode of giving it, is to pour down from a tea, to a table-spoonful of
clean fine salt, as soon as possible after the haemorrhage begins from the
lungs. This quantity generally stops it; but the dose must be repeated daily
for three or four days, to prevent a return of the disorder. If the bleeding
continues, the salt must be continued till it is checked, but in larger doses.
I have heard of several instances in which two table-spoonfuls were taken at
one time for several days.

IT sometimes excites a sickness at the stomach, and never fails to produce a
burning sensation in the throat in its passage into the stomach, and
considerable thirst afterward.

I HAVE found this remedy to succeed equally well in haemorrhages, whether they
were active or passive, or whether they occurred in young or in old people.

I HAD prescribed it for several years before I could satisfy myself with a
theory, to account for its extraordinary action upon the human body. My
inquiries led me to attend more particularly to the following facts.

1. THOSE persons who have been early instructed in vocal music, and who use
their vocal organs moderately through life, are seldom affected by an
haemorrhage from the lungs.

2. LAWYERS, players, public cryers, and city watchmen, all of whom exercise
their lungs either by long or loud speaking, are less affected by this
disorder, than persons of other occupations.

I ACKNOWLEDGE I cannot extend this observation to the public teachers of
religion. I have known several instances of their being affected by
haemoptysis; but never but one in which the disorder came on in the pulpit, and
that was in a person who had been recently cured of it. The cases which I have
seen, have generally been brought on by catarrhs.

TO this disorder, the practice of some of our American preachers disposes them
in a peculiar manner; for it is very common with this class of them, to expose
themselves to the cold or evening air immediately after taking, what a
celebrated and eloquent preacher used to call a pulpit sweat.

3. THIS haemorrhage chiefly occurs in debilitated habits, or in persons
afflicted by such a disposition to consumption, as indicates a weak and relaxed
state of the lungs.

4. IT generally occurs when the lungs are in a passive state; as in sitting,
walking, and more frequently in lying. Many of the cases that I have known,
have occurred during sleep, in the middle of the night.

FROM these facts, is it not probable that the common salt, by acting primarily
and with great force upon the throat, extends its stimulus to the bleeding
vessel, and by giving it a tone, checks the further effusion of blood?

I SHALL only add to this conjecture the following observations.

1. I HAVE never known the common salt perform a cure, where the haemorrhage
from the lungs has been a symptom of a consumption. But even in this case, it
gives a certain temporary relief.

2. THE exhibition of common salt in the haemoptysis, should by no means
supercede the use of occasional bleeding when indicated by plethora, nor of
that diet which the state of the pulse, or of the stomach, may require.

3. I HAVE given the common salt in one case with success, in an haemorrhage
from the stomach, accompanied by a vomiting; and have heard of several cases in
which it has been supposed to have checked a discharge of blood from the nose
and uterus, but I can say nothing further in its favor in these last
haemorrhages, from my own experience.

IT may perhaps serve to lessen the prejudices of physicians against adopting
improvements in medicine, that are not recommended by the authority of colleges
or universities, to add, that we are indebted to an old woman, for the
discovery of the efficacy of common salt in the cure of haemoptysis.

FREE THOUGHTS UPON THE CAUSE AND CURE OF THE Pulmonary Consumption.
THE ancient Jews used to say that a man does not fulfill his duties in life,
who passes through it, without building a house, planting a tree, and leaving a
child behind him. A physician, in like manner, should consider his obligations
to his profession and society as undischarged, who has not attempted to lessen
the number of incurable diseases. This is my apology for presuming to make the
consumption the subject of a medical inquiry.

PERHAPS I may suggest an idea, or fact, that may awaken the ideas and facts
which now lie useless in the memories or commonplace books of other
physicians; or I may direct their attention to some useful experiments upon
this subject.

I SHALL begin my observations upon the consumption, by remarking,

1. THAT it is unknown among the Indians in North America.

2. IT is scarcely known by those citizens of the United States, who live in
the first stage of civilized life, and who have lately obtained the title of
the first settlers.

THE principal occupations of the Indian consist in war, fishing, and hunting.
Those of the first settler, are fishing, hunting, and the laborious employments
of subduing the earth, cutting down forests, building a house and barn, and by
distant excursions in all kinds of weather, to mills and courts. All of which
tend to excite and preserve in the system, something like the Indian vigor of
constitution.

3. IT is less common in country places than in cities, and increases in both,
with intemperance and sedentary modes of life.

4. SHIP and house carpenters, smiths, and all those artificers, whose business
requires great exertions of strength, in the open air in all seasons of the
year, are less subject to this disorder, than men who work under cover, and at
occupations which do not require the constant action of their limbs.

5. WOMEN who sit more than men, and whose work is connected with less
exertion, are most subject to the consumption.

FROM these facts it would seem, that the most probable method of curing the
consumption, is to revive in the constitution, by means of exercise or labor,
that vigor which belongs to the Indians, or to mankind in their first stage of
civilization.

THE efficacy of these means of curing consumption will appear, when we inquire
into the relative merit of the several remedies which have been used by
physicians in this disorder.

I SHALL not produce among these remedies the numerous receipts for syrups,
bolusses, electuaries, decoctions, infusions, pills, medicated waters, powders,
draughts, mixtures, and diet-drinks, which have so long and so steadily been
used in this disease; nor shall I mention as a remedy, the best accomodated
diet, submitted to with the most patient self-denial; for not one of them all
without the aid of exercise has ever, I believe, cured a single consumption.

1. SEA-VOYAGES have cured consumptions; but it has been only when they have
been so long, or so frequent, as to substitute the long continuance of gentle,
to violent degrees of exercise of a shorter duration.

2. A CHANGE of CLIMATE has often been prescribed for the cure of consumptions,
but I do not recollect an instance of its having succeeded, except when it has
been accompanied by exercise, as in traveling, or by some active laborious
pursuit.

DOCTOR Gordon of Madeira, ascribes the inefficacy of the air of Madeira in the
consumption, in part to the difficulty patients find of using exercise in
carriages, or even on horseback, from the badness of the roads in that island.

3. JOURNIES have often performed cures in the consumption, but it has been
chiefly when they have been long, and accompanied by difficulties which have
roused and invigorated the powers of the mind and body.

4. VOMITS and NAUSEATING MEDICINES have been much celebrated for the cure of
consumptions. These, by procuring a temporary determination to the surface of
the body, so far lessen the pain and cough as to enable patients to use
profitable exercise. Where this has not accompanied or succeeded the exhibition
of vomits, I believe they have seldom afforded any permanent relief.

5. BLOOD-LETTING has often relieved consumptions; but it has been only by
removing the troublesome symptoms of inflammatory diathesis, and thereby
enabling the patients to use exercise, or labor, with advantage.

6. VEGETABLE BITTERS and some of the STIMULATING GUMS have in some instances
afforded relief in consumptions; but they have done so only in those cases
where there was great debility, accompanied by a total absence of inflammatory
diathesis. They have most probably acted by their tonic qualities as
substitutes for labor and exercise.

7. A PLENTIFUL and REGULAR PERSPIRATION excited by means of a flannel shirt
worn next to the skin, or by means of a stove-room, or by a warm climate, has
in many instances prolonged life in consumptive habits; but all these remedies
have acted as palliatives only, and thereby have enabled the consumptive
patients to enjoy the more beneficial effects of exercise.

8. BLISTERS, SETONS, and ISSUES, by determining the perspirable matter from
the lungs to the surface of the body, lessen pain and cough, and thereby
prepare the system for the more salutary effects of exercise.

9. THE effects of SWINGING upon the pulse and respiration, leave us no room to
doubt of its being a tonic remedy, and therefore a safe and agreeable
substitute for exercise.

FORM all these facts it is evident that the remedies for consumptions must be
sought for in those exercises and employments which give the greatest vigor to
the constitution. And here I am happy in being able to produce several facts
which demonstrate the safety and certainty of this method of cure.

DURING the late war, I saw three instances of persons in confirmed
consumptions who were perfectly cured by the hardships of a military life. They
had been my patients previously to their entering into the army. Besides these,
I have heard of four well attested cases of similar recoveries from nearly the
same remedies. One of these was the son of a farmer in New Jersey, who was sent
to sea as the last resource for a consumption. Soon after he left the American
shore, he was taken by a British cruiser, and compelled to share in all the
duties and hardships of a common sailor. After serving in this capacity for
twenty two months, he made his escape, and landed at Boston, from whence he
traveled on foot to his father's house, (nearly four hundred miles) where he
arrived in perfect health.

DOCTOR Way of Wilmington informed me, that a certain Abner Cloud, who was
reduced so low by a pulmonary consumption as to be beyond all relief from
medicine, was so much relieved by sleeping in the open air, and by the usual
toils of building a hut and improving a farm in the unsettled parts of a new
county in Pennsylvania, that he thought him in a fair way of a perfect recovery.

DOCTOR Latimer of Wilmington, had been long afflicted with a cough and an
occasional haemoptysis. He entered into the American army as a surgeon, and
served in that capacity till near the end of the war; during which time he was
perfectly free from all pulmonic complaints. The spitting of blood returned
soon after he settled in private practice. To remedy this complaint, he had
recourse to a low diet, but finding it ineffectual, he partook liberally of the
usual diet of healthy men, and he now (as he lately informed me) enjoys a good
share of health.

IT would be very easy to add many other cases, in which labor, the employments
of agriculture, and a life of hardship by sea and land, have prevented,
relieved, or cured not only the consumption, but pulmonary diseases of all
kinds.

TO the cases that have been mentioned, I shall add only one more, which was
lately communicated to me by the venerable Doctor Franklin, whose conversation
at all times conveys instruction, and not less in medicine than upon other
subjects. In traveling, many years ago, through New England, the doctor
overtook the post-rider; and after some inquiries into the history of his life,
he informed him that he was bred a shoemaker; that his confinement, and other
circumstances, had brought on a consumption, for which he was ordered by a
physician to ride on horseback. Finding this mode of exercise too expensive, he
made interest, upon the death of an old post-rider, to succeed to his
appointment, in which he perfectly recovered his health in two years. After
this he returned to his old trade, upon which his consumption returned. He
again mounted his horse, and rode post in all seasons and weathers, between
New York and Connecticut river, (about 140 miles); in which employment he
continued upward of thirty years, in perfect health.

THESE facts, I hope, are sufficient to establish the advantages of restoring
the original vigor of the constitution, in every attempt to effect a radical
cure of consumption.

BUT how shall these remedies be applied in the time of peace, or in a country
where the want of woods, and brooks without bridges, forbid the attainment of
the laborious pleasures of the Indian mode of hunting; or where the universal
extent of civilization does not admit of our advising the toils of a new
settlement, and improvements upon bare creation? Under these circumstances, I
conceive substitutes may be obtained for each of them, nearly of equal
efficacy, and attainable with much less trouble.

1. DOCTOR Sydenham pronounced riding on horseback, to be as certain a cure for
consumptions as bark is for an intermitting fever. I have no more doubt of the
truth of this assertion, than I have that inflammatory fevers are now less
frequent in London, than they were in the time of Doctor Sydenham. If riding on
horseback in consumptions has ceased to be a remedy in Britain, the fault is in
the patient, and not in the remedy. It is a sign that the stomach requires
milk, (says Doctor Cadogar,) when it cannot bear it. In like manner, the
inability of the patient to bear this manly and wholesome exercise, serves only
to demonstrate the necessity and advantages of it. I suspect the same
objections to this exercise which have been made in Britain, will not occur in
the United States of America; for the Americans, with respect to the symptoms
and degrees of epidemic and chronic diseases, appear to be nearly in the same
state that the inhabitants of England were in the seventeenth century. I can
easily conceive the vigor of the human constitution to have been such in Doctor
Sydenham's time, as that a defluxion or ulcer in the lungs should have had no
more effect in increasing the action of the arterial system, than a moderate
inflammation of the eyes has at present in exciting an inflammatory fever in a
good constitution: hence the safety and advantage formerly of riding on
horseback in pulmonic complaints. We find, in proportion to the decline of the
vigor of the body, that many occasional causes produce fever and inflammation,
which would not have done it an hundred years ago.

2. THE laborious employments of agriculture, if steadily pursued, and
accompanied at the same time by the simple, but wholesome diet of a farm-house,
and a hard bed, would probably afford a good substitute for the toils of a
savage or military life.

3. SUCH occupations or professions as require constant labor or exercise in
the open air, in all kinds of weather, may easily be chosen for a young man
who, either from hereditary predisposition, or an accidental affection of the
lungs, is in danger of falling into a consumption. In this we should imitate
the advice given by some wise men, always to prefer those professions for our
sons which are the least favorable to the corrupt inclinations of their
hearts. For example, where an undue passion for money, or a crafty disposition
discover themselves in early life, we are directed to oppose them by the less
profitable and more disinterested professions of divinity, or physic, rather
than cherish them by trade, or the practice of the law It is very common for
parents to prefer sedentary occupations for such of their children who are of
delicate constitutions, and the more active occupations for those of them who
are robust. The reverse of this practice should be followed. The weakly
children should be trained to the laborious, and the robust to the sedentary
occupations. From a neglect of this practice, many hundred apprentices to
tailors, shoemakers, conveyancers, watchmakers, silversmiths, mantuamakers,
etc. etc. perish every year by consumptions.
.

4. THERE is a case recorded by Doctor Smollet, of the efficacy of the cold
bath in a consumption; and I have heard of its having been used with success in
a negro man in one of the West India islands. To render this remedy useful, or
even safe, it will be necessary to join it with labor, or to use it in degrees
that shall prevent the alternation of the system with vigor and debility: for I
take the cure of consumption to depend upon the simple action of tonic, without
the least mixture of debilitating powers. Indeed, I conceive it to be easier to
palliate the symptoms, and prolong life, by the use of the powers which are
simply debilitating, than by a mixture of both of them. This is not a solitary
fact in the human body. We often see a stiff neck and spasms, brought on by a
person's being exposed, at the same time, to a stream of air from a door or
window, and to the heat of a warm room, where neither would have been
injurious, if it had acted singly upon the system. There are many extremes in
physic, as in other things, which meet in a point. There is an inflammatory
diathesis connected with debility, as certainly as with an excess of tone in
the arterial system. And I think I have seen greater degrees of this
inflammatory diathesis in the male inhabitants of cities, than of the country,
and more in women, than in men. I have moreover seen the most acute
inflammatory diseases where the system had been previously debilitated by a
long continuance of warm weather, or of an obstinate intermitting fever, and in
too many instances by the use of spirituous liquors. This species of
inflammatory diathesis appears to arise, therefore, from what has been called,
and perhaps not improperly, indirect debility. Is it the presence of this
species of inflammatory diathesis which renders consumptions so much more
difficult to cure than formerly? Is it this which often renders riding on
horseback so ineffectual, or so injurious in this disorder? I suspect it is;
and it is to be lamented that it often requires so much time, or such remedies
to remove this species of inflammatory diathesis, as to reduce the patient too
low to make use of those remedies afterward which would effect a radical cure.

IF it were possible to graduate the tone of the system by means of a scale, I
would add, that to cure consumptions, the system should be raised to the
highest degree of this scale. Nothing short of an equilibrium of tone, or a
free and vigorous action of every muscle and viscus in the body, will fully
come up to a radical cure for consumptions.

IN regulating the diet of consumptive patients, I conceive it to be as
necessary to feel the pulse, as it is in determining when and in what quantity
to draw blood. Where indirect inflammatory diathesis prevails, a vegetable diet
is certainly proper; but where the patient has escaped, or passed this stage of
the disorder, I believe a vegetable diet alone to be injurious; and am sure a
moderate quantity of animal food may be taken with advantage. In both cases,
the diet should consist, as much as possible, of one kind of aliment.

THE presence or absence of this inflammatory diathesis, furnishes the
indications for administering or refraining from the use of the bark and
balsamic medicines. With all the testimonies of their having done mischief,
many of which I could produce, I have known several cases in which they have
been given with obvious advantage; but it was only when there was a total
absence of inflammatory diathesis.

PERHAPS the remedies I have recommended, and the opinions I have delivered,
may derive some support from attending to the analogy of ulcers on the legs,
and in other parts of the body. The first of these occur chiefly in habits
debilitated by spirituous liquors, and the last frequently in habits
debilitated by the scrophula. In curing these disorders, it is in vain to
depend upon internal or external medicines. The whole system must be
strengthened, or we do nothing; and this is to be effected only by exercise and
a generous diet.

IN relating the facts that are contained in this essay, I wish I could have
avoided reasoning upon them; especially as I am confident of the certainty of
the facts, and somewhat doubtful of the truth of my reasonings.

I SHALL only add, that if the cure of consumptions should at last be effected
by remedies in every respect the opposites of those palliatives which are now
fashionable and universal, no more will happen than what we have already seen
in the tetanus, the smallpox, and in the management of fractured limbs.

SHOULD this be the case, we shall not be surprised to hear of physicians,
instead of prescribing any one, or all of the medicines formerly enumerated for
consumptions, ordering their patients to exchange the amusements or indolence
of a city, for the toils of a country life; of their advising farmers to
exchange their plentiful tables, and comfortable fire-sides, for the scanty but
solid subsistence, and midnight exposure of the herdsman; or of their
recommending, not so much the exercise of a passive sea-voyage, as the active
labors and dangers of a common sailor. Nor should it surprise us, after what we
have seen, to hear patients relate the pleasant adventures of their excursions,
or labors, in quest of their recovery from this disorder, any more than it does
now to see a strong or well shaped limb that has been broken; or to hear a man
talk of his studies, or pleasures, during the time of his being inoculated and
attended for the smallpox.

FROM a review of the facts and observations which have been mentioned, I
cannot help thinking that the words of the philosopher, "Quod petis in te est,"
apply not more to the means of obtaining happiness, than they do to the means
of obtaining a radical cure for the consumption.

I WILL not venture to assert, that there does not exist a medicine, which
shall supply, at least in some degree, the place of the labor or exercises,
whose usefulness in consumptions has been established by the facts that have
been mentioned. Many instances of the analogous effects of medicines, and of
exercise upon the human body, forbid the supposition. I shall only add, that if
there does exist in nature such a medicine, I am disposed to believe it will be
found in the class of TONICS. If this should be the case, I conceive its
strength, or its dose, must far exceed the present state of our knowledge or
practice, with respect to the efficacy or dose of tonic medicines.

I EXCEPT the disorder, which arises from recent abscesses in the lungs, from
the general observation which has been made, respecting the inefficacy of the
remedies that were formerly enumerated for the cure of consumptions without
labor or exercise. These abscesses often occur without being accompanied by a
consumptive diathesis, and are frequently cured by nature, or by very simple
medicines.

OBSERVATIONS UPON WORMS IN THE ALIMENTARY CANAL, AND UPON ANTHELMINTIC
MEDICINES.
WITH great diffidence I venture to lay before the public my opinions upon
worms: nor should I have presumed to do it, had I not entertained a hope of
thereby exciting further inquiries upon this subject.

WHEN we consider how universally worms are found in all young animals, and how
frequently they exist in the human body, without producing disease of any kind,
it is natural to conclude, that they serve some useful and necessary purposes
in the animal economy. Do they consume the superfluous aliment which all young
animals are disposed to take before they have been taught, by experience or
reason, the bad consequences which arise from it? It is no objection to this
opinion, that worms are unknown in the human body in some countries. The laws
of nature are diversified, and often suspended under peculiar circumstances in
many cases, where the departure from uniformity is still more unaccountable,
than in the present instance. Do worms produce diseases from an excess in their
number, and an error in their place, in the same manner that blood, bile and
air produce diseases from an error in their place, or from excess in their
quantities? Before these questions are decided, I shall mention a few facts
which have been the result of my own observations upon this subject.

1. IN many instances I have seen worms discharged in the smallpox and
measles, from children who were in perfect health previously to their being
attacked by those disorders, and who never before discovered a single symptom
of worms. I shall say nothing here of the swarms of worms which are discharged
in fevers of all kinds, until I attempt to prove that an idiopathic fever is
never produced by worms.

2. NINE out of ten of the cases which I have seen of worms, have been in
children of the grossest habits and most vigorous constitutions Since the above
observations upon worms were committed to paper, I have met with the following
facts, in a letter from Doctor Capelle of Wilmington, which has been read in
the College of Physicians of Philadelphia. In the livers of sixteen, out of
eighteen rats which he dissected, he informed me that he found a number of the
taenia worms. The rats were fat, and appeared in other respects to have been in
perfect health. The two rats in which he found no worms, he says, were very
lean, and their livers smaller in proportion than the others.
. This is more especially the case where the worms are dislodged by the
smallpox and measles.

3. IN weakly children, I have often known the most powerful anthelmintics
given without bringing away a single worm. If these medicines have afforded any
relief, it has been by their tonic quality. From this fact, is it not probable
-- The conjecture I am afraid is too bold -- but I will risk it. Is it not
probable. I say, that children are sometimes disordered from the want of worms?
Perhaps the tonic medicines which have been mentioned, render the bowels a more
quiet and comfortable asylum for them, and thereby provide the system with the
means of obviating the effects of crapulas, to which all children are disposed.
It is in this way that nature, in many instances, cures evil by evil. I confine
the salutary office of worms only to that species of them which is known by the
name of the round worm, and which occurs most frequently in children.

IS there any such disease as an idiopathic WORM-FEVER? The Indians in this
country say there is not, and ascribe the discharge of worms to a fever, and
not a fever to the worms See the inquiry into the diseases of the Indians, page
22.
.

BY adopting this opinion, I am aware that I contradict the observations of
many eminent and respectable physicians.

DOCTOR Huxham describes an epidemic pleurisy, in the month of March in the
year 1740, which he supposes was produced by his patients feeding upon some
corn that had been injured by the rain the August before Vol. II. of this
Epidemics, p. 56.
. He likewise mentions that a number of people, and these too of the elderly
sort p. 136.
, were afflicted at one time with worms in the month of April in the year 1743.

LIEUTAUD gives an account of an epidemic worm-fever from Velschius, an Italian
physician Vol. I. p. 76.
; and Sauvages describes, from Vandermonde, an epidemic dysentery from worms,
which yielded finally only to worm medicines Vol. II. p. 329.
. Sir John Pringle, and Doctor Monro, likewise frequently mention worms as
accompanying the dysentery and remitting fever, and recommend the use of
calomel as an antidote to them.

I GRANT that worms appear more frequently in some epidemic diseases than in
others, and oftener in some years than in others. But may not the same heat,
moisture and diet, which produced the diseases, have produced the worms? And
may not their discharge from the bowels have been occasioned in those
epidemics, as in the smallpox and measles, by the increased heat of the body;
by the want of nourishment; or by an anthelmintic quality being accidentally
combined with some of the medicines that are usually given in fevers?

IN answer to this, we are told that we often see the crisis of a fever brought
on by the discharge of worms from the bowels by means of a purge, or by an
anthelmintic medicine. Whenever this is the case, I believe it is occasioned by
offending bile being dislodged by means of the purge at the same time with the
worms, or by the anthelmintic medicine (if not a purge) having been given on,
or near one of the usual critical days of the fever. What makes the latter
supposition probable is, that worms are seldom suspected in the beginning of
fevers, and anthelmintic medicines seldom given, till every other remedy has
failed of success; and this generally happens about the usual time in which
fevers terminate in life or death.

IT is very remarkable, that since the discovery and description of the
hydrocephalus internus, we hear and read much less than formerly, of
worm-fevers. I suspect that disorder of the brain has laid the foundation for
the principal part of the cases of worm-fevers which are upon record in books
of medicine. I grant that worms sometimes increase the danger from fevers, and
often confound the diagnosis and prognosis of them, by a number of new and
analogous symptoms. But here we see nothing more than that complication of
symptoms which often occurs in diseases of a very different and opposite
nature. How often are we puzzled by hysteric and hypochondriac symptoms in a
fever; and yet what physician ever thought of an hysteric or an hypochondriac
fever?

HAVING rejected worms as the cause of fevers, I proceed to remark, that the
diseases most commonly produced by them, belong to the class of NEUROSES. And
here I might add, that there is scarcely a disease, or a symptom of a disease,
belonging to this class, which is not produced by worms. It would be only
publishing extracts from books, to describe them.

THE chronic and nervous diseases of children, which are so numerous, and
frequently fatal, are, I believe, most commonly occasioned by worms. There is
no great danger, therefore, of doing mischief by prescribing anthelmintic
medicines in all our first attempts to cure their chronic and nervous diseases.

I HAVE taken great pains to find out, whether the presence of the different
species of worms might not be discovered by certain peculiar symptoms; but all
to no purpose. I once attended a girl of twelve years of age, in a fever, who
discharged four yards of a taenia, and who was so far from having discovered
any peculiar symptom of this species of worms, that she had never complained of
any other indisposition, than now and then a slight pain in the stomach, which
often occurs in young girls from a sedentary life, or from errors in their
diet. I beg leave to add further, that there is not a symptom which has been
said to indicate the presence of worms of any kind, as the cause of a disease,
that has not deceived me; and none oftener than the one that has been so much
depended upon, viz. the picking of the nose. A discharge of worms from the
bowels, is, perhaps, the only symptom that is pathognomonic of their presence
in the intestines.

I SHALL now make a few remarks upon anthelmintic remedies.

BUT I shall first give an account of some experiments which I made in the year
1771, upon the common earth-worm, in order to ascertain the anthelmintic
virtues of a variety of substances. I made choice of the earth-worm for this
purpose, as it is, according to naturalists, exactly the same in its structure,
manner of subsistence, and mode of propagating its species, with the round worm
of the human body.

IN the first column I shall set down, under distinct heads, the substances in
which worms were placed; and in the second and third columns the time of their
death, from the action of these substances upon them.

Hours. Minutes. I. BITTER and ASTRINGENT SUBSTANCES. Watery Infusion of Aloes,
2 48 -- of Rhubarb, 1 30 -- of Peruvian bark, 1 30 II. PURGES. Watery Infusion
of Jalap, 1 -- of Bears-foot, 1 17 -- of Gamboge, 1 III. SALTS. 1. Acids.
Vinegar, 1 convulsed. Lime Juice, 1 Diluted nitrous Acid, 1 2. Alkali. A watery
Solution of Salt of Tartar, 2 convulsed, throwing up a mucus on the surface of
the water. 3. Neutral Salts. In a watery Solution of common Salt, 1 convulsed.
-- of Nitre, ditto. -- of Sal Diuretic, ditto. -- of Sal Ammoniac, 1 -- of
common Salt and Sugar, 4 4. Earthy and Metallic Salts. In a watery Solution of
Epsom Salt, 15 -- of Rock Alum, 10 -- of Corrosive Sublimate, 1 convulsed. --
of Calomel, 49 -- of Turpeth Mineral, 1 convulsed. -- of Sugar of Lead, 3 -- of
green Vitriol, 1 -- of blue Vitriol, 10 -- of white Vitriol, 30 IV. METALS.
Filings of Steel, 25 Filings of Tin, 1 V. CALCAREOUS EARTH. Chalk, 2 VI.
SEDATIVE SUBSTANCES. Watery Infusion of Opium, 11 convulsed. -- of Carolina
Pink-root, 3^ -- of Tobacco, 14 VII. ESSENTIAL OILS. Oil of Wormwood, 3
convulsed. -- of Mint, 3 -- of Caraway Seed, 3 -- of Amber, 1 -- of Aniseed, 4
-- of Turpentine, 6 VIII. ARSENIC. A watery Solution of white Arsenic, near 2
IX. FERMENTED LIQUORS. In Madeira Wine, 3 convulsed. -- Claret, 10 X. DISTILLED
SPIRIT. Common Rum, 1 convulsed. XI. THE FRESH JUICES OF RIPE FRUITS. The Juice
of red Cherries, 5 -- of black ditto, 5 -- of red Currants, 2 -- of
Gooseberries, 3 -- of Whortleberries, 12 -- of Blackberries, 7 -- of
Rasberries, 5 -- of Plumbs, 13 -- of Peaches, 25 -- of Water melons, no effect,
XII. SACCHARINE SUBSTANCES. Honey, 7 Melasses, 7 Brown Sugar, 30 Manna, 2 XIII.
IN AROMATIC SUBSTANCES. Camphor, 5 Pimento, 3 Black Pepper, 45 XIV. FOETID
SUBSTANCES. Juice of Onions, 3 Watery Infusion of Assafoetida, 27 --
Santonicum, or Worm-Seed, 1 XV. MISCELLANEOUS SUBSTANCES. Sulphur mixed with
Oil, 2 AEthiops Mineral, 2 Sulphur, 2 Solution of Gunpowder, 1 -- of Soap, 19
Oxymel of Squills, 3 Sweet Oil, 2 30

IN the application of these experiments to the human body, an allowance must
always be made for the alteration which the several anthelmintic substances
that have been mentioned, may undergo from mixture and diffusion in the stomach
and bowels.

IN order to derive any benefit from these experiments, as well as from the
observations that have been made upon anthelmintic medicines, it will be
necessary to divide them into such as act, 1. MECHANICALLY, 2. CHEMICALLY upon
worms; and, 3. INTO those which possess a power composed of chemical and
mechanical qualities.


1. THE mechanical medicines act indirectly and directly upon the worms.

THOSE which act indirectly are, vomits, purges, bitter and astringent
substances, particularly aloes, rhubarb, bark, bears-foot, and worm-seed. Sweet
oil acts indirectly and very feebly upon worms. It was introduced into medicine
from its efficacy in destroying the botts in horses; but the worms which infest
the human bowels, are of a different nature, and possess very different organs
of life from those which are found in the stomach of an horse.

THOSE mechanical medicines which act directly upon the worms, are, cowhage
Dolichos Pruriens, of Linnaeus.
and powder of tin. The last of these medicines has been supposed to act
chemically upon the worms, from the arsenic which adheres to it in its purest
state; but from the length of time a worm lived in a solution of white arsenic,
it is probable the tin acts altogether mechanically upon them.

2. THE medicines which act chemically upon worms, appear, from our
experiments, to be very numerous.

NATURE has wisely guarded children against the morbid effects of worms, by
implanting in them an early appetite for common salt, ripe fruits and
saccharine substances; all which appear to be among the most speedy and
effectual poisons for worms.

LET it not be said, that nature here counteracts her own purposes. Her conduct
in this business is conformable to many of her operations in the human body, as
well as throughout all her works. The bile is a necessary part of the animal
fluids, and yet an appetite for ripe fruits seems to be implanted chiefly to
obviate the consequences of its excess, or acrimony, in the summer and autumnal
months.

THE use of common salt as an anthelmintic medicine, is both ancient and
universal. Celsus recommends it. In Ireland it is a common practice to feed
children, who are afflicted by worms, for a week or two upon a salt sea-weed,
and when the bowels are well charged with it, to give a purge of wort in order
to carry off the worms, after they are killed by the salt diet.

I HAVE administered many pounds of common salt colored with cochineal, in
doses of half a dram, upon an empty stomach in the morning, with great
success in destroying worms.

EVER since I observed the effects of sugar and other sweet substances upon
worms, I have recommended the liberal use of all of them in the diet of
children, with the happiest effects. The sweet substances probably act in
preventing the diseases from worms in the stomach only, into which they often
insinuate themselves, especially in the morning. When we wish to dislodge worms
from the bowels by sugar or melasses, we must give these substances in large
quantities, so that they may escape in part the action of the stomach upon them.

I CAN say nothing from my own experience of the efficacy of the mineral salts,
composed of copper, iron and zinc, combined with vitriolic acid, in destroying
worms in the bowels. Nor have I ever used the corrosive sublimate in small
doses as an anthelmintic.

I HAVE heard well-attested cases of the efficacy of the oil of turpentine in
destroying worms.

THE expressed juices of onions and of garlic are very common remedies for
worms. From one of the experiments it appears that the onion juice possesses
strong anthelmintic virtues.

I HAVE often prescribed a tea-spoonful of gunpowder in the morning upon an
empty stomach, with obvious advantage. The active medicine here is probably the
nitre.

I HAVE found a syrup made of the bark of the Jamaica cabbage tree Geoffrea, of
Linnaeus.
, to be a powerful as well as a most agreeable anthelmintic medicine. It
sometimes purges and vomits, but its good effects may be obtained without
giving it in such doses as to produce these evacuations.

THERE is not a more certain anthelmintic than Carolina pink-root Spigella
Marylandica, of Linnaeus.
. But as there have been instances of death having followed excessive doses of
it, imprudently administered; and as children are often affected by giddiness,
stupor, and a redness and pain in the eyes, after taking it, I acknowledge that
I have generally preferred to it, less certain, but more safe medicines for
destroying worms.

3. OF the medicines whose action is compounded of mechanical and chemical
qualities, calomel, jalap, and the powder of steel, are the principal.

CALOMEL, in order to be effectual, must be given in large doses. It is a safe
and powerful anthelmintic. Combined with jalap, it often brings away worms when
given for other purposes.

OF all the medicines that I have administered, I know of none more safe and
certain than the simple preparations of iron, whether they be given in the form
of steel-filings or of the rust of iron. If ever they fail of success, it is
because they are given in too small doses. I generally prescribe from five, to
thirty grains every morning, to children between one year, and ten years old;
and I have been taught by an old sea-captain, who was cured of a taenia by this
medicine, to give from two drachms to half an ounce of it, every morning, for
three or four days, not only with safety, but with success.

I SHALL conclude this essay with the following remarks.

1. WHERE the action of medicines upon worms in the bowels, does not agree
exactly with their action upon the earthworms in the experiments that have
been related, it must be ascribed to the medicines being more or less altered
by the action of the stomach upon them. I conceive that the superior
anthelmintic qualities of pink-root, steel-filings, and calomel (all of which
acted but slowly upon the earthworms compared with many other substances) are
wholly occasioned by their escaping the digestive powers unchanged, and acting
in a concentrated state upon the worms.

2. IN fevers attended with anomalous symptoms, which are supposed to arise
from worms, I have constantly refused to yield to the solicitations of my
patients, to abandon the indications of cure in the fever, and to pursue worms
as the principal cause of the disease. While I have adhered steadily to the
usual remedies for the different genera and species of fever, in all their
stages, I have at the same time blended those remedies occasionally with
anthelmentic medicines. In this I have imitated the practice of physicians in
many other diseases; in which troublesome and dangerous symptoms are pursued,
without seducing the attention from the original disorder.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EXTERNAL USE OF ARSENIC IN THE CURE OF CANCERS. Read before
the American Philosophical Society, February 3, 1786.
A FEW years ago a certain Doctor Hugh Martin, a surgeon of one of the
Pennsylvania regiments stationed at Pittsburg, during the latter part of the
late war, came to this city, and advertised to cure cancers with a medicine
which he said he had discovered in the woods, in the neighborhood of the
garrison. As Doctor Martin had once been my pupil, I took the liberty of
waiting upon him, and asked him some questions respecting his discovery. His
answers were calculated to make me believe, that his medicine was of a
vegetable nature, and that it was originally an Indian remedy. He showed me
some of the medicine, which appeared to be the powder of a well-dried root of
some kind. Anxious to see the success of this medicine in cancerous sores, I
prevailed upon the doctor to admit me to see him apply it in two or three
cases. I observed in some instances, he applied a powder to the parts affected,
and in others only touched them with a feather dipped in a liquid which had a
white sediment, and which he made me believe was the vegetable root diffused in
water. It gave me great pleasure to witness the efficacy of the doctor's
applications. In several cancerous ulcers, the cures he performed were
complete. Where the cancers were much connected with the lymphatic system, or
accompanied with a scrophulous habit of body, his medicine always failed, and,
in some instances, did evident mischief.

ANXIOUS to discover a medicine that promised relief in even a few cases of
cancers, and supposing that all the caustic vegetables were nearly alike, I
applied the phytolacca or poke-root, the stramonium, the arum, and one or two
others, to foul ulcers, in hopes of seeing the same effects from them which I
had seen from Doctor Martin's powder; but in these I was disappointed. They
gave some pain, but performed no cures. At length I was furnished by a
gentleman from Pittsburg with a powder which I had no doubt, from a variety of
circumstances, was of the same kind as that used by Doctor Martin. I applied it
to a fungous ulcer, but without producing the degrees of pain, inflammation, or
discharge, which I had been accustomed to see from the application of Doctor
Martin's powder. After this, I should have suspected that the powder was not a
simple root, had not the doctor continued upon all occasions to assure me, that
it was wholly a vegetable preparation.

IN the beginning of the year 1784 the doctor died, and it was generally
believed that his medicine had died with him. A few weeks after his death I
procured, from one of his administrators, a few ounces of the doctor's powder,
partly with a view of applying it to a cancerous sore which then offered, and
partly with a view of examining it more minutely than I had been able to do
during the doctor's life. Upon throwing the powder, which was of a brown color,
upon a piece of white paper, I perceived distinctly a number of white particles
scattered through it. I suspected at first that they were corrosive sublimate,
but the usual tests of that metallic salt soon convinced me that I was
mistaken. Recollecting that arsenic was the basis of most of the celebrated
cancer powders that have been used in the world, I had recourse to the tests
for detecting it. Upon sprinkling a small quantity of the powder upon some
coals of fire, it emitted the garlic smell so perceptibly as to be known by
several persons whom I called into the room where I made the experiment, and
who knew nothing of the object of my inquiries. After this, with some
difficulty I picked out about three or four grains of the white powder, and
bound them between two pieces of copper, which I threw into the fire. After the
copper pieces became red hot, I took them out of the fire, and when they had
cooled, discovered an evident whiteness imparted to both of them. One of the
pieces afterward looked like dull silver. These two tests have generally been
thought sufficient to distinguish the presence of arsenic in any bodies; but I
made use of a third, which has lately been communicated to the world by Mr.
Bergman, and which is supposed to be in all cases infallible.

I INFUSED a small quantity of the powder in a solution of a vegetable alkali
in water for a few hours, and then poured it upon a solution of blue vitriol in
water. The color of the vitriol was immediately changed to a beautiful green,
and afterward precipitated.

I SHALL close this paper with a few remarks upon this powder, and upon the
cure of cancers and foul ulcers of all kinds.

1. THE use of caustics in cancers and foul ulcers is very ancient, and
universal. But I believe arsenic to be the most efficacious of any that has
ever been used. It is the basis of Plunket's and probably of Guy's well known
cancer powders. The great art of applying it successfully, is to dilute and mix
it in such a manner as to mitigate the violence of its action. Doctor Martin's
composition was happily calculated for this purpose. It gave less pain than the
common or lunar caustic. It excited a moderate inflammation, which separated
the morbid from the sound parts, and promoted a plentiful afflux of humors to
the sore during its application. It seldom produced an escar; hence it
insinuated itself into the deepest recesses of the cancers, and frequently
separated these fibers in an unbroken state which are generally called the
roots of the cancer. Upon this account, I think, in an ulcerated cancer it is
to be preferred to the knife. It has no action upon the sound skin. This Doctor
Hall proved by confining a small quantity of it upon his arm for many hours. In
those cases where Doctor Martin used it to extract cancerous or schirrous
tumors that were not ulcerated, I have reason to believe that he always broke
the skin with Spanish flies.

2. THE arsenic used by the doctor was the pure white arsenic. I should suppose
from the examination I made of the powder with the eye, that the proportion of
arsenic to the vegetable powder, could not be more than 1/40 part of the whole
compound. I have reason to think that the doctor employed different vegetable
substances at different times. The vegetable matter with which the arsenic was
combined in the powder which I used in my experiments, was probably nothing
more than the powder of the root and berries of the solanum lethale, or deadly
nightshade. As the principal, and perhaps the only design of the vegetable
addition was to blunt the activity of the arsenic, I should suppose that the
same proportion of common wheat flour as the doctor used of his caustic
vegetables, would answer nearly the same purpose. In those cases where the
doctor applied a feather dipped in a liquid to the sore of his patient, I have
no doubt but his phial contained nothing but a weak solution of arsenic in
water. This is no new method of applying arsenic to foul ulcers. Doctor Way of
Wilmington, has spoken in the highest terms to me of a wash for foulnesses on
the skin, as well as old ulcers, prepared by boiling an ounce of white arsenic
in two quarts of water to three pints, and applying it once or twice a day.

3. I MENTIONED formerly that Doctor Martin was often unsuccessful in the
application of his powder. This was occasioned by his using it indiscriminately
in all cases. In schirrous and cancerous tumors, the knife should always be
preferred to the caustic. In cancerous ulcers attended with a scrophulous or a
bad habit of body, such particularly as have their seat in the neck, in the
breasts of females, and in the axillary glands, it can only protract the
patient's misery. Most of the cancerous sores cured by Doctor Martin were
seated on the nose, or cheeks, or upon the surface or extremities of the body.
It remains yet to discover a cure for cancers that taint the fluids, or infect
the whole lymphatic system. This cure I apprehend must be sought for in diet,
or in the long use of some internal medicine.

TO pronounce a disease incurable, is often to render it so. The intermitting
fever, if left to itself, would probably prove frequently, and perhaps more
speedily fatal than cancers. And as cancerous tumors and sores are often
neglected, or treated improperly by injudicious people, from an apprehension
that they are incurable, (to which the frequent advice of physicians "to let
them alone," has no doubt contributed) perhaps the introduction of arsenic into
regular practice as a remedy for cancers, may invite to a more early
application to physicians, and thereby prevent the deplorable cases that have
been mentioned, which are often rendered so by delay or unskilful management.

4. IT is not in cancerous sores only that Doctor Martin's powder has been
found to do service. In sores of all kinds, and from a variety of causes, where
they have been attended with fungous flesh or callous edges, I have used the
doctor's powder with advantage.

I FLATTER myself that I shall be excused in giving this detail of a quack
medicine, when the society reflect that it was from the inventions and temerity
of quacks, that physicians have derived some of their most active and useful
medicines.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE CAUSE AND CURE OF THE TETANUS. Read before the American
Philosophical Society, March 17, 1786.
DURING my attendance, as physician-general, upon the military hospitals of the
United States, in the course of the late war, I met with several cases of the
tetanus. I had frequently met with this disorder in private practice, and am
sorry to say, that I never succeeded with the ordinary remedy of opium in any
one case that came under my care. I found it equally ineffectual in the army.
Baffled in my expectations from a remedy that had been so much celebrated, I
began to investigate more particularly the nature of the disorder. I found it
to be a disorder of warm climates, and warm seasons. This led me to ascribe it
to relaxation. I resolved to attempt the cure of it by a set of medicines in
some measure the opposites of most of the medicines that have been employed in
that disorder. Soon after I adopted this resolution, I was called to visit Col.
John Stone, who was wounded through the foot at the battle of Germantown, on
the 4th of October 1777. He was in the third day of a tetanus. His spasms were
violent, and his pains so exquisite that his cries were heard near a hundred
yards from his quarters. His head was thrown a little backwards, and his jaw
had become stiff and contracted. He was under the care of a skilful regimental
surgeon, who was pouring down opium in large quantities without effect.

DUTY and friendship both led me to do my utmost to save the life of this
valuable officer. I immediately dismissed the opium, and gave him large
quantities of wine and bark, to the amount of two or three ounces of the
latter, and from a bottle to three pints of the former in the day. In a few
hours I was delighted with their effects. His spasms and pains were less
frequent and violent, and he slept for several hours, which he had not done for
several days and nights before.

WITH the same indication in view, I applied a blister between his shoulders,
and rubbed in two or three ounces of mercurial ointment upon the outside of his
throat. He continued to mend gradually under the operation of these medicines,
so that in ten days he was out of danger, although the spasm continued in his
wounded foot for several weeks afterward.

IN the summer of the year 1782, I was called to visit a servant girl of Mr.
Alexander Todd, merchant of this city, who had brought on a tetanus by sleeping
in the evening on a damp brick pavement, after a day in which the mercury in
Farenheit's thermometer had stood at near 90. The case was nearly as violent
and alarming as the one I have described. I treated her in the same manner, and
with the same success. To the above named medicines, I added only the oil of
amber, which she took in large doses, after I suspected the tonic and
stimulating powers of the bark and wine began to lose their effects. The good
effects of the oil were very obvious. She recovered gradually, and has
continued ever since in good health.

IN the summer of the same year, I was called to Alexander Leslie, a joiner,
who had run a nail in his foot. I found him the day afterward in extreme pain,
with small convulsions, and now and then a twinge in his jaw. The wound in his
foot was without swelling or inflammation. I dilated the wound and filled it
with lint moistened with spirit of turpentine. This in a little while produced
a good deal of pain and a great inflammation in his foot. While I was preparing
to treat him in the manner I had treated the two former cases, the pains and
spasms in his body suddenly left him, and in twenty-four hours after I saw him,
he complained of nothing but of the pain and swelling in his foot, which
continued for several weeks, and did not leave him till it ended in a
suppuration. From the history of these three cases, I beg leave to make the
following remarks.

1. THAT the predisposition to the tetanus depends upon relaxation. This
relaxation is generally produced by heat; but excessive labor, watchings,
marches, or fatigue from any cause, all produce it likewise; and hence we find
it more frequent from wounds received in battles, than from similar wounds
received in any other way. These wounds more certainly produce the tetanus, if
they have been preceded for some time with warm weather. Doctor Shoepft, the
physician-general of the Anspach troops who served at the siege of York in the
year 1781, informed me of a singular fact upon this subject. Upon conversing
with the French surgeons after the capitulation, he was informed by them that
the troops who arrived just before the siege from the West Indies with Count de
Grass, were the only troops belonging to their nation who suffered from the
tetanus. There was not a single instance of that disorder among the French
troops who had spent a winter in Rhode Island.

2. As the tetanus seems to be occasioned by relaxation, the medicines
indicated to cure it are such only as are calculated to remove this relaxation,
and to restore a tone to the system. The bark and wine appear to act in this
way. The operation of the blisters is of a more complicated nature. That they
are sedative and antispasmodic in fevers is universally acknowledged, but in
the peculiar state of irritability which occurs in the tetanus, perhaps their
effects are more simply stimulating. But I will go one step further. In order
to cure this disorder, it is necessary not only to produce an ordinary tone in
the system, but something like the inflammatory diathesis. The absence of this
diathesis is taken notice of by all authors, particularly by Doctor Cullen.
First Lines, Vol. III.
.

MERCURY appears to act only by promoting this diathesis. Hence it never does
any service unless it be given time enough to produce a salivation. The
irritation and inflammation produced in the mouth and throat, seldom fail to
produce the inflammatory diathesis, as blood drawn in a salivation has
repeatedly shown.

I APPREHEND that the oil of amber acts as a stimulant chiefly in this
disorder. I have heard of a tetanus being cured in the island of Grenada by
large doses of mustard. Doctor Wright, lately of the island of Jamaica, relates
in the sixth volume of the London medical essays, several remarkable cases of
the tetanus being cured by the cold bath. Both these remedies certainly act as
stimulants and tonics. By reasoning a priori, I conceive that electricity would
be found to be an equally powerful remedy in this disorder.

AS a general inflammatory diathesis disposes to topical inflammation, so
topical inflammation disposes to general inflammatory diathesis. Wounds upon
this account are less apt to inflame in summer than in winter. In the tetanus,
I have uniformly observed an absence of all inflammation in the wounds or
injuries that produced it. Doctor Stoll of Vienna has made the same
observation. Pars tertia, rationis medendi, p. 423.
. A splinter under the nail produces no convulsions, if pain, inflammation or
suppuration follow the accident. It is by exciting pain and inflammation, I
apprehend, that the spirit of turpentine acts in all wounds and punctures of
nervous and tendinous parts. I have never known a single instance of a tetanus
from a wound, where this remedy had been applied in time. It was to excite an
inflammation in the foot of Mr. Leslie, that I dilated the wound and filled it
with the spirit of turpentine. I was not surprised at its good effects in this
case, for I was prepared to expect them.

I FIND a remarkable case related in Doctor W. Monro's Thesis, published in
Edinburgh in the year 1783, of a black girl who had a tetanus from running a
nail in her foot, being perfectly cured by deep and extensive incisions being
made in the wounded part by Doctor John Bell, of the island of Grenada.

IT is by producing inflammation in a particular part, and tone in the whole
system, I apprehend, that the amputation of a wounded limb sometimes cures a
tetanus; and it is because the degrees of both are too inconsiderable to oppose
the violence of the spasms in the advanced stages of the tetanus, that
amputation often fails of success.

I HAVE been informed by a physician who resided some time at St. Croix, that
the negroes on that island always apply a plaster made of equal parts of salt
and tallow to their fresh wounds, in order to prevent a locked jaw. The salt
always produces some degree of inflammation.

IF the facts that have been stated are true, and the inferences that have been
drawn from them are just, how shall we account for the action of the opium in
curing this disorder? I do not deny its good effects in many cases, but I
believe it has failed in four cases out of five in the hands of most
practitioners. It is remarkable that it succeeds only where it is given in very
large doses. In those cases I would suppose that its sedative powers are lost
in its stimulating. It is upon a footing, therefore, in one respect, with the
stimulating medicines that have been mentioned; but from its being combined
with a sedative quality, it is probably inferior to most of them. I am the more
inclined to adopt this opinion, from an account I once received from Doctor
Robert, of the island of Dominique, who informed me, that after having cured a
negro man of a tetanus with large doses of opium, he was afterward seized with
a disorder in his stomach, of which he died in a few days. Upon opening him, he
found his stomach inflamed and mortified. I do not forbid the use of opium
altogether in this disorder. I think small doses of it may be given to case
pain, as in other spasmodic disorders; but as its qualities are complicated,
and its efficacy doubtful, I think it ought to yield to more simple and more
powerful remedies.

TO the cases that have been mentioned, I could add many others, in which I
have reason to believe that the excitement of a topical inflammation by
artificial means, has effectually prevented a tetanus.

TO this account of the tetanus, I beg leave to subjoin a few words upon a
disorder commonly called the jaw-fall in infants, or the trismus nascentium of
Doctor Cullen, which is nothing but a species of tetanus.

I HAVE met with three cases of it in this city, all of which proved fatal. The
stage of the disorder in which I was consulted, and the age and weakness of the
infants, forbad me to attempt any thing for their relief. I have introduced the
subject of this disorder in children, only for the sake of mentioning a fact
communicated to me by the late Doctor Cadwalader Evans of this city. This
gentleman practiced physic for several years in Jamaica, where he had frequent
opportunities of seeing the tetanus in the black children. He found it in every
case to be incurable. He supposed it to be connected with the retention of the
meconium in the bowels. This led him invariably to purge every child that was
born upon the estates committed to his care. After he adopted this practice, he
never met with a single instance of the tetanus among children.

PERHAPS it may tend to enlarge our ideas of the tetanus, and to promote a
spirit of inquiry and experiment, to add, that this disorder is not confined to
the human species. I have known several instances of it in horses, from nails
running in their feet, and other accidents. It is attended with a rigidity of
the muscles of the neck, a stiffness in the limbs, and such a contraction of
the jaw as to prevent their eating. It is generally fatal. In two cases I had
the pleasure of seeing the disease perfectly cured by applying a potential
caustic to the neck under the mane, by large doses of oil of amber, and by
plunging one of them into the river, and throwing buckets of cold water upon
the other.

HOW far the reasonings contained in this paper may apply to the hydrophobia, I
cannot determine, having had no opportunity of seeing the disease since I
adopted these principles; but from the spasmodic nature of the disorder, from
the season of the year in which it generally occurs, and above all, from the
case related by Doctor Fothergill, of a young woman having escaped the effects
of the bite of a mad cat by means of the wound being kept open, (which from its
severity was probably connected with some degrees of inflammation) is it not
probable that the same remedies, which have been used with success in the
tetanus, may be used with advantage in the hydrophobia? In a disease so
deplorable, and hitherto so unsuccessfully treated, even a conjecture may lead
to useful experiments and inquiries.

Additional Observations UPON THE Tetanus and Hydrophobia.
SINCE the publication of the foregoing observations, in the second volume of
the American Philosophical transactions, I have received letters from several
physicians in America, and one from Doctor James Currie of Liverpool, in
Great Britain; in each of which are contained cases that confirm the efficacy
of tonic remedies, more especially of wine and the cold bath, in the cure of
tetanus. My own experience has furnished two new cases, in addition to those
which are published, in favor of the first of those remedies, joined with
mercury. I am, notwithstanding, obliged to own, that the method of cure above
mentioned has failed, in some instances, in the hands of several respectable
practitioners in Philadelphia; but I have reason to believe it was only where
it was not used in the first stage of the disorder, or where every possible
advantage has not been taken of the combined powers of all of the tonic
remedies that have been mentioned.

THE Rev. Dr. Henry Muhlenberg, principal of the German college in Lancaster,
informed me in the month of June 1787, that he had often met with the trismus
nascentium among the children of poor people belonging to his congregation.
After reading the account of Doctor Evans's successful method of preventing
that disorder in Jamaica, by means of gentle purges, he recommended that
practice to the parents of children where he suspected the disease might take
place, and always with success.

THE more I have considered the causes and symptoms of hydrophobia, the more I
am disposed to ascribe it to the same proximate cause as the tetanus. 1. They
both affect the muscles of deglutition. I have lately seen a tetanus brought on
by a fractured leg, in which an attempt to swallow the smallest quantity of any
liquid, produced the same sudden and general convulsions which occur in the
hydrophobia. 2. They both proceed from causes which appear to be related to
each other, viz. from wounds, and from the action of cold after the body has
been previously weakened by heat and exercise. Of the last, we have a
remarkable proof in an account of a spontaneous hydrophobia, published by Mr.
Arthaud, president of the circle of Philadelphians at Cape Francois, in the
first volume of the transactions Recherches, memories, et observations sur les
maladies epizootiques, de Saint Domingue, p. 220.
of that new and enterprizing society. 3. They both sometimes appear as
symptoms of the same idiopathic disorder, viz. the hysteria. 4. They both yield
to the same remedies, viz. to the excitement of an inflammation in the wounded
part of the body, or to a long continued discharge of matter from it, and to
mercury. Of the efficacy of each of these remedies, there are proofs, not only
in Mr. Arthaud's observations upon the hydrophobia, before mentioned, but in
Vanswieten's commentaries upon Boerhaave's aphorisms. Aphorism ^143, No 1.
.

TO these facts I shall add one more, which may serve still further to
establish the sameness of the indications of cure in the tetanus and
hydrophobia. In the London medical journal for the months of April, May, and
June, 1784, I find the following account published by Doctor De Mathiis,
physician to the king of Naples' army. During his residence in Calabria, (the
doctor tells us) that having one day caught a viper in the fields, he had
occasion in his way home to pass by a farm-yard, where he saw a dog chained
that was said to be mad. He offered water to this dog, upon which he
immediately fell into convulsions. Recollecting his viper, he was tempted to
try its effects by applying it to the dog's throat. This was accordingly done,
and the consequences were, the head of the dog swelled, the symptoms of the
hydrophobia ceased, and the animal recovered.

IF more facts should occur, which shall show the relation that the tetanus and
hydrophobia have to each other, perhaps we may be led to conclude, that the
wound inflicted by the teeth of a dog sometimes acts in the same manner in
producing hydrophobia, that wounds made by a nail, or any obtuse lacerating
instrument act, in producing tetanus; and that both diseases may be prevented,
or cured, with equal certainty by the same tonic remedies.

THE RESULT OF OBSERVATIONS MADE UPON THE DISEASES WHICH OCCURRED IN THE
Military Hospitals of the United States, DURING THE LATE WAR.
1. THE army when it lay in tents was always more sickly, than when it lay in
the open air. It was likewise more healthy when it was kept in motion, than
when it lay in an encampment.

2. YOUNG men under twenty years of age were subject to the greatest number of
camp diseases.

3. THE southern troops were more sickly than the northern or eastern troops.

4. THE native Americans were more sickly than the natives of Europe who served
in the American army.

5. MEN above thirty, and five and thirty years of age, were the hardiest
soldiers in the army. Perhaps the reason why the natives of Europe were more
healthy than the native Americans, was, they were more advanced in life.

6. THE southern troops sickened from the want of salt provisions. Their
strength and spirits were restored only by means of salted meat. I once saw a
private, in a Virginia regiment, throw away his ration of choice fresh beef,
and give a dollar for a pound of salted bacon.

7. THOSE officers who wore flannel shirts or waistcoats next to their skins,
in general escaped fevers and diseases of all kinds.

8. THE principal diseases in the hospitals were the typhus gravior and mitior
of Doctor Cullen. Men who came into the hospitals with pleurisies or
rheumatisms, soon lost the types of their original diseases, and suffered, or
died, by the above mentioned fever.

9. THIS fever always prevailed most, and with the worst symptoms in winter. A
free air, which could only be obtained in summer, always prevented, or
mitigated it.

10. IN all those cases, where the contagion was received, cold seldom failed
to render it active. Whenever an hospital was removed in winter, one half of
the patients generally sickened on the way, or soon after their arrival at the
place to which they were sent.

11. DRUNKEN soldiers and convalescents were most subject to this fever.

12. THOSE patients in this fever who had large ulcers on their backs or limbs,
generally recovered.

13. I MET with several instances of buboes, also of ulcers in the throat,
as-described by Doctor Donald Monro. They were mistaken by some of the junior
surgeons for venereal sores, but they yielded to the common remedies of the
hospital fever.

14. THERE were many instances of patients in this fever, who suddenly fell
down dead, upon being moved, without any previous symptoms of approaching
dissolution. This was more especially the case, when they arose to go to stool.

15. THE contagion of this fever was frequently conveyed from the hospital to
the camp, by means of blankets and clothes.

16. THOSE black soldiers who had been previously slaves, died in a greater
proportion by this fever, or had a much flower recovery from it, than the same
number of white soldiers.

17. THE remedies which appeared to do most service in this disorder were
vomits of tartar emetic, gentle doses of laxative salts, bark, wine, and
volatile salt in large doses, and in some cases, blisters.

18. AN emetic seldom failed of checking this fever if exhibited while it was
in a forming state, and before the patient was confined to his bed.

19. MANY causes concurred to produce, and increase this fever; such as the
want of cleanliness, excessive fatigue, the ignorance or negligence of officers
in providing suitable diet and accommodations for their men, the general use of
linen instead of woollen clothes in the summer months, and the crouding too
many patients together in one hospital, with such other inconveniences and
abuses, as usually follow the union of the purveying and directing departments
of hospitals in the same persons. But there is one more cause of this fever
which remains to be mentioned, and that is, the sudden assembling of a great
number of persons together of different habits and manners, such as the
soldiers of the American army were in the years 1776 and 1777. Doctor Blane
informs us in his observations upon the diseases of seamen, that it sometimes
happens that a ship with a long established crew shall be very healthy, yet if
strangers are introduced among them, who are also healthy, sickness will be
mutually produced. The history of diseases furnishes many proofs of the truth
of this assertion. "Cleanliness is founded on a natural aversion to what is
unseemly and offensive in the persons of others; and there seems also to be an
instinctive horror at strangers implanted in human nature for the same purpose,
as is visible in young children, and uncultivated people. In the early ages of
Rome, the same word signified both a stranger and an enemy." Dr. Blane, p. 235.
. It was very remarkable, that while the American army at Cambridge in the year
1775, consisted only of New England men (whose habits and manners were the
same) there was scarcely any sickness among them. It was not till the troops of
the eastern, middle and southern states met at New York and Ticonderoga in the
year 1776, that the typhus became universal, and spread with such peculiar
mortality in the armies of the United States.

20. THE dysentery prevailed in the summer of 1777 in the military hospitals in
New Jersey, but with very few instances of mortality. This dysentery was
frequently followed by an obstinate diarrhoea, in which the warm bath was found
in many cases to be an effectual remedy.

21. I SAW several instances of fevers occasioned by the use of the common
ointment made of the flour of sulphur and hogs lard, for the cure of the itch.
The fevers were probably brought on by the exposure of the body to the cold
air, in the usual method in which that ointment is applied. I have since
learned, that the itch may be cured as speedily by rubbing the parts affected,
two or three times with the dry flour of sulphur, and that no inconvenience and
scarcely any smell, follow this mode of using it.

22. IN gunshot wounds of the joints, Mr. Ranby's advice of amputating the limb
was followed by success. I saw two cases of death where this advice was
neglected.

23. THERE was one instance of a soldier who lost his hearing, and another of a
soldier who had been deaf, who recovered his hearing by the noise of artillery
in a battle.

24. THOSE soldiers who were billetted in private houses, generally escaped the
contagion of the hospital fever, and recovered soonest from all their diseases.

25. SOLDIERS are but little more than adult children. That officer, therefore,
will best perform his duty to his men, who obliges them to take the most care
of their HEALTH.

26. HOSPITALS are the sinks of human life in an army. They robbed the United
States of more citizens than the sword. Humanity, economy, and philosophy, all
concur in giving a preference to the conveniences and wholesome air of private
houses; and should war continue to be the absurd and unchristian mode of
deciding national disputes, it is to be hoped that the progress of science will
so far mitigate one of its greatest calamities, as to produce an abolition of
hospitals for acute diseases. Perhaps there are no cases of sickness in which
reason and religion do not forbid the seclusion of our fellow creatures from
the offices of humanity in private families, except where they labor under the
calamities of madness and the venereal disease, or where they are the subjects
of some of the operations of surgery.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE INFLUENCE OF THE MILITARY AND POLITICAL EVENTS OF THE
AMERICAN REVOLUTION UPON THE HUMAN BODY.
THERE were several circumstances peculiar to the American revolution, which
should be mentioned previously to an account of the influence of the events
which accompanied it, upon the human body.

1. THE revolution interested every inhabitant of the country of both sexes,
and of every rank and age that was capable of reflection. An indifferent, or
neutral spectator of the controversy, was scarcely to be found in any of the
states.

2. THE scenes of war and government which it introduced, were new to the
greatest part of the inhabitants of the United States, and operated with all
the force of novelty upon the human mind.

3. THE controversy was conceived to be the most important of any that had ever
engaged the attention of mankind. It was generally believed by the friends of
the revolution, that the very existence of freedom upon our globe, was involved
in the issue of the contest in favor of the United States.

4. THE American revolution included in it the cares of government, as well as
the toils and dangers of war. The American mind was, therefore, frequently
occupied at the same time, by the difficult and complicated duties of political
and military life.

5. THE revolution was conducted by men who had been born free, and whose sense
of the blessings of liberty was of course more exquisite than if they had just
emerged from a state of slavery.

6. THE greatest part of the soldiers in the armies of the United States had
family connections and property in the country.

7. THE war was carried on by the Americans against a nation; to whom they had
long been tied by the numerous obligations of consanguinity, laws, religion,
commerce, language, interest, and a mutual sense of national glory. The
resentments of the Americans of course rose, as is usual in all disputes, in
proportion to the number, and force of these ancient bonds of affection and
union.

8. A PREDILECTION to a limited monarchy, as an essential part of a free and
safe government, and an attachment to the reigning king of Great Britain, (with
a very few exceptions) were universal in every part of the United States.

9. THERE was at one time a sudden dissolution of civil government in all, and
of ecclesiastical establishments in several of the states.

10. THE expenses of the war were supported by means of a paper currency, which
was continually depreciating.

FROM the action of each of these causes, and frequently from their combination
in the same persons, effects might reasonably be expected, both upon the mind
and body, which have seldom occurred; or if they have, I believe were never
fully recorded in any age or country.

IT might afford some useful instruction, to point out the influence of the
military and political events of the revolution upon the understandings,
passions, and morals of the citizens of the United States; but my business in
the present inquiry, is only to take notice of the influence of these events
upon the human body, through the medium of the mind.

I SHALL first mention the effects of the military, and secondly, of the
political events of the revolution. The last must be considered in a twofold
view, accordingly as they affected the friends or the enemies of the revolution.

I. IN treating of the effects of the military events, I shall take notice,
first, of the influence of actual war, and, secondly, of the influence of the
military life.

IN the beginning of a battle, I have observed thirst to be a very common
sensation among both officers and soldiers. It occurred where no exercise or
action of the body could have excited it.

MANY officers have informed me, that after the first onset in a battle, they
felt a glow of heat, so universal as to be perceptible in both their ears. This
was the case in a particular manner, in the battle of Princeton, on the third
of January in the year 1777, on which day the weather was remarkably cold.

A VETERAN colonel of a New England regiment, whom I visited at Princeton, and
who was wounded in the hand at the battle of Monmouth on the ^8th of June,
1778, (a day in which the mercury stood at 90 of Farenheit's thermometer),
after describing his situation at the time he received his wound, concluded his
story by remarking, that fighting was hot work on a cold day, but much more so
on a warm day. The many instances which appeared after that memorable battle,
of soldiers who were found among the slain without any marks of wounds or
violence upon their bodies, were probably occasioned by the heat excited in the
body by the emotions of the mind, being added to that of the atmosphere.

SOLDIERS bore operations of every kind immediately after a battle, with much
more fortitude than they did at any time afterward.

THE effects of the military life upon the human body come next to be
considered under this head.

IN another place Page 141.
I have mentioned three cases of pulmonary consumption being perfectly cured by
the diet and hardships of a camp life. Doctor Blane, in his valuable
observations on the diseases incident to seamen, ascribes the extraordinary
healthiness of the British fleet in the month of April 1782, to the effects
produced on the spirits of the soldiers and seamen, by the victory obtained
over the French fleet on the 12th of that month; and relates, upon the
authority of Mr. Ives, an instance in the war between Great Britain and the
combined powers of France and Spain in 1744, in which the scurvy, as well as
other diseases, were checked by the prospect of a naval engagement.

THE American army furnished an instance of the effects of victory upon the
human mind, which may serve to establish the inferences from the facts related
by Doctor Blane. The Philadelphia militia who joined the remains of General
Washington's army in December 1776, and shared with them a few days afterward
in the capture of a large body of Hessians at Trenton, consisted of 1500 men,
most of whom had been accustomed to the habits of a city life. These men slept
in tents and barns, and sometimes in the open air during the usual colds of
December and January; and yet there were only two instances of sickness, and
only one of death, in that body of men in the course of near six weeks, in
those winter months. This extraordinary healthiness of so great a number of men
under such trying circumstances, can only be ascribed to the vigor infused into
the human body by the victory of Trenton having produced insensibility to all
the usual remote causes of diseases.

MILITIA officers and soldiers, who enjoyed good health during a campaign, were
often affected by fevers and other disorders, as soon as they returned to their
respective homes. I knew one instance of a militia captain, who was seized with
convulsions the first night he lay on a feather bed, after sleeping several
months on a mattress, or upon the ground. These affections of the body appeared
to be produced only by the sudden abstraction of that tone in the system which
was excited by a sense of danger, and the other invigorating objects of a
military life.

THE NOSTALGIA of Doctor Cullen, or the homesickness, was a frequent disease in
the American army, more especially among the soldiers of the New England
states. But this disease was suspended by the superior action of the mind under
the influence of the principles which governed common soldiers in the American
army. Of this General Gates furnished me with a remarkable instance in 1776,
soon after his return from the command of a large body of regular troops and
militia at Ticonderoga. From the effects of the nostalgia, and the feebleness
of the discipline, which was exercised over the militia, desertions were very
frequent and numerous in his army, in the latter part of the campaign; and yet
during the three weeks in which the general expected every hour an attack to be
made upon him by General Burgoyne, there was not a single desertion from his
army, which consisted at that time of 10,000 men.

THE patience, firmness, and magnanimity with which the officers and soldiers
of the American army endured the complicated evils of hunger, cold, and
nakedness, can only be ascribed to an insensibility of body, produced by an
uncommon tone of mind excited by the love of liberty and their country.

BEFORE I proceed to the second general division of this subject, I shall take
notice, that more instances of apoplexies occurred in the city of Philadelphia,
in the winter of 1774, 5, than had been known in former years. I should have
hesitated in recording this fact, had I not found the observation supported by
a fact of the same kind, and produced by a nearly similar cause, in the
appendix to the practical works of Doctor Baglivi, professor of physic and
anatomy at Rome. After a very wet season in the winter of 1694, 5, he informs
us, that apoplexies displayed their rage; and perhaps (adds our author) that
some part of this epidemic illness was owing to the universal grief and
domestic care, occasioned by all Europe being engaged in a war. All commerce
was disturbed, and all the avenues of peace blocked up, so that the strongest
heart could scarcely bear the thoughts of it. The winter of 1774, 5, was a
period of uncommon anxiety among the citizens of America. Every countenance
wore the marks of painful solicitude, for the event of a petition to the throne
of Britain, which was to determine whether reconciliation, or a civil war, with
all its terrible and destroying consequences, were to take place. The
apoplectic fit, which deprived the world of the talents and virtues of the
Honorable Peyton Randolph, Esquire. while he filled the chair of congress in 1775,
appeared to be occasioned by the pressure of the uncertainty of those great
events upon his mind. To the name of this illustrious patriot, several others
might be added, who were affected by the apoplexy in the same memorable year.
At this time, a difference of opinion upon the subject of the contest with
Great Britain, had scarcely taken place among the citizens of America.

II. THE political events of the revolution produced different effects upon the
human body, through the medium of the mind, accordingly as they acted upon the
friends or enemies of the revolution.

I SHALL first describe its effects upon the former class of citizens of the
United States.

MANY persons of infirm and delicate habits, were restored to perfect health,
by the change of place, or occupation, to which the war exposed them. This was
the case in a more especial manner with hysterical women, who were much
interested in the successful issue of the contest. The same effects of a civil
war upon the hysteria, were observed by Doctor Cullen in Scotland, in the years
1745 and 1746. It may perhaps help to extend our ideas of the influence of the
passions upon diseases, to add, that when either love, jealousy, grief, or even
devotion, wholly engross the female mind, they seldom fail, in like manner, to
cure, or to suspend hysterical complaints.

THE population in the United States was more rapid from births during the war,
than it had ever been in the same number of years since the settlement of the
country.

I AM disposed to ascribe this increase of births chiefly to the quantity and
extensive circulation of money, and to the facility of procuring the means of
subsistence during the war, which favored marriages among the laboring part
of the people Wheat, which was sold before the war for seven shillings and
sixpence, was sold for several years during the war for four, and in some
places for two and sixpence, Pennsylvania currency per bushel. Beggars of every
description disappeared in the year 1776, and were seldom seen till near the
close of the war.
. But I have sufficient documents to prove, that marriages were more fruitful
than in former years, and that a considerable number of unfruitful marriages
became fruitful during the war. In 1783, the year of the peace, there were
several children born of parents who had lived many years together without
issue.

Mr. Hume informs us, in his history of England, that some old people, upon
hearing the news of the restoration of Charles the IId, died suddenly of joy.
There was a time when I doubted the truth of this assertion; but I am now
disposed to believe it, from having heard of a similar effect from an agreeable
political event, in the course of the American revolution. The doorkeeper of
congress, an aged man, died suddenly, immediately after hearing of the capture
of Lord Cornwallis's army. His death was universally ascribed to a violent
emotion of political joy. This species of joy appears to be one of the
strongest emotions that can agitate the human mind.

PERHAPS the influence of that ardor in trade and speculation, which seized
many of the friends of the revolution, and which was excited by the fallacious
nominal amount of the paper money, should rather be considered as a disease
than as a passion. It unhinged the judgment, deposed the moral faculty, and
filled the imagination, in many people, with airy and impracticable schemes of
wealth and grandeur. Desultory manners, and a peculiar species of extempore
conduct, were among its characteristic symptoms. It produced insensibility to
cold, hunger, and danger. The trading towns, and in some instances the
extremities of the United States, were frequently visited in a few hours or
days by persons affected by this disease; and hence "to travel with the speed
of a speculator" became a common saying in many parts of the country. This
species of insanity (if I may be allowed to call it by that name) did not
require the confinement of a bedlam to cure it, like the south sea madness
described by Doctor Mead. Its remedies were the depreciation of the paper
money, and the events of the peace.

THE political events of the revolution produced upon its enemies very
different effects from those which have been mentioned.

THE hypochondriasis of Doctor Cullen, occurred in many instances in persons of
this description. In some of them, the terror and distress of the revolution,
brought on a true melancholia Insania partialis sine dyspepsia, of Doctor
Cullen.
. The causes which produced these diseases, may be reduced to four heads. 1.
The loss of former power or influence in government. 2. The destruction of the
hierarchy of the English church in America. 3. The change in the habits of
diet, company and manners, produced by the annihilation of just debts by means
of depreciated paper money. And, 4. The neglect, insults, and oppression, to
which the loyalists were exposed, from individuals, and in several instances,
from the laws of some of the states.

IT was observed in South Carolina, that several gentlemen who had protected
their estates by swearing allegiance to the British government, died soon after
the evacuation of Charleston by the British army. Their deaths were ascribed to
the neglect with which they were treated by their ancient friends, who had
adhered to the government of the United States. The disease was called, by the
common people, the Protection Fever.

FROM the causes which produced this hypochondriasis, I have taken the liberty
of distinguishing it by the specific name of Revolutiana.

IN some cases, this disease was rendered fatal by exile and confinement; and,
in others, by those persons who were afflicted with it, seeking relief from
spirituous liquors.

THE termination of the war by the peace in 1783, did not terminate the
American revolution. The minds of the citizens of the United States were wholly
unprepared for their new situation. The excess of the passion for liberty,
inflamed by the successful issue of the war, produced, in many people, opinions
and conduct which could not be removed by reason, nor restrained by government.
For a while, they threatened to render abortive the goodness of heaven to the
United States, in delivering them from the evils of slavery and war. The
extensive influence which these opinions had upon the understandings, passions,
and morals of many of the citizens of the United States, constituted a species
of insanity, which I shall take the liberty of distinguishing by the name of
Anarchia.

I HOPE no offense will be given by the freedom of any of these remarks. An
inquirer after philosophical truth, should consider the passions of men in the
same light that he does the laws of matter or motion. The friends and enemies
of the American revolution must have been more or less than men, if they could
have sustained the magnitude and rapidity of the events that characterised it,
without discovering some marks of human weakness, both in body and mind.
Perhaps these weaknesses were permitted, that human nature might receive fresh
honors in America, by the contending parties (whether produced by the
controversies about independence or the national government) mutually forgiving
each other, and uniting in plans of general order and happiness.

AN INQUIRY INTO THE Relation of Tastes and Aliments TO EACH OTHER; AND INTO
THE INFLUENCE OF THIS RELATION UPON Health and Pleasure.
IN entering upon this subject, I feel like the clown, who, after several
unsuccessful attempts to play upon a violin, threw it hastily from him,
exclaiming at the same time, that "there was music in it," but that he could
not bring it out.

I SHALL endeavor, by a few brief remarks, to lay a foundation for more
successful inquiries upon this difficult subject.

ATTRACTION and repulsion seem to be the active principles of the universe.
They pervade not only the greatest but the minutest works of nature. Salts,
earths, inflammable bodies, metals, and vegetables, have all their respective
relations to each other. The order of these relations is so uniform, that it
has been ascribed by some philosophers to a latent principle of intelligence
pervading each of them.

COLORS, odors, and sounds, have likewise their respective relations to each
other. They become agreeable and disagreeable, only in proportion to the
natural or unnatural combination which takes place between each of their
different species.

IT is remarkable, that the number of original colors and notes in music is
exactly the same. All the variety in both proceeds from the difference of
combination. An arbitrary combination of them is by no means productive of
pleasure. The relation which every color and sound bear to each other, was as
immutably established at the creation, as the order of the heavenly bodies, or
as the relation of the objects of chemistry to each other.

BUT this relation is not confined to colors and sounds alone. It probably
extends to the objects of human aliment. For example; bread and meat, meat and
salt, the alkalescent meats and acescent vegetables, all harmonize with each
other upon the tongue; while fish and flesh, butter and raw onions, fish and
milk, when combined, are all offensive to a pure and healthy taste.

IT would be agreeable to trace the analogy of sounds and tastes. They have
both their flats and their sharps. They are both improved by the contrast of
discords. Thus pepper, and other condiments, (which are disagreeable when taken
by themselves) enhance the relish of many of our aliments, and they are both
delightful in proportion as they are simple in their composition. To illustrate
this analogy by more examples from music, would lead us from the subject of the
present inquiry.

IT is observable that the tongue and the stomach, like instinct and reason,
are, by nature, in unison with each other. One of these organs must always be
disordered, when they disagree in a single article of aliment. When they both
unite in articles of diet that were originally disagreeable, it is owing to a
perversion in each of them, similar to that which takes place in the human
mind, when both the moral faculty and the conscience lose their natural
sensibility to virtue and vice.

UNFORTUNATELY for this part of science, the taste and the stomach are so much
perverted in infancy and childhood by heterogeneous aliment, that it is
difficult to tell what kinds and mixtures of food are natural, and what are
artificial. It is true, the system possesses a power of accommodating itself
both to artificial food, and to the most discordant mixtures of that which is
natural; but may we not reasonably suppose, that the system would preserve its
natural strength and order much longer, if no such violence had been offered to
it?

IF the relation of aliments to each other follows the analogy of the objects
of chemistry, then their union will be influenced by many external
circumstances, such as heat and cold, dilution, concentration, rest, motion,
and the addition of substances which promote unnatural, or destroy natural
mixtures. This idea enlarges the field of inquiry before us, and leads us still
further from facts and certainty upon this subject, but at the same time it
does not preclude us from the hope of obtaining both; for every difficulty that
arises out of this view of the subject, may be removed by observation and
experiment.

I COME now to apply these remarks to health and pleasure. I shall select only
a few cases for this purpose; for if my principles are true, my readers cannot
avoid discovering many other illustrations of them.

1. WHEN an article of diet is grateful to the taste, and afterward disagrees
with the stomach, may it not be occasioned by some other kind of food, or by
some drink being taken into the stomach, which refuses to unite with the
offending article of diet?

2. MAY not the uneasiness which many persons feel after a moderate meal, arise
from its having consisted of articles of aliment which were not related to each
other?

3. MAY not the delicacy of stomach which sometimes occurs after the fortieth
or forty-fifth year of human life, be occasioned by nature recovering her
empire in the stomach, so as to require simplicity in diet, or such articles
only of aliment, as are related? May not this be the reason why most people,
who have passed those periods of life, are unable to retain or to digest fish
and flesh at the same time, and why they generally dine only upon one kind of
food?

4. IS not the language of nature in favor of simplicity in diet, discovered by
the avidity with which the luxurious and intemperate often seek relief from
variety and satiety, by retreating to spring water for drink, and to bread and
milk, for aliment?

5. MAY not the reason why plentiful meals of fish, venison, oysters, beef or
mutton, when eaten alone, lie so easily in the stomach, and digest so speedily,
be occasioned by no other food being taken with them? A pound, and even more,
of the above articles, frequently oppress the system much less than half the
quantity of heterogeneous aliments.

6. DOES not the facility with which a due mixture of vegetable and animal food
digests in the stomach, indicate the certainty of their relation to each other?

7. MAY not the peculiar good effects of a diet wholly vegetable, or animal, be
occasioned by the more frequent and intimate relation of the articles of the
same kingdoms to each other? And may not this be the reason why so few
inconveniences are felt from the mixture of a variety of vegetables in the
stomach?

8. MAY not the numerous acute and chronic diseases of the rich and luxurious,
arise from heterogeneous aliments being distributed in a diffused, instead of a
mixed state, through every part of the body?

9. MAY not the many cures which are ascribed to certain articles of diet, be
occasioned more by their being taken alone, than to any medicinal quality
inherent in them? A diet of oysters in one instance, of strawberries in
another, and of sugar of roses in many instances, has cured violent and
dangerous disorders of the breast (...)
. Grapes, according to Doctor Moore, when eaten in large quantities, have
produced the same salutary effect. A milk diet, persisted in for several years,
has cured the gout. I have seen many cases of dyspepsia cured by a simple diet
of beef or mutton, and have heard of a well attested case of a diet of veal
alone having removed the same disorder. Squashes, and turnips likewise, when
taken by themselves, have cured that distressing complaint in the stomach. It
has been removed even by milk, when taken by itself in a moderate quantity
Medical observations and (...)
. The farther the body, and more especially the stomach, recede from health,
the more this simplicity of diet becomes necessary. The appetite in these cases
does not speak the language of uncorrupted nature. It frequently calls for
various and improper aliment; but this is the effect of intemperance having
produced an early breach between the taste and the stomach.

PERHAPS the extraordinary cures of obstinate diseases which are sometimes
performed by persons not regularly educated in physic, may be occasioned by a
long and steady perseverance in the use of a single article of the materia
medica. Those chemical medicines which decompose each other, are not the only
substances which defeat the intention of the prescriber. Galenical medicines,
by combination, I believe, frequently produce effects that are of a compound
and contrary nature to their original and simple qualities. This remark is
capable of extensive application, but I quit it as a digression from the
subject of this inquiry.

10. I WISH it to be observed, that I have condemned the mixture of different
aliments in the stomach only in a few cases, and under certain circumstances.
It remains yet to determine by experiments, what changes are produced upon
aliments by heat, dilution, addition, concentration, motion, rest, and the
addition of uniting substances, before we can decide upon the relation of
aliments to each other, and the influence of that relation upon health. The
olla podrida of Spain, is said to be a pleasant and wholesome dish. It is
probably rendered so, by a previous tendency of all its ingredients to
putrefaction, or by means of heat producing a new arrangement, or addition new
relations of all its parts. I suspect heat to be a powerful agent in disposing
heterogeneous aliments to unite with each other; and hence a mixture of
aliments is probably less unhealthy in France and Spain, than in England, where
so much less fire is used in preparing them than in the former countries.

AS too great a mixture of glaring colors, which are related to each other,
becomes painful to the eye, so too great a mixture of related aliments
oppresses the stomach, and debilitates the powers of the system. The original
colors of the sky, and of the surface of the globe, have ever been found the
most permanently agreeable to the eye. In like manner, I am disposed to believe
that there are certain simple aliments which correspond, in their sensible
qualities, with the intermediate colors of blue and green, that are most
permanently agreeable to the tongue and stomach, and that every deviation from
them is a departure from the simplicity of health and nature.

11. WHILE nature seems to have limited us to simplicity in aliment, is not
this restriction abundantly compensated by the variety of tastes which she
allows us to impart to it in order to diversify and increase the pleasure of
eating? It is remarkable that salt, sugar, mustard, horseradish, capers, and
spices of all kinds, according to Mr. Gosse's experiments, related by Abbe
Spallanzani Dissertations, Vol. 1. Page 326.
, all contribute not only to render aliments savoury, but to promote their
digestion.

12. WHEN we consider, that part of the art of cookery consists in rendering
the taste of aliments agreeable, is it not probable that the pleasure of eating
might be increased beyond our present knowledge upon that subject, by certain
new arrangements or mixtures of the substances which are used to impart a
pleasant taste to our aliment?

13. SHOULD philosophers ever stoop to this subject, may they not discover and
ascertain a table of the relations of sapid bodies to each other, with the same
accuracy that they have ascertained the relation of the numerous objects of
chemistry to each other?

14. WHEN the tongue and stomach agree in the same kinds of aliment, may not
the increase of the pleasure of eating be accompanied with an increase of
health and a prolongation of life?

15. UPON the pleasure of eating, I shall add the following remarks. In order
to render it truly exquisite, it is necessary that all the senses, except that
of taste, should be as quiescent as possible. Those persons mistake the nature
of the appetite for food, who attempt to whet it by accompanying a dinner by a
band of music, or by connecting the dining table with an extensive and
delightful prospect. The excitement of one sense, always produces collapse in
another. Even conversation sometimes detracts from the pleasure of eating;
hence great feeders love to eat in silence, or alone; and hence the speech of a
passionate Frenchman, while dining in a talkative company, was not so improper
as might at first be imagined. "Hold your tongues, (said he) I cannot taste my
dinner." I know a physician who, upon the same principle, always shuts his
eyes, and requests silence in a sick chamber, when he wishes to determine by
the pulse the propriety of blood-letting, in cases where its indication is
doubtful. His perceptions become more distinct, by confining his whole
attention to the sense of feeling.

IT is impossible to mention the circumstance of the senses acting only in
succession to each other in the enjoyment of pleasure, without being struck by
the impartial goodness of Heaven, in placing the rich and the poor so much upon
a level in the pleasures of the table. Could the numerous objects of pleasure,
which are addressed to the ears and the eyes, have been possessed at the same
time, with the pleasure of eating, the rich would have commanded three times as
much pleasure in that enjoyment as the poor; but this is so far from being the
case, that a king has no advantage over a beggar, in eating the same kind of
aliment.

WITH this remark, I shall close this collection of Inquiries and Observations.
To the interests of science and humanity, I thus publicly devote them. If the
histories of epidemics, which I have given, contain no discoveries, they may
perhaps prove useful, by showing the degrees of affinity between similar
diseases in the same latitudes, and in the same state of society in different
countries, and thereby contribute to form a complete system of the history of
epidemics.

I SHALL make no apology for having suggested several new remedies for common
diseases. Each of those remedies has been so often, and so successfully,
administered in Philadelphia, and in the neighboring states, that I shall
leave them to plead their own cause before the bar of the public.

AN apology will be more necessary for those opinions in which I have taken the
liberty of differing from some of the present established systems of medicine.
My motives for publishing these opinions were, that if true, they might be
placed in a situation to receive support from the inquiries and observations of
other physicians; and if they are erroneous, that they might, as speedily as
possible, be examined and refuted. Nor will my errors be without benefit to
medicine. Men (says M. de Fontenelle) cannot, upon any subject, arrive at what
is rational, till they have first, on that very subject, exhausted all
imaginable folly. How many absurdities (adds the same enlightened author)
should we not now utter, if the ancients had not said them before us, and thus
delivered us from the trouble of repeating them. -- The uniformity of nature in
this instance, with her conduct in the production of moral happiness, deserves
our particular attention. As good can be known by mortals, only by the means of
evil; so truth, perhaps, can be discovered by them, only through the means of
error.

THE END.
APPENDIX: CONTAINING, THE NEW METHOD OF Inoculating for the Smallpox.
DELIVERED IN A LECTURE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE 20th OF
FEBRUARY, 1781.

ALSO, OBSERVATIONS ON THE Duties of a Physician, AND THE METHODS OF IMPROVING
MEDICINE, ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY AND MANNERS IN THE
UNITED STATES. DELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE 7th OF
FEBRUARY 1789, AT THE CONCLUSION OF A COURSE OF LECTURES UPON CHEMISTRY AND THE
PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE CLASS.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA.

THE SECOND EDITION WITH ADDITIONS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET NEAR
FRONT STREET. M. DCC LXXXIX.

GENTLEMEN,
IT must afford no small pleasure to a benevolent mind in the midst of a war,
which daily makes so much havoc with the human species, to reflect, that the
smallpox which once proved equally fatal to thousands, has been checked in its
career, and in a great degree subdued by the practice of INOCULATION.

IT is foreign to my purpose to deliver to you the history of this art, and to
mark the various steps that have attended its progress to its present state of
improvement. We have yet to lament the want of uniformity and of equal success
in the practice of it among physicians. A great number of pamphlets have been
written upon the subject without exhausting it. There is still ample room left
for the man of genius to exercise his talents for observation and reasoning
upon it. The facts I mean to lay before you are so inconsiderable, compared
with what still remain to be known upon this subject, that I have to request,
when your knowledge in it is completed, that you would bury my name in
silence; and forget that ever I ventured to lay a single stone in this part of
the fabric of science.

IN treating upon this subject, I shall I. CONSIDER the proper subjects and
seasons for inoculation. II. I SHALL describe the method of communicating the
disorder. III. I SHALL consider the method of preparing the body for the
smallpox. IV. I SHALL mention the treatment proper during the eruptive fever;
and, V. POINT out a few cautions that are necessary after the disease is over.


I. FORMERLY there were great difficulties in the choice of the subjects for
Inoculation. But experience teaches us that it may be practiced in every stage
of life, and in almost every condition of the human body. In infancy the
periods before and after dentition are to be preferred. But we seldom see any
great inconveniences from submiting to the general necessity of inoculating
children between the ages of three months and two years. Indeed we often see
children cut three or four teeth during the preparation and eruptive fever
without the least addition being made to any of the troublesome symptoms which
accompany the smallpox. There is one inconvenience attending the choice of the
first months of infancy for inoculating, and that is, the matter often fails of
producing the disorder in such young subjects. I have frequently failed in two
or three attempts to communicate the disorder to children under four months old
with the same matter that has succeeded in a dozen other patients inoculated at
the same time. When the inoculation succeeds in such tender subjects, they
generally have less fever, and fewer pustules, than are common in any future
period of life.

ALTHOUGH a physician would prefer a patient in good health to any other as a
subject for inoculation, yet cases often occur in which it is necessary to
communicate the smallpox while the body is affected with some other disorder.
I can with pleasure inform you, that the smallpox is rendered so perfectly
safe by inoculation, that there are few chronic diseases which should be
considered as obstacles in the way of it. I have inoculated patients laboring
under a tertian fever, obstructed viscera, the hooping cough, the
hypochondriasis, the asthma, the itch, and other cutaneous disorders, and even
pregnant women, with the same, and in some instances, with greater success than
persons in perfect health. Doct. Cullen informs us that he has seen inoculation
succeed in scrophulous patients. A physician in Jamaica informed me that he had
inoculated Negroes with success in the worst stage of the yaws. To these facts
I must add one more extraordinary than any that has been yet mentioned: Doct.
Brown, my late colleague in the care of the military hospitals, informed me,
that he had seen inoculation succeed in patients who were seized, after the
infection was communicated with the hospital fever. The preparation of the body
should be accommodated to the disease which affects it. Some physicians have
thought the smallpox received in this way, was a remedy for other diseases,
but my experience has not confirmed this opinion. On the contrary, I am
disposed to think that no other change is produced by inoculation than by the
regimen and medicines that are used to prepare the body for the smallpox. Nor
does the smallpox, during its continuance, afford any security against the
attacks of other diseases. I have seen the most alarming complication of the
smallpox and measles in the same person.

THE seasons commonly preferred for inoculation in this country are, the spring
and fall. It may be practiced with equal safety in the winter, a due regard
being had to the temperature of the air in the preparation of the body.

THE principal objection to inoculating in the summer months in this climate,
arises from the frequency of bilious disorders at that season, to which the
preparation necessary for the smallpox probably disposes the body. This
caution applies more directly to children who at a certain age are more subject
than grown people to a disorder in their bowels in warm weather.

II. THE methods of communicating the smallpox by inoculation, have been
different in different countries, and in the different aeras of its progress
toward its present stage of improvement. The scab, dossel of lint, and the
thread impregnated with variolous matter and bound up in a gash in the arm,
have been laid aside.

WE are indebted to Mr. Sutton for the mode of communicating it by a slight
puncture with the point of a lancet, or needle, dipped in fresh matter. As it is
difficult sometimes to procure matter in a fresh state, I have been led to use
it with equal success by preserving it on lint in a box, and moistening it with
cold water just before I used it. Matter may be kept in this way for a month
without losing its infectious quality, provided it be not exposed to heat or
moisture. The former destroys its power of infecting as certainly as the salt
of tartar destroys the acidity of vinegar. Moisture by remaining long upon the
matter, probably destroys its virulence by subjecting it to fermentation. The
longer matter has been kept in a general way, the longer the distance will be
between the time of communicating the disorder and the eruptive fever. It will
be proper always to yield to the prejudices of our patients in favor of matter
taken from persons who have but few pustules. But I am persuaded from repeated
observations, that the disease is no ways influenced by this circumstance. I am
satisfied likewise that there is no difference between the effects of the
matter, whether it be taken in its watery or purulent state. The puncture
should not be larger than is sufficient to draw one drop of blood, but it
should always be made by a sharp lancet, for the sudden inflammation and
suppuration, excited by a dull lancet, sometimes throw off the matter so as to
prevent its infecting the body I am disposed to believe that the external
applications which are used by the Indians for the cure of the bite of
poisonous snakes, act only by exciting inflammation and suppuration, which
discharge the poison from the wound before it is absorbed. All their external
remedies are of a stimulating nature.
. No plaster or bandage should be applied over the puncture. It should be made
in the left arm of all subjects. The objections to inoculating in the leg are
too obvious to be mentioned. I have heard of the disease being communicated by
rubbing the dry skin with the matter. My own observations upon this subject
give me reason to suspect the facts that are contained in books relative to
this mode of infecting the body. I have bound large pieces of lint dipped in
fresh matter for 24 hours upon the arm, without producing the disorder. A
practitioner of physic in New Jersey informed me that he once gave a
considerable quantity of fresh variolous matter in a dose of physic without
infecting his patient. I suspect the matter that produces the disease is of the
same nature with certain poisons, which require to be brought in contact with a
wound or sore in the body before they produce their effects. I deliver this
opinion with diffidence. The subject stands in need of more experiments and
investigation.

III. I COME now to consider the best method of preparing the body for the
smallpox. This must be done, 1st by DIET, and 2dly by MEDICINE. The DIET
should consist chiefly of vegetables. I have never seen any inconvenience from
the free use of milk as a part of the preparative diet. In some habits, where a
morbid acid prevails in the stomach, we may indulge our patients in a little
weak flesh broth two or three times a week with safety. Tea, coffee, and even
weak chocolate, with biscuit or dry toast, may be used as usual, by persons
accustomed to that kind of aliment. Wine and spirits of all kinds should be
withheld from our patients during the preparation. The more acescent their
drinks are, the better. It is unnecessary that this change in the diet should
take place till a day or two before the time of communicating the disorder. The
system accommodates to a vegetable and low diet in the course of three weeks or
a month, so as to defeat in some measure the advantages we expected from it.
The good effects of it appear to depend in a great degree upon the suddenness
with which we oblige our patients to conform to it. For this reason, when we
are called upon to inoculate persons who have lived more than three or four
weeks upon a low diet, we should always direct them to live a few days upon
animal food before we communicate the disorder to them. By these means we may
produce all the good effects of the sudden change in the diet I have already
mentioned. 2. The MEDICINES most commonly used to prepare the body for the
smallpox are antimony and mercury. The latter has had the preference, and has
been given in large quantities under a notion of its being a specific antidote
to the variolous matter. Many objections might be made to this opinion; I shall
mention only three.

1. WE often see the disorder in a high degree after the system is fully
impregnated with mercury.

2. WE often see the same salutary effects of mercury when given before the
disorder is communicated to the body, that we perceive when it is given after
inoculation; in which case we are sure the mercury cannot enter into mixture
with the variolous matter so as to destroy it.

3. IF mercury acted specifically in destroying the variolous matter, it would
render every other part of the preparation unnecessary, but this we know is not
the case, for the neglect or improper use of the vegetable diet or cool regimen
is often attended with an extraordinary number, or virulence of the smallpox,
even in those cases where mercury is given in the largest quantity.

THE way in which mercury prepares the body for the smallpox, seems to be by
promoting the several excretions, particularly that by perspiration, which by
diminishing the quantity of the fluids and weakening the tone of the solids,
renders the system less liable to a plentiful eruption of the smallpox. But I
object to the use of this medicine for the following reasons.

1. IT effectually deprives us of all the benefits of the cool regimen; for
mercury, we know, always disposes the system to take hold.

2. ALL the good effects of mercury may be procured by PURGES which do not
subject the body to the above mentioned inconvenience.

THE PURGES may be suited to the constitutions, and in some cases, even to the
inclinations of our patients. I have seen jalap, rhubarb, senna, manna, aloes,
soluble tartar, Glauber and Epsom salts, and the butternut pill, all given with
equal success. The quantity should be sufficient to procure three or four
stools every day. A little magnesia should always be mixed with rhubarb and
jalap in preparing children. It will be sufficint for the mothers and nurses of
infants to conform strictly to the vegetable diet. I have never seen any
advantages from giving them even a single dose of physic.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that the quality, dose, and number of
purges are to be determined by the age, sex, and habits of our patients. A
constitution enfeebled with a previous disease forbids the use of purges, and
requires medicines of a restorative kind. Patients afflicted with cutaneous
disorders bear larger and more frequent doses of physic than are indicated in
more healthy subjects.

IN adult subjects of a plethoric habit, bloodletting is very useful on the
third or fourth day after inoculation. We are not to suppose, that every fat
person labors under a plethora. A moderate degree of fat is so far from
rendering the disease more violent, especially in children, that I think I have
generally found such subjects have the smallpox more favorably than others.

MODERATE exercise in the open air should be used during the preparation. But
hard labor and every thing that promotes sweat or fatigue, as also the
extremes of heat and cold, should be avoided.

IV. WE come now to consider the treatment of the body during the eruptive
fever. On the eighth day after inoculation our patients are generally seized
with the common symptoms of fever. Sometimes this fever appears on the sixth
and seventh day after inoculation. But when it is irregular it is often delayed
till the ninth and tenth days. I have seen many instances of it on the
fourteenth, a few on the fifteenth and sixteenth, and one case in which it did
not come on till the eighteenth day after the infection was communicated to the
body Since the publication of the first edition of this lecture, I have heard
of two cases, in one of which the fever did not come on till the 20th, and in
the other till the 21st day after the infection was communicated to the body.
In some of these tedious cases. I have seen an inflammation and suppuration on
the punctured part of the arm on the 8th day without any fever. Perhaps in
these cases the inflammation and suppuration are only cuticular, and that the
smallpox is taken from the matter which is formed by them.
. The place where the puncture was made with the lancet or needle generally
serves as an harbinger of the approaching fever. A slight inflammation appears
about it and a pock rises up in the center. But this remark is liable to some
objections. I have seen four instances in which the fever came on at the
expected time, and the disorder went through all its stages with the greatest
regularity, and yet there was no sign of an inflammation or pock near the spot
where the puncture was made: even the puncture itself became invisible. On the
other hand we sometimes see an inflammation and pock on the arm appear on the
eighth and ninth days without any fever accompanying them. Some physicians
pretend that this inflammation and solitary pock are sufficient to constitute
the disease, but repeated experience has taught me to be very cautious in
relying upon these equivocal marks. It is true, I have sometimes seen patients
secured against the smallpox both in the natural way and by inoculation where
these marks have appeared; but I have as often seen such patients seized
afterward with the smallpox in the natural way to the great distress of
families and mortification of physicians. Upon this account I make it a
constant practice to advise a second or third inoculation where a fever and
eruption have been wanting. As the absence of these symptoms is probably
occasioned by the weakness or age of the variolous matter, or the too high
state of preparation of the body, we should always guard against both, by
making the puncture the second time with fresh matter, by subjecting our
patients to a less abstemious diet, and by giving fewer doses of physic. I have
heard it remarked, that if a slight redness and a small pimple appeared on the
arm on the third day after inoculation, it was a sign the matter had infected
the whole constitution. I acknowledge I have often seen a greater degree of
redness on the third than on the second day after inoculation, but I have not
been able to establish a diagnostic mark from it; for I have seen the disease
produced on the usual days where the redness has appeared on the second day,
and in some cases where it has not appeared until the eruptive fever.

I AM led here unwillingly to discuss the old question, Is it possible to have
the smallpox in the natural way after inoculation? -- In many of the cases
supposed to be the smallpox from inoculation, it is probable the matter has
been taken from the chicken-pox, which resembles the smallpox in many of its
peculiarities, but in none more than that of leaving pits or marks on the skin.
But there are certainly cases where there are the most irrefragible proofs of
the infection implanted by inoculation being of a variolous nature, where the
disorder has been afterward taken in the natural way. In these cases I would
suppose the variolous matter produced only a topical or cuticular disorder. We
see something analogous to this in nurses who attend patients in the smallpox.
But further, this topical or cuticular infection may be produced by art in
persons who have had the smallpox in the natural way. Some years ago I made a
puncture on my left hand with a lancet moistened with variolous matter. On the
eighth day an inflammation appeared on the place accompanied with an
efflorescence in the neighborhood of it, which extended about two inches in
every direction from the spot where the puncture was made. On the eleventh day
I was surprised to find two pocks (if I may venture to call them such) the one
on the outside of the fourth finger of my left hand, and the other on my
forehead. They remained there for several days but without filling with matter,
and then dropped off rather in the form of a soft wart than of a common scab.
Doct. Way of Wilmington repeated the same experiment upon himself, but with an
issue to his curiosity more extraordinary than that I have just now related. On
the eighth day after he had made a puncture on his hand, a pock appeared on the
spot, which in the usual time filled with matter, from which he inoculated
several children, who sickened at the usual time, and went through all the common
stages and symptoms of the smallpox. It would seem from these facts, that it
is necessary the smallpox should produce some impression upon the whole
system, in order to render it ever afterward incapable of receiving an
impression of a similar nature. A fever and an eruption therefore seem
necessary for this purpose. As the inflammation of the arm on the eighth day is
a sign of the topical and cuticular infection, so an eruption (though ever so
small) seems to be the only certain sign of the infection of the whole system.
The eruption is the more decisive in its report in proportion as it comes out
and goes off in the usual manner of the smallpox in the natural way. In those
cases where patients have been secured against a second attack of the disorder,
where there have been no obvious fever or visible eruption, I think I have
observed an unusual inflammation, and a copious and long continued discharge of
matter from the arm. Perhaps this may serve as an outlet of the matter, which
in other cases produces the fever and eruption. I am the more disposed to
embrace this opinion from the testimony which several authors have left us of
the effects of ulcers in securing the body from the infection of the plague.
The effects of issues are still more to our purpose. We observe a plentiful
discharge of matter from them every time the body is exposed to cold, and the
febrile effects of it upon the system are thereby frequently obviated. How far
a ratio exists between the degrees of inflammation and the discharge of matter
from the arm, and the degrees of fever and eruption, must be determined by
future and very accurate observations. If it should appear that there are the
least inflammation and smallest discharge where there have been the highest
fever and most copious eruption, and on the contrary, if it should appear that
there are the greatest inflammation and discharge where there have been the
least fever and smallest eruption, I must beg leave to add, without attempting
in this place to explain the reasons of it, that the remark, if generally true,
is liable to some exceptions. But the subject is involved in darkness; I shall
be satisfied if I have brought you within sight of the promised land. Your own
ingenuity, like another Jewish leader, must conduct you thither.

THE indications in the treatment of the body during the eruptive fever are,

1st. To regulate the degree of fever.

2d. To mitigate troublesome and alarming symptoms.

THE fever which produces the eruption is generally of the inflammatory kind.
It sometimes therefore comes on with the symptoms of great heat, preceded with
chilliness, and determination to the head and breast, and a full hard pulse.
The remedies proper in this case are,

A. Bloodletting. The quantity to be drawn must be regulated by the violence of
the symptoms, the constitution, habits, and even country of the patient, and by
the season of the year. I have never found more than one bleeding, to the
quantity of twelve or fourteen ounces, necessary in any stage or degree of the
eruptive fever of the smallpox by inoculation.

B. Cool air is of the utmost consequence in the eruptive fever. The use of
this remedy in fevers marks an era, not only in the management of the
smallpox, but in medicine. The degrees of cold should always be increased in
proportion to the violence of the fever. Stove-rooms, so common in this
country, should be carefully avoided. The more we oblige our patients to set up
and walk in the open air, the better. Even in those cases where they languish
most for the bed, they should be encouraged rather to lie upon, than under the
bed clothes. Children should be stripped of flannel petticoats that come in
contact with their skins, and even clouts should be laid aside if possible,
without great inconvenience, and at any rate they should be often removed.
Great and obvious as the advantages of cold air appear to be in the eruptive
fever, it has sometimes been used to an excess that has done mischief. There
are few cases where a degree of cold below forty of Farenheit's thermometer is
necessary in this stage of the smallpox. When it has been used below this, or
where patients have been exposed to a damp atmosphere some degrees above it, I
have heard of inflammations of an alarming nature being produced in the throat
and breast.

C. The bowels, more especially of children, should be kept open with gentle
laxatives. And

D. Cool subacid drinks should be used plentifully until the eruption is
completed.

Sometimes the smallpox comes on with a fever the reverse of that which we
have described. The heat is inconsiderable, the pulse is weak, and scarcely
quicker than ordinary, and the patient complains of but slight pains in the
back and head. Here the treatment should be widely different from that which
has been mentioned when the fever is of the inflammatory kind. Bleeding in this
case in hurtful, and even cool air must be admitted with caution. The business
of the physician in this case is to excite a gentle action in the sanguiferous
system, in order to produce the degree of fever which is necessary to the
eruption of the pock. For this purpose he may recommend the use of warm drinks,
and even of a warm bed, with advantage. If the eruption delays beyond the third
day, with all the circumstances of debility that have been mentioned, I have
frequently ordered my patients to eat a few ounces of animal food, and to drink
a glass or two of wine, with the most desirable success. The effects of this
indulgence are most obvious where the weakness of the fever and the delay of
the eruption in children, have made it necessary to allow it to mothers and
nurses.

THE smallpox by inoculation so seldom comes on with the symptoms of a putrid
fever, that little need be said of the treatment proper in such cases. I shall
only observe, that the cold regimen in the highest degree, promises more
success in these cases than in any others. I have repeatedly been told, that
when the smallpox appears confluent among the Africans, it is a common
practice for mothers to rub their children all over with pepper, and plunge
them immediately afterward into a spring of cold water. This, they say,
destroys a great part of the pock, and disposes the remainder to a kindly
suppuration. From the success that has attended the use of the cold bath in
putrid fevers in some parts In a dissertation entitled "Epidemia ^^rna qu^^
^^atis^aviam, A^^. 173^ afflixit." published in the appendix to the Act^ Not.
Curios. Vol. X. it appears, that washing the body all over with cold water in
putrid fevers, attended with great debility, was attended with success at
Br^^l^w in Sl^^ia. The practice has since been adopted we are told by several
of the neighboring countries. CULLEN's FIRST LINES OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
of Europe mentioned in a former lecture, I am disposed to believe in the
efficacy of the African remedy.

THE fever generally lasts three days, and the eruption continues for a similar
length of time, counting the last day of the fever as the first day of the
eruption. But this remark is liable to many exceptions. We sometimes observe
the eruption to begin on the first, and often on the second day of the fever,
and we sometimes meet with cases in which a second eruption comes on after the
fever has abated for several days, and the first eruption considerably advanced
in its progress toward a complete suppuration. This is often occasioned by the
application of excessive cold or heat to the body, or by a sudden and premature
use of stimulating drinks or animal food.

I COME now to treat of the best method of mitigating troublesome and alarming
symptoms.

THE only alarming symptom is convulsions, to which children are subject during
the time of dentition. These have been less frequent, since the liberal and
judicious use of cool air in the eruptive fever than formerly. They are often
relieved by putting the feet in warm water. But a more effectual and speedy
method of curing them is to expose our patients suddenly to the open air. The
colder the air the quicker relief it affords in these cases. To prevent the
return of the fits, as well as to allay any disagreeable and troublesome
startings, a few drops of laudanum should be given. They generally yield in a
little while to this excellent remedy.

THE next symptom which demands the aid of our art, is the inflammation and
sore on the arm. Poultices of all kinds should be laid aside, as tending to
increase the inflammation and sore. Instead of these, the part affected should
be washed three or four times a day with cold water Where the inflammation on
the arm has been so considerable as not to yield immediately to the application
of cold water, I have used the vegeto mineral water with advantage.
. This application is not only agreeable to our patients, but soon checks the
progress of the inflammation, and disposes the sore to heal about the time the
eruption is completed. The eyes should likewise be washed frequently with cold
water, to secure them from pustules and inflammation. With respect to those
alarming or troublesome symptoms which occur in those cases where the pocks are
numerous, or confluent, they happen so seldom in inoculation that they do not
come properly under our notice in this place. They are moreover fully discussed
by Docts. Boerhaave, Huxham, Hillary and other practical writers.

V. I COME now, in the last place, to deliver a few directions that are
necessary after the eruption and suppuration are over.

IT is well known that eruptions of an obstinate nature sometimes follow the
smallpox. These I believe are often occasioned by a too sudden and speedy use
of animal food. To guard against these disagreeable consequences of
inoculation, it is of the utmost importance to enjoin a cautious and gradual
return to the free use of an animal diet, and at the same time it will be
necessary to give our patients a dose or two of purging physic.

THUS, gentlemen, have I delivered to you a short history of the new method of
inoculating for the smallpox. I am aware that prejudices are entertained
against some parts of it by physicians of the most ancient name and character
among us. I have witnessed the effects of the old and new methods of preparing
the body upon many thousand patients, and I am satisfied not only from my own
observations, but from the experience of gentlemen upon whose judgments I rely
more than upon my own, that the new method is by far the safest and most
successful. Added to this, I can assure my pupils, that I have never known a
single instance of a patient prepared and treated in the manner I have
described, that ever had an abscess after the smallpox, or even such an
inflammation or sore upon the arm as required the application of a poultice.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE Duties of a Physician, AND THE METHODS OF IMPROVING
MEDICINE, ACCOMMODATED TO THE PRESENT STATE OF SOCIETY AND MANNERS IN THE
UNITED STATES. DELIVERED IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE 7th OF
FEBRUARY, 1789, AT THE CONCLUSION OF A COURSE OF LECTURES UPON CHEMISTRY AND
THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
GENTLEMEN,
I SHALL conclude our course of lectures, by delivering to you a few directions
for the regulation of your future conduct and studies, in the line of your
profession.

I SHALL, first, suggest the most probable means of establishing yourselves in
business, and of becoming acceptable to your patients, and respectable in life.

Secondly. I SHALL mention a few thoughts which have occurred to me on the mode
to be pursued, in the further prosecution of your studies, and for the
improvement of medicine.

I. PERMIT me, in the first place, to recommend to such of you as intend to
settle in the country, to establish yourselves as early as possible upon farms.
My reasons for this advice are as follow.

1. IT will reconcile the country people to the liberality and dignity of your
profession, by showing them that you assume no superiority over them from your
education, and that you intend to share with them in those toils, which were
imposed upon man in consequence of the loss of his innocence. This will prevent
envy, and render you acceptable to your patients as men, as well as physicians.

2. BY living on a farm you may serve your country by promoting improvements in
agriculture. Chemistry (which is now an important branch of a medical
education) and agriculture are closely allied to each other. Hence some of the
most useful books upon agriculture have been written by physicians. Witness the
essays of Dr. Home of Edinburgh, and of Dr. Hunter of Yorkshire in England.

3. THE business of a farm will furnish you with employment in the healthy
seasons of the year, and thereby deliver you from the taedium vitae, or what is
worse, from retreating to low or improper company. Perhaps one cause of the
prevalence of dram or grog drinking, with which country practitioners are
sometimes charged, is owing to their having no regular or profitable business
to employ them in the intervals of their attendance upon their patients.

4. THE resources of a farm will create such an independence as will enable you
to practice with more dignity, and at the same time screen you from the trouble
of performing unnecessary services to your patients. It will change the nature
of the obligation between you and them. While money is the only means of your
subsistence, your patients will feel that they are the channels of your daily
bread; but while your farm furnishes you with the necessaries of life, your
patients will feel more sensibly that the obligation is on their side, for
health and life.

5. THE exigencies and wants of a farm, in stock and labor of all kinds, will
enable you to obtain from your patients a compensation for your services in
those articles. They all possess them; and men part with that of which money is
only the sign, much more readily than they do with money itself.

6. THE resources of a farm will prevent your cherishing, for a moment, an
impious wish for the prevalence of sickness in your neighborhood. A healthy
season will enable you to add to the produce of your farm, while the rewards of
an unhealthy season will enable you to repair the inconvenience of your
necessary absence from it. By these means your pursuits will be marked by that
variety and integrity, in which true happiness is said to consist.

7. LET your farms be small, and let your principal attention be directed to
grass and horticulture. These afford most amusement, require only moderate
labor, and will interfere least with your duties to your profession.

II. AVOID singularities of every kind in your manners, dress, and general
conduct. Sir Isaac Newton, it is said, could not be distinguished in company,
by any peculiarity, from a common well-bred gentleman. Singularity in any
thing, is a substitute for such great or useful qualities as command respect;
and hence we find it chiefly in little minds. The profane and indelicate
delicate combination of extravagant ideas, improperly called wit, and a formal
and pompous manner, whether accompanied by a wig, a cane, or a ring, should all
be avoided, as incompatible with the simplicity of science and the real dignity
of physic. There is more than one way of playing the quack. It is not
necessary, for this purpose, that a man should advertise his skill, or his
cures, or that he should mount a phaeton and display his dexterity in operating
to an ignorant and gaping multitude. A physician acts the same part in a
different way, who assumes the character of a madman or a brute in his manners,
or who conceals his fallibility by an affected gravity and taciturnity in his
intercourse with his patients. Both characters, like the quack, impose upon the
public. It is true, they deceive different ranks of people; but we must
remember that there are two kinds of vulgar, viz. the rich and the poor; and
that the rich vulgar are often below the poor, in ignorance and credulity.

III. IT has been objected to our profession, that many eminent physicians have
been unfriendly to christianity. If this be true, I cannot help ascribing it in
part to that neglect of public worship with which the duties of our profession
are often incompatible; for it has been justly observed, that the neglect of
this religious and social duty generally produces a relaxation either in
principles or morals. Let this fact lead you, in setting out in business, to
acquire such habits of punctuality in visiting your patients, as shall not
interfere with acts of public homage to the SUPREME BEING. Dr. Gregory has
observed, that a cold heart is the most frequent cause of deism. Where this
occurs in a physician, it affords a presumption that he is deficient in
humanity. But I cannot admit that infidelity is peculiar to our profession. On
the contrary, I believe christianity places among its friends more men of
extensive abilities and learning, in medicine, than in any other secular
employment. Stahl, Hoffman, Boerhaave, Sydenham, Haller and Fothergill, were
all christians. These enlightened physicians were considered as the ornaments
of the ages in which they lived, and posterity has justly ranked them among the
greatest benefactors of mankind.

IV. PERMIT me to recommend to you a regard to all the interests of your
country. The education of a physician gives him a peculiar insight into the
principles of many useful arts, and the practice of physic favors his
opportunities of doing good, by diffusing knowledge of all kinds. It was in
Rome, when medicine was practiced only by slaves, that physicians were
condemned by their profession mutam exercere artem. But in modern times, and in
free governments, they should disdain an ignoble silence upon public subjects.
The history of the American revolution has rescued physic from its former
slavish rank in society. For the honor of our profession it should be recorded,
that some of the most intelligent and useful characters, both in the cabinet
and the field, during the late war, have been physicians. The illustrious Dr.
Fothergill opposed faction and tyranny, and took the lead in all public
improvements in his native country, without suffering thereby the least
diminution of that reputation, or business, in which, for forty years, he
flourished almost without a rival in the city of London.

V. STUDY simplicity in the preparation of your medicines. My reasons for this
advice are as follow.

1. ACTIVE medicines produce the most certain effects in a simple state.

2. MEDICINES when mixed frequently destroy the efficacy of each other. I do
not include chemical medicines alone in this remark. It applies likewise to
galenical medicines. Nor do I assert that the virtues of all these medicines
are impaired by mixture; but we can only determine when they are not, by actual
experiments and observation.

3. WHEN medicines of the same class, or even of different classes, are given
together, the strongest only produces an effect. But what are we to say to a
compound of two medicines which gives exactly the same degrees of impression to
the system? The effect of them will probably be such, if we may judge from
analogy, as would have been produced by neither in a simple state.

4. BY observing simplicity in your prescriptions, you will always have the
command of a greater number of medicines of the same class, which may be used
in succession to each other, in proportion as habit renders the system
insensible of their action.

5. BY using medicines in a simple state, you will arrive at an exact knowledge
of their virtues and doses, and thereby be able to decide upon the numerous and
contradictory accounts, which exist in our books, of the characters of the same
medicines.

UNDER this head I cannot help adding two more directions.

1. AVOID sacrificing too much to the taste of your patients, in the
composition of your medicines. The nature of a medicine may, in some instances,
be wholly changed, by being mixed with sweet substances. The Author of nature
seems to have had a design in making medicines unpalatable. Had they been more
agreeable to the taste, they would long ago have yielded to the unbounded
appetites of man, and by becoming articles of diet or condiments, have lost
their efficacy in diseases.

2. GIVE as few medicines as possible in tinctures made with distilled spirits.
Perhaps there are but few cases in which it is safe to exhibit medicines
prepared in spirits, in any other form than in drops. Many people have been
innocently seduced into a love of strong drink, from taking large or frequent
doses of bitters infused in spirits. Let not our profession in a single
instance be charged with adding to the calamities which have been entailed upon
mankind by this dreadful species of intemperance.

VI. LET me advise you, in your visits to the sick, never to appear in a hurry,
nor to talk of indifferent matters before you have made the necessary inquiries
into the symptoms of your patient's disease.

VII. AVOID making (...) of any case; respice finem should be the (...) of
every indisposition. There is scarcely a disorder so trifling, that has not,
directly or indirectly, proved an outlet to human life. This consideration
should make you anxious and punctual in your attendance upon every acute
disease, and keep you from risking your reputation by an improper or hasty
prognosis.

VIII. DO not condemn, or oppose, unnecessarily, the simple prescriptions of
your patients. Yield to them in matters of little consequence, but maintain an
inflexible authority over them in matters that are essential to life.

IX. PRESERVE, upon all occasions, a composed or cheerful countenance in the
room of your patients, and inspire as much hope of a recovery as you can,
consistent with truth, especially in acute diseases. The extent of the
influence of the will over the human body, has not yet been fully ascertained.
I reject the futile pretensions of Mr. Mesmer to the cure of diseases, by what
he has absurdly called animal magnetism; but I am willing to derive the same
advantages from his deceptions, which the chemists have derived from the
delusions of the alchemists. The facts which he has established, clearly prove
the influence of the imagination and will upon diseases. Let us avail ourselves
of the aid which these powers of the mind present to us, in the strife between
life and death. I have frequently prescribed remedies of doubtful efficacy in
the critical stage of acute diseases, but never till I had worked up my
patients into a confidence, bordering upon certainty, of their probable good
effects. The success of this measure has much oftener answered, than
disappointed my expectations; and while my patients have commended the vomit,
the purge, or the blister which was prescribed, I have been disposed to
attribute their recovery to the vigorous concurrence of the will in the action
of the medicine. Does the will beget insensibility to cold, heat, hunger, and
danger? Does it suspend pain, and raise the body above feeling the pangs of
Indian tortures? Let us not then be surprised that it should enable the system
to resolve a spasm, to open an obstruction, or to discharge an offending humor.
I have only time to hint at this subject. Perhaps it would lead us, if we could
trace it fully, to some very important discoveries in the cure of diseases.

X. PERMIT me to advise you to attend to that principle in the human mind,
which constitutes the association of ideas, in your intercourse with your
patients. A chamber, a chair, a curtain, or even a cup, all belong to the means
of life or death, accordingly as they are associated with cheerful or
distressing ideas, in the mind of a patient. But this principle is of more
immediate application in those chronic diseases which affect the mind. Nothing
can be accomplished here, till we produce a new association of ideas. For this
purpose, a change of place and company are absolutely necessary. But we must
sometimes proceed much further. I have heard of a gentleman in South Carolina,
who cured his fits of low spirits by changing his clothes. The remedy was a
rational one. It produced at once a new train of ideas, and thus removed the
paroxysm of his disease.

XI. A PHYSICIAN in sickness is always a welcome visitor in a family: hence he
is solicited to partake of the usual sign of hospitality in this country, by
taking a draught of some strong drink every time he enters into the house of a
patient. Let me charge you to lay an early restraint upon yourselves, by
refusing to yield to this practice, especially in the forenoon. Many physicians
have been led by it into habits of drunkenness. You will be in the more danger
of falling into this vice, from the fatigue and inclemency of weather to which
you will be exposed in country practice. But you have been taught that strong
drink affords only a temporary relief from those evils, and that it tends
afterward to render the body more sensible of them.

XII. MAKE it a rule never to be angry at any thing a sick man says or does to
you. Sickness often adds to the natural impatience and irritability of the
temper. We are, therefore, to submit to the severe and unnecessary toils that
are sometimes exacted from us, and to bear even the reproaches of our patients
with meekness and silence. It is folly to resent injuries at any time, but it
is cowardice to resent an injury from a sick man; since, from his weakness and
dependence upon us, he is unable to contend with us upon equal terms. You will
find it difficult to attach your patients to you by the obligation of
friendship or gratitude. You will sometimes have the mortification of being
deserted by those patients who owe most to your skill and humanity. This led
Dr. Turner to advise physicians never to choose their friends from among their
patients. But this advice can never be followed by a heart that has been taught
to love true excellency, wherever if finds it. I would rather advise you to
give the benevolent feelings of your hearts full scope, and to forget the
unkind returns they will often meet with, by giving to human nature -- a tear.
Let us not despair. From the increasing influence of reason and religion in our
world, the time must soon come, when even physicians, and the brute creation,
shall become the objects of the justice and humanity of mankind.

XIII. AVOID giving a patient over in an acute disease. It is impossible to
tell, in such cases, where life ends and where death begins. Hundreds of
patients have recovered who have been pronounced incurable, to the great
disgrace of our profession. I know that the practice of predicting danger and
death upon every occasion, is sometimes made use of by physicians, in order to
enhance the credit of their prescriptions, if their patients recover, and to
secure a retreat from blame, if they should die. But this mode of acting is
mean and illiberal. It is not necessary that we should decide with confidence
at any time, upon the issue of a disease.

XIV. CASES will frequently occur in which you will be exposed to a struggle
between a regard for your own reputation, and for the life of a patient. In
such cases, let christianity determine what is to be done. That new commandment
which directs us to make the measure of our love to our fellow creatures, the
same as the love of the Author of our religion was to the human race, certainly
requires that we should at all times risk, and even sacrifice reputation, to
preserve the life of a fellow creature. The pusillanimous, or, as he is
commonly called, the safe physician, who, absorbed wholly in the care of his
own reputation, views without exertion the last conflict between life and death
in a patient, in my opinion will be found hereafter to have been guilty of a
breach of the sixth commandment; while the conscientious, or, as he is commonly
called, the bold physician, who loses sight of his character, and even of the
means of his subsistence, and by the use of a remedy of doubtful efficacy turns
the scale in favor of life, performs an act that borbers upon divine
benevolence. A physician who has only once in his life enjoyed the godlike
pleasure that is connected with such an act of philanthropy, will never require
any other consideration to reconcile him to the toils and duties of his
profession.

XV. I SHALL now give some directions with respect to the method of charging
for your services to your patients.

WHEN we consider the expense of a medical education, and the sacrifices a
physician is obliged to make of ease, society, and even health, to his
profession; and when we add to these, the constant and painful anxiety which is
connected with the important charge of the lives of our fellow creatures, and
above all, the inestimable value of that blessing which is the object of his
services, I hardly know how it is possible for a patient sufficiently and
justly to reward his physician. But when we consider, on the other hand, that
sickness deprives men of the means of acquiring money; that it increases all
the expenses of living; and that high charges often drive patients from
regular-bred physicians to quacks; I say, when we attend to these
considerations, we should make our charges as moderate as possible, and conform
them to the following state of things.

AVOID measuring your services to your patients by scruples, drachms, and
ounces. It is an illiberal mode of charging. On the contrary, let the number
and the time of your visits, the nature of your patient's disease, and his rank
in his family or society, determine the figures in your accounts. It is
certainly just to charge more for curing an apoplexy, than an intermitting
fever. It is equally just to demand more for risking your life by visiting a
patient in a contagious fever, than for curing a pleurisy. You have a right
likewise to be paid for your anxiety. Charge the same services, therefore,
higher to the master or mistress of a family, or to an only son or daughter,
who call forth all your feelings and industry, than to less important members
of a family and of society. If a rich man demands more frequent visits than are
necessary, and if he imposes the restraints of keeping to hours by calling in
other physicians to consult with you upon every trifling occasion, it will be
just to make him pay accordingly for it. As this mode of charging is strictly
agreeable to reason and equity, it seldom fails of according with the reason
and sense of equity of our patients. Accounts made out upon these principles,
are seldom complained of by them. I shall only remark further upon this
subject, that the sooner you send in your accounts after your patients recover,
the better. It is the duty of a physician to inform his patient of the amount
of his obligation to him at least once a year. But there are times when a
departure from this rule may be necessary. An unexpected misfortune in
business, and a variety of other accidents, may deprive a patient of the money
he had allotted to pay his physician. In this case, delicacy and humanity
require, that he should not know the amount of his debt to his physician, till
time has bettered his circumstances.

I SHALL only add, under this head, that the poor of every description should
be the objects of your peculiar care. Dr. Boerhaave used to say, they were his
best patients, because God was their paymaster. The first physicians that I
have known, have found the poor the steps by which they ascended to business
and reputation. Diseases among the lower class of people are generally simple,
and exhibit to a physician the best cases of all epidemics, which cannot fail
of adding to his ability of curing the complicated diseases of the rich and
intemperate. There is an inseparable connection between a man's duty and his
interest. Whenever you are called, therefore, to visit a poor patient, imagine
you hear the voice of the good Samaritan sounding in your ears, Take care of
him, and I will repay thee.

I COME now to the second part of this address, which was to point out the best
mode to be pursued, in the further prosecution of your studies, and the
improvement of medicine.

I. GIVE me leave to recommend to you, to open all the dead bodies you can,
without doing violence to the feelings of your patients, or the prejudices of
the common people. Preserve a register of the weather, and of its influence
upon the vegetable productions of the year. Above all, record the epidemics of
every season; their times of appearing, and disappearing, and the connection of
the weather with each of them. Such records, if published, will be useful to
foreigners, and a treasure to posterity. Preserve, likewise, an account of
chronic cases. Record the name, age and occupation of your patient; describe
his disease accurately, and the changes produced in it by your remedies;
mention the doses of every medicine you administer to him. It is impossible to
tell how much improvement and facility in practice you will derive from
following these directions. It has been remarked, that physicians seldom
remember more than the two or three last years of their practice. The records
which have been mentioned, will supply this deficiency of memory, especially in
that advanced stage of life when the advice of physicians is supposed to be
most valuable.

II. PERMIT me to recommend to you further, the study of the anatomy (if I may
be allowed the expression) of the human mind, commonly called metaphysics. The
reciprocal influence of the body and mind upon each other, can only be
ascertained by an accurate knowledge of the faculties of the mind, and of their
various modes of combination and action. It is the duty of physicians to assert
their prerogative, and to rescue the mental science from the usurpations of
schoolmen and divines. It can only be perfected by the aid and discoveries of
medicine. The authors I would recommend to you upon metaphysics, are, Butler,
Lock, Hartly Reid, and Beattie. These ingenious writers have cleared this
sublime science of its technical rubbish, and rendered it both intelligible and
useful.

III. Do not confine your studies and attention only to extraordinary cases.
The most frequent outlets of human life are through the channels of common
diseases. A late professor in the college of Glasgow, when a student in one of
the London hospitals, was observed to be busy in examining the pulse of a
patient in a fever, while all his fellow students were employed in examining
with uncommon attention the case of a child with two heads that had just been
brought into the hospital. Upon being condemned by his companions for
neglecting to profit by the examination of so new a case, he answered, "I never
expect in the whole course of my life to see, or hear, of another child with
two heads: but I expect to meet with fevers in my practice, every day of my
life." This sensible answer admits of extensive application to the advancement
of medicine. Could we eradicate fevers only from our bills of mortality, how
much more should we add to the population and happiness of our country, than by
discovering remedies for polypi and aneurisms?

IV. LET me remind you, that improvement in medicine is not to be derived, only
from colleges and universities. Systems of physic are the productions of men of
genius and learning; but those facts which constitute real knowledge, are to be
met with in every walk of life. Remember how many of our most useful remedies
have been discovered by quacks. Do not be afraid, therefore, of conversing with
them, and of profiting by their ignorance and temerity in the practice of
physic. Medicine has its Pharisees, as well as religion. But the spirit of this
sect is as unfriendly to the advancement of medicine, as it is to christian
charity. By conversing with quacks, we may convey instruction to them, and
thereby lessen the mischief they might otherwise do to society. But further. In
the pursuit of medical knowledge, let me advise you to converse with nurses and
old women. They will often suggest facts in the history and cure of diseases
which have escaped the most sagacious observers of nature. Even negroes and
Indians have sometimes stumbled upon discoveries in medicine. Be not ashamed to
inquire into them. There is yet one more means of information in medicine which
should not be neglected, and that is, to converse with persons who have
recovered from indispositions without the aid of physicians. Examine the
strength and exertions of nature in these cases, and mark the plain and
homemade remedy to which they ascribe their recovery. I have found this to be a
fruitful source of instruction, and have been led to conclude, that if every
man in a city, or a district, could be called upon to relate to persons
appointed to receive and publish his narrative, an exact account of the effects
of those remedies which accident or whim has suggested to him, it would furnish
a very useful book in medicine. To preserve the facts thus obtained, let me
advise you to record them in a book to be kept for that purpose. There is one
more advantage that will probably attend the inquiries that have been
mentioned; you may discover diseases, or symptoms of diseases, or even laws of
the animal economy, which have no place in our systems of nosology, or in our
theories of physic.

V. IN dangerous cases that are plain and common, let me caution you against
having recourse to consultations. They relax exertion, suspend enterprise, and
lessen responsibility in a physician. They moreover add, unnecessarily, to the
expenses of a patient. But in difficult and obscure cases let me advise you to
anticipate the fears of your patients, by requesting assistance. Such candor
begets subsequent confidence and business, for truth is the universal interest
of mankind. There are few instances in which any solid advantages have been
derived from more than two physicians consulting together. Where a greater
number are employed, the prescriptions are generally the result of neutralized
opinions, and are of course often unsuccessful. The epitaph of Pliny, viz. Se
turba medicorum peruisse, might be inscribed upon the tombstones of many
persons, whose sick beds had been surrounded by a crowd of physicians.

VI. LET me recommend to your particular attention, the indigenous medicines of
our country. Cultivate or prepare as many of them as possible, and endeavor to
enlarge the materia medica, by exploring the untrodden fields and forests of
the United States. The ipecacuana, the Seneka and Virginia snake roots, the
Carolina pink-root, the spice-wood, the sassafras, the butter-nut, the
thoroughwort, the poke, and the strammonium, are but a small part of the
medicinal productions of America. I have no doubt but there are many hundred
other plants which now exhale invaluable medicinal virtues in the desert air.
Examine, likewise, the mineral waters, which are so various in their
impregnation, and so common in all parts of our country. Let not the properties
of the infects of America escape your investigation. We have already discovered
among some of them, a fly equal in its blistering qualities to the famous fly
of Spain. Who knows but it may be reserved for America to furnish the world,
from her productions, with cures for some of those diseases which now elude the
power of medicine? Who knows but what, at the foot of the Allegany mountain
there blooms a flower that is an infallible cure for the epilepsy? Perhaps on
the Monongahela, or the Potowmac, there may grow a root that shall supply, by
its tonic powers, the invigorating effects of the savage or military life in
the cure of consumptions. Human misery of every kind is evidently on the
decline. Happiness, like truth, is an unit. While the world, from the progress
of intellectual, moral and political truth, is becoming a more safe and
agreeable abode for man, the votaries of medicine should not be idle. All the
doors and windows of the temple of nature have been thrown open by the
convulsions of the late American revolution. This is the time, therefore, to
press upon her altars. We have already drawn from them discoveries in morals,
philosophy, and government, all of which have human happiness for their object.
Let us preserve the unity of truth and happiness, by drawing from the same
source, in the present critical moment, a knowledge of antidotes to those
diseases which are supposed to be incurable.

I HAVE now, gentlemen, only to thank you for the attention with which you have
honored the course of lectures which has been delivered to you, and to assure
you, that I shall be happy in rendering you all the services that lie in my
power, in any way you are pleased to command me. Accept of my best wishes for
your happiness, and may the blessings of hundreds and thousands who were ready
to perish, be your portion in life, your comfort in death, and your reward in
the world to come.

THE END.

