A DISSERTATION ON THE MANNER OF ACQUIRING THE CHARACTER AND PRIVILEGES OF A
CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCLXXXIX.

A DISSERTATION, etc.
THE United States are a new nation, or political society, formed at first by
the declaration of independence, out of those British subjects in America, who
were thrown out of royal protection by act of parliament, passed in December,
1775.

A citizen of the United States, means a member of this new nation. The
principle of government being radically changed by the revolution, the
political character of the people was also changed from subjects to citizens.

The difference is immense. Subject is derived from the latin words, sub and
jacio, and means one who is under the power of another; but a citizen is an
unit of a mass of free people, who, collectively, possess sovereignty.

Subjects look up to a master, but citizens are so far equal, that none have
hereditary rights superior to others. Each citizen of a free state contains,
within himself, by nature and the constitution, as much of the common
sovereignty as another. In the eye of reason and philosophy, the political
condition of citizens is more exalted than that of noblemen. Dukes and earls
are the creatures of kings, and may be made by them at pleasure; but citizens
possess in their own right original sovereignty.

There is also a great difference between citizens, and inhabitants or
residents.

Any person living within a country or state, is an inhabitant of it, or
resident in it.

Negroes are inhabitants, but not citizens. Citizenship confers a right of
voting at elections, and many other privileges not enjoyed by those who are no
more than inhabitants.

The precise difference may be thus stated: The citizen of a free state is so
united to it as to possess an individual's proportion of the common
sovereignty; but he who is no more than an inhabitant, or resident, has no
farther connection with the state in which he resides, than such as gives him
security for his person and property, agreeably to fixed laws, without any
participation in its government.

Republics, both ancient and modern, have been jealous of the rights of
citizenship. The new constitution carries this matter so far, as to require not
only present citizenship in federal representatives and senators, but
antecedent citizenship for the term of seven and nine years. The time and
manner of acquiring the high character of a citizen of the United States, is
therefore well worthy of public discussion.

The following appear to be the only modes of acquiring this distinguishing
privilege.

1st. By being parties to the original compact, the declaration of independence.

2d. By taking an oath of fidelity to some one of the United States, agreeably
to law.

3d. By tacit consent and acquiescence.

4th. By birth or inheritance.

5th. By adoption. Of each of these in their order.

1st. By the declaration of independence congress proclaimed to the world, that
their constituents, "the people of the united colonies, were absolved from all
allegiance to the crown of England," and that the late colonies were "free and
independent states." For the support of this bold measure, they confederated
together, by pledging to each other "their lives, fortunes, and sacred honor."
By this eventful declaration, "a nation was born in a day." Nearly three
millions of people who had been subjects, became citizens. Their former
political connection with George the third was done away, and a new one was
formed, not with another king, but among themselves, by which they became
coequal citizens, and, collectively, assumed all the rights of sovereignty. As
this was done by the representatives of the people of this country, and in
their name, and on their behalf, all who had concurred in investing congress
with power, acquired citizenship, by being parties to this solemn act. These
original citizens were the founders of the United States. Citizenship could not
be acquired in this way by absentees from America, for two reasons; 1st. Such
were not thrown out of British protection by the restraining act of parliament,
and therefore continued British subjects, under the obligations, and in quiet
possession of their British allegiance: And, secondly, Such could not be
parties to the constitution of congress. The members of that body were not
their deputies, or agents, and therefore could not bind them, or act for them.

2d. To cement the people of America more firmly together, oaths of fidelity to
the states were respectively administered soon after the declaration of
independence, to all above a certain age. By these oaths, a compact was
established between the state and the individuals; and those who took them
acquired or confirmed their citizenship by their own personal act. By swearing
to do the duty of citizens, they, by law, acquired a right to the privileges
and protection of citizens. Those who refused, were ordered to depart, as being
persons unfriendly to the revolution.

3d. As the war drew near a close, the administration of oaths being less
necessary, was less frequent. Citizenship was then, and now is, daily acquired
by tacit consent or acquiescence. Minors who were not old enough to be parties
to the declaration of independence, or to take the oaths of fidelity to the
states at the time they were imposed, became citizens in consequence of their
continuing to reside in the United States after they had arrived to mature age,
especially if at the same time they claimed the protection, and performed the
duties of citizens.

At twenty-one years of age, every freeman is at liberty to choose his country,
his religion, and his allegiance. Those who continue after that age in the
allegiance under which they have been educated, become, by tacit consent,
either subjects or citizens, as the case may be. In this manner, young men are
now daily acquiring citizenship, without the intervention of an oath.

It is to be observed, that in order that such persons may acquire citizenship
in this way, their residence subsequent to the revolution is indispensably
necessary, previous to the commencement of their citizenship: for no man can be
said so far to acquiesce in, or consent to a government, before he has lived
under it, as to become a citizen thereof by tacit consent.

Citizenship, when acquired in this way by an absentee at the time of the
declaration of independence, can therefore only be dated from the time in which
the claimant of that high privilege became a resident under the independent
government of the state of which he claims to be a citizen.

4th. None can claim citizenship as a birthright, but such as have been born
since the declaration of independence, for this obvious reason: no man can be
born a citizen of a state or government, which did not exist at the time of his
birth. Citizenship is the inheritance of the children of those who have taken a
part in the late revolution: but this is confined exclusively to the children
of those who were themselves citizens. Those who died before the revolution,
could leave no political character to their children, but that of subjects,
which they themselves possessed. If they had lived, no one could be certain
whether they would have adhered to the king or to congress. Their children,
therefore, may claim by inheritance the rights of British subjects, but not of
American citizens.

5th. Persons born in any country may have acquired citizenship by adoption, or
naturalization, agreeably to law.

The citizenship of such must be dated from the time of their adoption.

From these observations, the following inferences result.

Citizenship is an adventitious character to every adult in the United States;
and there was a certain period in the lives of such persons, when they ceased
to be subjects, and began to be citizens.

The citizenship of no man could be previous to the declaration of
independence, and, as a natural right, belongs to none but those who have been
born of citizens since the 4th of July, 1776.

This accounts for the use of the word resident in that paragraph of the new
constitution, which describes the qualifications of the president of the United
States. The senators must be citizens nine years, and the representatives seven
years; but it is not said, that the president must be a citizen for fourteen
years. The thing was impossible, for independence was then not quite twelve
years declared; therefore the word resident was introduced in order to
comprehend time before the declaration of independence.

By the same paragraph, the distinction between a citizen and a resident is
constitutionally recognized; for though it is necessary, that the president must
have been "fourteen years a resident," it is sufficient for him to have become
a citizen "at the time of the adoption of the constitution." By this it is
acknowledged, that one may be much longer a resident within the United States,
than a citizen of the same. The precision of this paragraph, in respect to
language, is worthy of observation. It is not said, that the president must
have been a resident in, or an inhabitant of the United States, for fourteen
years. The word used is within, which, as explained by Doctor Johnson, means,
"in the compass of," -- "the enclosure of." The sentence, therefore, when
analyzed, means nothing more than that the president must have been a resident
within the limits of the United States for fourteen years.

Though the states have not existed as states for fourteen years; yet, their
geographical boundaries, or limits, have existed from the first settlement of
America. But to proceed with inferences. From the premises already established,
it may be farther inferred, that citizenship, by inheritance, belongs to none
but the children of those Americans, who, having survived the declaration of
independence, acquired that adventitious character in their own right, and
transmitted it to their offspring. The children of those who died before the
revolution, who are now citizens, must have acquired that privilege in their
own right, and by their own personal act; that is, by joining their country at
or since the revolution.

Citizenship, acquired by tacit consent, is exclusively confined to the cases
of persons who have resided within the United States since the declaration of
independence, and could not have commenced prior to their actual residence
under their new and independent governments.

From the whole it is plain, that no private individual, though a native, who was
absent from this country at the time independence was declared, could have
acquired citizenship with the United States, prior to his returning and
actually joining his countrymen subsequent to the revolution.

Dangerous consequences would follow from admitting that birth and residence,
before the declaration of independence in the country now called the United
States, were sufficient to confer the rights of citizenship on persons who were
absent during the late war, before they returned to their native country.

If this should be established, many persons, hostile to our liberties and
independence, might put in their claim to be citizens. All the children born in
the interval between the peace of Paris, 1763, and the declaration of
independence in 1776, within the British posts on our north-western frontier,
now wrongfully held from us, would be citizens. Our East India trade would be
laid open to many adventurers, who have contributed nothing toward the
establishment of our liberties: for the natives of this country, born before
the revolution, who are now dispersed over the world, might, on that principle,
fit out ships, make voyages to India, come here and sell their goods, under the
character of citizens, from the circumstance of their having been born among us
thirty or forty years ago, and return with the net proceeds of their cargoes,
to their present residence in foreign countries. These, and many other
consequences, injurious to the liberties and commerce of these states, would
result from admitting the dangerous position, that birth and residence in this
country, before the revolution, conferred citizenship on absentees, antecedent
to their return after that event had taken place.

FINIS.

