A SERMON, Delivered at BOSTON, March 12th, 1789, BY THE REV. SAMUEL WEST, AT
HIS INSTALMENT TO THE Pastoral Care of the CHURCH and SOCIETY in HOLLIS STREET.
To which are added, THE CHARGE, Given on that Occasion, BY THE REV. JEREMY
BELKNAP. AND THE RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP, BY THE REV. JOSEPH ECKLEY.

PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND COMPANY. MDCCLXXXIX.

REV. MR. WEST'S SERMON, AT HIS INSTALMENT.
CHRISTIANITY is the method devised by infinite wisdom and goodness to effect
the salvation and happiness of fallen man. The execution of this gracious plan
is committed to JESUS CHRIST the Son of GOD; who, as he fulfilled his Ministry
on earth, raised up and commissioned chosen men, whom he named Apostles, to
complete the establishment of his spiritual kingdom here below, and the sacred
volume agreeable to which it is to be governed. Which being accomplished, the
Ministers of CHRIST receive their authority from him indeed, but in the way of
his common providence, and under the general direction of his SPIRIT. How men
are invested with that office -- the difficulties which attend it -- and the
motives which should engage them to diligence and perseverance in it, will form
the subject of the following discourse, founded on those words: II.
CORINTHIANS, iv.1. THEREFORE, SEEING WE HAVE THIS MINISTRY, AS WE HAVE RECEIVED
MERCY, WE FAINT NOT.



THE Apostle concludes the preceding chapter with representing the great effect
of Christianity, as producing the image of GOD in the hearts of men; from
whence he infers the dignity and importance of the Gospel Ministry. Therefore,
seeing we have, etc. That is, Since the great design and effect of the Gospel
is to restore depraved human nature to the lost image, forfeited favor and
enjoyment of GOD, how interesting and important is the Ministry of CHRIST! And
as it has pleased him in his distinguishing mercy, to invest us with, and to
support us in that office, so, under all the difficulties which we meet with,
far from being discouraged, we pursue it, with a zeal and resolution
proportioned to the greatness of its object, the glory of CHRIST, and the
salvation of the souls of men.

IT would be arrogance in the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel to assume the
style of the Apostles, or apply to themselves what was only intended of those
primitive and inspired Preachers of Christianity. But, as the Ministers of
CHRIST in every age derive their authority from him, as they are engaged in the
same cause, serve the same Divine Master, from whose gracious hand they expect
their final reward; so the same grateful ardour becomes them, and the same
animating motives should excite their zeal and diligence, in pursuing the great
ends of their Ministry.

AS GOD originally produced the grand system of nature by an immediate exercise
of his almighty power; but, when produced, governs it in the course of his
common providence, agreeable to certain stated laws: So, when by the miraculous
exercise of the same almighty power, he had introduced and established his
spiritual kingdom among men, he left it to be governed by the same universal
providence, under the direction of his SPIRIT, and agreeable to the dictates of
his holy word.

JESUS CHRIST administers the government of providence. He is in particular
that King whom GOD has anointed upon his holy hill of Sion, and who is
therefore head over all things to his Church. JESUS CHRIST raises up and
qualifies some for the work of the Ministry, by bestowing upon them those
natural and intellectual talents, a competent share of which is evidently
necessary to the purpose. For whilst we readily acknowledge on the one hand,
that the most shining talents are not essential to the work of the Ministry, it
cannot be supposed on the other, agreeable to the mind of CHRIST, that persons
should be appointed to that office to whom he has denied the abilities
necessary to the proper discharge of the common affairs of life. If shining
talents are not indispensable, they are at least ornamental to the Ministry and
useful to the Church.

THE same all disposing Providence favors some with advantages for acquiring
such degrees of learning as are, if not essential, greatly conducive to the
ends of the Ministry. An acquaintance with science has a happy effect on the
characters of men: It enlarges the mind, softens the manners, and furnishes
with a variety, both of sentiment and language, for the instruction of others.
Learning is not, by any means, to be set in competition with an experimental
acquaintance with true religion. Nor do we pretend that it necessarily tends to
render men pious or virtuous. Like all other temporal advantages it is very
liable to be abused as the occasion of pride and self sufficiency; and is,
perhaps, as often perverted in this manner as any distinction which one man
possesses above another. But when consecrated by divine grace to the honor and
service of CHRIST, it becomes not only an ornament to the office, but tends to
the accomplishment of its great design; and is a qualification nearly
indispensable, in those who are set for the defense of the Gospel.

BUT CHRIST designates or points out some for the work of the Ministry in a
more direct way, by the effectual teachings of his HOLY SPIRIT; leading them
into an acquaintance with the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; enabling them
to realize the truth of his doctrines, the excellency of his character, the
beauties of holiness, and the grandeur of those prospects which are opened,
through him, into the eternal world.

WHATEVER natural talents a man may possess -- whatever learning he may have
acquired, we must insist upon it, that the effectual teachings of the blessed
SPIRIT of GOD, or that spiritual discernment which distinguishes spiritual
things, is necessary to the work of the Ministry; and that it cannot be the
mind of the great Head of the Church, that men should be appointed to that
office, whose commission has not thus (if you will indulge the expression) been
sealed with his own hand; that is, who are not partakers of his spirit and
adorned with his image. Is that man properly qualified to urge others to accept
of CHRIST, who has not himself accepted him? Will he be likely to recommend the
Gospel to others, who has not embraced it himself? -- Will he be a good soldier
of JESUS CHRIST, who has never given his allegiance to that Divine Master? --
Will he pursue his Ministry with proper zeal and perseverance, through all the
difficulties with which it is attended, who has no sense of the excellency of
the Gospel, or the worth of souls, and is a stranger to those hopes which
should warm the heart and animate the services of the Minister of CHRIST? -- In
a word, is he qualified to take care of and watch for the souls of others, who
has neglected his own soul? -- You will readily acknowledge the absurdity of
the above suppositions, and of consequence, how necessary it is, that the
Ministers of CHRIST should be partakers of the spirit of CHRIST.

BUT we do not suppose, that a man's possessing the above qualifications, in
the most extensive manner, implies that he is under any obligation to engage in
the work of the Ministry. There ought to be a particular inclination of the
heart to it, attended with a persuasion of the mind, that GOD requires it of
him, and that, of consequence, it is his duty thus to serve the LORD CHRIST.
When the above mentioned particulars meet with the acceptance and approbation
of the Church and People of GOD, there is an evident designation to office, and
such men are called of GOD, as really, though in a different way, as those
primitive preachers, whom he pointed out by the miraculous gifts of his HOLY
SPIRIT.

WE do not consider the ministerial office as necessarily assumed for life;
many circumstances may concur to render a continuance in it improper, and even
impracticable. The same leading Providence which has pointed out the expediency
of taking it up, may, with equal evidence, convince us that it is proper to
relinquish it.

AS the work of the Ministry is important, so, like most other interesting
pursuits, it is attended with many difficulties and discouragements. It affords
but little prospect of worldly advantage, less than either of the other learned
professions, whilst the service which it requires is equal, or, perhaps,
greater. And as for the pleasures and honors of science, the man who
faithfully attends to his duty, as a Minister of CHRIST, will find but little
leisure to indulge in curious learned disquisitions; or, if he does so, there
is great reason to fear, it must be at the expense of, what is infinitely more
important, a proper attention to the duties of his office and the salvation of
souls. That man makes a wretched exchange, who forfeits the favor of his
Divine Master and endangers the souls of men, for the sake of enjoying the
pleasures of learning or obtaining the honors of a literary character.

THE good Minister will find much discouragement from the imperfections of his
own heart: His office renders it necessary that he should be much engaged in
the exercises of piety and in religious conversation; but alas! how difficult
does he find it, always to keep alive that spirit of religion, without which,
the exercises of piety and religious conversation, become a painful, instead of
a pleasing service. He wishes to exemplify in his own temper and conduct, that
religion which he preaches to others; but upon trial he finds, with painful
regret, that, in many instances, this is impracticable. He is obliged to plead
the sincerity of his intentions, to excuse the deficiencies of his conduct with
men; whilst, with respect to his Maker, he considers the sacrifice of JESUS as
the ground of his own as well as his people's hope of pardon, salvation and
happiness.

THERE is much discouragement arising to the faithful Minister of CHRIST, from
the froward humors of mankind. He is often censured where he ought to have met
with commendation -- and discharging the most difficult office of friendship,
reproving the faults of men, though done with exquisite caution, will often
forfeit their friendship, and convert it to the cruelest hatred. Those in whose
service he has labored with the most painful assiduity, will, when
unreasonably offended, reward him with the most bitter reproaches. He
frequently finds reason to adopt the complaint of his Divine Master, that he
has labored in vain, and spent his strength for naught and in vain. To which
we may add the awful apprehension of bringing on himself the blood of souls who
may perish through his neglect. These are some of the discouragements which
attend the work of the Ministry. They are formidable indeed; but the faithful
Ministers of CHRIST may notwithstanding adopt the language of the text, we
faint not. The same mercy of GOD which has honored us, putting us into that
office and has hitherto supported, will still support us whilst we continue
faithful to him.

THERE are many considerations to encourage the heart and animate the labors
of the faithful Minister. He is engaged in a service which claims the attention
of all holy and good beings, whether on earth or in heaven. He is a worker
together with GOD, and so long as he studies to show himself approved unto GOD,
he is sure of his gracious presence. His office, to speak modestly of it, is of
great importance to mankind, and has therefore been held in high repute by the
wise and the good of every age. It is an office well adapted to gratify the
benevolent affections of the human heart. The very design of it is the
happiness of mankind -- to second the views of the compassionate SAVIOR of the
world -- to save those who are lost -- to open the prison doors to those who
are bound -- to release the captive from his chains -- to comfort the mourner
and to heal the broken heart -- to instruct the ignorant -- reclaim the
wanderer to the paths of virtue -- and encourage the disciples of JESUS in
their fidelity to him and perseverance in his service. -- Pleasing office!
where the heart is engaged in it, and where success attends our labors, and we
are instrumental, in the hands of CHRIST, in promoting the salvation and
happiness of the souls of men. We serve a gracious Master, who is as willing as
he is able to afford us every needed support, and whose address to us is the
same which silenced the fears of the Apostle Paul, My grace is sufficient for
you. We act always under his eye; a powerful motive to exertion, as we are sure
no instance of it, however inconsiderable in itself, or unknown to the world,
will pass unnoticed or unrewarded by him. We act with a view to eternity, and
in prospect of the rewards of our fidelity and zeal at the end of our warfare,
when they who have turned many unto righteousness shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament, and as the stars forever and ever. How well adapted are such
views as these to lighten every burden, to reconcile us to every trial, and to
call forth every exertion? Who would not cheerfully spend and be spent for such
a Master and in such a service? Blessed JESUS, our faith looks to thee, through
the vale of death, and anticipates the all important moment when we shall hear
from thy gracious lips, Well done good and faithful servants, enter ye into the
joys of your LORD.

WE infer, from what has been said, that the Ministry of the Gospel is a
painful and laborious service; that it is ill suited to the indulgence of sloth
and dissipation. Much study is a weariness to the flesh: The solicitude which
the good Minister feels for the proper discharge of his duty, and the success
of his Ministry, is much more painful. His hands and his heart will be
constantly employed, and the affectionate manner in which he pursues his
Ministry in private, will discover itself in the warmth of his public
addresses; and one spirit of rational, consistent and animated zeal will give
life and ornament to every duty.

I ADDRESS myself, with great affection, to the Church and Society who have,
with such unanimity, invited me to the pastoral office among them, and to whose
service I am this day consecrating myself in a public manner.

MEN AND BRETHREN,

THE Minister of CHRIST is the servant of his Church, and his labors, as to
time and place, ought to be regulated by the prospect of doing good, or
promoting the interests of religion. But when by mutual agreement, a relation
is formed between him and a particular people, it becomes exceeding near and
interesting; their happiness is closely connected. The relation ought never to
be dissolved but upon the most urgent necessity -- it never can be dissolved
but with the most painful sensations. Friendship is balm to a pained heart --
The affectionate manner in which you have received me, the kind attention with
which you have treated me, are exceedingly soothing, and afford the most
pleasing and flattering prospect. But you will allow me to observe, that it is
your conduct toward our Divine Master, for which I ought to be principally
concerned. Would you give me the greatest pleasure, it must be by a serious
attention to the institutions of religion, and practice of its duties. I
expect, indeed, as I stand in need of your candor toward me, that you will
not lightly admit a prejudice against me, and that you will give me the first
opportunity of explaining for myself, whatever may need explanation, either in
my preaching or conduct. I was going to ask your prayers -- but I am sure you
will not cease to pray for the success of my Ministry, with which your own and
your children's happiness is so nearly connected. -- This much depends upon the
countenance and encouragement which I shall receive from the principal members
of the society, who, I am persuaded, will not fail to second my endeavors to
promote the cause of piety and virtue among us. May the GOD of peace dwell with
us -- his glory be advanced by us -- and his blessing rest upon us.

I CANNOT omit this opportunity of paying my grateful acknowledgments to the
inhabitants of the town in general, and to my brethren in the Ministry in
particular, for the very obliging manner in which they have received me, and
the kind attention which they have paid to me, since I have been among them. --
With respect to my brethren in the Ministry, I can with great propriety adopt
the words of St. Paul, These are my fellow workers to the kingdom of GOD, who
have been a comfort unto me. I greatly rejoice in that spirit of candor which
at present prevails between Ministers of different denominations: May it more
and more prevail, that, united by that charity which is the bond of
perfectness, instead of dividing upon circumstantials, we may use our joint
endeavors for promoting the great essentials of our holy religion.

I PROMISE myself great pleasure and advantage from my connection with persons
of such amiable characters. May we encourage each other in the service of our
common Master, and long know how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity.

LASTLY,

I ADDRESS myself in a few pathetick words to this great and very respectable
assembly. -- If an heathen monarch, as ancient history informs us, once wept
over a numerous concourse of his fellow creatures, on reflecting that they must
soon become the prey of death, how much more does this tear of tenderness
become the eye of one, who is professedly the Minister of the GOD of mercy and
the compassionate SAVIOR of the world.

IT is to that SAVIOR I would now direct your views; Behold the LAMB of GOD,
which takes away the sin of the world. Are you desirous of obtaining
happiness? Yes, for what child of Adam is not? In JESUS CHRIST all fullness
dwells: He is that wisdom, which is a tree of life to them who lay hold upon
her; and happy is every one that retains her; whose ways are pleasantness and
all whose paths are peace. JESUS CHRIST can and will supply every real want,
and satisfy every reasonable desire. But where shall we find, and how shall we
secure an interest in this inestimable friend? Attend to his address; Behold I
stand at the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. You will easily
recollect, that from your earliest remembrance, CHRIST has been urging this
admission to your hearts; or, which is the same thing, he has by a gentle, but
powerful influence, been pointing you to religion as the only means of
happiness; saying, This is the way, walk ye in it. Admit him then into your
hearts, make him the ground of your trust, the object of your affections, and
he will be the source of your joys; the peace of GOD which passes all
understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through CHRIST JESUS.

THE kingdom of CHRIST is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion rules over
all. His subjects are partakers with him in the glory and happiness of his
reign. Lift up your heads therefore and rejoice, ye servants of CHRIST, for
your redemption draws nigh. Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in
the morning. You shall return and come, with singing, unto Sion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon your heads. You shall obtain gladness and joy,
and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

THE CHARGE, GIVEN TO THE REV. MR. WEST, BY THE REV. MR. BELKNAP.
TO form the character of a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, it is necessary that he
be first qualified, with gifts and graces, proper for the discharge of his
office, and then that he be regularly called to exercise them.

CHURCHES have a right to elect their own Pastors; but before they exercise
this right, it becomes them, impartially and devoutly, to look into the word of
GOD, to see what qualifications are required in a Gospel Minister; and then
charitably to judge, whether the person whom they are desirous of appointing to
this office, be possessed of those qualifications; if they find a
correspondence between the marks there laid down, and the character which he
exhibits, they have a sufficient warrant to call him to officiate; because they
may on good grounds be satisfied that the HOLY GHOST has fitted him to be an
Overseer of the Church of GOD.

IT does not become the children of light to involve in clouds of mystery, that
which ought to appear void of all ambiguity. As far as Ordination, in the
primitive times, was the conferring a gift or ability to exercise powers
peculiar to the state of the Church in that age, we have nothing to do with it;
but as far as it is the designation or appointment of a qualified person to the
office of teaching and ruling in the Church of GOD, according to his word,
there is nothing mysterious in it. The concurrence of neighboring Ministers
and Churches in the public investiture is but an act of communion and a
testimony of their brotherly love.

IF the Apostles were endowed with extraordinary powers, those powers have
ceased with their personal Ministry. We know of no successors to them in their
apostolic character, nor do we conceive that there is the least necessity for
such a succession, while they themselves are present with us for all the
purposes of christian edification, in their valuable writings. From them we
learn the characters and duties of Gospel Ministers: By them Churches are to
govern themselves in their choice, and Ministers in the exercise of their
gifts: By an appeal to them we may regulate all our proceedings; and the nearer
we conform to the simplicity, the better shall we preserve the purity of divine
institutions. Let the Apostles then be heard speaking in the name of their
Master and of ours; and let no assumption of spiritual power interpose itself,
as a medium, between CHRIST and his Church. The sheep will hear the voice of
their own shepherd; but they know not the voice of strangers.

WE claim no sacerdotal rights by virtue of any real or supposed uninterrupted
succession from the Apostles. With equal propriety might we seek for evidence
of our descent from Adam, to prove ourselves human beings, as call over the
roll of Bishops from the Apostles to this day, to entitle us to the character
of Christian Ministers. As there are indubitable marks by which it is manifest
that we are of the human race, without the former; so we conceive there are
equally distinguishing and satisfactory marks of the Ministers of CHRIST,
without the latter. The children of GOD are made such, by the efficacious
influence of his word and SPIRIT; from the same source are derived the
qualifications for the Gospel Ministry; and the Churches of CHRIST have a right
to call to the exercise of this office him whom they charitably judge the
SPIRIT of GOD has qualified for it.

ON such an occasion, it is the duty and pleasure of his brethren, while they
bid him welcome as a labourer in the vineyard of their common LORD, to put him
in mind of that solemn CHARGE which the HOLY GHOST, in the writings of the
Apostles, has given to him and to themselves.

YOU will therefore, my dear Brother, permit me (though your inferior in age,
as well as in other respects) to call your attention, at this time, to those
sacred injunctions which are given by the HOLY GHOST to you and to us. -- They
are these:

"PREACH the word. Be instant, in season, out of season. Reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine.

"HOLD fast the faithful word, as thou have been taught; and the form of sound
words which thou have heard, in faith and love which is in CHRIST JESUS.

"WATCH thou in all things, endure afflictions, make full proof of thy Ministry.

"STUDY to show thyself approved unto GOD, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth.

"BE gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those
who oppose themselves.

"FOLLOW after righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them who call on the
LORD out of a pure heart.

"BE not ashamed of the testimony of the LORD; but be thou partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospel according to the power of GOD.

"BE strong in the grace which is in CHRIST JESUS, and endure hardness as a
good soldier of JESUS CHRIST.

"LET no man despise thee, but be thou an example to the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

"GIVE attention to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. Neglect not the gift
that is in thee, but meditate on these things, give thyself wholly to them,
that thy profiting may appear unto all.

"TAKE heed to thyself and to thy doctrine, continue in them; for in so doing
thou shall both save thyself and them who hear thee.

"THOSE who sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Do nothing by
partiality. Lay hands suddenly on no man. Be not partaker of other men's sins.
Keep thyself pure.

"FEED the flock of GOD, taking the oversight of it, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being lord
over GOD'S heritage, but as an example to the flock.

"TAKE heed therefore to thyself and to all the flock over which the HOLY GHOST
has made thee an overseer, to feed the Church of GOD which he has purchased
with his own blood.

FINALLY -- Remember that the HOLY GHOST, by the pen of the inspired Apostle
Paul, "gives thee in charge in the sight of GOD, who quickens all things,
and before JESUS CHRIST, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession;
that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed
and only Potentate, the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, who only has
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can approach, whom no man has
seen nor can see; to whom be honor and power everlasting."

AMEN.
THE RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP,
BY THE REV. MR. ECKLEY.
THE grand design of the Gospel is to give us information respecting another
world, and teach us to find our way to heaven; where, as the friends and
disciples of the Son of GOD, we may hold communion with him in glory; -- where,
fed forever upon truth, and transported with the displays of the divine majesty
and beauty, we may spend our time with holy angels; with prophets and apostles;
with martyrs and all our fellow saints, in wonder, love and praise.

THE hopes of Christians in relation to these their future enjoyments, rest not
however on the writings of the Gospel, exclusive of other aid. It pleases their
indulgent Parent, when they sincerely apply their hearts and minds to the study
or his religion, to annex such delight to their meditations, that their present
joy serves to corroborate their faith, and is an internal and most convincing
evidence of the reality of things which are unseen, and everlasting in the
heavens.

TO promote the study of divine truth; -- to improve the Christian's graces and
increase his joys, it has seemed good to the great Head over all things, to
organize the members of his Church by certain established laws; -- giving some,
Apostles; and some, Prophets; and some, Evangelists; and some, Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of CHRIST.

CONSIDERING that we are all seeking the same heavenly home; -- that we all
acknowledge the same Master, and profess our hopes and joys to be of the same
kind -- how much does it become the members of CHRIST'S Church, who are now
necessarily divided into many distinct societies, to venerate and esteem each
other! -- Yet not more than it becomes the Ministers of our common LORD, who
are alike engaged in one honorable employment, and when faithful, are alike
depending on one reward.

IN order to encourage this affection between the Churches and their Pastors,
it has been a custom in our Ecclesiastical Councils at the Ordination or
Instalment of a Minister, that one of the members should publicly declare
their communion and friendship with him. This agreeable part of the solemnity
of the day, by choice of the venerable Council, is devolved on me.

WITH pleasure therefore, Reverend and dear Sir, I perform the service, by
which the Churches and their Pastors here convened, openly acknowledge your
relation to them as a Christian; -- receive you as the regularly initiated
Pastor of this Church, and bid you welcome as their esteemed brother and
respected friend. -- Accept my right hand as the token of our affection. -- GOD
almighty vouchsafe to bless and smile upon you. -- With the work of the Gospel
Ministry you are already acquainted, having served with reputation and honor
in another part of the Christian Church. As by divine Providence you are now
called to officiate to this people, we implore the sovereign Ruler of the
universe, to sanctify your labors to them, for their spiritual and eternal
good. -- May you, my dear Sir, and the rest of us in the Gospel Ministry, be
instrumental in turning many sinners unto righteousness; -- and after having
lived together as Christians, as Brethren, and as good Ministers in the present
world, may we be so happy as to meet in a better, and hear our SAVIOR
pronounce unto us, Well done good and faithful servants; enter ye into the joy
of your LORD.

WILL you permit me now, my Brethren of this Christian Society, to address
myself to you also on this agreeable occasion.

THE connection which existed between us some time ago, as it will not be
forgotten on my part, neither will it, I trust, on yours also. -- Often have we
mingled our souls together at the same Church, in humble adoration of the GOD
of heaven; -- often have we sat as brethren around the same table of our
SAVIOR, when in his course of duty, your late worthy and pious Pastor, has
carried our spirits to the Almighty's throne, and in able, solemn and pathetick
prayer, presented us before the LORD. AFTER the Church in Hollis Street was
destroyed by the fire in 1787, the greater part of the society assembled at the
Old South Church, where the two congregations united in the worship, and the
Rev. Mr. Wight, who is the gentleman here referred to, assisted at times, in
performing the public service.


YOU will allow me thus to pay my tribute of respect to a much esteemed
brother, and beloved friend. Since in the providence of GOD, he is deprived of
his health, and on this account, in consequence of his desire and your consent,
his connection with you is closed, we rejoice and congratulate you this day, my
Christian friends, that you have found another Pastor in whom you so well
unite; who is able to serve you in the duties of his profession, and whose
praise is in the Churches.

WE shall not forget the time when the edifice wherein you formerly worshipped
on this spot, was wrapped in flames; -- when the houses in which you dwelled,
were laid in ashes by the fire, and many a heart was swelled with terror at
the sight, and many an eye was bathed with tears. -- We behold already a great
reverse of scenes; -- and whilst the elegant and goodly fabric in which we are
now assembled, affords a very pleasing specimen of the taste and genius of the
gentleman MR. Charles Bulfinch.
who gave the plan, it is a monument to you, my friends, of the great goodness
of almighty GOD, who in his providence has assisted you to repair the waste
places, and after your dispersion, enabled you to worship him in the spot where
his name was known before.

NOR will it be amiss, if, when sitting in this building, and happening at some
minute or other to be reflecting on its superiority in comparison with the one
which was lost by fire, you allow the circumstance to remind you of that vastly
more agreeable and beneficial exchange to be made on the august and important
day, when all the faithful friends of the REDEEMER shall be admitted into the
temple of GOD above, not made with hands, which, for external beauty and
advantage, inconceivably surpasses any thing that is known on earth, but much
more excels in glory, by reason of the perfect spirituality of its worship, the
unmingled zeal and affection of the inhabitants, and that exalted holiness
which ever gives rise to the most enraptured Alleluias, and the profoundest
praise. -- For this celestial employment, may you here acquire a preparation.
-- To these blessed mansions, may you be received in the proper time, and so be
ever with the LORD.

FINALLY -- LET all of us who are present on this occasion, reflect seriously
on the mutablity of all earthly things; the design of our existence here below,
and the necessity of living in a constant state of readiness for our own great
change. -- It is to be remembered that the period of probation will speedily
have a close, and the day of the LORD is fast approaching, when our hopes and
expectations of happiness will be put to a trial, conformably to the laws of
divine writ, by which we must infallibly abide.

THROUGH sincere repentance for our sins, and faith in JESUS CHRIST, may we be
prepared for his coming. Then -- when as we once saw the former Church upon
this ground encircled with the flames, we shall behold a general conflagration
all around us; -- when the whole world shall be on fire, and the elements
melting with fervent heat, may we shout aloud, for our redemption draws nigh.
-- Secured by our station near the Son of GOD, may we stand unmoved amidst the
wreck of time; and with the ransomed of the LORD -- with songs, and everlasting
joy upon our heads, be received into the new heavens and the new earth which
are prepared for the saints; where righteousness, peace and love shall be the
ingredients of our felicity, and we shall sing the new anthem, To him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us kings
and priests unto GOD and his Father; to him be glory and dominion, forever and
ever.

AMEN.

