Life, Last Words and Dying CONFESSION, OF RACHEL WALL, Who, with William Smith
and William Dunogan, were executed at BOSTON, on Thursday, October 8, 1789, for
HIGHWAY ROBBERY.
BOSTON-GOAL, WEDNESDAY EVENING, October 7, 1789.
I RACHEL WALL, was born in the town of Carlisle, in the state of Pennsylvania,
in the year 1760, of honest and reputable parents, who were alive and in good
health not long since: They gave me a good education, and instructed me in the
fundamental principles of the Christian Religion, and taught me the fear of
God; and if I had followed the good advice (...) should never have come to this
untimely fate. When I left home I had three brothers and two sisters alive and
well.

Without doubt the ever-curious Public, (but more especially those of a serious
turn of mind) will be anxious to know every particular circumstance of the Life
and Character of a person in my unhappy situation, but in a peculiar manner
those relative to my birth and parentage

With regard to my Parents, I have only room in this short Narrative to
observe, that my father was a Farmer, who was in good circumstances when I left
him. Both my parents being of the Presbyterian, or rather Congregational
Persuasion, I was educated in the same way. My father was of a very serious and
devout turn of mind, and always made it his constant practice to perform
family-prayers in his house every morning and evening; and was very careful to
call his children and family together every Sabbath Day evening, to hear the
holy scriptures, and other pious books read to them; each one being obliged,
after reading was over, to give an answer to such questions in the Assembly's
Catechism as were proposed to them.

I left my parents without their consent when I was very young, and returning
again was received by them, but could not be contented; therefore I tarried
with them but two years, before I left them again, and have never seen them
since.

I came away with one George Wall, to whom I was lawfully married: If I had
never seen him I should not have left my parents. I went with him to
Philadelphia; we tarried there some time, but left that place and went to
New York, where we staid about three months. -- From thence we came to Boston,
where he tarried with me some time, and then went off, leaving me an entire
stranger: Upon which I went to service and lived very contented, and should
have remained so, had it not been for my husband; for, as soon as he came back,
he enticed me to leave my service and take to bad company, from which I may
date my ruin. I hope my unhappy fate will be a solemn warning to him. He went
off again and left me, and where he is now I know not (...) forgive him, as I
expect forgiveness at the bar of God, through the merits of my dear Savior and
Redeemer JESUS CHRIST, who is able to save all those that, by faith, come unto
him, not refusing even the chief of sinners.

I hope my awful and untimely fate will be a solemn warning and caution to
every one, but more particularly to the youth, especially those of my own sex.

I acknowledge myself to have been guilty of a great many crimes, such as
Sabbath-breaking, stealing, lying, disobedience to parents, and almost every
other sin a person could commit, except murder; and have not lived in the fear
of God, nor regarded the kind admonitions and counsels of man.

In short, the many small crimes I have committed, are too numerous to mention
in this sheet, and therefore a particular narrative of them here would serve to
extend a work of this kind to too great a length; which crimes I most sincerely
desire to confess to Almighty God, humbly hoping forgiveness through his dear Son.

But as I could heartily wish that the innocent may not suffer with the guilty,
I shall, in some degree, deviate from my first intention, by relating the
particulars of some material transactions of my life, which, perhaps, may serve
as a solemn warning to the living, of my sex at least; especially to those whom
they may more immediately concern: They are as follow, viz.

In one of my nocturnal excursions, when the bright goddess Venus shined
conspicuous, and was the predominant Planet among the heavenly bodies, sometime
in the spring of 1787, not being able to ascertain the exact time, I happened
to go on board a ship, lying at the Long-Wharf, in Boston; -- the Captain's
name I cannot recollect, but think he was a Frenchman: On my entering the
cabin, the door of which not being fa^tened, and finding the Captain and Mate
asleep in their beds, I hunted about for plunder, and discovered, under the
Captain's head, a black silk handkerchief containing upwards of thirty pounds,
in gold, crowns, and small change, on which I immediately se^zed the booty and
decamped therewith as quick as possible; which money I spent freely in comapny
as (...) and wicked as myself, fully proving the old adage, "Light come light
go."

At another time, I think it was about the year 1788, I br^ke into a sloop, on
board of which I was acquainted, lying at Doane's Wharf, in this town, and
finding the Captain and every hand on board asleep in the cabin and steerage, I
looked round to see what I could help myself to, when I espied a silver watch
hanging over the Captain's head, which I pocketed. I also took a pair of silver
buckles out of the Captain's shoes: I likewise made free with a parcel of small
change for pocket-money, to make myself merry among my evil companions* and
made my escape without being discovered.

I would beg the patience of the public for only a few minutes, while I relate
another adventure that happened in the course of my life, which, were it not
for the novelty thereof, might be thought too trifling to mention in this
sheet; but with a view of gratifying the curiosity of some particular friends,
who have been very kind to me under sentence. I have con^^^^ed to give it to
the publisher for insertion, which is as follows:

Sometime about the year 1785, my husband being confined in the Goal in this
place for these, I had a mind to try an expedient to extricate him from his
imprisonment, which was to have a brick-loaf baked, in which I contrived to
enclose a number of tools, such as a saw, file, etc. in order to assist him to
make his escape, which was handed to him by the jailer in person, who little
suspected such a trick was playing with him; however, it like to have had the
desired effect the crafty contriver intended; for, by means of this stratagem,
the poor culprit, Wall, had busily employed himself with the implements that
his kind help-mate had in this curious manner conveyed to him, and had nearly
effected his design before it was discovered.

I do now, in the presence of God, declare Miss Dorothy Horn, a crippled person
in Boston Almshouse, to be entirely innocent of the theft at Mr. Vaughn's in
Essex-Street, though she suffered a long imprisonment, was set on the gallows one
hour, and whipped five stripes therefore.

As to the crime of Robbery, for which I am in a few hours to suffer an
ignominious death. I am entirely innocent to the truth of this declaration I
appeal to that God before whom I must shortly appear, to give an account of
every transaction of my life.

With regard to the above Robbery, I would beg permission to relate a few
particulars, which are, that I had been at work all the preceding day, and was
on my way home in the evening, without design to injure any person: in my way I
(...) a (...) in the street; what it was I knew not, until I was taken up; I
never saw Miss Bendar (the person I was charged with robbing that evening) and
was quite surprised when the crime was laid to my charge. The witnesses who
swore against me are certainly mistaken; but as a dying person I freely forgive
them.

I return my sincere thanks to the Hon. gentlemen who were my Judges, for
assigning me counsel, and to them for their kindness in pleading my cause.

I likewise return my hearty thanks to the several Ministers of the town, who
have attended me since I have been under sentence: also to a number of other
kind friends, for the care they have shown to me, both for soul and body, which
gratitude obliges me to acknowledge. May God reward them all for their kindness
to me.

And now, into the hands of Almighty God I commit my soul, relying on his
mercy, through the merits and mediation of my Redeemer, and die an unworthy
member of the Presbyterian Church, in the 29th year of my age.

Taken from the prisoner's mouth, a few hours before her execution, and signed
by Rachel Wall. JOSEPH OTIS, Deputy-Goaler. WM. CROMBIE, Assistant.



