THE Saints Everlasting Rest: OR, A TREATISE OF THE BLESSED STATE OF THE SAINTS
IN THEIR Enjoyment of GOD in Glory: Extracted from the Works of MR. RICHARD
BAXTER, BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. Late Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET, AND SOLD BY JOHN
DICKINS, IN FOURTH STREET, No 43, NEAR RACE STREET.

M.DCC.XC.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF KIDDERMINSTER.
MY DEAR FRIENDS,
IF either I or my labors have any thing of public use or worth, it is wholly
(though not only) yours. And I am convinced by Providence, that it is the will
of GOD it should be so. This I clearly discerned in my first coming to you, in
my former abode with you, and in the time of my forced absence from you. When I
was separated by the miseries of the late unhappy war, I durst not six in any
other congregation, but lived in a military unpleasing state, lest I should
forestal my return to you. The offers of greater worldly accommodations were no
temptatied to me once to question whether I should have you: your free
invitation of my return, your ceedi^^^ to my doctrine, the strong affection
which I have yet toward you above all people, and the general hearly return of
love which I find from you, do all persuade me, that I was sent into the world
especially for the service of your send^^ and that even when I am dead, I might
be yet a help to your salvation, the LORD has forced me, quite beside my own
resolution, to write thi^ treatise, and leave it in your hands. It was far from
my thoughts ever to have become thus public, and burdened the world with any
writing of mine: therefore have I often resisted the request of my reverend
brethren, and some superiors, who might else have commanded much more at my
hands. But see how GOD over-^^leth and crosses our resolutions!

Being in my quarters far from home, cast into extreme languishing (by the
sudden loss of about a gallon of blood, after many years foregoing weakness)
and having no acquaintance about me, nor any book but my Bible, and living in
continual expectation of death, I bent my thoughts on my everlasting rest: and
because my memory, through extreme weakness, was imperfect, I took my pen, and
began to draw up my own funeral sermon, or some help for my own meditations of
heaven, to sweeten both the rest of my life, and my death. In this condition
GOD was pleased to continue me about five months from home; where being able
for nothing else, I went on with this work, which lengthened to this which you
here see. It is no wonder therefore if I be too abrupt in the beginning, seeing
I then intended but the length of a sermon or two. Much less may you wonder if
the whole be very imperfect, seeing it was written as it were with one foot in
the grave, by a man that was betwixt the living and dead, that wanted strength
of nature to quicken invention or affection, and had no book but his Bible,
while the chief part was finished. But how sweet is this Providence now to my
review, which so happily forced me to that work of meditation, which I had
formerly found so profitable to my soul! and showed me more mercy in depriving
me of other helps, than I was aware of! and has caused my thoughts to feed on
this heavenly subject, which has more benefited me than all the studies of my
life.

And now, dear friends, such as it is, I here offer it you; and upon the knees
of my soul, I offer up my thanks to the merciful GOD, who has fetched up both
me and it, as from the grave for your service: who reversed the sentence of
present death, which by the ablest physicians was past upon me! who interrupted
my public labors for a time, that he might trace me to do you a more lasting
service, which else I had never been like to have attempted! That GOD do I
heartily bless and magnify, who has resened me from the many dangers of four
years war, and after so many tedious nights and days, and so many doleful
sights and tidings, has returned me, and many of yourselves, and reprieved us
now to serve him in peace! And though men be ungrateful, and my body ruined
beyond hope of recovery; yet he has made up all in the comforts I have in you.
To the GOD of mercy I do here offer up my most hearty thanks, who has not
rejected my prayers, but has by a wonder delivered me in the midst of my
duties: and has supported me these fourteen years in a languishing state,
wherein I have scarce had a waking hour free from pain; who has above twenty
several times delivered me when I was near death. And though he has made me
spend my days in groans and tears, and in a constant expectation of my change,
yet he has not wholly disabled me for his service; and hereby has more
effectually subdued my pride, and made this world contemptible to me, and
forced my dull heart to more importunate requests, and occasioned more rare
discoveries of his mercy than ever I could have expected in a prosperous state.

THE Saints Everlasting Rest.
HEBREWS iv. 9. There remains therefore a Rest to the People of GOD.


CHAP. I. This Rest defined.
IT was not only our interest in GOD, and actual fruition of him, which was
lost in Adam's fall; but all spiritual knowledge of him, and true disposition
toward such a felicity. Man has now an heart too suitable to his estate; a
low state, and a low spirit. As the poor man that would not believe that any
one man had such a sum as an hundred pounds, it was so far above what he
possessed: so man will hardly now believe, that there is such an happiness as
once he had, much less as Christ has now procured.

The apostle bestows most of this epistle in proving to the Jews, that the end
of all ceremonies and shadows, is to direct them to Jesus Christ, the
substance; and that the rest of sabbaths, and Canaan, should teach them to look
for a future rest. My text is his conclusion after diverse arguments to that
end; a conclusion so useful to a believer, as containing the ground of all his
comforts, the end of all his duty and sufferings, that you may easily be
satisfied, why I have made in the subject of my present discourse. What more
welcome to men under afflictions, than rest? What more welcome news to men
under public calamities? Hearers, I pray GOD your entertainment of it, be but
half answerable to the excellency of the subject; and then you will have cause
to bless GOD, while you live, that ever you heard it, as I have that ever I
studied it.

Let us see, 1. What this rest is. 2. What these people of GOD, and why so
called. 3. The truth of this from other scripture-arguments. 4. Why this rest
must yet remain. 5. Why only to the people of GOD. 6. What use to make of it.


And though the sense of the text includes in the word rest, all that ease and
safety which a soul, wearied with the burden of sin and suffering, and pursued
by law, wrath and conscience, has with Christ in this life, the rest of grace:
yet because it chiefly intends the rest of eternal glory, I shall consine my
discourse to this.

The rest here in question, is, the most happy estate of a christian, having
obtained the end of his course; or, it is the perfect endless fruition of GOD
by the perfected saints, according to the measure of their capacity, to which
their souls arrive at death: and both soul and body most fully after the
resurrection and final judgment.

1. I call it the estate of a christian, to note both the active and passive
fruition, wherein a christian's blessedness lies, and the established
continuance of both. Our title will be perfect, and perfectly cleared;
ourselves, and so our capacity perfected; our possession and security for its
perpetuity perfect; our reception from GOD perfect; and therefore our fruition
of him, and consequently our happiness, will then be perfect. And this is the
estate which we now briefly mention, and shall afterward more fully describe.

2. I call it the most happy estate, to difference it not only from all seeming
happiness which is to be found in the enjoyment of creatures, but also from all
those beginnings, foretastes, and imperfect degrees which we have in this life.

3. I call it the estate of a christian, where I mean only the sincere,
regenerate, sanctified christian, whose soul having discovered that excellency
in GOD through Christ, closes with him, and is cordially set upon him.

4. I add, That this happiness consists in obtaining the end, where I mean the
ultimate and principal end, not any subordinate or less principal end. O how
much does our everlasting state depend on our right judgment and estimation of
our end!

But it is a doubt with many, whether the attainment of this glory may be our
end? Nay, concluded, that it is mercenary: yea, that to make salvation the end
of duty, is to be a Legalist, and act under a covenant of works, whose tenor
is, Do this and live. And money that think it may be our end, yet think it may
not be our ultimate end; for that should be only the glory of GOD. I shall
answer these briefly.

1. It is properly called mercenary, when we expect it as wages for work done;
and so we may not make it our end. Otherwise it is only such a mercinariness as
Christ commands. For consider what this end is; it is the fruition of GOD in
Christ: and if seeking Christ be mercenary, I desire to be so mercenary.

2. It is not a note of a Legalist neither. It has been the ground of a
multitude of late mistakes in divinity, to think, that Do this and live, is
only the language of the covenant of works. It is true, in some sense it is;
but in other, not. The law of works only says, Do this (that is, perfectly
fulfill the whole law) and live, (that is, for so doing): But the law of grace
says, Do this and live, too: that is, believe in Christ, seek him, obey him
sincerely, as thy LORD and King: forsake all, suffer all things, and overcome,
and by so doing, or in so doing, you shall live. If you set up the abrogated
duties of the law again, you are a Legalist: if you set up the duties of the
gospel in Christ's stead, in whole or in part, you err still. Christ has his
place and work; duty has its place and work too: set it but in its own place,
and expect from it but its own part, and you go right: yea, more, (how
unsavory soever the phrase may seem) you may, so far as this comes to, trust
to your duty and works; that is, for their own part: and many miscarry in
expecting nothing from them, (as to pray, and to expect nothing the more) that
is, from Christ in a way of duty. For if duty have no share, why may we not
trust Christ as well in a way of disobedience as duty? In a word, you must both
use and trust duty in subordination to Christ, but neither use them nor trust
them in co-ordination with him. So that this derogates nothing from Christ; for
he has done, and will do all his work perfectly, and enableth his people to do
theirs: yet he is not properly said to do it himself; he believes not, repents
not, but works these in them; that is, enableth and exciteth them to it. No
man must look for more from duty than GOD has laid upon it; and so much we may
and must.

2. If I should quote all the scriptures that plainly prove this, I should
transcribe a great part of the bible: I will therefore only desire you to study
what tolerable interpretation can be given of the following places, which will
not prove that life and salvation may be, yea, must be the end of duty. John v.
40. Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. Matt. xi. 12. The kingdom
of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Matt. vii. 13.
Luke xiii. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate. Phil. ii. 12. Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling. Romans ii. 7, 10. To them who by patient
continuance in welldoing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life. Glory, honor, and peace, to every man that works good. 1 Cor. ix. 24.
So run that ye may obtain. 2 Timothy ii. 12. If we suffer with him, we shall reign
with him. 1 Timothy vi. 12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal
life. 1 Timothy vi. 18, 19. That they do good works, laying up a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Rev. xxii.
14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the
tree of life, and enter in by the gates into the city. Matt. xxv. 34, 35, 36.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit, etc. For I was an hungered, and ye, etc.
Luke xi. 28. Blessed are they that hear the word of GOD, and keep it. Yea, the
escaping of hell is a right end of duty to a believer. Heb. iv. 1. Let us fear,
left a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should come
short of it. Luke xii. 5. Fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell; yea, (whatsoever others say) I say unto you, fear him. 1 Cor. ix. 27.
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection; lest, when I have preached
to others, I myself should he a castaway. Multitudes of scriptures and
scripture-arguments might be brought, but these may suffice to any that believe
scripture.

3. For those that think this rest may be our end, but not our ultimate end,
that must be GOD's glory only: I will not gainsay them. Only let them consider,
What GOD has joined, man must not separate. The glorifying himself, and the
saving of his people, (as I judge) are not two ends with GOD, but one; to
glorify his mercy in their falvation: so I think they should be with us
together intended: we should aim at the glory of GOD (not alone considered,
without our salvation, but) in our salvation. Therefore I know no warrant for
putting such a question to ourselves, as some do, whether we could be content
to be damned, so GOD were glorified? Christ has put no such questions to us,
nor bid us put such to ourselves. Christ had rather that men would enquire
after their true willingness to be saved than their willingness to be damned.
Sure I am, Christ himself is offered to faith, in terms for the most part
respecting the welfare of the sinner, more than his own abstracted glory. He
would be received as a Savior, mediator, redeemer, reconciler, and
intercessor. And all the precepts of scripture being backed with so many
promises and threatenings, every one intended of GOD, as a motive to us, imply
as much.

4. I call a christian's happiness, the end of his course, thereby meaning, as
Paul. 2 Timothy iv. 7. the whole scope of his life. For salvation may and must be
our end; and not only the end of our faith, (though that principally) but of all
our actions: For as whatsoever we do, must be done to the glory of GOD, so must
they all be done to our salvation.

5. Lastly, I make happiness to consist in this end obtained; for it is not the
mere promise of it that immediately makes perfectly happy, nor Christ's mere
purchase, nor our mere seeking, but the apprehending and obtaining, which sets
the crown on the saint's head.

CHAP. II. What this Rest pre-supposeth.
FOR the clearer understanding the nature of this rest, you must know, (1.)
There are some things pre-supposed to it. (2.) Some things contained in it.
(3.) Al^ these things are pre-supposed to this rest.


1. A person in motion, seeking rest. This is man here in the way: angels have
it already; and the devils are past hope.

2. An end toward which he m^^^th for rest. This can be only GOD. He that
takes any thing else for happiness, is out of the way the first step. The
principal damning sin, is, to make any thing besides GOD our end or rest. And
the first true saving act, is, to choose GOD only for our end and happiness.

3. A distance is pre-supposed from this end, else there can be no motion
toward it. This sad distance is the case of all mankind since the fall: it was
our GOD that we principally lost, and were shut out of his gracious presence;
and since are said to be without him in the world: nay, in all men, at age,
here is supposed, not only a distance, but also a contrary motion. When Christ
comes with regenerating, saving grace, he finds no man sitting still, but all
posting to eternal ruin; till, by conviction, he first brings them to a stand,
and by conversion, turns first their hearts, and then their lives, to himself.

4. Here is pre-supposed the knowledge of the true ultimate end, and its
excellency; and a serious intending it. For so the motion of the rational
creature proceeds: an unknown end, is no end; it is a contradiction. We
cannot make that our end, which we know not; nor that our chief end which we
know not, or judge not to be the chief good. Therefore where this is not known,
that GOD is this end; there is no obtaining rest in any ordinary way,
whatsoever may be in ways that by GOD are kept secret.

5. Here is pre-supposed, not only a distance from this rest, but also the true
knowledge of this distance. If a man have lost his way, and know it not, he
seeks not to return: therefore they that never knew they were without GOD,
never yet enjoyed him; and they that never knew they were actually in the way
to hell, did never yet know the way to heaven: nay, there will not only be a
knowledge of this distance, and lost estate, but affections answerable. Can a
man find himself on the brink of hell, and not tremble? Or find he has lost
his GOD, and his soul, and not cry out, I am undone!

6. Here is also pre-supposed, a superior moving cause, else should we all
stand still, and not move a step forward toward our rest; no more than the
inferior wheels in the watch would stir, if you take away the spring, or the
first mover. This is GOD. If GOD move us not, we cannot move. Therefore it is a
most necessary part of our christian wisdom, to keep our subordination to GOD,
and dependence on him; to be still in the path where he walks, and in that way
where his Spirit does most usually move.

7. Here is pre-supposed, an internal principle of life in the person. GOD
moves not man like a stone, but by enduing him first with life, (not to enable
him to move without GOD, but) thereby to qualify him to move himself, in
subordination to GOD, the first mover.

8. Here is pre-supposed also, such a motion as is rightly ordered and directed
toward the end. Not all motion or labor brings to rest. Every way leads not to
this end; but he whose goodness has appointed the end, has in his wisdom, and
by his sovereign authority, appointed the way. Christ is the door, the only way
to this rest. Some will allow nothing else to be called the way, lest it
derogate from Christ. The truth is, Christ is the only way to the Father: yet
faith is the way to Christ; and gospel-obedience, or faith and works, the way
for those to walk in, that are in Christ.

9. There is supposed also, a strong and constant motion, which may reach the
end. The lazy world, that think all too much, will find this to their cost one
day: they that think less ado might have served, do but reproach Christ for
making us so much to do. They that have been most holy, watchful, painful to
get to heaven, find, when they come to die, all too little: we see daily the
best christians, when dying, repent their negligence: I never knew any then
repent his holiness and diligence. It would grieve a man's soul to see a
multitude of mistaken sinners lay out their care and pains for a thing of
naught, and think to have eternal salvation with a wish. If the way to heaven
be not far harder than the world imagines. Christ and his apostles knew not the
way: for they have told us, That the kingdom of heaven suffers violence; that
the gate is strait, and the way nar^^w; and we must strive, if we will enter;
for many sh^^ seek to enter, and not be able, (which implies, the faintness of
their seeking, and that they put not strength to the work;) and that the
righteous themselves are scarcely saved.

I have seen this doctrine also thrown by with contempt by others, who say,
What! do ye set us a working for heaven? Does our duty do any thing? Has not
Christ done all? Is not this to make him an half Savior, and to preach the law?

Ans. It is to preach the law of Christ; his subjects are not lawless: it is to
preach duty to Christ. None a more exact requirer of duty or hater of sin, than
Christ. Christ has done, and will do, all his work; and therefore is a perfect
Savior: but yet leaves us a work too: he has paid all the price, and left us
none to pay; yet he never intended his purchase should put us into absolute
title to glory, in point of law, much less into immediate possession. He has
purchased the crown to bestow, only on condition of believing, denying all for
him, suffering with him, persevering and overcoming. He has purchased
justification to bestow, only on condition of believing, yea, repenting and
believing: though it is Christ that enableth also to perform the condition. It
is not a savior offered, but received also, that must save: it is not the
blood of Christ shed only, but applied also, that must fully deliver; nor is it
applied to the justification or salvation of a sleepy soul. Nor does Christ
carry us to heaven in a chair of security. Our righteousness, which the law of
works requires, and by which it is satisfied, is wholly in Christ, and not one
grain in ourselves: nor must we dare to think of patching up a legal
righteousness of Christ's and our own together; that is, that our doings can be
the lea^t part of satisfaction for our sins. But yet ourselves most personally
fulfill the conditions of the new covenant; and so have the perfect evangelical
righteousness, (...) never be saved by Christ's righteousness. Therefore say
not, it is not duty, but Christ; for it is Christ in a way of duty. As duty
cannot do it without Christ, so Christ will not do it without duty.

And as this motion must be strong, so must it be constant, or it will fall
short of rest. To begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh, will not bring to
the end of the saints. Men as holy as the best of us, have fallen off. Read but
the promises, Rev. ii. and iii. To him that overcomes. Christ's own disciples
must be commanded to continue in his love, and that by keeping his
commandments: and to abide in him, and his word in them. See John xv. 4, 5, 6,
7, 9, 10.

CHAP. III. What this Rest contains.
1. THERE is contained in this Rest.

1. A cessation from motion or action. Not from all action, but of that which
implies the absence of the end. When we have obtained the haven, we have done
sailing: when we are at our journey's end, we have done with the way. Therefore
prophesying cease, tongues fail, and knowledge shall be done away; that is,
so far as it was imperfect. There shall be no more prayer, because no more
necessity, but the full enjoyment of what we prayed for. Neither shall we need
to fast, and weep and watch any more, being out of the reach of sin and
temptations. Nor will there be use for instructions and exhortations: preaching
is done: the ministry of man cease: sacraments useless: the laborers called
in, because the harvest is gathered: the unregenerate past hope, the saints
past fear, for-ever. Much less shall there be any need of laboring for
inferior ends, as here we do; seeing they shall all devolve themselves into the
ocean of the ultimate end, and the lesser good be swallowed up in the greatest.

2. This rest contains a perfect freedom from all the evils that accompany us
through our course, and which necessarily follow our absence from the chief
good: besides our freedom from those eternal flames, which the neglecters of
Christ must endure. There is no such a thing as grief and sorrow known there:
nor is there such a thing as a pale face, a languid body, feeble joints, unable
infancy, decripid age, peccant humors, painful sickness, griping fears,
consuming care, nor whatsoever deserves the name of evil. Indeed a gale of
groans and sighs, a stream of tears, accompanied us to the very gates, and
there bid us farewell for-ever. We did weep and lament, when the world did
rejoice; but our sorrow is turned into joy, and our joy shall no man take from
us.

3. This rest contains the highest degree of perfection, both of soul and
body. This qualifies them to enjoy the glory, and thoroughly to partake the
sweetness of it. Were the glory never so great, and themselves not made capable
of it, it would be little to them. But the more perfect the appetite, the
sweeter the food. The more musical the ear, the more pleasant the melody. The
more perfect the soul, the more joyous those joys, and the more glorious is
that glory. Nor is it only sinful imperfection that is removed, nor only that
which is the fruit of sin, but that which adhered to us in our pure nature.
There is far more procured by Christ, than was lost by Adam. It is the misery
of wicked men here, that all without them is mercy, but within them an heart
full of sin, shuts the door against all, and makes them but the more miserable.
When all is well within, then all is well indeed. Therefore will GOD, as a
special part of his saints happiness, perfect themselves as well as their
condition.

4. This rest contains, as the principal part, our nearest fruition of GOD.
As all good whatsoever is comprised in GOD, and all in the creature are but
drops of this ocean; so all the glory of the blessed is comprised in their
enjoyment of GOD: and if there be any mediate joys there, they are but drops
from this. If men and angels should study to speak the blessedness of the
estate, in one word, what can they say beyond this, That it is the nearest
enjoyment of GOD? Say, They have GOD; and you say, they have all that is worth
the having. O the full joys offered to a believer in that one sentence of
Christ's! I would not for all the world that verse had been left out of the
bible; Father, I will, that those whom thou have given Me, be with Me where I
am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me, John xvii. 24.
Every word is full of life and joy. If the queen of Sheba had cause to say of
Solomon's glory, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants that stand
continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; then sure they that stand
continually before GOD, and see his glory, and the glory of the Lamb, are
somewhat more than happy; to them will CHRIST give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the paradise of GOD, Rev. ii. 7.

5. This rest contains a sweet and constant action of all the powers of the
soul and body in this fruition of GOD. But great will the change of our bodies
and senses be; even so great, as now we cannot conceive. If grace makes a
christian differ so much from what he was, that the christian could say to his
companion, Ego non sum ego: I am not the man I was; how much more will glory
make us differ? We may then say much more, This is not the body I had, and
these are not the senses I had. Yet because we have no other name for them, let
us call them senses; call them eyes and ears, seeing and hearing: but conceive,
that as much as a body spiritual, above the sun in glory, exceeds these
frail, noisome, diseased lumps of flesh, that we now carry about us; so far
shall our senses of seeing and hearing exceed these we now possess: for the
change of the senses must be conceived proportionable to the change of the
body. And doubtless as GOD advances our sense, and enlarges our capacity; so
will He advance the happiness of those senses, and fill up with himself all
that capacity. And certainly the body should not be raised up, if it should not
share in the glory: for as it has shared in the obedience and sufferings, so
shall it also do in the blessedness: and as Christ bought the whole man, so
shall the whole partake of the everlasting benefits of the purchase.

And if the body shall be thus employed, O how shall the soul be taken up! As
its powers and capacities are greatest, so its actions are strongest, and its
enjoyments sweetest. As the bodily senses have their proper aptitude and
action, whereby they receive and enjoy their objects; so does the soul in its
own action, enjoy its own object: by knowing, by thinking, and remembering, by
loving, and by delightful joying: by these eyes it sees, and by these arms it
embraces. If it might be said of the disciples with Christ on earth, much more
that behold him in his glory, Blessed are the eyes that see the things that you
see, and the ears that hear the things that you hear: for many princes and
great ones have d^sired (and hoped) to see the things that you see, and have
not seen them, etc. Matt. xiii. 16, 17.

Knowledge of itself is very desirable. As far as the rational soul exceeds the
sensitive, so far the delights of a philosopher, in discovering the secrets of
nature, and knowing the mystery of sciences, exceeds the delights of the
glutton, the drunkard, and of all voluptuous sensualists whatsoever; so
excellent is all truth. What then is their delight, who know the GOD of truth?
What would I not give, so that all the uncertain principles in logic, natural
philosophy, metaphysies, and medicine, were but certain? And that my dull,
obscure notions of them, were but quick and clear? O what then would I not
perform, or part with, to enjoy a clear and true apprehension of the most true
GOD! How noble a faculty of the soul is the understanding! It can compass the
earth; it can measure the sun, moon, stars, and heaven; it can foreknow each
eclipse to a minute, many years before: yea, but this is the top of all its
excellency, it can know GOD, who is infinite, who made all these; a little
here, and much more hereafter. O the wisdom and goodness of our blessed LORD!
he has created the understanding with a natural bias to truth, and its object;
and to the prime truth as its prime object: and lest we should turn aside to
any creature, he has kept this as his own divine prerogative, not communicable
to any creature, viz. to be the prime truth.

Did thou never look so long upon the Son of God, till thine eyes were
dazzled with his astonishing glory? and did not the splendour of it make all
things below seem black and dark to thee, when thou lookedst down again,
especially in thy day of suffering for Christ (when he usually appears most
manifestly to his people?) did thou never see one wol^ing in the midst of the
fiery furnace with thee, like the Son of God? If thou know him, value him as
thy life, and follow on to know him; and thou shall know incomparably more than
this. Or if I do but renew thy grief, to tell thee what thou once did feel,
but now have lost; I counsel thee to remember whence thou art fallen, and
repent, and do the first works, and be watchful, and strengthen the things
which remain; and I dare promise thee, (because GOD has promised) thou shall
see and know that which here thine eye could not see, nor thy understanding
conceive. Believe me, christians, yea, believe GOD; you that have known most of
GOD in Christ here, it is as nothing to that you shall, know; it scarce, in
comparison of that, deserves to be called knowledge. The difference betwixt our
knowledge now, and our knowledge then, will be as great as that between our
fleshly bodies now, and our spiritual bodies then. For as these bodies, so that
knowledge must cease, that a more perfect may succeed. Our silly childish
thoughts of GOD, which now is the highest we can reach to, must give place to a
more manly knowledge.

Marvel not, therefore, how it can be life eternal to know God and his Son
Jesus Christ: to enjoy GOD and his Christ is eternal life, and the soul's
enjoying is in knowing. They that savor only of earth, and have no way to
judge but by sense, and never were acquainted with this knowledge of GOD, think
it a poor happiness to know GOD. Let them have health and wealth, and worldly
delights, and take you the other. Alas, poor men! they that have made trial of
both, do not envy your happiness: O that you would come near, and taste and try
as they have done; and then judge; then continue in your former mind, if you
can. For our parts we say with that knowing apostle, (though the speech may
seem presumptuous) 1 John v. 19, 20. We know that we are of GOD, and the whole
world lies in wickedness: and we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true; and we are in him
that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God and eternal life.
The Son of GOD is come to be our head and fountain of life, and has given us
an understanding, that the soul may be made capable to know him (GOD) that is
true, the prime truth; and we are brought so near to this enjoyment, that we
are in him that is true; we are in him, by being in his Son Jesus Christ: this
is the true God, and so the fittest object for our understanding, and this
knowing of him, and being in him, in Christ, is eternal life.

And doubtless the memory will not be idle in this blessed work. If it be but
by looking back, to help the soul to value its enjoyment. Our knowledge will be
enlarged, not diminished; therefore the knowledge of things past shall not be
taken away. From that height the saint can look behind him and before him: and
to compare past with present things, must needs raise in the blessed soul an
unconceivable sense of its condition. To stand on that mount, whence we can see
the wilderness and Cancan both at once; to stand in heaven, and look back on
earth, and weigh them together in the balance, how must it transport the soul,
and make it cry out, Is this the purchase that cost so dear as the blood of
God? O blessed price, and thrice blessed love! Is this the end of believing? is
this the end of the Spirit's workings? have the gales of grace blown me into
such an harbor? is it hither that Christ has enticed my soul? O blessed way,
and thrice blessed end! Is this the glory which the scriptures spoke of, and
ministers preached of so much? Now I see the gospel indeed is good tidings,
even tidings of great joy to all nations! Is my mourning, my fasting, my heavy
walking, groanings, complainings, come to this? Are all my afflictions and
fears, all Satan's temptations and the world's scorns, come to this? O vile
nature, that resisted such a blessing! Unworthy soul! is this the place thou
came so unwilling to? was the world too good to lose? did thou stick at
leaving all, denying all, and suffering any thing for this? O false heart! that
had almost betrayed me to eternal flames, and lost me this glory! O base flesh!
that would needs have been pleased, though to the loss of this felicity! did
thou make me to question the truth of this glory? did thou draw me to
distrust the LORD? My soul, art thou not ashamed that ever thou did question
that love that has brought thee hither? that thou wast jealous of the
faithfulness of thy LORD? that thou suspectedst his love, when thou should
have only suspected thyself? that thou did not live continually transported
with thy Savior's love? and that ever thou quenchedst a motion of his spirit?
art thou not ashamed of all thy hard thoughts of such a GOD? of all thy
mis-interpreting those providence, and repining at those ways that have such
an end? Now thou art convinced that the ways thou calledst hard, and the cup
thou calledst bitter, were necessary: that thy LORD meant thee better than thou
would believe: and that thy Redeemer was saving thee, as well when he crossed
thy desires, as when he granted them; as well when he broke thy heart, as when
he bound it up. No thanks to thee, for this crown; but to JEHOVAH and the Lamb
for-ever.

Thus, as the memory of the wicked will eternally promote their torment, to
look back on the sin committed, the grace refused, Christ neglected, and time
lost: so will the memory of the saints for-ever promote their joys.

But O the full, the near, the sweet enjoyment, is that of the affections, love
and joy: it is near, for love is the essence of the soul, and love is the
essence of GOD. GOD is love, and ^e that dwells in love, dwells in GOD, and
GOD in him. The acting of this affection wheresoever carries much delight with
it; especially when the object appears deserving, and the affection is strong.
But what will it be, when perfect aflections shall have the strongest, perfect
acting upon the most perfect object? Now the poor soul complains, O that I
could love Christ more! but I cannot, alas, I cannot: yea, but then thou can
not choose but love him; I had almost said, forbear if thou can. Now thou
know little of his amiableness, and therefore love little: then thine eye
will affect thy heart, and the continual viewing of that perfect beauty, will
keep thee in continual ravishments of love. Now thy salvation is not perfected,
nor all the mercies purchased, yet given in: but when the topstone is set on,
thou shall with shoutings cry, grace, grace. Christians, does it now stir up
your love, to remember all the experiences of his love; to look back upon a
life of mercies? does not kindness melt you? and the sunshine of divine
goodness warm your frozen hearts? What will it do then, when you shall live in
love, and have all in him, who is all? O the high delights of love! of this
love! the content that the heart finds in it! the satisfaction it brings
along with it! surely love is both work and wages.

And if this were all, what a high favor, that GOD will give us leave to love
him! that he will vouchsafe to be embraced by such arms that have embraced sin
before him! But this is not all, he returns love for love; nay, a thousand
times more, as perfect as we shall be, we cannot reach his measure of love:
christian thou will then be brimful of love; yet love as much as thou can,
thou shall be ten thousand times more beloved. Do thou think thou can
over-love him? what, love more than love itself! were the arms of the Son of
GOD open upon the cross, and an open passage made to his heart by the spear?
and will not arms and heart be open to thee in glory? did he begin to love
before thou lovedst, and will he not continue now? did he love thee an enemy?
thee a sinner? thee who even loathest thyself? and own thee when thou did
disclaim thyself? and will he not now unmeasurably love thee a son? thee a
perfect saint? thee who returnest love for love? thou wast wont injuriously to
question his love: doubt of it now if thou can. As the pains of hell will
convince the rebellious sinner of GOD'S wrath, who would never before believe
it: so the joys of heaven will convince thee thoroughly of that love which thou
would so hardly be persuaded of. He that in love wept over the old Jerusalem
near her ruins; with what love will he rejoice over the new Jerusalem in he^
^lory? Methinks I see him groaning and weeping over dead Lazarus, till he
forced the Jews that stood by to say, Behold how he loved him! Will he not then
much more by rejoicing over us, make all (even the damned, if they see it) say,
behold how he loves them!

Here is the heaven of heaven! the fruition of GOD: in these mutual
embracements of love, does it consist. To love, and be beloved: These are the
everlasting arms that are underneath: his left hand is under their beads, and
with his right hand does he embrace them.

Stop here, and think a while what a state this is. Is it a small thing to be
beloved of GOD? to be the son, the spouse, the love, the delight of the King of
glory? Believe this, and think on it: thou shall be e^ernally embraced in the
arms of that love, which was from everlasting and will extend to everlasting;
of that love, which brought the Son of GOD'S love from heaven to earth, from
earth to the cross, from the cross to the grave, from the grave to glory; that
love, which was weary, hungry, tempted, scorned, scourged, buffeted, spit upon,
crucified, pierced; which did fast, pray. teach, heal, weep, sweat, bleed, die:
that love will eternally embrace them. When perfect created love, and most
perfect uncreated love meet together, O the blessed meeting! It will not be
like Joseph and his brethren, who lay upon one another's necks weeping: it will
break forth into pure joy; not a mixture of joy and sorrow: it will be loving
and rejoicing, not loving and sorrowing: yet will it make Pharaoh's ( Satan's)
court to ring, with the news that Joseph's brethren are come; that the saints
are arrived safe at the bosom of Christ, out of the reach of hell for-ever.

And now are we not left in the apostle's admiration? what shall we say to
th^se things? Infinite love must needs be a mystery to a finite capacity. No
wonder, if angels desire to pry into the mystery; and if it be the study of the
saints here, to know the height and breadth, and length, and depth of this
love, though it pass^^h knowledge: this is the saints rest in the fruition of
GOD by love.

Lastly, The affection of joy has not the least share in this fruition. The
inconceivable complacency which the blessed feel in their seeing, knowing,
loving, and being beloved of GOD. The delight of the senses here, cannot be
known by expressions, as they are felt: how much less this joy? This is the
white stone, which none knows but he that receives: and if there be any joy
which the stranger meddleth not with, then surely this, above all, is it. All
Christ's ways of mercy tend to, and end in the saints joys. He wept, sorrowed.
suffered, that they might rejoice: he sends the spirit to be their comforter:
he multiplieth promises, he discovers their future happiness, that their joy
might be full; he abounds to them in mercies of all sorts: he makes them lie
down in green pastures, and leads them by the still waters; yea, opens to
them the fountain of living waters, that their joy may be full, that they may
thirst no more, and that it may spring up in them to everlasting life: he
causes them to suffer, that he may cause them to rejoice; and chasteneth them,
that he may give them rest; and makes them (as he did himself) to drink of the
brook in the way, that they may lift up the head, Psalm cx. 7. And lest after
all this they should neglect their own comforts, he makes it their duty,
commanding them to rejoice in him always. And he never brings them into so low a
condition, wherein he leaves them not more cause of joy than of sorrow. And
has the LORD such a care for us here; where, the bridegroom being from us, we
must mourn? O! what will that joy be, where, the soul being perfectly prepared
for joy, and joy prepared by Christ for the soul, it shall be our work, our
business eternally to rejoice?

And it seems the saints joy shall be greater than the damned's torment: for
their torment is the torment of creatures prepared for the devil and his
angels: but our joy is the joy of our LORD, even our LORD'S own joy shall we
enter. And the same glory which the Father gives him, does the Son give them,
John xvii. 22. And to sit down with him in his throne, even as he is set down
in his Father's throne, Rev. iii. 21. Thou that now spendest thy days in
sorrow, who know no garments but sackcloth, no food but the bread and water
of afflictions, what say thou to this great change? from all sorrow to more
than all joy? Thou poor soul, who prayest for joy, complainest for want of joy,
then thou shall have full joy, as much as thou can hold, and more than ever
thou thoughtest on, or thy heart desired.

And in the meantime walk carefully, watch constantly, and then let GOD measure
out thy times and degrees of joy. It may be he keeps them till thou have more
need: thou may better lose thy comfort, than thy safety: as the joy of the
hypocrite, so the fears of the upright, are but for a moment. Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. O blessed morning! Poor
drooping soul, how would it fill thee with joy now, if a voice from heaven
should assure thee of thy part in these joys! What then will thy joy he, when
thy actual possession shall convince thee of thy title: when the angels shall
bring thee to Christ, and when Christ shall (as it were) take thee by the hand,
and lead thee into thy purchased possession! Will thou not be almost ready to
draw back, and to say, What I, LORD, I, the unworthy neglecter of thy grace! I,
the unworthy disesteemer of thy blood, and slighter of thy love! Must I have
this glory? Make me an hired servant, I am no more worthy to be called a son:
but love will have it so; therefore thou must enter into his joy.

And it is not thy joy only: it is a mutual joy, as well as mutual love: is
there such joy in heaven at thy conversion, and will there be none at thy
glorification? Will not the angels welcome thee thither, and congratulate thy
safe arrival? Yea, it is the joy of Jesus Christ: for now he has the end of
his labor, suffering, dying, when we have our joys; when he is glorified in
his saints, and admired in all them that believe. We are his seed, and the
fruit of his soul's travail, which when he sees, he will be satisfi^d: he will
rejoice over his purchased inheritance, and his people shall rejoice in him.

Yea, the Father himself puts on joy too, in our joy: as we grieve his spirit,
and weary him with our iniquities; so he is rejoiced in our good. O how quickly
here does he spy a returning prodigal, even afar off! How does he run and meet
him, fall on his neck, and kiss him! This is indeed a happy meeting; but
nothing to the joy of that last and great meeting.

And now look back upon all this: I say to thee as the angel to John, What have
thou seen? Or if vet thou perceive not, draw nearer, come up higher, Come and
see: do thou fear thou have been all this while in a dream? Why, These are
the true sayings of GOD. Do thou fear (as the disciples) that thou have seen
but a ghost instead of Christ? a shadow instead of rest? Come near, and feel: a
shadow contains not those substantial blessings, nor rests upon such a sure
word of promise, as you have seen these do. Go thy way now, and tell the
disciples, and tell the drooping souls thou meetest with, That thou have, in
this glass, seen heaven; that the LORD indeed is risen, and has here appeared
to thee; and behold he is gone before us into rest; and that he is now
preparing a place for them, and will come again, and take them to himself, that
where he is, there they may be also.

But alas! my fearful heart dares scarce proceed: methinks I hear the
Almighty's voice, saying to me, as to Elihu, Job xxxviii. 2. Who is this that
darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?

But pardon, O LORD, thy servant's sin: I have not pried into unrevealed
things, nor curiously searched into thy counsels; but indeed I have dishonored
thy holiness, wronged thine excellency, disgraced thy saints glory, by my
disproportionable pourtraying: I will bewail from my heart that my
apprehensions are so dull, my thoughts so mean, my affections so stupid, and my
expressions so low. But I have only heard by the hearing of the ear; O let thy
servant see thee, and possess these joys, and then I shall have more suitable
conceivings, and shall give thee fuller glory. I have now uttered that I
understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. Yet I believed,
and therefore spoke. Remember with whom thou have to do: what can thou expect
from dust, from corruption, but defilement? Our foul hands will leave, where
they touch, the marks of their uncleanness; and most on those things that are
most pure. I know thou will be sanctified in them that come nigh thee, and
before all the people thou will be glorified: and if thy jealousy excluded from
that land of rest, thy servants Moses and Aaron, because they sanctified thee
not in the midst of Israel; what then may I expect? But though the weakness be
the fruit of my own corruption; yet the fire is from thine altar, and the work
of thy commanding. I looked not into thine ark, nor put forth my hand unto it
without thee. O therefore wash away these stains also in the blood of the Lamb!

CHAP. IV. The four great Preparatives to our Rest.
HAVING thus showed you a small glimpse of that resemblance of the saints rest,
which I had seen in the gospel-glass; it follows, that we proceed to view a
little the blessed properties of this rest. And why does my trembling heart
draw back? Surely the LORD is not now so inaccessible, nor the way so blocked
up, as when the law and curse reigned. Wherefore, finding the flaming sword
removed, I shall look again into the paradise of our GOD.

And first, let us consider the great preparations: for the porch of this
temple is exceeding glorious. Let us observe, 1. The most glorious coming of
the Son of GOD. 2. His raising our bodies, and uniting them again with the
soul. 3. His solemn proceedings in their judgment, where they shall be
justified before all the world. 4. His enthroning them in glory.


1. And well may the coming of CHRIST be reckoned with those ingredients that
compound this precious rest: for to this end it is intended; and to this end it
is of apparent necessity. For his people's sake he sanctified himself to his
office: for their sake he came into the world, suffered, died, rose, ascended:
and for their sake it is that he will return. To this end will CHRIST come
again to receive his people to himself, That where he is, they may be also.
John xiv. 3. He that would come to suffer, will surely come to triumph: and he
that would come to purchase, will surely come to possess.

But why stayed he not with his people while he was here? Why? must not the
Comforter be sent? Was not the work on earth done? Must he not receive the
recompense of reward, and enter into his glory? Must he not take possession in
our behalf? Must he not go to prepare a place for us? Must he not intercede
with the Father, and plead his sufferings, and be filled with the spirit to
send it forth, and receive authority to subdue his enemies? Our abode here is
short: if he had stayed on earth, what would it have been to enjoy him for a
few days, and then die? But he has more in heaven to dwell among; even the
spirits of the just of many generations, there made perfect. O what a day will
that be! when we who have been kept prisoners by the grave, shall be fetched
out by the LORD himself; when Christ shall come from heaven to plead with his
enemies, and set his captives free? It will not be such a coming as his first
was, in meanness, and poverty, and contempt: he will not come to be spit upon,
and buffeted, and scorned, and crucified again: he will not come, O careless
world! to be slighted by you any more. And yet that coming which was in
infirmity and reproach for our sakes, wanted not its glory. If the angels of
heaven must be the messengers of that coming, as being Tidings of joy to all
people: and the heavenly host must accompany his nativity, and must praise GOD
with that solemnity: O with what shoutings will angels and saints at that day
proclaim, Glory to GOD, and peace and good will toward men! If the stars of
heaven must lead men to come to worship a child in a manger, how will the glory
of his next appearing constrain all the world to acknowledge his sovereignty!
If when he was in the form of a servant, they cry out, What manner of man is
this, that both wind and sea obey him! What shall they say when they shall see
him coming in his glory, and the heavens and earth obey him? Then shall appear
the sign of the Son of man in heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the
earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven
with power and great-glory.

This coming of Christ is frequently mentioned in the prophets, as the great
support of his people's spirits till then. And whenever the apostles would
quicken to duty, or encourage to patient waiting, they usually do it by
mentioning Christ's coming. Why then do we not use more this cordial
consideration, whenever we want support and comfort? Shall the wicked with
inconceivable horror behold him, and cry out, Yonder is he whose blood we
neglected, whose grace we resisted, whose counsels we refused, whose government
we cast off! And shall not the saints, with inconceivable gladness, cry out,
Yonder is he whose blood redeemed us, whose spirit cleansed us! Yonder comes he
in whom we trusted, and now we see he has not deceived our trust: he for whom
we long waited, and now we see we have not waited in vain! O how should it then
be the character of a christian, To wait for the Son of GOD from heaven, whom
he raised from the dead, even JESUS which delivered us from the wrath to come!
1 Thessalonians. i. 10. And with all faithful diligence, to prepare to meet our LORD
with joy. And seeing his coming is of purpose to be glorified in his saints,
and admired in all them that believe; what thought should glad our hearts more
than the thought of that day? A little while indeed we have not seen him, but
yet a little while and we shall see him, for he has said, I will not have you
comfortless, but will come unto you. We were comfortless should he not come.
And while we daily gaze and look up to heaven after him, let us remember what
the angel said, This some JESUS which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven. Let every christian
that hears and reads, say, Come; and our LORD himself says, Surely I come
quickly, amen, even so come LORD JESUS.

The second stream that leads to paradise, is that great work of Jesus
Christ, in raising our bodies from the dust, uniting them again unto the soul.
What, says the atheist, shall all these scattered bones and dust become a man?
Thou fool, do thou dispute against the power of the Almighty? Do thou
object difficulties to infinite strength? Thou blind mole! thou little piece of
creeping, breathing clay! But come thy way, let me take thee by the hand, and
with reverence (as Elihu) plead for GOD; and for that power whereby I hope to
arise. See thou this great massy body of the earth? upon what foundation does
it stand? See thou this vast ocean of waters? what limits them, and why do
they not overflow and drown the earth? whence is that e^^nstant cobing and
flowing of her tides? will thou say from the moon, or other planets? and whence
have they that influence? Must thou not come to a cause of causes, that can do
all things? And does not reason require thee, to conceive of that cause as a
perfect intelligence, and voluntary agent, and not such a blind worker and
empty notion as that nothing is, which thou call nature? What think thou?
Is not that power able to effect thy resurrection, which does all this? Is it
not as easy to raise the dead, as to make heaven and earth, and all out of
nothing? But if thou be unpersuadable, all I say to thee more is as the prophet
to the prince of Samaria, 2 Kings vii. 19. Thou shall see that day with thine
eyes, but little to thy comfort; for that which is the day of relief to the
saints, shall be a day of revenge on thee.

Come then, fellow christians, let us commit these carcases to the dust: that
prison shall not long contain them. Let us lie down in peace and take our rest:
it will not be an everlasting night, or endless sleep. What if we go out of the
troubles and stirs of the world, and enter into those chambers of dust, and the
doors be shut upon us, and we hide ourselves, at it were, for a little moment
until the indignation be overpast? Yet, behold the LORD comes out of his place
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: and then the earth
shall disclose us, and the dust shall hide us no more. As sure as we awake in
the morning, when we have slept out the night, so sure shall we then awake.

Lay down then cheerfully this lump of corruption: thou shall undoubtedly
receive it again in incorruption. Lay down freely this terrestrial, this
natural body: thou shall receive it again a celestial, a spiritual body. Though
thou lay it down with great dishonor, thou shall receive it in glory: and
though thou art separated from it through weakness, it shall be raised again in
mighty power. When the trumpet of GOD shall sound the call, Come away, rise ye
dead; who shall then stay behind? Who can resist the powerful command of our
LORD? When he shall call to the earth and sea. O earth, O sea, give up thy
dead: the first that shall be called are the saints that sleep; and then the
saints that are alive shall be changed. For they which are alive, and remain
till the coming of the LORD, shall not prevent them which are asleep. For the
LORD himself shall descend from heaven with a shoul, with the wi^^ of the
archangel, and with the trump of GOD; and the dead in Christ shall rise first.
Then they which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the LORD in the ^ir; and so shall we ever be with the LORD.
Triumph now, O christian! in these promises: thou shall shortly triumph in
their performance: for this is the day that the LORD will make; We shall be
glad and rejoice therein. The grave that could not keep our LORD, cannot keep
us: he arose for us, and by the same power will cause us to arise. For if we
believe that JESUS died and rose again; even so them also which slee^^ JESUS,
will GOD bring with him. Therefore let our hearts be glad, and our glory
rejoice, and our flesh also rest in hope; for he will not leave us in the
grave, nor suffer us still to see corruption. Yea, therefore let us be
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the LORD, for as much as
we know our labor is not in vain in the LORD.

The third part of this prologue to the saints rest, is the solemn process at
their judgment, where they shall first themselves be justified; and then with
Christ judge the world. All the world must there appear, young and old, of all
estates and nations, that ever were from the creation to that day. The judgment
shall be set, and the books opened, and the book of life produced; and the dead
shall be judged out of those things which were written in the books, according
to their works, and whosoever is not found written in the book of life, is cast
into the lake of fire. O terrible! O joyful day! Terrible to those that have
not watched, but forgot the coming of their LORD! Joyful to the saints, whose
waiting and hope was to see this day! Then shall the world behold the goodness
and severity of the LORD; on them who perish, severity; but to his chosen,
goodness. When every one must give account of his stewardship; and every talent
of time, health, wit, mercies, affliction, means, warnings must be reckoned
for. When the sins of youth, and those which they had forgotten, and their
secret sins shall be laid open before angels and men: when they shall see all
their friends, wealth, old delights, all their confidence and false hopes
forsake them. When they shall see the LORD JESUS whom they neglected, whose
word they disobeyed, whose ministers they abused, whose servants they hated,
now sitting to judge them: when their own consciences shall cry out against
them, and call to their remembrance all their misdoings. Remember, at such a
time such or such a sin; at such a time Christ sued hard for thy conversion;
the minister pressed it home to thy heart, thou wast touched to the quick with
the word; thou did purpose and promise returning, and yet thou did cast off
all. O which way will the wretched sinner look! O who can conceive the thoughts
of his heart! Now the world cannot help him; his old companions cannot help
him: the saints neither can nor will; only the LORD JESUS can: but there is the
misery, he will not: nay, without violating the truth of his word, he cannot:
though otherwise, in regard of his absolute power, he might. The time was,
sinner, when Christ would, and you would not; and now, fain would you, and he
will not. What then remains but to cry to the mountains, Fall on us; and the
hills cover us from the presence of him that sits upon the throne! But all in
vain! for thou have the LORD of mountains and hills for thine enemy, whose
voice they will obey, and not thine. Sinner, make not light of this; for as
thou live (except a thorough change prevent it) thou shall shortly, to thy
inconceivable horror, see that day.

Poor careless sinner, I did not think here to have said so much to thee: but
if these lines fall into thy hands, I charge thee before GOD, and the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
kingdom; that thou make haste and get alone, and set thy self sadly to ponder
these things. Ask thy heart, is this true, or is it not? Is there such a day,
and must I see it? What do I then? Is it not time, full time, that I had made
sure of Christ and comfort long ago? Should I sit still another day, who have
lost so many? Friend, I profess to thee from the word of the LORD, that of all
thy sweet sins, there will then be nothing left, but the sting in thy
conscience, which will be never out through all eternity.

But why tremblest thou, O gracious soul! He that would not overlook one Lot in
Sodom; nay, that could do nothing till he went forth; will he forget thee at
that day? Thy LORD knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to
reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be punished: he knows how to
make the same day the greatest terror to his foes, and yet the greatest joy to
his people. There is no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And, who shall lay any thing to the
charge of GOD 's elect? Shall the law? Why, whatsoever the law says, it says
to them that are under the law: but we are not under the law, but under grace:
for the law of the spirit of life, which is in CHRIST JESUS, has made us free
from the law of sin and death. Or shall conscience? We were long ago justified
by faith, and so have peace with GOD, and have our hearts sprirkled from an
evil conscience: and the spirit bearing witness with our spirits, that we are
the children of GOD. It is GOD that justifies, who shall condemn? If our judge
condemn us not, who shall? He that said to the adulterous woman, Has no man
condemned thee? Neither do I condemn thee: He will say to us, (more faithfully
than Peter to him) Though all men deny thee, or condemn thee, I will not. Thou
have confessed me before men, and I will confess thee before my Father and the
angels in heaven.

What inexpressible joy may this afford a believer? Our dear LORD shall be our
judge. Will a man fear to be judged by his dearest friend, by a brother, by a
father, or a wife by her own husband? Did he come down, and suffer and weep,
and bleed, and die for thee; and will he now condemn thee? Was he judged and
condemned, and executed in thy stead, and now will he condemn thee? Has it
cost him so dear to save thee? and will he now destroy thee? Has he done the
most of the work already, in justifying, preserving and perfecting thee? and
will he now undo all again? O what an unreasonable sin is unbelief, that will
charge our LORD with such absurdities! Well then, fellow christians, let the
terror of that day be never so great, our LORD can mean no ill to us in all.
Let it make the devils tremble; and the wicked tremble; but it shall make us
leap for joy. And it must needs affect us deeply with the sense of our mercy
and happiness, to behold the contrary condition of others. To see most of the
world tremble with terror, while we triumph with joy: to see them thrust into
hell, when we are proclaimed heirs of the kingdom; to see our neighbors that
lived in the same towns, came to the same congregations, dwelt in the same
houses, and were esteemed more honorable in the world than ourselves; now so
differenced from us, and by the searcher of hearts eternally separated. This,
with the great magnificence and dreadfulness of the day, does the apostle
pathetically express, in 2 These. i. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. It is a righteous thing
with GOD to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are
troubled, rest with us; when the LORD JESUS shall be revealed from heaven with
his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on the^^ that know not
GOD, and obey not the gospel of our LORD JESUS CHRIST; who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the LORD, and from the glory
of his power. And now is not here enough to make that day a welcome day, and
the thoughts of it delightful to us? But yet there is more. We shall be so far
from the dread of that judgment, that ourselves shall become the judges. Christ
will take his people, as it were into commission with him; and they shall sit
and approve his righteous judgment.

Do you not know that the saints shall judge the world? Nay, Know you not that
we shall judge angels? Surely, were i^ not the word of Christ that speaks it,
this advancement would seem incredible, yet even Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of this; saying, Behold the LORD comes with ten thousand of his
saints, to execute judgment upon all, and convince all that are ungodly among
them, of their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and of all
their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoke against him. Jude 14,
etc. Thus shall the saints be honored, and the righteous have dominion in the
morning. O that the careless world were but wise to consider this, and that
they would remember their latter end! That they would be now of the same mind,
as they will be when they shall see the heavens pass away with a great noise,
and the elements melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are
therein be burnt up! When all shall be on fire about their ears, and all
earthly glory consumed. For the heavens, and the earth which are now, by the
same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment,
and perdition of ungodly men. Seeing then all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness:
looking for, and hasting to the coming of the day of GOD: wherein the heavens
being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements melt with fervent heat.

The fourth antecedent to the saints advancement is, their solemn coronation,
and receiving into the kingdom. For as Christ, their head, is anointed both
king and priest: so under him are his people made unto GOD both kings and
priests: To reign, and to offer praises for-ever, Rev. v. 10. The crown of
righteousness, which was laid up for them, shall by the LORD, the righteous
judge, be given them at that day, 2 Timothy iv. 8. They have been faithful to the
death, and therefore shall receive the crown of life: and according to the
improvement of their talents here, so shall their rule and dignity be enlarged.
So that they are not dignified with empty titles, but real dominions. For
Christ will take them and set them down with himself, in his own throne; and
will give them power over the nations, even as he received of his Father. And
will give them the morning star. The LORD himself will give them possession
with these applauding expressions: Well done, good and faithful servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things;
enter thou into the joy of thy LORD. And with this solemn and blessed
proclamation shall he enthrone them; Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Every word is full
of life and joy. [Come] This is the holding forth of the golden scepter; to
warrant our approach unto this glory. Come now as near as you will: fear not
the Bethshemites judgment: for the enmity is utterly taken away. This is not
such a Come as we were wont to hear, Come take up your cross, and follow me:
though that was sweet, yet this is much more. [Ye blessed] Blessed indeed, when
that mouth shall so pronounce us. For though the world has accounted us
accursed, yet certainly those that he blesses are blessed: and those whom he
curses only, are cursed: and his blessing shall not be revoked. But he has
blessed us, and we shall be blessed. [Of my Father] Blessed in the Father's
love, as well as the Son's: for they are one: the Father has testified his
love, in sending Christ and accepting his ransom; as the Son has also
testified his. [Inherit] No longer bondmen, nor servants only, nor children
under age, who differ not in possession, but only in the title from servants:
but, now we are heirs of the kingdom, coheirs with CHRIST. [The kingdom] No
less than the kingdom! Indeed to be KING of kings, and LORD of lords, is our
LORD'S own title: but to be kings and reign with him, is ours: the fruition of
this kingdom, is as the fruition of the light of the sun, each has the whole,
and the rest never the less. [Prepared for you] GOD is the Alpha, as well as
the Omega of our blessedness. Eternal love has laid the foundation. He
prepared the kingdom for us, and then prepared us for the kingdom. This is the
preparation of his counsel: for the execution whereof Christ was yet to make a
further preparation. [For you] Not for believers only in general, but for you
in particular. [From the foundation of the world] Not only from the promise
after Adam's fall, but from eternity.

But a difficulty arises in our way. In what sense is our improvement of our
talent, our well-doing, our overcoming, our harboring, visiting, feeding
Christ in his little ones, alleged as a reason of our coronation and glory? Is
it not the purchased possession, and mere fruit of Christ's blood? If every man
must be judged according to his works, and receive according to what they have
done in the flesh, whether good or evil; if GOD will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans ii. 6, 7. and give eternal life to all men, if
they patiently continue in well-doing; if he will give right to the tree of
life, Rev. xxii. 14. and entrance into the city, to the doers of his
commandments; and if this last absolving sentence (...) the completing of our
justification; and so the do^^ (...) law be justified, Romans ii. 13. then what
is become of free grace? or justification by faith only? of the sole
righteousness of Christ to make us accepted? I answer,

1. Let not the names of men draw thee one way or other, nor make thee partial
in searching for the truth: dislike the men for their unsound doctrine; but
call not doctrine unsound, because it is theirs: nor sound because of the
repute of the writer. 2. Know this, that as an unhumbled soul is far apter to
give too much to duty and personal righteousness, than to Christ; so an humble
self-denying christian is as likely to err on the other hand, in giving less to
duty than Christ has given, and laying all the work from himself on Christ,
for fear of robbing Christ of the honor; and so much to look at Christ without
him, and think he should look at nothing in himself; that he forgets Christ
within him. 3. Our giving to Christ more of the work than scripture does, or
rather our ascribing it to him out of the scripture-way, does but dishonor,
and not honor him; and depress, but not exalt his free grace: while we deny
the inward sanctifying work of his spirit, and extol his free justification,
which are equal fruits of his merit, we make him an imperfect Savior. 4. But
to arrogate to ourselves any part of Christ's prerogative, is most desperate of
all, and no doctrine more directly overthrows the gospel almost, than that of
justification by the merits of our own, or by works of the law.
And thus we have seen the christian safely landed in paradise; and conveyed
honorably to his rest. Now let us a little further view those mansions,
consider his privileges, and see whether there be any glory like unto this
glory.

CHAP. V. The Excellencies of our Rest.
LET us see more immediately from the pure fountain of the scriptures, what
further excellencies this rest affords. And the LORD hide us in the clefts of
the rock, and cover us with the hands of indulgent grace, while we approach to
take this view.

And first, it is a most singular honor of the saint's rest, to be called the
purchased possession; that it is the fruit of the blood of the Son of GOD; yea,
the chief fruit: yea, the end and perfection of all the fruits of that blood.
Surely love is the most precious ingredient in the whole composition; and of
all the flowers that grow in the garden of love, can there be brought one more
sweet than this blood? Greater love than this there is not, to lay down the
life of the lover. And to have this our Redeemer ever before our eyes, and the
liveliest sense and freshest remembrance of that dying bleeding love still upon
our souls; O how will it fill our souls with perpetual ravishments, to think
that in the streams of this blood, we have swam through the violence of the
world, the snares of Satan, the seducements of the flesh, the curse of the law,
the wrath of an offended GOD, the accusations of a guilty conscience, and the
doubts and fears of an unbelieving heart, and are passed through all, and
arrived safely at the breast of GOD! Now we are stupefied with vile and
senseless hearts, that can hear all the story of this love, and read all the
sufferings of love; and all with dullness, and unaffectedness. He cries to us,
Behold and see, is it nothing to you, O all ye that pass by? Is there any
sorrow like unto my sorrow? And we will scarce hear or regard the voice; or
turn aside to view the wounds of him who healed our wounds at so dear a rate.
But oh! then our perfected souls will feel as well as hear, and with feeling
apprehensions flame in love for love. Now we set his picture wounded and dying
before our eyes, but can get it no nearer our hearts, than if we believed
nothing of what we read. But then when the obstructions between the eye and the
understanding are taken away, and the passage opened between the head and
heart, surely our eyes will everlastingly affect our heart! And while we view
with one eye our slain revived LORD, and with the other eye our lost recovered
soul, these views will eternally pierce us, and warm our very souls. And those
eyes through which folly has so often stolen into our hearts, l^^ in the love
of our dearest LORD for-ever.

We shall then leave these hearts of stone and rock behind us, and the sin that
here so close besets us, and the sottish unkindness that followed us so long,
shall not be able to follow us into glory. But we shall behold, as it were, the
wounds of love, with eyes and hearts of love for-ever. Now his heart is open to
us, and ours shut to him: but when his heart shall be open, and our hearts
open, oh the blessed congress that will then be! What a passionate meeting is
there between our new-risen LORD, and the first sinful woman that he appears
to! How does love struggle for expressions? and the straightened fire shut up in
the breast, strive to break forth? Mary! says Christ: Master! says Mary: and
presently she clasps about his feet, having her heart as near to his heart as
her hands were to his feet. What a meeting of ^^ve then will there be, between
the new glorified saint, and the glorious Redeemer! But I am here at a loss, my
apprehensions fail me, and fall too short. Only this I know, it will be the
singular praise of our inheritance, that it was bought with the price of that
blood; and the singular joy of the saints, to behold the purchaser and the
price, together with the possession: neither will the views of the wounds of
love renew our wounds or sorrow: he whose first words after his resurrection
were to a great sinner, Woman, why weepest thou? knows how to raise love and
joy by all those views, without raising any cloud of sorrow. If a dying friend
deliver but a token of his love, how carefully do we preserve it? and still
remember him when we behold it, as if his own name were written on it? And will
not then the death and blood of our LORD everlastingly sweeten our possessed
glory? Well then, christians, as you use to do in your books, and on your
goods, to write down the price they cost you: so on your righteousness, and on
your glory; write down the price, The precious blood of CHRIST.

Yet understand this rightly: not that this highest glory was in the strictest
sense purchased, so as that it was the most immediate effect of Christ's death;
we must take heed that we conceive not of GOD as a tyrant, who so delights in
cruelty, as to exchange mercies for stripes. GOD was never so pleased with the
sufferings of the innocent, much less of his Son, us to sell his mercy properly
for their sufferings. But the sufferings of Christ were primarily and
immediately to satisfy justice, and to bear what was due to the sinner, and so
to restore him to the life he lost, and the happiness he sell from: but this
dignity, which surpasses the first, is as it were, from the redundancy of his
merit, or a secondary fruit of his death. The work of his redemption so well
pleased the Father, that he gave him power to advance his chosen to a higher
dignity than they fell from; and to give them the glory which was given to
himself; and all this according to the good pleasure of his own will.

2. The second pearl in the saint's diadem, is, that it is free. This seems
as Pharaoh's second kine, to devour the former. But the seeming discord, is but
a pleasing diversity which constitutes the melody. These two attributes
purchased and free, are the two chains of gold, which make up the wreath for
the heads of the pillars in the temple of GOD. It was dear to Christ, but free
to us. When Christ was to buy, silver and gold were nothing worth; prayers and
tears could not suffice; nor any thing below his blood; but when we come to
buy, our buying is but receiving: we have it freely, without money and without
price. Nor do the gospel-conditions make it the less free; if the
gospel-conditions had been such as are the laws, or payment of the debt
required at our hands; the freeness then were more questionable. Yea, if GOD
had said to us, Sinners, if you will satisfy my justice for one of your sins, I
will forgive you all the rest, it would have been a hard condition on our part,
and the grace of the covenant not so free, as our disability does require. But
if all the condition be our cordial acceptance, surely we deserve not the name
of purchasers. Thankful accepting of a free acquittance, is no paying of the
debt. If life be offered to a condemned man, upon condition that he shall not
refuse the offer, the favor is nevertheless free. Nay, though the condition
were, that he should beg, and wait before he have his pardon, and take him for
his LORD who has thus redeemed him, this is no satisfying the justice of the
law: especially when the condition is also given by GOD; surely then ^^^e is
all free: if the Father freely give the Son, and the Son freely pay the debt;
and if GOD freely accept that way of payment, when he might have required it of
the principal; and if both Father and Son freely offer us the purchased life
upon those fair conditions; and if they also freely send the spirit to enable
us to perform those conditions, then what is here, that is not free? O the
everlasting admiration that must needs surprise the saints to think of this
freeness! What did the LORD see in me, that he should judge me meet for such a
state? that I who was but a poor, despised wretch, should be clad in the
brightness of this glory? that I, a silly, creeping worm, should be advanced to
this high dignity? He that durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but stood afar
off smiting his breast, and crying, LORD, be merciful to me a sinner! now to be
lifted up to heaven himself! He who was wont to write his name in Bradford's
style, the unthankful, the hard-hearted, the unworthy sinner! and was wont to
admire that patience could bear so long, and justice suffer him to live: sure
he will admire at this alteration, when he shall find by experience, that
unworthiness could not hinder his salvation, which he thought would have
bereaved him of every mercy. Ah! christian, there is no talk of our worthiness
or unworthiness. If worthiness were our condition for admittance, we might sit
down with St. John, and weep, Because none in heaven or on earth is found
worthy. But the lion of the tribe of Judah is worthy, and has prevailed; and
by that title must we hold the inheritance. We shall offer there the offering
that David refused, even praise for that which cost us nothing. Here our
commission runs, freely ye have received, freely give. But Christ has dearly
received, yet freely gives. Yet this is not all. If it were only for nothing,
and without our merit, the wonder were great: but it is moreover against our
merit, and against our long endeavoring our own ruin. The (...) that has
known the desert of sin, does (...) understand (...) what I say. What an
astonishing thought it will (...) to think of the unmeasurable difference
between our deservings, and our receivings! between the state we should have
been in, and the state we are in! to look down upon hell, and see the vast
difference that free grace has made betwixt us and them! to see the
inheritance there, which we were born to, so different from that which we are
adopted to! Oh! what pangs of love will it cause within us, to think, yonder
was the place that sin would have brought me to; but this is it that Christ
has brought me to! Yonder death was the wages of my sin; but this eternal life
is the gift of GOD, through JESUS CHRIST my LORD. Doubtless this will be our
everlasting admiration, that so rich a crown should sit the head of so vile a
sinner! that such high advancement, and such long unfruitfulness and unkindness
can be the state of the same persons! and that such vile rebellions can
conclude in such most precious joys! But no thanks to us; nor to any of our
duties and labors, much less to our neglects and laziness; we know to whom the
praise is due, and must be given for-ever. And indeed to this very end it was,
that infinite wisdom did cast the whole design of man's salvation into the
mould of PURCHASE and FREENESS, that the love and joy of man might be
perfected, and the honor of grace most highly advanced: that the thought of
merit might neither cloud the one, nor obstruct the other; and that on these
two hinges the gates of heaven might turn. So then let [DESERVED] be written on
the (...) hell, but on the door of heaven and life, [THE FREE GIFT.]

A third comfortable adjunct of this rest is, that it is the fellowship of the
blessed saints and angels of GOD. Not so singular will the christian be, as to
be solitary. Though it be proper to the saints only, yet is it common to all
the saints. For what is it, but an association of blessed spirits in GOD? A
corporation of perfected saints, whereof Christ is the head? The communion of
saints completed? For those that have prayed and fasted, and wept, and watched,
and waited together; now to enjoy, and praise together, methinks should much
advance their pleasure. He who mentions the qualifications of our happiness,
of purpose that our joy may be full, and makes so often mention of our
conjunction in his praises, sure does hereby intimate to us, that this will be
some advantage to our joys. Certain I am of this, fellow christians, that as we
have been together in labor, duty, danger and distress, so shall we be in the
great recompense; and as we have been scorned and despised, so shall we be
crowned and honored together; and we who have gone through the day of sadness,
shall enjoy together that day of gladness. And those who have been with us in
persecution and prison, shall be with us also in that place of consolation.
When I look in the faces of the people of GOD, and believingly think of this
day, what a refreshing thought is it? Shall we not there remember our
fellowship in duty, and in sufferings? How often our groans made as it were one
sound, our tears but one stream, and our desires but one prayer? And now all
our praises shall make up one melody; and all our churches one church; and all
ourselves but one body: for we shall be one in Christ, even as he and the
Father are one. It is true, we must be very careful that we look not for that
in the saints, which is alone in Christ, and that we give them not his
prerogative; nor expect too great a part of our comfort in the fruition of
them: we are prone enough to this kind of idolatry. But yet he who commands us
so to love them now, will give us leave in the same subordination to himself to
love them then, when himself has made them much more lovely. And if we may
love them, we shall surely rejoice in them; for love cannot stand without an
answerable joy. If the forethought of sitting down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and all the prophets in the kingdom of GOD, may be our lawful joy; then how
much more that real sight, and actual possession? It cannot choose but be
comfortable to me to think of that day, when I shall join with Moses in his
song, with David in his psalms of praise, and with all the redeemed in the song
of the Lamb for-ever. When we shall see Enoch walking with GOD; Noah enjoying
the end of his singularity; Joseph of his integrity; Job of his patience;
Hezekiah of his uprightness: and all the saints the end of their faith. O happy
day, when I shall depart out of this crowd and sink, and go to that same
council of souls! I know that Christ is All in All, and that it is the presence
of GOD that makes heaven to be heaven. But yet it much sweeteneth the thoughts
of that place to me, to remember that there are such a multitude of my most
dear and precious friends in Christ: with whom I took sweet counsel, and with
whom I went up to the house of GOD, who walked with me in the fear of GOD, and
integrity of their hearts: In the face of whose conversation there was written
the name of Christ; whose sensible mention of his excellencies has made my
heart to burn within me. To think such a friend that died at such a time, and
such a one at another time, and that all these are entered into rest; and we
shall surely go to them. It is a question with some, Whether we shall know each
other in heaven or no? Surely, there shall no knowledge cease which now we
have; but only that which implies our imperfection. And what imperfection can
this imply? Nay our present knowledge shall be increased beyond belief: it
shall indeed be done away, but as the light of the stars is done away by the
rising of the sun; which is more properly doing away of our ignorance than our
knowledge; indeed we shall not know each other after the flesh; but by the
image of Christ, and spiritual relation, and former faithfulness in improving
our talents, beyond doubt, we shall know and be known. Nor is it only our old
acquaintance, but all the saints of all ages, whose faces in the flesh, we
never saw, whom we shall there both know and comfortably enjoy. Yea, and angels
as well as saints will be our blessed acquaintance. These who now are willingly
ministerial spirits for our good, will willingly then be our companions in joy
for the perfecting of our good: and they who had such joy in heaven for our
conversion, will gladly rejoice with us in our glorification. I think,
christian, this will be a more honorable assembly than ever you have beheld;
and a more happy society than you were ever of before. Then we shall truly say
as David, I am a companion of all them that fear thee: when we are come to
mount Sion, and to the city of the living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to
an innumerable company of angels; to the general assembly, and church of the
firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to GOD the judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant. So then I conclude: This is one singular excellency of the rest of
heaven, That we are fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of
GOD.

4. Another excellent property of our rest will be, that the joys of it are
immediately from GOD. We shall see GOD face to face: and stand continually in
his presence; and consequently derive our life and comfort immediately from
him. Whether GOD will make use of any creatures for our service then; or if
any, of what creatures, and what use; is more than I yet know: but it is
certain, that at least, our greatest joys will be immediate, if not all. Now we
have nothing at all immediately, but at the second or third hand, or how many
who knows? From the earth, from man, from the sun and moon, from the influence
of the planets, from the ministration of angels, and from the spirit of Christ;
and doubtless, the further the stream runs from the fountain, the more impure
it is. It gathers some defilement from every unclean channel it passes
through. Though it savours not in the hand of angels, of the imperfection of
sinners, yet it does of the imperfection of creatures; and as it comes from
man, it savours of both. How quick and piercing is the word it itself? Yet many
times it never enters, being managed by a feeble arm. O what weight and worth
is there in every passage of the blessed gospel! enough, one would think, to
enter and force the dullest soul, and wholly possess its thoughts and
affections: and yet how often does it drop as water upon a stone? The things of
GOD which we handle, are divine: but our manner of handling is human: and there
is little or none that ever we touch, but we leave the print of our fingers
behind us; but of GOD should speak this word himself, it would be a piercing
melting word indeed.

If an angel from heaven should preach the gospel, yet could he not deliver it
according to its glory; much less we who never saw what they have seen, and
keep this treasure in earthen vessels. The comforts that flow through sermons,
sacraments, reading, conference, and creatures, are but half comforts; in
comparison of those which the Almighty shall speak with his own mouth, and
reach forth with his own hand. The christian knows by experience now, that his
most immediate joys are his sweetest joys; which have least of man, and are
most directly from the spirit. That is one reason, I conceive, why christians
who are much in secret prayer and meditation, are men of greatest life; because
they are nearer the wellhead, and have all more immediately from GOD himself.
And that I conceive the only reason, why we are more indisposed to those secret
duties, and can easier bring our hearts to hear and read, than to secret
prayer, self-examination and meditation; because in the former is more of man,
and in these we approach the LORD alone, ^^d our natures draw back from the
most spiritual duties. Not that we should therefore cast off the other, and
neglect any ordinance of GOD: to live above them while we use them, is the way
of a christian. But to live above ordinances, as to live without them, is to
live without the government of Christ. It is then we shall have light without a
candle; and a perpetual day without the sun: For the city has no need of the
sun, neither of the moon to shine in it: for the glory of GOD does lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof, Rev. xxi. 23. Nay, There shall be no night
there, and they need no candle, nor light of the sun, for the LORD GOD gives
them light, and they shall reign for-ever and ever. We shall then have rest
without sleep, and be kept from cold without our clothing, and need no
fig leaves to hide our shame: for GOD will be our rest, and Christ our
clothing, and shame and sin will cease together. We shall then have health
without physic, and strength without the use of food; for the LORD GOD will be
our strength, and the light of his countenance will be health to our souls, and
marrow to our bones. We shall then (and never till then) have enlightened
understandings without scripture, and be governed without a written law. For
the LORD will perfect his law in our hearts, and we shall be all perfectly
taught of GOD; his own will shall be our law, and his own face shall be our
light for-ever. We shall then have communion without sacraments, when Christ
shall drink with us of the fruit of the vine new, that is, refresh us with the
comforting wine of immediate fruition in the kingdom of his Father.

5. A further excellency of this rest is this; it will be a suitable rest:
suited, 1. to our natures. 2. to our desires. 3. to our necessities.


1. To our natures. If suitableness concur not with excelleney, the best things
may be bad to us: for it is not that which makes things good in themselves, to
be good to us. In our choice of friends, we often pass by the more excellent, to
choose the more suitable; every good agrees not with every nature. The choicest
dainties which we feed upon ourselves, would be to our beasts, as an
unpleasing, so an insufficient sustenance.

Now here is suitableness and excellency conjoined. The new nature of the
saints does suit their spirits to this rest: and indeed their holiness is
nothing else but a spark taken from this element, and by the spirit of Christ
kindled in their hearts, the flame whereof, as mindful of its divine original,
does ever mount aloft, and tend to the place from whence it comes. Gold and
earthly glory, temporal crowns and kingdoms, could not make a rest for saints.
As they were not redeemed with so low a price, so neither are they endued with
so low a nature. As GOD will have from them a spiritual worship, suitable to
his own spiritual being; so will he provide them a spiritual rest, suitable to
his people's spiritual nature.

A heaven of the knowledge of GOD, and his Christ; and a delightful complacency
in that mutual love, and everlasting rejoicing in the fruition of our GOD, a
perpetual singing of his high praises: this is a heaven for a saint: a
spiritual rest, suitable to a spiritual nature. Then we shall live in our
element. We are now as the fish in some small vessel of water, that has only
so much as will keep him alive: but what is that to the full ocean? We have a
little air let into us to afford us breathing: but what is that to the sweet
and fresh gales upon mount Sion? We have a beam of the sun to lighten our
darkness, and a warm ray to keep us from freezing: but then we shall live in
its light, and be revived by its heat for-ever.

2. It is suitable to the desires of the saints: for such as is their nature,
such are their desires; and such as their desires, such will be their rest.
Indeed we have now a mixed nature; and from contrary principles, arise contrary
desires. But it is the desires of our renewed nature, which this rest is suited
to. Whilst our desires remain corrupt and misguided, it is a far greater mercy
to deny, yea, to destroy them, than to satisfy them: but those which are
spiritual, are of his own planting, and he will surely water them, and give the
increase. He quickened our hunger and thirst for righteousness, that he might
make us happy in a full satisfaction.

Christian, this is a rest after thy own heart; it contains all that thy
heart can wish, that which thou longest for, prayest for, labourest for, there
thou shall find it all. Thou had rather have GOD in Christ, than all the
world; why there thou shall have him. Desire what thou can, and ask what thou will, as a christian, and it shall be given thee; not only to half of the
kingdom, but to the enjoyment of both kingdom and king. This is a life of
desire and prayer; but that is a life of satisfaction and enjoyment.

3. This rest is suitable to the saints necessities also, as well as to their
natures and desires. It contains whatsoever they truly wanted; not supplying
them with gross created comforts, which, like Readiness armor on David, are more
burden than benefit: but they shall there have the benefit without the burden;
and the pure spirits extracted (as it were) shall make up their cordial,
without the mixture of any drossy or earthly substance. It was Christ and
perfect holiness, which they most needed, and with these shall they be supplied.

4. Another excellency of our rest will be this, that it will be absolutely
perfect and complete; and this both in the sincerity and universality of it. We
shall then have joy without sorrow, and rest without weariness: as there is no
mixture of our corruption with our graces, so no mixture of sufferings with our
so^ac^^ there is none of those waves in that harbor, which now to^ us up and
down. Today we are well, tomorrow sick; today in esteem, tomorrow in
disgrace; today we have friends, tomorrow none: nay, we have wine and vinegar
in the same cup. If revelation should raise us up to the third heaven, the
messenger of Satan must presently buffet us: but there is none of this
inconstancy in heaven. It perfect love cast out fear; then perfect joy must
needs cast out sorrow, and perfect happiness exclude all the relics of misery.
There will be an universal perfecting of all our parts and powers, and an
universal removal of all our evils. And though the positive part be the
sweetest, and that which draws the other after it, even as the rising of the
sun excludes the darkness; yet is not the negative part to be slighted, even
our freedom from so many and great calamities. Let us therefore look over these
more punctually, and see what it is we shall there rest from. In general, it is
from all evil. Particularly, First, from sin. Secondly, suffering.

First, It excludes nothing more directly than sin; whether original, and of
nature; or actual, and of conversation: for there enters nothing that
defiles, nor that works abomination, nor that makes a lie. What need Christ
have died, if heaven could have contained imperfect souls? For to this end cam^
he into the world, that he might put away the works of the devil. His blood and
spirit have not done all this, to leave us after all, defi^ed. For what
communion has light with darkness? And what fellowship has CHRIST with
Belial? He that has prepared for sin the torments of hell, will never admit it
into the blessedness of heaven. Therefore, christian, never fear this: if thou
be once in heaven, thou shall sin no more. Is not this glad news to thee, who
have prayed, and watched, and labored against it so long? I know, if it were
offered to thy choice, thou would rather choose to be freed from sin, than to
be made heir of the world. Thou shall have thy desire: that hard heart, those
vile thoughts, which thou could no more leave behind thee, than leave thyself
behind thee, shall be now left behind for-ever. If they accompany thee to
death, they cannot proceed a step further. Thy understanding shall never more
be troubled with darkness: ignorance and error are inconsistent with this
light. Now thou walk like a man in the twilight, ever afraid of being out of
the way: but then will all darkness be dispelled, and our blind understandings
fully opened.

O what would we give to know clearly all the profound mysteries in the
doctrine of redemption, of justification, of the nature of grace, of the divine
attributes! What would we give to see all dark scriptures made plain; to see
all seeming contradictions reconciled! Why, when glory has taken away the veil
from our eyes, all this will be known in a moment; we shall then see clearly
into all the controversies about doctrine or discipline that now perplex us.
The poorest christian is presently there a more perfect divine, than any is
here. We are now through our ignorance subject to such mutability, that in
points not fundamental, we change as the moon: but when once our ignorance is
perfectly healed, then shall we be settled, resolved men; then shall our
reproach be taken from us, and we shall never change our judgment more. Our
ignorance now does lead us into error, to the grief of our more knowing
brethren, to the disturbing the church's quiet, to the scandalizing of others,
and weakening ourselves. How many a faithful soul is seduced into error! Loath
they are to err, GOD knows; and therefore read and pray, and yet err still. And
in lesser and more difficult points, how can it be otherwise?

Can it be expected, that men void of learning and strength of parts, unstudied
and untaught, should at the first onset know those truths, which they are
almost incapable of knowing at all? When the greatest divines of clearest
judgment acknowledge so much difficulty, that they could almost find in their
hearts, sometimes to profess them quite beyond their reach. But O that happy
approaching day, when error shall vanish away for-ever, when our understanding
shall be filled with GOD himself, whose light will leave no darkness in us! His
face shall be the scripture, where we shall read the truth: and himself instead
of teachers and counselors, to perfect our understandings, and acquaint us
with himself. No more error, no more scandal to others, no more disquiet to our
own spirits, no more mistaken zeal for falsehood. Many a good man has here in
his mistaken zeal, been a means to deceive and pervert his brethren; and when
he sees his own error, cannot again tell how to undeceive them: but there we
shall all conspire in one truth, as being one in him who is the truth.

And as we shall rest from all the sin of our understandings, so of our wills,
affection and conversation. We shall no more retain this rebelling principle,
which is still withdrawing us from GOD. We shall no more be oppressed with the
power of our corruptions, nor vexed with their presence: no pride, passion,
slothfulness, senselessness shall enter with us; no strangeness to GOD, and the
things of GOD; no coldness of affections, nor imperfection in our love; no
uneven walking, nor grieving of the spirit; no scandalous action, or unholy
conversation: we shall rest from all these for-ever. Then shall our
understandings receive their light from the face of GOD, as the full moon from
the open sun: then shall our wills correspond to the divine will, as face
answers face in the glass; and his will shall be our law and rule, from which
we shall never swerve again. I conclude therefore with the words next my text,
He that is entered into his rest, has ceased from his own works, as GOD from
his. So that there is a perfect rest from sin.

Secondly, It is a perfect rest from suffering. When the cause is gone, the
effect cease. Our sufferings were but the consequents of our sinning, and
here they both shall cease together.

1. We shall rest from all the temptations of Satan. What a grief is it to a
christian, though he yield not to the temptation, yet to be still solicited to
deny his LORD? That such a thought should be cast into his heart? That he can
set about nothing that is good, but Satan is still dissuading him from it,
distracting him in it, or discouraging him after it? What a torment, as well as
a temptation is it, to have such horrid motions made to his soul? Sometime
cruel thoughts of GOD; sometime undervaluing thoughts of Christ; sometime
unbelieving thoughts of scripture; sometime injurious thoughts of Providence:
to be tempted sometime to turn to present things; sometime to play with the
baits of sin; sometime to venture on the delights of the flesh; and sometime to
Atheism itself? Especially when we know the treachery of our own hearts, that
they are as tinder, ready to take fire, as soon as one of these sparks shall
fall upon them: but when the day of our deliverance comes, we shall fully rest
from these temptations: Satan is then bound up, the time of tempting is done;
the time of torment to himself, and his conquered captives, is then come; and
the victorious saints shall have triumph from temptation. Now we walk among his
snares, and are in danger to be circumvented with his wiles: but then we are
quite above his snares. He has power here to tempt us in the wilderness, but
he enters not the holy city: he may s^^ on the pinnacle of the temple in the
earthly Jerusalem, but the new Jerusalem he (...) not approach. Pe^haps he may
bring us to an exceeding high mountain; but the mount Sim, and city of the
living GOD, he cannot ascend. Or if he should, yet all the kingdoms of the
world, and he glory of them, would be but a poor bait to the soul which is
possessed of the kingdom of our LORD.

2. We shall rest from all our temptations which we now undergo from the world
and the flesh, as well as Satan: and that is a number inexpressible. O the
hourly dangers that we here walk in! Every sense is a snare; every member a
snare; every creature a snare; every mercy a snare; and every duty a snare to
us. We can scarce open our eyes but we are in danger: if we behold them above
us, we are in danger of envy: if we see sumptuous buildings, pleasant
habitations, honor and riches, we are in danger to be drawn away with covetous
desires: if the rags and beggary of others, we are in danger of self-applauding
thoughts or unmercifulness: if we see beauty, it is a bait to lust; if
deformity, to loathing and disdain. We can scarcely hear a word spoken, but
contains to us matter of temptation. How soon do slanderous reports, vain
jests, or wanton speeches creep into the heart? How strong and prevalent a
temptation is our appetite? And how constant and strong a watch does it
require? Have we comeliness and beauty? what fuel for pride! Are we deformed?
what an occasion of repining! Have we strength of reason and learning? O how
hard is it not to be puffed up! to hunt after applause? to despise our
brethren? Are we unlearned, of shallow heads, and slender parts? How apt then
to despise what we have not? And to undervalue that which we do not know? And
to err with confidence, because of our ignorance? And if conceitedness and
pride do but strike in, to become a zealous enemy to truth, and a leading
troubler of the church's peace, under pretenses of truth? Are we men of
eminency and authority? How strong is our temptation to slight our brethren? to
abuse our trust? to seek ourselves? to stand upon our honor and privileges? to
forget ourselves, our poor brethren, and the public good? how hard to devote
our power to his glory, from whom we have received it? how prone to make our
wills our law? Are we inferiors? how prone to grudge at others pre-eminence?
and to bring their actions to the bar of our judgment? Are we rich, and not too
much exalted? Are we poor, and not discontented? Do we set upon duties? they
are snares too: either we are stupid and lazy, or rest on them, and turn from
Christ. In a word, not one word that falls from the mouth of a minister and
christian, but is a snare; nor a place we come into; not a word that our
ton^^es speak, not any mercy we possess, nor a bit we put into our mouths, but
they are snares; not that GOD has made them so, but through our own corruption
they become so to us. So that what a sad case are we in? especially they that
discern them not? For it is almost impossible they should esa^^ them. It was
not for nothing that our LORD cried out, What I say to one, I say to all,
watch. We are like the lepers at Samaria, If we go into the city, there is
nothing but famine; if we sin still, we perish.

But for-ever blessed be omnipotent love, which saves us out of all these, and
makes our straits but the advantages of the glory of his grace! And blessed be
the LORD, who has not given our souls for a prey: our soul is escaped as a
bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken and we are escaped.
Now, our houses, our clothes, our sleep, our food, our physic, our father,
mother, wife, children, friends, goods, lands, are all so many temptations; and
ourselves the greatest snare to ourselves: but in heaven, the danger and
trouble is over; there is nothing but what will advance our joy. Now every
companion is beckoning us to sin, and we can scarce tell how to say to them,
nay: but our rest will free us from all these. As Satan has no entrance there,
so neither any thing to serve his malice: but all things there with us conspire
the praises of our great Deliverer.

3. And as we rest from temptations, so also from all abuses and persecutions
which we suffer at the hands of wicked men. We shall be scorned, derided,
imprisoned, banished by them no more; the prayers of the souls under the altar
will then be answered, and GOD will avenge their blood on those that dwell on
the earth. This is the time for crowning with thorns, buffeting, spitting on:
that is the time for crowning with glory. Now the law is decreed on, That
whosoever will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, shall suffer persecutions: then they
that suffered with him, shall be glorified with him. Now we must be hated of
all men for CHRIST 's name sake: then will CHRIST be admired in his saints that
were thus hated. We are here as the scorn and offscouring of all things; as
men set up for a gazing-stock to angels and men, even for signs and wonders
amongst professing christians; they put us out of their synagogues, and cast
out our name as evil, and separate us from their company: but we shall then be
as much gazed at for our glory, and they will be shut out of the church of the
saints, and separated from us, whether they will or no. They now thi^^^ strange
that we run not with them to all excess of riot: they will then think more
strange that they ran not with us in the despised ways of GOD. We can now
scarce pray in our families, or sing praises to GOD, but our voice is a
vexation to them: how must it torment them then, to see us praising and
rejoicing, while they are howling and lamenting?

Brethren, you that now can attempt no work of GOD without resistance, and find
you must either lose the love of the world, and your outward comforts, or else
the love of GOD, and your eternal salvation; consider you shall in heaven have
no discouraging company, nor any but who will further your work, and gladly
join heart and voice with you in your everlasting joy and praises. Till then,
possess your souls in patience: bind all reproaches as a crown to your heads:
esteem them greater riches than the world's treasure: account it matter of joy
when ye fall into tribulation. You have seen that our GOD is able to deliver
us; but this is nothing to our final deliverance: he will recompense
tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you that are troubled rest with
CHRIST.

4. We shall then also rest from all our sad divisions and unchristian quarrels
with one another. As he said, who saw the carcases lie together, as if they had
embraced each other, who had been slain by each other in a duel: How lovingly
do they embrace one another, who perished through their mutual enmity! So, how
lovingly do thousands live together in heaven, who lived in divisions on earth!
As he said, who beheld how quietly and peaceably the bones and dust of mortal
enemies did lie together, "you did not live together so peaceably." So we may
say of multitudes in heaven now all of one mind, one heart, and one employment,
you lived not on earth in so sweet familiarity. There is no contention, because
none of this pride, ignorance, or other corruption: Paul and Barnabas are now
fully reconciled. There they are not every man conceited of his own
understanding, and in love with the issue of his own brain; but all admiring
the divine perfection, and in love with GOD, and one another. As old Gryneus
wrote to his friend, "If I see you no more on earth, yet we shall there meet,
where Luther and Zuinglius are now well agreed." There is no recording our
brethren's infirmities; nor raking into the sores which Christ died to heal.
There is no plotting to strengthen our party; nor deep designing against our
brethren.

And is it not a shame and pity, that our course is now so contrary? Surely, if
there be sorrow or shame in heaven, we shall then be both sorry and ashamed to
look one another in the face: and to remember all this carriage on earth, even
as the brethren of Joseph were to behold him, when they remembered their former
unkind usage. Is it not enough that all the world is against us, but we must
also be against ourselves? Did I ever think to have heard christians so to
reproach and scorn christians! And men professing the fear of GOD, to make so
little conscience of censuring, vilifying, and disgracing one another! O what
hellish things are ignorance and pride, that can bring men's souls to such a
case as this! Paul knew what he said, when he commanded, that a novice should
not be a teacher, lest being lifted up he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil, 1 Timothy iii. 6. He discerned that such young christians that have got but
a little smattering knowledge in religion, lie in greatest danger of this pride
and condemnation. Who but Paul could have foreseen that among the very teachers
and governors of so choice a church as Ephesus, there were some that afterward
should be notorious sect-masters? That of their own selves men should arise,
speaking per verse things, to draw away disciples after them, Acts xx. 30. Who
then can expect better from any society now, how knowing and holy soever? To
day they may be unanimous, and joined in love; and perhaps within a few weeks
be divided, and at bitter enmity, through their doting on questions that tend
not to edify.

5. We shall then rest from all which we now undergo, by participating with our
brethren in their calamities. Alas, if we had nothing upon ourselves to trouble
us, yet what heart could lay aside sorrows, that lives in the sound of the
church's sufferings? If Job had nothing upon his body to disquiet him, yet the
message of his children's overthrow must needs grieve the most patient soul.
Except we are turned into steel or stone, and have loft both christian and
human affection, there needs no more than the miseries of our brethren to fill
our hearts with sorrows. The church on earth is a mere hospital; which way
soever we go, we hear complaining; and into what corner soever we cast our
eyes, we behold objects of pity: some groaning under a dark understanding, some
under a senseless heart, some languishing under unfruitful weakness, and some
bleeding for miscarriages and wilfulness, and some in a lethargy, that they are
past complaining; some crying out of their pining poverty; some groaning under
pains and infirmities, and some bewailing a whole catalogue of calamities,
especially in days of common sufferings: but our day of rest will free us and
them from all this. Now we may enter many a poor christian's cottage, and see
poverty possessing and filling all: how much better is that day, when we shall
see them filled with Christ, clothed with glory, and equal with the greatest
princes?

But a far greater grief it is to our spirits, to see the spiritual miseries of
our brethren: to see such an one, with whom we took sweet counsel, now falling
off to sensuality, turned drunkard, worldling, or a persecutor, and these
trying times have given us too large occasion for such sorrows: to see our
dearest friends turned aside from the truth of Christ, and confident in the
flesh continue their neglect of Christ and their souls, and nothing waking them
out of their security; and to think how certainly they shall be in hell
for-ever, if they die in their present state: and will it not be a blessed day,
when we shall rest from all these sorrows? When the people shall be all
righteous, even the work of GOD 's hands, the branch of his planting, that he
may be glorified? Thus shall we rest from our participation of our brethren's
sufferings.

6. We shall rest from all our personal sufferings. And though this may seem a
small thing to those that live in continual ease, and abound in all kind of
prosperity; yet methinks, to the daily afflicted soul, it should make the
fore-thoughts of heaven delightful: and I think I shall meet with few of the
saints, but will say, that this is their own case.

Though we are reconciled by the blood of the covenant, and the price is paid
for our full deliverance; yet our Redeemer sees fit to leave this measure of
misery upon us, to mind us of what we would else forget; to be serviceable to
his wise and gracious designs, and advantageous to our full and final recovery.
As all our senses are the inle^s of sin; so they are the inlets of sorrow.
Grief creeps in at our eyes, at our ears, and almost every where: it seizes
upon our head, our hearts, our flesh, our spirits: and what part does escape
it? fears devour us, and darken our delights, as the frost nips the buds: cares
feed upon our our spirits, as the scorching sun does wither the delicate
flowers. Or, if any has fortified his inwards against these, yet he is naked
still without.

What tender pieces are these dusty bodies? What brittle glasses do we bear
about us? And how many thousand dangers are they hurried through? And how
hardly cured if once cracked? O the multitude of slender veins, of tender
membranes, nerves, fibers, muscles, arteries; and all subject to obstructions,
tensions, contractions, resolutions, ruptures, or one thing or other to cause
their grief! Every one is a fit subject for pain, and fit to communicate that
pain to the whole: but sin, and flesh, and dust, and pain, will all be left
behind together.

O the blessed tranquillity of that region, where there is nothing but sweet
continued peace! No succession of joy there, because no intermission. Our lives
will be but one joy, as our time will be changed into one eternity. O healthful
place, where none are sick! O fortunate land, where all are kings! O place most
holy, where all are priests! How free a state, where none are servants, save to
their supreme monarch! Our face shall no more be pale or sad; our groans and
sighs will be done away, and GOD shall wipe away all tears from our eyes. No
more parting of friends, nor voice of lamentation heard in our dwellings; no
more breaches nor disproportion in our friendship; nor any trouble accompanying
our relations: no more care of masters for servants, or parents for children,
or magistrates over subjects, or ministers over people. O what room can there
be for any evil, where the whole is perfectly filled with GOD? Then shall the
ransomed of the LORD return and come to Sion with songs, and everlasting joy
upon their heads. They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away, Isaiah xxxv. 10. Hold out then a little longer, O my soul;
bear with the infirmities of thine earthly tabernacle; endure that share of
sorrows, that the love of thy Father shall impose; submit to his indignation
also, because thou have sinned against him; it will be thus but a little while;
the sound of thy Redeemer's feet is even at the door; and thine own deliverance
nearer than many others. And thou who haft often cried in the language of the
divine poet, Sorrow was all my soul; I scarce believed,
Till grief did tell me roundly, that I lived.
shall then feel, that GOD and joy is all thy soul; the fruition of whom, with
thy freedom from all these sorrows, will more sweetly, and more feelingly make
thee know, and to his eternal praise acknowledge, that thou live. And thus we
shall rest from all afflictions.

The last blessed attribute of this rest is, that it is an eternal rest. This
is the crown of our crown; without which all were comparatively nothing. The
very thought of leaving it would embitter all our joys; and the more, because
of the singular excellencies we must forsake. It would be a hell in heaven to
think of once losing heaven: as it would be a kind of heaven to the damned, had
they but hopes of once escaping.

It makes our present life of little value (were it not for the reference it
has to eternity) to think that we must shortly lay it down. How can we take
delight in any thing, when we remember how short that delight will be? But, O
blessed eternity! where our lives are perplexed with no such thoughts, nor our
joys interrupted with any such fears! O, what do I say when I talk of eternity?
Can my shallow thoughts conceive it? To be eternally blessed, and so blessed!
Surely this, if any thing, is the resemblance of GOD: eternity is a piece of
infiniteness. Then, O death, where is thy sting, O grave, where is thy victory?
Days, and nights, and years, time and end, and death, are words which there
have no signification; nor are used, except perhaps to extol eternity; as the
mention of hell, to extol heaven: all the years of our LORD, and the years of
our life, are swallowed up and los;t in this eternity.

While we were servants, we held by lease; and that but for the term of
transitory life: But the son abides in the house for ever. Our earthly
paradise in Eden had a way out, but none, that ever we could find, in again:
but this eternal paradise has a way in, (a milky way to us, but a bloody way
to Christ) but no way out again: For they that would pass from hence to you
(says Abraham) cannot: a strange phrase! would any pass from such a place, if
they might? Could they endure to be absent from GOD again one hour? No: but
upon supposal they would, yet they could not. O then, my soul, let go thy
dreams of present pleasures: and loose thy hold of earth and flesh. Fear not to
enter that estate, where thou shall ever after cease thy fears. Sit down, and
sadly once a day bethink thyself of this eternity: among all the arithmetical
numbers, study the value of this infinite cipher, which though it stand for
nothing in the vulgar account, does yet contain all our millions, as much less
than a simple unit: lay by the perplexed and contradicting chronological
tables, and fix thine eye on this eternity; and the lines which remote thou
could not follow, thou shall see altogether here concentred. Study less these
tedious volumes of history, which contain but the silent narration of dreams,
and are but the pictures of the actions of shadows: and instead of all, study
frequently, study thoroughly this one word [eternity,] and when thou have
thoroughly learned that one word, thou will never look on books again. What!
live and never die! Rejoice, and ever rejoice! O, what sweet words are these!
This word [everlasting] contains the accomplished perfection of our glory. O
that the wicked sinner would but soundly study this word [everlasting;]
methinks it should startle him out of his deep sleep! O that the gracious soul
would believingly study this word [everlasting;] methinks it should revive him
in the deepest agony! And must I, LORD, thus live for ever? Then will I also
love for ever. Must my joys be immortal? And shall not my thanks be also
immortal? Surely, if I shall never lose my glory, I will never also cease thy
praises. If thou will both perfect and perpetuate me, and my glory; as I shall
be thine, and not mine own, so shall my glory, be thy glory; and as they did
take their spring from thee, so all shall devolve to thee again; and as thy
glory was thine ultimate end in my glory, so shall it also be mine end, when
thou have crowned me with that glory which has no end. And to Thee, O king
eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise GOD, shall be the honor, and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VI. The People of GOD described.
HAVING thus performed my first task of describing the saints rest: it remains
that now I proceed to the second, and show you what these people of GOD are,
and why so called; for whom this blessed rest remains.

Regeneration is the first and great qualification of the people of GOD. To be
the people of GOD without regeneration, is as impossible as to be the children
of men without generation; seeing we are are born GOD'S enemies, we must be
newborn his sons, or else remain his enemies still.

Christ has spoken it with his mouth, That except a man be born again, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD. The greatest reformation of life, without
this new life wrought in the soul, may procure our further delusion, but never
our salvation.

But by what acts does this new life discover itself?

The first work I call conviction, which comprehends the knowledge of what the
scripture speaks against sin and sinners; and that this scripture which speaks
so, is the word of GOD himself. It comprehends also, some knowledge of
ourselves, and our own guilt, and an acknowledgment of the verity of those
consequences, which, from the practice of sin in us, and threats in scripture,
conclude us miserable.

2. As there must be conviction, so also sensibility. GOD works on the heart,
as well as the head: both were corrupted, and out of order. The principle of
new life does quicken both. All true spiritual knowledge does pass into
affections. The great things of sin, of grace, and Christ, and eternity, which
are of weight, one would think to move a rock; yet shake not the heart of the
carnal professor, nor pierce his soul to the quick: though he should be a
constant preacher of them to others, yet they little affect himself: when he is
pressing them upon the hearts of others, you would little think how insensible
is his own soul: his invention precureth him zealous and moving expressions,
but they cannot procure him answerable affections.

The things that the soul is thus convinced and sensible of, are especially
these:

1. The evil of sin. The sinner is made to know and feel, that the sin, which
was his delight, is a more loathsome thing than toads or serpents, and a
greater evil than plague or famine, or any other calamities: it being a breach
of the righteous law of the most high GOD, dishonorable to him, and
destructive to the sinner.

Now the sinner reads and hears the reproofs of sin, as words of course; but
when you mention his sin, he feels you speak at his very heart, and yet is
contented you should show him the worst: he was wont to marvel, what made men
keep such a stir against sin, what harm it was for a man to take a little
pleasure; he saw no such heinousness in it. But now the case is altered; GOD
has opened his eyes to see its inexpressible vileness.

2. The soul in this great work is convinced and sensible, as of the evil of
sin, so of its own misery by reason of sin. They who before read the threats of
GOD's law, as men do the stories of foreign wars; now find it is their own
story, and perceive they read their own doom, as if they found their names
written in the curse, or heard the law say, as Nathan, thou art the man. The
wrath of GOD seemed to him but as a storm to a man in a dry house: but now he
finds the disease is his own, and feels the pains in his own bowels. In a word,
he finds himself a condemned man, dead and damned in point of law, and that
nothing is wanting but mere execution to make him absolutely and irrecoverably
miserable.

Whether you will call this a work of the law or gospel, it is a work of the
Spirit wrought in some measure in all the regenerate: And though some judge it
unnecessary bondage, yet it is beyond my conceiving, how he should come to
Christ for pardon, that first found not himself guilty and condemned: The whole
need not the physician, but they that are sick. Yet I deny not, but the
discovery of the remedy as soon as the misery, may prevent a great part of the
trouble, and the distinct effect on the soul, to be with much more difficulty
discerned: nay, the actings of the soul are so quick, and often so confused, that
the distinct order of these workings may not be apprehended or remembered at
all: and perhaps the joyful apprehensions of mercy may make the sense of misery
the sooner forgotten.

3. So does the spirit also convince the soul, of the creature's vanity and
insufficiency. Every man naturally is a flat idolater, our hearts were turned
from GOD in our first fall; and ever since the creature has been our GOD: this
is the grand sin of nature: when we set up to ourselves a wrong end, we must
needs err in all the means. The creature is to every unregenerate man his GOD:
he ascribes to it the divine prerogatives, and allows it the highest room in
his soul, or if ever he come to be convinced of misery, he flees to it as his
Savior. Indeed GOD and his Christ have usually the name; but the real
expectation is from the creature, and the work of GOD is laid upon it. His
pleasure, his profit, and his honor, is the natural man's trinity; and his
self, that is these in unity: indeed, it is that flesh that is the principal
idol; the other three are deified in their relation to ourselves. It was our
first sin, to aspire to be as gods; and it is the greatest sin that runs in our
blood, and is propagated in our nature from generation to generation.

When GOD should guide us, we guide curselves; when he should be our sovereign,
we rule ourselves. The laws which he gives us, we find fault with; and if we
had had the making of them, we would have made them otherwise: when he should
take care of us, (and must, or we perish) we will care for ourselves; when we
should depend on him daily, we had rather keep our stock ourselves, and have
our portion in our own hands; when we should stand at his disposal, we would be
at our own; and when we should submit to his Providence, we usually quarrel at
it; as if we knew better what is good for us than he, or how to dispose all
things more wisely. This is the language of a carnal heart, though it does not
always speak out. When we should study GOD, we study ourselves; when we should
mind GOD, we mind ourselves; when we should love GOD, we love ourselves; when
we should trust GOD, we trust ourselves; when we should honor GOD, we honor
ourselves; when we should ascribe to GOD and admire him, we ascribe to, and
admire ourselves: and instead of GOD, we would have all men's eyes and
dependence on us, and all men's thanks returned to us, and would gladly be the
only men on earth extolled and admired by all.

And thus we are naturally our own idols: but down falls this Dagon, when GOD
does once renew the soul: it is the great business of that great work to bring
the heart back to GOD. He convinces the sinner, 1. That the creature can
neither be his GOD, to make him; 2. Nor yet his Christ, to recover him from his
misery, to restore him to GOD, who is his happiness.
This GOD does not only by preaching, but by Providence a so; because words
will hardly take off the raging senses, therefore does GOD make his rod to
speak, and continue speaking, till the sinner hear, and has learned this great
lesson.

This is the great reason why affliction does so ordinarily concur in the work
of conversion; these real arguments which speak to the quick, will force a
hearing when the most powerful words are slighted. When a sinner made his
credit his GOD, and GOD shall cast him into the lowest disgrace; or bring him
that idolized his riches, into a condition wherein they cannot help him, or
cause them to take wings and fly away; what a help is here to this work of
conviction? When a man that made his pleasure his GOD, whether ease, or sports,
or mirth, or company, or gluttony, or drunkenness, or clothing, or buildings:
or whatsoever a ranging eye, a curious ear, a raging appetite, or a lustful
heart could desire, and GOD shall take these from him, or give him their sting
and curse with them, and turn them all into gall and wormwood, what a help is
here to conviction? When GOD shall cast a man into a languishing sickness, and
inflict wounds and anguish on his heart, and stir up against him his own
conscience, and then as it were take him by the hand, and lead him to credit,
to riches, to pleasure, to company, to sports, or whatsoever was dearest to
him, and say, now try if these can help you; can these heal thy wounded
conscience? Can they now support thy tottering cottage? Can they keep thy
departing soul in thy body? Or save thee from mine everlasting wrath? Will they
prove to thee eternal pleasures? Or redeem thy soul from the eternal flames?
Cry aloud to them, and see now whether these will be instead of GOD and his
Christ unto thee. O how this works with the sinner! when sense itself
acknowledges the truth, and even the flesh is convinced of the creature's
vanity.

4. The fourth thing that the soul is convinced and sensible of, is the
absolute necessity, the full sufficiency, and perfect excellency of JESUS
CHRIST.

This conviction is not by mere argumentation, as a man is convinced of some
unconcerning consequence by disp^te: but also by the sense of our desperate
misery, as a man in a famine of the necessity of food; or a man that had read,
or heard his condemnation, is convinced of the absolute necessity of a pardon.
Now the sinner finds himself in another case than ever he was aware of: he
feels an insupportable burden upon him, and sees there is none but Christ can
take it off: he perceives that he is under the wrath of GOD, and that the law
proclaims him a rebel and outlaw, and none but Christ can make his peace: he
is as a man pursued by a lion, that must perish if he find not present
sanctuary: he feels the curse does lie upon him, and upon all he has, for his
sake, and Christ alone can make him blessed: he is now brought to this dilemma,
either he must have Christ to justify him, or be eternally condemned; he must
have Christ to save him, or burn in hell for-ever: he must have Christ to bring
him again to GOD, or be shut out of his presence everlastingly. And no wonder,
if he cry, as the martyr Lambert, none but Christ; none but Christ. It is not
gold but bread, that will satisfy the hungry: nor any thing but pardon, that
will comfort the condemned. All things are now but dross and dung; and what he
counted gain, is now but loss in comparison of Christ: for as the sinner feeth
his utter misery, and the disability of himself, and all things to relieve him;
so he does perceive, that there is no saving mercy out of Christ. There is none
found in heaven or on earth that can open the sealed book save the Lamb;
without his blood there is no remission, and without remission there is no
salvation. Could the sinner now make any shift without Christ, or could any
thing else supply his wants, and save his soul, then might Christ be
disregarded: but now he is convinced, that there is no other name, and the
necessity is absolute.

2. And as the soul is thus convinced of the necessity of Christ, so also of
his full sufficiency: he sees, though the creature cannot, and himself cannot,
yet Christ can. Though the fig leaves of our own unrighteous righteous
righteousness are too short to cover our nakedness, yet the righteousness of
Christ is large enough: ours is disproportionable to the justice of the law,
but Christ's does extend to every tittle: his sufferings being a perfect
satisfaction to the law, and all power in heaven and earth being given to him,
he is now able to supply every of our wants, and to save to the uttermost all
that come to him.

3. The soul is also here convinced of the perfect excellency of JESUS CHRIST,
both as he is considered in himself, and as considered in relation to us; both
as he is the only way to the Father, and as he is the end, being one with the
Father. Before he knew Christ's excellency, as a blind man knows the light of
the sun; but now, as one that beholds his glory.

And thus does the Spirit convince the soul.

4. After this sensible conviction, the will discovers also its change; and
that in regard of all the forementioned objects.

1. The sin which the understanding pronounces evil, the will does turn from
with abhorrency. Not that the sensitive appetite is changed, or any way made to
abhor its object; but when it would carry us to sin against GOD; this disorder
and evil the will abhors.

2. The misery also which sin has procured, as he discerns, so he bewaileth.
It is impossible that the soul now living, should look either on its trespass
against GOD, or its own self procured calamity, without some compunction. He
that truly discerns, that he has killed Christ, and killed himself, will
surely in some measure be pricked to the heart. If he cannot weep, he can
heartily groan; and his heart -- feels what his understanding sees.

3. The creature he now renounceth as vain, and turns it out of his heart
with disdain. Not that he undervalueth it or disclaimeth its use; but its
idolatrous abuse, and its unjust usurpation.

There is a twofold error very common in the descriptions of the work of
conversion. The one, of those who only mention the sinner's turning from sin to
GOD, without mentioning the receiving Christ by faith. The other, of those who
only mention a sinner's believing, and then think they have said all: nay, they
blame them as Legalists, who make any thing but the bare believing of the love
of GOD in Christ to us, to be part of the work; and would persuade poor souls
to question all their former comforts, and conclude the work to have been only
legal, because they have made their change of heart and turning from sin, part
of it; and have taken up part of their comfort from the reviewing of these.

Indeed, should they take up here without Christ, or take such a change instead
of Christ, in whole or in part, the reprehension were just. But can Christ be
the way, where the creature is the end; is he not the only way to the Father?
Can we seek to Christ to reconcile us to GOD, while in our hearts we prefer the
creature before him? In the soul of every unregenerate man, the creature is
both GOD and Christ. Can Christ be believed in, where our own righteousness, or
any other thing, is trusted as our Savior?

The truth is: as turning from the creature to GOD, and not by Christ, is no
true turning; so believing in Christ, while the creature has our hearts, is no
true believing. And therefore in the work of self-examination, whoever would
find in himself a thorough sincere work, must find an entire work; even the one
of these as well as the other.

In the review of which entire work, there is no doubt but his soul may take
comfort. And it is not to be made so light of, as most do, that scripture does
so ordinarily put repentance before faith, and make them jointly conditions of
the gospel: which repentance contains those acts of the will before expressed.

It is true, if we take faith in the largest sense, then it contains repentance
in it: but if we take it strictly, no doubt there are some acts of it go before
repentance, and some follow after.

4. And as the will is thus averted from the forementioned objects; so at the
same time does it cleave to GOD the Father, and to Christ. Its first acting
consists especially in intending and desiring GOD for his portion and chief
good; having before been convinced, that nothing e^se can be his happiness, he
now finds it in GOD; and therefore looks toward it. But it is yet rather with
desire than hope. For alas, the sinner has already found himself to be a
stranger and an enemy to GOD, under the guilt of sin and curse of the law, and
knows there is no coming to him in peace till his case be altered; and
therefore having before been convinced also, that only Christ is able and
willing to do this, and having heard this mercy in the gospel freely offered;
his next act is, to accept of Christ as his Savior and Lord.

Therefore both mistake: they who only mention our turning to Christ, and they
who only mention our turning to GOD, in this work of conversion. St. Paul's
preaching was repentance toward GOD, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
And life eternal consists, first in knowing the only true GOD, and then Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, John xvii. 3. The former is the natural part of the
covenant, to take the LORD only for our GOD. The latter is the supernatural
part, to take Christ only for our Redeemer. The former is first necessary, and
implied in the latter.

Though repentance and good works are required to our full justification at
judgment, as subservient to; or concurrent with faith; yet is the nature of
this justifying faith itself contained, in accepting of Christ for Savior and
Lord. I call it accepting, it being principally an act of the will; but yet
also of the whole soul. This accepting being that which the gospel presses to,
and calls the receiving or accepting Christ. I call it an affectionate
accepting, though love seem distinct from faith, yet I take it as essential to
that faith that justifies. To accept Christ without love, is not justifying
faith. Nor does love follow as a fruit, but immediately concur; as essential to
a true accepting.

It is an accepting him for our Savior and Lord. For in both relations will he
be received, or not at all. It is not only to acknowledge his sufferings, and
accept of pardon and glory, but to acknowledge his sovereignty, and submit to
his government and way of saving.

The work (which Christ thus accepted of, is to perform) is, to bring the
sinners to GOD, that they may be happy in him; and this both really by his
Spirit, and relatively in reconciling them, and making them sons; and to
present them perfect before him at last, and to possess them of the kingdom.
The obtaining of these are the sinner's lawful ends in receiving Christ; and to
these uses does he offer himself to us.

5. To this end does the sinner now enter into a cordial covenant with Christ.
But he was never strictly, nor comfortably in covenant with Christ till now. He
is sure Christ does consent, and now does he cordially consent himself; and so
the agreement is fully made.

6. With this covenant concurs, a mutual delivery; Christ delivers himself in
all comfortable relations to the sinner, and the sinner delivers up himself
to be saved and ruled by Christ. Now does the soul resolvedly conclude, I have
been blindly led by the flesh, the world, and the devil, too long, almost to my
destruction: I will now be wholly at the disposal of my LORD, who has bought
me with his blood, and will bring me to his glory. And thus the complete work
of saving faith consists in this covenanting, or mystical marriage of the
sinner to Christ.

Thus you have a naked enumeration of the essentials of this people of GOD: not
a full portraiture of them in all their excellencies, nor all the notes whereby
they be discerned. And though it will be part of the following application, to
put you upon trial: yet because the description is now before your eyes, and
these evidencing works are fresh in your memory, it will not be unseasonable,
to take an account of your own estates, and to view yourselves exactly in this
glass, before you pass. And I beseech thee, reader, as thou have the hope of a
christian, yea, or the reason of a man, to deal thoroughly, and search
carefully, and judge thyself as one that must shortly be judged by the
righteous GOD: and faithfully answer to these few questions.

And first, have thou been thoroughly convinced of an universal depravation,
through thy whole soul? And an universal wickedness through thy whole life? and
how vile a thing this sin is? and that by the ten^r of that covenant which thou
have transgressed, the least sin deserves eternal death? Do thou consent to
this law, that it is true and righteous? Have thou perceived thyself sentenced
to this death by it, and been convinced of thy undone condition? Have thou
further seen the utter insufficiency of every creature, either to be itself thy
happiness, or the means of curing this thy misery, and making thee happy in
GOD? Have thou been convinced, that thy happiness is only in GOD as the end?
and only in Christ as the way to him? and that thou must be brought to GOD by
Christ, or perish eternally? Have thou seen hereupon an absolute necessity of
enjoying Christ? and the full sufficiency that is in him, to do for thee
whatsoever thy case requires, by reason of the fullness of his satisfaction,
the greatness of his power, the dignity of his person, and the freeness of his
promises? Have thou discovered the excellency of this pearl, to be worth thy
selling all to buy it? Has all this been joined with some sensibility? As the
convictions of a man that thirsts, of the worth of drink? And not been only a
change of opinion produced by reading and education, as a bare notion in the
understanding? Has it proceeded to an abhorring sin? Have both thy sin and
misery been a burden to thy soul? and if thou could not weep, yet could
thou groan under the insupportable weight of both? Have thou renounced all
thine own righteousness? Have thou turned thy idols out of thy heart; so that
the creature has no more the sovereignty; but GOD and Christ? Do thou accept
of Christ as thy only Savior, and expect thy justification, recovery and glory
from him alone? Do thou take him also for Lord and King? And are his laws the
most powerful commanders of thy soul? Do they ordinarily prevail against the
commands of the flesh, of Satan, of the greatest on earth that shall
countermand? and against the interest of thy credit, profit, pleasure, or life?
So that thy conscience is directly subject to Christ alone? Has he the highest
room in thy affections? So that though thou can not love him as thou would,
yet nothing else is loved so much? Have thou made a hearty convenant to this
end? and delivered up thyself to him? and take thyself for his, and not thine
own? Is it thy utmost care and watchful endeavor, that thou may be found
faithful in this covenant? If this be truly thy case, thou art one of the
people of GOD: and as sure as the promise of GOD is true, this blessed rest
remains for thee. Only see thou abide in Christ, and continue to the end; For
if any draw back, his soul will have no pleasure in them.

THE CONCLUSION.
And thus I have explained to you the subject of my text; and showed you
darkly, what this rest is, and briefly who are this people of GOD. O that the
Lord would now open your eyes, to discern, and be affectect with the glory
revealed! That he would take off your hearts from those dunghill delights, and
ravish them with the views of these everlasting pleasures! That he would bring
you into the state of his holy and heavenly people, for whom alone this rest
remains! That you would exactly try yourselves by the foregoing description!
That no soul of you might be so damnably deluded, as to take your natural or
acquired parts, for the characters of a saint! O happy, and thrice happy you,
if these sermons might have such success with your souls, that so you might die
the death of the righteous, and your last end be like his.

End of the First Part.
THE Saints Everlasting Rest.
PART II.
HEBREWS iv. 9. There remains therefore a Rest to the People of GOD.


CHAP. I.
I HAVE been hitherto presenting to your understandings, the excellency of the
Rest of the Saints. Let your hearts now cheerfully embrace it, and improve it,
and I shall present it to you, in its respective uses.

I will lay together all those uses that most concern the ungodly, and then
those that are proper to the godly themselves.

The inconceivable misery of the ungodly in their loss of this Rest.

And first, if this rest be for none but the people of GOD, what tidings is
this to the ungodly world? That there is so much glory, but none for them: so
great joys for the saints of GOD, while they must consume in perpetual sorrows!
If thou who read these words, art a stranger to Christ, and to the holy
nature and life of his people, and shall live and die in the condition thou art
now in; I am a messenger of the saddest tidings to thee, that ever yet thy ears
did hear: that thou shall never partake of the joys of heaven, nor have the
least taste of the saints eternal rest. I may say to thee, as Ehud to Egl^n; I
have a message to thee from GOD: but it is a mortal message, that as sure as
the word of GOD is true, thou shall never see the face of GOD with comfort.
This sentence I am commanded to pass upon thee! Take it as thou will, and
escape it if thou can. I know, if thy heart and life were thoroughly changed,
thy relation to Christ and eternity, would be changed also; he would then
acknowledge thee for one of his people, and give thee a portion in the
inheritance of his chosen. But if thou end thy days in thy present condition,
as sure as the heavens are over thy head, and the earth under thy feet; as sure
as thou live and breathest in this air, so sure shall thou be shut out of
this rest of the saints, and receive thy portion in everlasting sire. I expect
that thou should in the pride of thy heart, turn upon me, and say, and when
did GOD show you the book of life, or tell you who they are that shall be
saved, and who shut out?

I will not answer thee according to thy folly; but plainly discover this thy
folly to thyself, that if there be yet any hope, thou may recover thy
understanding, and return to GOD and live: First, I do not name thee, nor any
other; I only conclude of the unregenerate in general, and of thee
conditionally, if thou be such an one. Secondly, I do not go about to determine
who shall repent, and who shall not, much less, that thou shall never repent,
and come to Christ. These things are unknown to me; I had far rather show thee
what hopes thou have before thee, if thou will not sit still and lose them: and
I would far rather persuade thee to hearken in time, before the door is shut
against thee, that so thy soul may return and live, than tell thee that there
is no hope of thy repenting and returning. But if the foregoing description of
the people of GOD do not agree with the state of thy soul; it is then a hard
question, whether thou shall ever be saved? Even as hard a question, as whether
GOD be true? Do I need to ascend up into heaven, to know, That without holiness
none shall see GOD? or, That only the pure in heart shall see GOD? or, That
except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD? Cannot
these be known without searching into GOD's councils? And yet do thou ask me,
how I know who shall be saved? What need I go up to heaven to enquire that of
Christ, which he came down to earth to tell us? and sent his Spirit in his
prophets and apostles to tell us? and has left upon record to all the world?
And though I do not know the secrets of thy heart, and therefore cannot tell
thee by name, whether it be thy state, or no; yet if thou art but willing or
diligent, thou may know thyself, whether thou art an heir of heaven, or not.
And that is the main thing that I desire, that if thou be yet miserable, thou
may discern it, and escape it. But can thou escape, if thou neglect Christ
and salvation? If thou love father, mother, wife, children, houses, lands, or
thine own life better than Christ; if so, thou can not be his disciple. And
consequently can never be saved by him. Is it not as impossible for thee to
be saved, except thou be born again, as it is for the devils themselves to be
saved? Nay, GOD has more plainly and frequently spoken it in the scripture,
that such sinners as thou shall never be saved, than he has done, that the
devils shall never be saved. And do not these tidings go cold to thy heart?
Methinks, but that there is yet life and hope before thee, and thou have yet
time and means to have thy soul recovered. the sight of thy case should even
strike thee dead with amazement. But because I would fain have thee, if it be
possible, to lay it to heart, I will here stay a little longer, and show thee,
first, the greatness of thy loss: secondly, the aggravations of thy unhappiness
in this loss; thirdly, the positive miseries that thou must endure, with their
aggravations.

First, The ungodly in their loss of heaven, lose all that glorious personal
perfection, which the people of GOD there enjoy. They lose that shining luster
of the body, surpassing the brightness of the sun. Though even the bodies of
the wicked will be raised incorruptible, yet that will be so far from being
happiness to them, that it only makes them capable of the more exquisite
torments. They would be glad then, if every member were a dead member, that it
might not feel the punishment inflicted on it; and the whole body were a rotten
carcass, or might again lie down in dust and darkness. Much more do they want
that moral perfection which the blessed partake of; those holy dispositions;
that blessed conformity to the holiness of GOD; that cheerful readiness to do
his will; that perfect rectitude of all their actions: instead of these, they
have their old ulcerous deformed souls, that perverseness of will, that
disorder in their faculties, that loathing of good, that love to evil, that
violence of passion, which they had on earth. It is true, their understandings
will be much cleared, both by the ceasing of temptation and deluding objects,
and by the sad experience which they will have in hell, of the falsehood of
their former conceits and delusions. But the evil disposition is never the more
changed; they have the same dispositions still, and sain would commit the same
sins, if they could; they want but opportunity; certainly they shall have none
of the glorious perfections of the faints, either in soul or body. There will
be a greater difference between these wretches and the glorified christians,
than there is betwixt a toad and the sun in the firmament.

But the great loss of the damned, will be their loss of GOD, they shall have
no comfortable relation to him: nor communion with him. As they did not like to
retain GOD in their knowledge; but bid him, d^part from us, we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways; so GOD will abhor to retain them in his household, or to
give them entertainment in his fellowship and glory. He will never admit them
to the inheritance of his saints, nor endure them to stand amongst them in his
presence: but bid them, depart from Me, ye workers of iniquity, I know ye not.
Now these men dare belly the Lord, if not blaspheme, in calling him by the title
of their Father; how boldly and confidently do they daily approach him with
their lips, and indeed reproach him in their formal prayers, with that
appellation? As if GOD would father the devil's children; or, as if the
slighters of Christ, the friends of the world, the haters of godliness, or any
that delight in iniquity, were the offspring of heaven! They are ready now, to
lay confident claims to Christ, as if they were sincere believers. But when
that time is come, and Christ will separate his followers from his foes, and
his faithful friends from his deceived flatterers, where then will be their
presumptuous claim? Then they shall find that GOD is not their father, but
their foe, because they would not be his people. And as they would not consent
that GOD should by his Spirit dwell in them, so shall not these evildoers
dwell with him; the tabernacles of wickedness shall have no fellowship with
him: nor the wicked inhabit the city of GOD; for without are dogs, sorcerers,
whore mongers, murderers, idolaters, and whatsoev^r loves and makes a lie.
GOD is first enjoyed in part on earth, before he be fully enjoyed in heaven. It
is only they, that walked with him here, who shall live and be happy with him
there. Oh, little does the world know what a loss that soul has, who loses
GOD! What were the world but a dungeon, if it had loft the sun? What were the
body, but a loathsome carrion, if it had lost the soul? Yet all these are
nothing to the loss of GOD. So that as the enjoyment of GOD, is the heaven of
the saints; so the loss of GOD is the hell of the ungodly. And as the enjoying
of GOD is the enjoying of all; so the loss of GOD is the loss of all.

Thirdly, As they lose GOD: so they lose all those delightful affections and
actions, by which the blessed feed on GOD; tha^ transporting knowledge: those
ravishing views of his glorious face: the inconceivable pleasure of loving GOD:
the apprehensions of his infinite love to us: the constant joys which his
saints are taken up with, and the rivers of consolation wherewith he does
satisfy them. Is it nothing to lose all this? The employment of a king in
ruling a kingdom, does not so far exceed the employment of the vilest slave, as
this heavenly employment exceeds his.

Fourthly, They shall be depri^ed of the blessed society of angels and
glorified saints. Instead of being companions of those happy spirits, and
numbered with those joyful and triumphing kings, they must now be members of
the corporation of hell, where they shall have companions of a far different
nature. While they lived on earth, they loathed the saints, they imprisoned,
banished them, and cast them out of their societies, or at least they would not
be their companions in labor, and in sufferings; and therefore they shall not
now be their companions in their glory. Now you are shut out of that company,
from which you first shut out yourselves; and are separated from them whom you
would not be joined with. You could not endure them in your houses, nor in your
town, nor scarce in the kingdom; you took them as Ahab did Elias, for the
troublers of the land; and as the apostles were taken for men that turned the
world upside down: if any thing fell out amiss, you thought all was through
them. When they were dead or banished, you were glad they were gone; and
thought the country was well rid of them. They molested you with their faithful
reproving your sin: their holy conversation troubled you. You scarce ever heard
them pray or sing praises in their families, but it was a vexation to you; and
you envied their liberty of worshipping GOD. And is it then any wonder if you
be separated from them hereafter? The day is near when they will trouble you no
more; betwixt them and you will be a great gulf set, that those that would pass
from thence to you (if any had a desire to ease you with a drop of water)
cannot, neither can they pass to them, who would go from you.

CHAP. II. The Aggravation of the Loss of Heaven to the Ungodly.
I KNOW many will be ready to think, if this be all, they do not much care:
what care they for losing the perfections above? What care they for losing GOD,
his favor, or his presence? They lived merrily without him on earth, and why
should it be so grievous to be without him hereafter? and what care they for
being deprived of that love, and joy, and praising of GOD. They never tasted
sweetness in the things of that nature; or what care they for being deprived of
the fellowship of angels and saints? They could spare their company in this
world well enough, and why may they not be without it in the world to come? To
make these men therefore understand the truth of their future condition, I will
here annex these two things:

1. I will show you why this loss will be intolerable, and most tormenting
then, though it seem as nothing now. 2. I will show you what other losses will
accompany these; which, though they are less in themselves, yet will now be
more sensibly apprehended.
1. Then, That this loss of heaven will be most tormenting, may appear by these
considerations.

1. The understandings of the ungodly will be then cleared, to know the worth
of that which they have lost. Now they lament not their loss of GOD, because
they never knew his excellency, nor the loss of that holy employment and
society, for they were never sensible what they were worth. A man that has
lost a jewel, and took it but for a common stone, is never troubled at his
loss; but when he comes to know what he has lost, then he lamenteth it.

Though the understandings of the damned will not then be sanctified; yet will
they be cleared from a multitude of errors. They think now that their honor,
their estates, their pleasures, their health and life, are better worth their
labor, than the things of another world; but when these things which had their
hearts, have left them in misery, when they know by experience, the things
which before they did but read and heard of, they w^^^ be quite in another
mind. They would not believe that water would drown, till (...) were in the
sea; nor that the fire would burn, (...) were cast into it; but when they seel
it, they will easily believe. All that error of their mind, which made them set
light by GOD, and abhor his worship, and vilify his people, will then be
removed by experience; their knowledge shall be increased, that their sorrows
may be increased. Doubtless those poor souls would be comparatively happy, if
their understandings were wholly taken from them, if they had no more knowledge
than idiots, or brute beasts; or if they knew no more in hell, than they did
upon earth, their loss and misery would then less trouble them.

How happy would they now think themselves, if they did not know there is such
a place as heaven! Now when their knowledge would help to prevent their misery,
they will not know: but then when their knowledge will but feed their consuming
fire, they shall know whether they will or no.

2. The loss of heaven will more torment them then, because, as the
understanding will be cleared, so it will be more enlarged, and made more
capacious, to conceive of the worth of that glory which they have lost. The
strength of their apprehensions, as well as the truth of them, will then be
increased. What deep apprehensions of the wrath of GOD, of the madness of
sinning, of the misery of sinners, have these souls that now endure this
misery, in comparison of those on earth that do but hear of it? What sensible
apprehensions of the worth of life, has the condemned, man that is going to be
executed, in comparison of what he was wont to have in the time of his
prosperity? Much more will the actual deprivation of eternal blessedness make
the damned exceeding apprehensive of the greatness of their loss: and as a
large vessel will hold more water than a shell, so will their more enlarged
understandings contain more matter to feed their torment, than now their
shallow capacity can do.

3. And as the damned will have deeper apprehensions of the happiness they have
lost, so will they have a closer application of this doctrine to themselves,
which will exceedingly tend to increase their torment. It will then be no hard
matter to them to say, this is my loss, and this is my everlasting misery. The
want of this is the main cause why they are now so little troubled at their
condition; they are hardly brought to believe that there is such a state of
misery, but more hardly to believe that it is like to be their own. This makes
so many sermons to be lost, and all threatenings and warnings prove in vain.
Let a minister of Christ show them their misery never so plainly, they will not
be persuaded that they are so miserable. Let him tell them of the glory they
must lose, and the sufferings they must feel, and they think it is not they
whom he means. We find in all our preaching, by sad experience, that it is one
of the hardest things in the world to bring a wicked man to know that he is
wicked; a man who is in the way to hell, to know that he is in that way; or to
make a man see himself in a state of wrath and condemnation: how seldom do we
hear men, after the plainest discovery of their condemned state, cry out, I am
the man! or to acknowledge, that if they die in their present condition, they
are undone for-ever.

There is no persuading men of their misery till they fell it, except the
Spirit of the Almighty persuade them.

Oh, but when they find themselves suddenly in the land of darkness, perceive
by the execution of the sentence that they were indeed condemned, and feel
themselves in the scorching flames, and see that they are shut out of the
presence of GOD for-ever, it will then be no such difficult matter to convince
them of their misery: this particular application of GOD'S anger to themselves,
will then be the easiest matter in the world; then they cannot choose but know
and apply it, whether they will or no.

4. Again, as the understandings and consciences of sinners will be
strengthened, so will their affections be more lively and enlarged: as judgment
will be no longer blinded, nor conscience stifled, so the affections will be no
longer stupefied. A hard heart now makes heaven and hell seem but trifles: and
when we have showed them everlasting glory and misery, they are as men half
asleep, they scarce take notice what we say, our words are cast as stones
against a hard wall, which fly back in the face of him that casts them. We
talk of terrible astonishing things, but it is to dead men that cannot
apprehend it: we speak to rocks rather than to men; the earth will as soon
tremble as they. But when these dead wretches are revived, what passionate
sensibility! what working affections! what pangs of horror! what depth of
sorrow will there then be! How violently will they fly in their own faces! How
will they rage against their former madness! The lamentations of the most
passionate wife for the loss of her husband, or of the tenderest mother for the
loss of her children, will be nothing to theirs for the loss of heaven. Oh, the
selfaccusing, and self-tormenting fury of those forlorn wretches! How they will
even tear their own hearts, and be GOD'S executioners upon themselves! I am
persuaded, as it was none but themselves that committed the sin, and themselves
that were the meritorious cause of their sufferings, so themselves will be the
chief executioners of those sufferings; GOD will have it so for the clearing of
his justice: even Satan himself, as he was not so great a cause of their
sinning as themselves, so will he not be so great an instrument of their
torment. How happy would you think yourselves then, if you were turned into
rocks, or any thing that had neither passion or sense! How happy were you, if
you could now feel, as lightly as you were wont to hear! And if you could sleep
out the time of execution, as you did the time of the sermons that warned you
of it! But your stupidity is gone, it will not be.

5. Moreover, it will much increase the torment of the damned, that their
memories will be as large and strong as their understandings and affections.
Were their loss never so great, and their sense of it never so passionate, yet
if they could but lose the use of their memory, those passions would die, and
that loss, being forgotten, would little trouble them. But as they cannot lay
by their life and being, so neither can they lay aside any part of that being.
Understanding, conscience, affections, memory, must all live to torment them,
which should have helped to their happiness. And as by these they should have
fed upon the love of GOD, and drawn forth perpetually the joys of his presence;
so by these must they now feed upon the wrath of GOD, and draw forth
continually the pains of his absence.

And yet these men would never be brought to consider; but in the latter days
(says the LORD) they shall perfectly consider it: when they are ensnared in
the work of their own hands: when GOD has arrested them, and judgment is
passed upon them, and vengeance is poured out upon them to the full, then they
cannot choose but consider it whether they will or no. Now they have no leisure
to consider, nor any room in their memories for the things of another life. But
then they shall have leisure enough, they shall be where they have nothing else
to do; their memories shall have no other employment, it shall be engraven upon
the tables of their hearts. GOD would have had the doctrine of their eternal
state to have been written on the posts of their doors, on their houses, on
their hands, and on their hearts: and seeing they rejected this counsel of the
LORD, therefore shall it be written always before them in the place of their
thraldom, that which way soever they look, they may still behold it.

I will briefly lay down some of those considerations, which will thus feed the
anguish of these damned wretches.

1. It will torment them to think of the greatness of the glory which they have
lost. Oh if it had been that which they could have spared, it had been a small
matter: Or, if it had been a loss reparable with any thing else; if it had been
health, or wealth, or friends, or life, it had been nothing; but to lose that
exceeding eternal weight of glory! --

2. It will torment them to think of the possibility that once they were in of
obtaining it. Then they will remember, the time was, when I was in as fair a
possibility of the kingdom as others; I was set upon the stage of the world; if
I had played my part wisely and faithfully, now I might have had possession of
the inheritance; I might have been amongst yonder blessed saints, who am now
tormented with these damned fiends! The Lord did set before me life and death,
and having chosen death, I deserve to suffer it: the prize was once held out
before me; if I bad run well, I might have obtained it: if I had striven, I
might have had the mastery: if I had fought valiantly, I had been crowned.

3. It will yet more torment them to remember, not only the possibility, but
the great probability that once they were in, to obtain the crown. It will then
wound them, to think: why, I had once the gales of the Spirit ready to have
assisted me. I was fully purposed to have been another man, to have cleaved to
Christ, and to have forsook the world; I was almost resolved to have been
wholly for GOD: I had even cast off my old companions, and yet I turned back,
and lost my hold, and broke my promises, and slacked my purposes; almost GOD
had persuaded me to be a real christian, and yet I conquered those persuasions.
What workings were in my heart! when a faithful minister pressed home the
truth. O how fair was I once for heaven! I had almost had i^, and yet I have
lost it; if I had but followed on to seek the LORD, and blown up the sparks of
desire which were kindled in me, I had now been blessed among the saints.

4. Yet further, it will much add to their torment to remember that GOD himself
did condescend to entreat them: how long he did wait, how freely he did offer,
how lovingly he did invite, and how importunately he did solicit them! how the
Spirit did continue striving with their hearts, as if he were loath to take a
denial: how Christ stood knocking at the door of their hearts, sermon after
sermon, and one sabbath after another; crying out, open, sinner, open thy heart
to the Savior, and I will come in and sup with thee and thou with me. Why do
thou thus delay? What do thou mean, that thou do not open to me? How long
shall it be till thou attain to innocence? How long shall thy vain thoughts
ledge within thee? Woe to thee, Oh unworthy sinner! Will thou not be made clean?
Will thou not be pardoned and sanctified, and made happy? When shall it once
be? Oh that thou would hearken to my word, and obey my gospel! Then should
thy peace be as the (...), and thy righteousness as the waves of the s^a:
though thy sins were as red as crimson, I would mak^ them as white as the snow:
O that thou were but wise to consider this! and that thou would in time
remember thy latter end, before the evil days come upon thee, and the years
draw nigh, when thou shall say of all thy vaind lights, I have no pleasure in
them! Why sinner! shall thy Maker thus bespeak thee in vain? Shall the GOD of
all the world beseech thee to be happy, and beseech thee to have pity upon
thine own soul, and will thou not regard him? Why did he make thy ears but to
hear his voice? Why did he make thy understanding, but to consider? Or thy
heart, but to entertain the Son in love? Thus says the Lord of hosts, consider
thy ways. --

Oh how all these passionate pleadings of Christ will passionately transport
the damned with self-indignation! That they will be ready to ^ear out their own
hearts! How fresh will the remembrance of them be still in their minds, lancing
their souls with renewed torments! What self-condemning pangs will it raise
within them, to remember how often Christ would have gathered them to himself
even as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but they would not?
Then will they cry out against themselves, how justly is all this befallen me!
Must I tire out the patience of Christ? Must I make the GOD of heaven to follow
me in vain, till I had wearied him with crying to me, repent, return? Must the
LORD of all the world thus wait upon me, and all in vain? O how justly is that
patience now turned into fury, which falls upon my soul with irresistible
violence! when the LORD cried out to me in his word, How long will it be before
thou will be made clean and holy? My heart, or at least my practice answered,
never; I will never be so precise: and now when I cry out, how long will it be
till I be freed from this torment, and saved with the saints! how justly do I
receive the answer! never, never. -- Oh sinner, I beseech thee for thy own
sake, think of this while the voice of mercy sounds in thine ears! Yet
patience continues waiting upon thee: can thou think it will do so still?
Yet the offers of Christ and life are made to thee in the gospel, and the hand
of GOD is stretched out to thee: but will it still be thus? The Spirit has not
yet done striving with thy heart: but do thou know how soon he may turn away,
and give thee over to a reprobate mind? Thou haft yet life, and time, and
strength, and means: but do thou think that this life will always last? Oh
se^k the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near: he
that has an ear to hear, let him hear what Christ now speaks to his soul.
And today, while it is called today, harden not your hearts, lest he swear in
his wrath that you shall never enter into his rest. For-ever blessed is he,
that has a hearing heart and ear, while Christ has a calling voice.

5. Again, it will be a most cutting consideration to these, to remember on
what easy terms they might have escaped their misery. If their work had been to
remove mountains, to conquer kingdoms, then the impossibility would somewhat
assuage the rage of their self-accusing conscience. If their conditions for
heaven had been, the satisfying of justice for all their transgressions, the
suffering of all the law did lay upon them, or bearing the burden which Christ
was fain to bear; this were nothing but to suffer hell to escape hell. But
their conditions were of another nature. The yoke was light and the burden was
easy, which JESUS CHRIST would have laid upon them; his commandments were not
grievous. It was but to repent, and accept him as their Savior; to study his
will, and seek his face; to renounce all other happiness, but that which he
procures us, and to take the LORD alone for our supreme good; to renounce the
government of the world and the flesh, and to submit to his meek and gracious
government; to forsake the ways of our own devising, and to walk in his holy
delightful way; to engage ourselves to this by covenant with him, and to
continue faithful in (...) ^^venant.

These were the terms on which they might ha^^ joyed the kingdom. And was there
any thing (...) reasonable in all this? Was it a hard bargain to (...) heaven
upon these conditions?

When the poor wretch shall look back upon these easy terms which he refused,
and compare the labor of them with the pains and loss which he there
sustaineth, it cannot be now conceived how it will rent his very heart! Ah,
thinks he, how justly do I suffer all this, who would not be at so small pains
to avoid it? Where was my understanding when I neglected thy gracious offer;
when I called the LORD a hard master? and thought his pleasant service to be a
bondage, and the service of the devil and my flesh to be the only freedom? Was
I not a thousand times worse than mad, when I censured the holy way of GOD, as
needless preciseness? And cried out on it, as an intolerable burden? When I
thought the laws of Christ too strict; and all too much, that I did for the
life to come? O, what had all the trouble of duty been, in comparison of the
trouble I now sustain? Or all the sufferings for Christ and well-doing, in
comparison of these sufferings that I must undergo for-ever? What if I had
spent my days in the strictest life? What if I had lived still upon my knees?
What if I had lost my credit with men? and been hated of all men for the sake
of Christ? and borne the reproach of the foolish? What if I had been
imprisoned, or banished, or put to death? O, what had all this been to the
miseries that I now suffer! Would not the heaven which I have lost, have
recompensed all my losses? and should not all my sufferings have been there
forgotten? What if Christ had bid me do some great matter? as to live in
continual tears and sorrow, to suffer death a hundred times over? (which yet he
did not) should I not have done it? How much more, when he said but, beli^^ce,
and be saved: seek my f^^e, and thy soul shall live: love me above all, walk in
my sweet and holy way, take up thy cross and follow me, and I will save thee
from the wrath of God, and I will give thee everlasting life. O gracious offer!
O easy terms! O cursed wretch, that would not be persuaded to accept them.

6. This also will be a most tormenting consideration, to remember what they
sold their eternal welfare for. When they compare the value of the pleasures of
sin, with the value of the recompense of reward, how will the vast
disproportion astonish them! To think of a few pleasant cups, or sweet morsels,
a little case, or low delight to the flesh; and then to think of everlasting
glory! What a vast difference between them will then appear? To think, this is
all I had for my soul, my GOD, my hopes of blessedness! It cannot possibly be
expressed how these thoughts will tear his heart. Then will he exclaim against
his folly. O miserable wretch! Did I set my soul to sale for so base a price?
Did I part with my GOD for a little dirt and dross? and sell my Savior, as
Judas, for a little silver? O for how small a matter have I parted with my
happiness! I had but a dream of delight, for my hopes of heaven: and now I am
awaked, it is all vanished: where are now my honors and attendance? My morsels
are now turned to gall, and my cups to wormwood. They delighted me no longer
than while they were passing down; and is this all that I have had for the
inestimable treasure? O what a mad exchange did I make? What if I had gained
all the world, and lost my soul? But alas, how small a part of the world was
it, for which I gave up my part of glory! -- O tha^ sinners would think of
this, when they are swimming in delights, and studying to be rich and
honorable! When they are desperately venturing upon known transgression, and
sinning against the checks of conscience!

7. Yet much more will it add unto their torment, when they consider that all
this was their own doings, and that they wilfully procured their own
destruction: had they been forced to sin, it would much abate the rage of their
consciences, or if they were punished for another man's transgressions: or if
any other had been the chief author of their ruin: but to think, that it was
the choice of their own wills, and that GOD had set them in so free a
condition, that none in the world could have forced them to sin against their
wills, this will be a griping thought. What (thinks this wretched creature) had
I not enemies enough in the world, but I must be an enemy to myself? GOD would
neither give the devil, nor the world, so much power over me, as to force me to
commit the least transgression. If I had not consented, their temptations had
been in vain; they could but entice me, it was myself that yielded, and did the
evil; and I must needs lay hands upon my own soul, and imbrue my hands in my
own blood. Who should pity me, who pitied not myself, and who brought all this
upon mine own head? Never did GOD do me any good, or offer me any for the
welfare of my soul, but I resisted him: he has heaped mercy upon me, and
renewed one deliverance after another, to entice my heart to him, and yet was I
never heartily willing to serve him: he has gently chastised me, and made me
groan under the fruit of my disobedience, and yet, though I promised largely in
my affliction, I was never unfeignedly willing to obey him.

Thus will it gnaw the hearts of these wretches, to remember that they were the
cause of their undoing; and that they wilfully and obstinately persisted in
their rebellion, and were mere volunteers in the service of the devil. They
would venture, they would go on, they would not hear him that spoke against it:
GOD called to them to hear and stay, but they would not: men called, conscience
called, and said to them, (as Pilate's wise) have nothing to do with that
h^^^ful sin; for I have suffered many things because of it; ^ut they would not
hear; their will was their law, their rule, and their ruin.

8. Lastly, It will yet make the wound in their consciences much deeper, when
they shall remember, that it was not only their own doing, but that they were
at so much cost and pains for their own damnation. What great undertakings did
they engage into effect their ruin, to resist GOD, to conquer the Spirit, to
overcome the power of mercies, judgments, and the word itself, to silence
conscience? All this they did take upon them and perform. What a number of sins
did they manage at once! What difficulties did they set upon! Even the
conquering the power of reason itself. What dangers did they adventure on!
Though they walked in continual danger of the wrath of GOD, and knew he could
lay them in the dust in a moment; though they knew they lived in danger of
eternal perdition, yet would they run upon all this. What did they forsake for
the service of Satan, and the pleasures of sin? They forsook their GOD, their
conscience, their best friends, their hopes of salvation.

Oh the labor that it costeth poor wretches to be damned! Sobriety they might
have at a cheaper rate, and a great deal of health and ease too; and yet they
will rather have gluttony and drunkenness, with poverty and shame and sickness,
with the outcries and lamentations of wife and children, and conscience
itself. Contentedness they might have with ease and delight; yet will they
rather have covetousness and ambition; though it cost them study, and cares,
and fears, and labor of body and mind, and continual unquietness and
distraction of spirit. Though their anger be nothing but a tormenting
themselves, and revenge and envy consume their spirits, and keep them upon a
continual rack; though uncleanness destroy their bodies, and estates, and
names; yet will they do and suffer all this, rather than suffer their souls to
be saved.

O how the reviews of this will feed the flames in hell! With what rage will
these damned wretches curse themselves, and say, was damnation worth all this
cost and pains? Was it not enough that I perished enough my negligence, and
that I sat still while Satan played his game, but I must seek so diligently my
own perdition? Might I not have been damned on free cost, but I must purchase
it so dearly? I thought I could have been saved without so much ado: and could
I not have been destroyed without so much ado? How well is all my care, and
pains, and violence now requited? Must I work out so laboriously my own
damnation, when GOD commanded me to work out my salvation? O if I had done as
much for heaven as I did for hell, I had surely had it. I cried out of the
tedious way of godliness; and yet I could be at more pains for Satan, and for
death. If I had loved Christ as strongly as I did my pleasures, and profits,
and honors, and thought on him as often, and sought him as painfully, O how
happy had I now been! But justly do I suffer the flames of hell, who would
rather buy them so dear, than have heaven when it was purchased to my hands.

Thus I have showed you some of those thoughts which will aggravate the misery
of these wretches forever. O that GOD would persuade thee, who read these
words, to take up these thoughts now, for the preventing that inconceivable
calamity, so that thou may not take them up in hell as thy own tormentor.

CHAP. III. They shall lose all Things that are comfortable, as well as Heaven.
HAVING showed you those considerations which will then aggravate their misery,
I am next to show you their additional losses, which will aggravate it. For as
godliness has the promise both of this life, and that which is to come; and as
GOD has said, That if we first seek his kingdom and righteousness, all things
else shall be added to us: so also are the ungodly threatened with the loss
both of spiritual and of corporal blessings; and because they sought not first
Christ's kingdom and righteousness, therefore shall they lose both it, and that
which they did seek, and there shall be taken from them even that little which
they have. If they could but have kept their present enjoyments, they would not
have much cared for the loss of heaven: but catching at the shadow for the
substance, they now find they have lost both; and that when they rejected
Christ, they rejected all things. If they had lost and forsaken all for Christ,
they would have found all again in him; for he would have been all in all to
them: but now they have forsaken Christ for other things, they shall lose
Christ, and that also for which they did forsake him.

But I will particularly open to you some of their other losses.

1. They shall lose their present conceit of their interest in GOD, and of his
favor toward them, and of their part in the merits and sufferings of Christ.
This false belief does now support their spirits, and defend them from the
terrors that would else seize upon on them: but what will ease their trouble
when this is gone? When they can believe no longer, they will be quiet no
longer. If a man conceit that he is in safety, his conceit may make him
cheerful till his misery comes, and then both his conceit and comforts vanish.

There is none of this believing in hell; nor any persuasion of pardon or
happiness, nor any boasting of their honesty, nor justifying themselves. This
was but Satan's stratagem, that, being blindfold, they might follow him the
more boldly; but then he will uncover their eyes, and they shall see where they
are.

2. Another addition to the misery of the damned will be this: that with the
loss of heaven, they shall lose all their hopes. In this life, though they were
threatened with the wrath of GOD, yet their hope of escaping it did bear up
their hearts. We can now scarce speak with the vilest drunkard, or swearer, or
scorner, but he hopes to be saved for all this. O happy world, if salvation
were as common as this hope; even those whose hellish nature is written in the
face of their conversation, whose tongues plead the cause of the devil, and
speak the language of hell; yet strongly hope for heaven, though the GOD of
heaven has told them no such shall ever come there. Nay, so strong are men's
hopes, that they will dispute the cause with Christ himself at judgment, and
plead their eating and drinking in his presence, their preaching in his name,
and casting out devils, (and these are more probable arguments than our
baptism, and common profession, and name of christians) they will stiffly deny
that ever they neglected Christ in hunger, nakedness, prison, till Christ
confute them with the sentence of their condemnation. Though the heart of their
hopes will be broken at their death; yet, it seems, they would fain plead for
such hope at the general judgment.

But, O the sad state of these men, when they must bid farewell to all their
hopes! When their hopes shall all perish with them! The eyes of the wicked
shall fail, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. The giving
up of the ghost is a fit, but terrible resemblance of a wicked man's giving up
his hopes.

For First, as the soul departs not from the body without the greatest pain,
so does the hope of the wicked depart. O the pangs that seize upon the soul of
the sinner at death and judgment, when he is parting with all his hopes!

Secondly, The soul departs from the body suddenly, in a moment, which has
there delightfully continued so many years: just so does the hope of the wicked
depart.

Thirdly, The soul which then departs, will never return to live with the
body in this world any more; and the hope of the wicked, when it departs,
takes an everlasting farewell of his soul. A miracle of resurrection shall
again conjoin the soul and body, but there shall be no such miraculous
resurrection of the damned's hope.

Methinks it is the most doleful spectacle that this world affords, to see an
ungodly person dying; his soul and hopes departing together! With what a sad
change he appears in another world! Then if a man could but speak with that
hopeless soul, and ask it, are you now as confident of salvation as you were
wont to be? Do you now hope to be saved as soon as the most godly? O what a sad
answer would he return!

O that careless sinners would be awakened to think of this in time! If thou be
one of them, who art reading these lines, I do here, as a friend, advise thee,
that as thou would not have all thy hopes deceive thee, when thou have most
need, thou presently try them, whether they will prove current at the
touchstone of the scripture; and if thou find them unsound, let them go,
whatsoever sorrow they cost thee. Rest not till thou can give a reason of all
thy hopes; till thou can prove, that they are the hopes which grace and not
nature, has wrought; that they are grounded upon scripture-promises; that they
purify thy heart; that they quicken, and not cool thy endeavors in godliness;
that the more thou hopest, the less thou sinnest, and the more painful thou art
in following on the work, and not grown more loose and careless by the
increasing of thy hopes; that thou art willing to have them tried, and fearful
of being deceived; that they stir up thy desires of enjoying what thou hopest
for, and the deferring thereof is the trouble of thy heart.

There is a hope which is a singular grace and duty; and there is a hope which
is a notorious, dangerous sin: so consequently there is a despair which is a
grievous sin; and there is a despair which is absolutely necessary to thy
salvation.

I would not have thee despair of the sufficiency of the blood of Christ to
save thee, if thou believe, and heartily obey him; nor of the willingness of
GOD to pardon and save thee, if thou be such a one: nor yet absolutely of thy
own salvation, because while there is life and time, there is hope of thy
conversion, and so of thy salvation; nor would I draw thee to despair of
finding Christ, if thou do but heartily seek him: but this is the despair that
I would persuade thee to, as thou love thy soul; that thou despair of ever
being saved, except thou be born again; or of seeing GOD, without holiness; or
escaping perishing, except thou suddenly repent; or of ever having part in
Christ, except thou love him above father, mother, or thy own life; or of ever
truly loving GOD, or being his servant, while thou love the world, and
servest it.

These things I would have thee despair of, and whatever else GOD has told
thee shall never come to pass. And when thou have sadly searched into thy own
heart, and find thyself in any of these cases, I would have thee despair of
ever being saved in that state thou art in. This kind of despair is one of the
first steps to heaven.

Consider, if a man be quite out of his way, what must be the first means to
bring him in again? Why a despair of ever coming to his journey's end in the
way that he is in. If his home be eastward, and he be going westward, as long
as he hopes he is in the right, he will go on: and as long as he goes on
hoping, he goes further amiss. Therefore when he meets with somebody that
assures him that he is clean out of his way, and brings him to despair of
coming home except he turn back again; then he will return, and then he may
hope.

Why, sinner, just so it is with thy soul; thou art out of the way to heaven,
and in that way thou have proceeded many a year; yet thou go on quietly, and
hopest to be saved, because thou art not so bad as many others. Why, I tell
thee, except thou throw away these hopes, and see that thou have all this while
been quite out of the way to heaven; I say, till thou be brought to this, thou will never return and be saved. Who will turn out of his way while he hopes he
is right? Remember what I say; till thou feel GOD convincing thee, that the way
which thou have lived in will not serve thy turn, and so break down thy former
hopes, there is yet no saving work wrought upon thee, how well soever thou
may hope of thyself. Yea, thus much more, if any thing keep thy soul out of
heaven, there is nothing in the world likelier to do it, than thy false hopes
of being saved, while thou art out of the way to salvation.

3. Another additional loss, aggravating their loss of heaven, is this, they
shall lose all their carnal mirth; they will say to themselves (as Solomon
does) of their laughter, thou art mad; and of their mirth, what did thou?
Eccles. ii. 2. Their pleasant conceits are then ended, and their merry tales
are all told, their mirth was but as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
Eccles. vii. 6. It made a blaze for a while, but it was presently gone, and
will return no more. They scorned to entertain any saddening thoughts: the talk
of death and judgment was irksome to them, because it damped their mirth: they
could not endure to think of their sin or danger, because these thoughts did
sad their spirit: they knew not what it was to weep for sin, or to humble
themselves under the mighty hand of GOD: they could laugh away sorrow, and sing
away cares, and drive away these melancholy thoughts: they thought if they
should meditate, and pray, and mourn, as the godly do, their lives would be a
continual misery.

Alas, poor souls! What a misery then will that life be, where you shall have
nothing but sorrow; intense, heart-piercing, multiplied sorrow? When you shall
have neither the joys of the saints, nor your own former joys? Do you think
there is one merry heart in hell? Or one joyful countenance, or jesting tongue?
You cry now, A little mirth is worth a great deal of sorrow: but surely a
little godly sorrow, which would have ended in eternal joy, had been more worth
than a great deal of your foolish mirth, which will end in sorrow.

4. Another additional loss will be this: they shall lose all their sensual
delights; that which they esteemed their chief good, their heaven, their false
god, must they lose, as well as GOD himself.

O what a fall will the pro^^d ambitious man have from the top of his honors!
As his dust and bones will not be known from the dust and bones of the poorest
beggars; so neither will his soul be honored or savoured any more than theirs.
What a number of the great, noble, and learned, are now shut out of the
presence of Christ? They are shut out of their well contrived houses, and
sumptuous buildings; their comely chambers, with costly hangings; their soft
beds, and easy couches. They shall not find their gallant walks, their curious
gardens, with variety of beauteous fruits and flowers; their rich pastures, and
pleasant meadows, and plenteous harvest, and flocks and herds. Their tables
will not be so spread and furnished, nor they so punctually attended and
observed. They have not there variety of dainty fare, or several courses, to
please their appetites to the full. The rich man there fares not deliciously
every day, neither shall he wear there his purple and fine linen.

O that sinners would remember this in the midst of their jollity, and say to
one another, we must shortly reckon for this. Will the remembrance of it then
be comfortable or terrible? Will these delights accompany us to another world?
How shall we look each other in the face, if we meet in hell? Will not the
memorial of them be then our torment? Come, as we have sinned together, let us
pray together before we stir, that GOD would pardon us; and let us enter into a
promise with one another that we will do thus no more, but will meet together
in the worship of GOD, and help one another toward heaven, as often as we have
met for our sinful merriments, in helping to deceive and destroy each other. --
This would be the way to prevent this sorrow, and a course that would comfort
you, when you look back upon it hereafter.

CHAP. V. The Greatness of the Torments of the Damned discovered.
HAVING thus showed you how great their loss is, who are shut out of rest, and
how it will be aggravated by those additional losses which will accompany it. I
should next here show you the greatness of those positive sufferings, which
will accompany this loss. But I will not meddle with the quality of those
sufferings, but only show their greatness in some few discoveries, lest the
careless sinner, while he hears of no other punishment but ^^at of loss, should
think he can bear that well enough* That there are, besides the loss of
happiness, a^^^^^, sensible torments for the damned, is a matter beyond all
doubt, and that they will be exceeding great, may appear by these arguments
following.

1. From the principal author of them, which is GOD himself: as it was no less
than GOD whom the sinners had offended, so it is no less than GOD that will
punish them for their offenses. He has prepared those torments for his
enemies. His continued anger will still be devouring them. His breath of
indignation will kindle the flames. His wrath will be an intolerable burden to
their souls. If it were but a creature that they had to do with, they might
better bear it. But woe to him that falls under the strokes of the Almighty!
They shall feel to their sorrow, That it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living GOD. It were nothing in comparison to this, if all the
world were against them, or if the strength of all the creatures were united in
one to inflict their penalty. What a consuming fire is his wrath? If it he
kindled here, and that but a little, how do we wither before it, as the grass
that it cut down before the sun? How soon does our strength decay, and turn to
weakness, and our beauty to deformity! The flames do not so easily run through
the dry stubble, as the wrath of GOD will feed upon these wretches. Oh, they
that could not bear a prison, or a gibbet, for Christ, scarce a few scorns, how
will they now bear the devouring fire?

2. The place or state of torment, is purposely ordained for the glorifying
GOD's justice. As all the works of GOD are great and wonderful, so those above
all, which are specially intended for the eminent advancing of some of his
attributes. When he will glorify his power, he makes the worlds. The comely
order of all, and singular creatures, declare his wisdom. His providence is
shown, in sustaining all things and maintaining order, and attending his
excellent ends, amongst the confused, perverse, tumultuous agitations of a world
of wicked, foolish self-destroying miscreants. When a spark of his wrath does
kindle upon the earth, the whole world, save only eight persons, are drowned,
Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, are burnt with fire from heaven to ashes.
The sea shuts her mouth upon some. The earth does open and swallow others. The
pestilence destroys them by thousands. The present deplorable state of the
Jews may fully testify this to the world. And yet the glorifying of the two
great attributes, of mercy and justice, is intended most eminently for the life
to come. As therefore when GOD will purposely glorify his mercy, he will do it
in a way that is now beyond the comprehension of the saints that must enjoy it;
so that the blood of his Son, and the enjoyment of himself immediately in
glory, shall not be thought too high an honor for them: so also, when the time
comes that he will purposely manifest his justice, it shall appear to be indeed
the justice of GOD. The everlasting flames of hell will not be thought too hot
for the rebellious; and when they have there burned through millions of ages,
he will not repent him of the evil which is befallen them. Oh, woe to the soul
that is thus set up for a b^^t, for the wrath of the Almighty to shoot at! and
for a bush that must burn in the flames of his jealously, and never be consumed!

3. Consider who shall be GOD's executioners of their torment; and that is,
first, Satan. Secondly, themselves. First, he that was here so successful in
drawing them from Christ, will then be the instrument of their punishment, for
yielding to his temptations. It was a pityful fight to see the man possessed,
that was bound with chains, and lived among tombs; and that other that would be
cast into the fire and into the water; but alas! that was nothing to the
torment that Satan puts them to in hell: that is the reward he will give them
for all their service; for their rejecting the commands of GOD, and forsaking
Christ, and neglecting their souls at his persuasion. Ah, if they had served
Christ as faithfully as they did Satan, he would have given them a better
reward. 2. And it is most just also, that they should there be their own
tormenters, that they may see that their whole destruction is of themselves;
and they who were wilfully the meritorious cause, should also be the efficient
in their own sufferings; and then who can they complain of but themselves?

4. Consider also that their torment will be universal, not upon one part
alone, while the rest are free; but as all have joined in the sin, so must all
partake of the torment. The soul, as it was the chief in sinning, shall be the
chief in suffering; and as it is of a more spiritual and excellent nature than
bodies are, so will its torments far exceed bodily sufferings. And as the joys
of the soul far surpass all sensual pleasures, so the pains of the soul surpass
corporal pains.

And it is not only a soul, but a sinful soul that must suffer: the guilt which
still remains upon it, will make it fit for the wrath of GOD to work upon: as
fire will not burn, except the fuel be combustible; but if the wood be dry, how
fiercely will it burn then! The guilt of their sins will be as tinder to
gunpowder to the damned soul, to make the flames of hell take hold upon them
with fury.

And as the soul, so also the body must bear its part. That body that must
needs be pleased, whatsoever became of its eternal safety, shall now be paid
for its unlawful pleasures. That body which was so carefully looked to, so
tenderly cherished -- That body which could not endure heat or cold, or an ill
smell, or a loathsome sight: Oh what must it now endure! how are its haughty
looks now taken down! how little will those flames regard its comeliness and
beauty! but as death did not regard it, nor the worms regard it, but as freely
feed upon the face of the proud and lustful dames, and the heart of the most
ambitious lords or princes, as if they had been but beggars; so will their
tormenters then as little pity their tenderness, or reverence their lordliness.
Those eyes which were wont to be delighted with curious sights, must then see
nothing, but what shall amaze and terrify them; an angry GOD above them, and
those saints whom they scorned, enjoying the glory which they have lost; and
about them will be only devils and damned souls; ah! then how sadly will they
look back and say, are all our feasts, our games and revels come to this! Then
those ears which were wont to be delighted with music, shall hear the shrieks
and cries of their damned companions; children crying out against their
parents, that gave them encouragement and example in evil; husbands crying out
upon their wives, and wives upon their husbands; masters and servants cursing
each other; ministers and people; magistrates and subjects, charging their
misery upon one another, for discouraging in duty, conniving at sin, and being
silent or formal when they should have plainly told one another of their
misery, and forewarned them of their danger. Thus will soul and body be
companions in calamity.

5. And the greater by far will their torments be, because they shall have no
comfort lest to mitigate them. In this life when a minister told them of hell,
or conscience began to trouble their peace, they had comforts enough at hand to
relieve them: their carnal friends were all ready to comfort them, but now they
have not a word of comfort either for him or themselves. Formerly they had
their business, their company, their mirth, to drive away their fears; they
could drink away their sorrows, or play them away, or sleep them away, or at
least, time did wear them away; but now all these remedies are vanished. They
had a hard, a presumptuous unbelieving heart, which was a wall to defend them
against troubles of mind; but now their experience bath banished these, and
lest them naked to the fury of those flames. Yea, formerly Satan himself was
their comforter, and would unsay all that the minister said against them, as he
did to our first mother. Has GOD said, Ye shall not eal? Ye shall not surely
die. So does he now: does GOD tell you that you shall lie in hell? it is no
such matter; GOD is more merciful: he does but tell you so to fright you from
sinning: or if there be a hell, what need you fear it? are not you christians?
and shall you not be saved by Christ? was not his blood shed for you? Ministers
may tell you what they please, they would make men believe that they shall all
be damned except they will fit themselves to their humor. -- Thus as the
Spirit of Christ is the comforter of the saints, so Satan is the comforter of
the wicked; for he knows if he should now disquiet them, they would no longer
serve him; or if fears or doubts should trouble them, they would bethink
themselves of their danger. Never was a thief more careful lest he should awake
the people, when he is robbing the house, than Satan is, not to awaken a
sinner. But when the sinner is dead, and he has his prey, then he has done
flattering and comforting them. While the sight of sin and misery might have
helped to save them, he took all the pains he could to hide it from their eyes;
but when it is too late, and there is no hope left, he will make them see and
feel to the utmost. Oh, which way will the forlorn sinner then look for
comfort! They that drew him into the snare, and promised him safety, now
forsake him, and are forsaken themselves. His ancient comforts are taken from
him, and the righteous GOD, whose fore-warning he made light of, will now make
good his word against him to the least tittle.

6. But the great aggravation of this misery, will be its eternity. That when a
thousand millions of ages are past, their torments are as fresh to begin as at
the first day. If there were any hope of an end, it would ease them to foresee
it; but when it must be for-ever so, that thought is intolerable: much more
will the misery itself be. They never heartily repented of their sin, and GOD
will never repent him of their suffering. They broke the laws of the eternal
GOD, and therefore shall suffer eternal punishment. They knew it was an
everlasting kingdom which they refused; and therefore what wonder if they be
everlastingly shut out of it? It was their immortal souls that were guilty of
the trespass, and therefore must immortally suffer the pains. What happy men
would they think themselves, if they might have lain still in their graves, or
continued dust, or suffered no worse than the gnawing of those worms! Oh that
they might but there lie down again! What a mercy now would it be to die? And
how will they call and cry out for it? Oh death! whither art thou gone? Now
come and cut off this doleful life. O that these pains would break my heart,
and end my being! O that I might once die at last! O that I had never had a
being! -- These groans will the thoughts of eternity wring from their hearts.
They were wont to think the sermon long, and prayer long; how long then will
they think these endless torments? What difference is there betwixt the length
of their pleasures and of their pains? The one continued but a moment, the
other endures through all eternity. Oh that sinners would lay this thought to
heart! Remember how time is almost gone. Thou art standing all this while at
the door of eternity; and death is waiting to open the door, and put thee in.
Go sleep out but a few more nights, and stir up and down on earth a few more
days, and then thy nights and days shall end; thy thoughts, and cares, and
pleasures, and all shall be devoured by eternity; thou must enter upon the
state which shall never be changed. As the joys of heaven are beyond our
conceiving, so also are the pains of hell. Everlasting torment is inconceivable
torment.

But methinks I perceive the obstinate sinner desperately resolving, if I must
be damned, there is no remedy; rather than I will live so precisely, I will put
it to the venture; I shall escape as well as the rest of my neighbors, and we
will even bear it as well as we can. -- Alas, poor creature! would thou did
but know what it is that hou do so boldly venture on: I dare say thou would
sleep this night but very unquietly. Will thou leave thyself no room for hope?
Art thou such an implacable enemy to Christ and thy own soul? And do thou
think indeed, that thou can bear the wrath of GOD, and go away so easily with
these eternal torments? Yet let me beg this of thee, that before thou do so
flatly resolve, thou would lend thine attention to these few questions.

First, Who art thou that thou should bear the wrath of GOD? Art thou a God;
or art thou a man? What is thy strength to undergo so much? is it not as the
strength of wax or stubble to resist the fire? or as chaff to the wind; or as
dust before the whirlwind? Was he not as stout a man as thyself, who cried to
GOD, Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? And will thou pursue the dry
stubble? If thy strength were as iron, and thy bones as brass, thou could not
bear. If thy foundation were as the earth, and thy power as the heavens, yet
should thou perish at the breath of his indignation. How much more when thou
art but a little, creeping, breathing clay, kept a few days from stinking, and
from being eaten with worms, by the mere support and favor of him whom then
thus resistest?

Secondly, If thou be so strong, and thy heart so stout, why do those small
sufferings so dismay thee? If thou have but a sit of the gout or stone, what
groans do thou utter? The house is filled with thy complaints. If thou
should but lose a leg or an arm, thou would make a great matter of it. If
thou lose thine estate, and fall into poverty and disgrace; how heavily would
thou bear any one of these? And yet all these laid together, will be one day
accounted a happy state, in comparison of that which is suffered in hell. Let
me see thee make as light of convulsive, gouty, rheumatic pains, when they
seize upon thee, and then the strength of thy spirit will appear. Alas, how
many such boasters as thyself have I seen made stoop and cat their words! And
when GOD has but let out a little of his wrath, that Pharaoh, who before
asked, Who is the Lord? has cried, I have sinned.

Thirdly, If all this be nothing, go try thy strength by some corporal torment;
as Bilney before he went to the stake, would first try his finger in the
candle; so do thou: hold thy singer awhile in the fire, and feel there whether
thou can endure the fire of hell. Austin mentions a chaste christian woman,
who being tempted to uncleanness by a lewd ruffian, she desired him for her
sake to hold his finger one hour in the sire; he answered, it is an
unreasonable request: how much more unreasonable is it (said she) that I should
burn in hell for the satisfying your lust? So say I to thee; if it be an
intolerable thing to suffer the heat of the are for a year, or a day, or an
hour, what will it be to suffer ten thousand times more for ever? What if thou
were to suffer Lawrence's death, to be roasted upon a grid-iron; or to be
scraped or pricked to death, as other martyrs were? If thou could not endure
such things as these, how will thou endure the eternal flames?

Fourthly, If thou be so fearless of that eternal misery, why is the least
foretaste of it so terrible? Did thou never feel such a thing as tormenting
conscience? If thou have not, thou shall do. Did thou never see and speak
with a man that lived in desperation, or in some degree of these wounds of
spirit that was near despair? How uncomfortable was their conference? How
burdensome their lives? Nothing does them good which they possess; the sight of
friends, or house, or goods, which refresh others, is a trouble to them: they
feel no sweetness in meat or drink; they are weary of life, and fearful of
death. What is the matter with these men? If the misery of the damned itself
can be endured, why cannot they more easily endure these little sparks?

Fifthly, Tell me faithfully, what if thou should but see the devil appear to
thee in some terrible shape, would it not daunt thee? What if thou should
meet him in thy way home, or he should show himself to thee at night in thy
bedchamber, would not thy heart sail thee, and thy hair stand on end? I could
name thee those that have been as confident as thyself, who, by such a sight,
have been so appalled, tha^ they were in danger of being driven out of their
wits. Or what if some damned soul, of thy former acquaintance, should appear to
thee, would not this amaze thee? Alas! what is this to the torments of hell?
Can thou not endure a shadow to appear before thee? O how will thou endure to
live with them for-ever, where thou shall have no other company but devils and
the damned: and shall not only see them, but be tormented with them, and by
them!

Lastly, Let me ask thee, if the wrath of GOD be to be made so light of, why
did the Son of GOD himself make so great a matter of it? When he had taken upon
him the payment of our debt, and bore that punishment we had deserved, it makes
him sweat water and blood; it makes the LORD of life to cry, My soul is heavy,
even to the death. It makes him cry out upon the cross, My GOD, my GOD, why
have thou forsaken me? Surely, if any one could have borne these sufferings, it
would have been Jesus Christ. He had another measure of strength to bear it
than thou have.

Woe to poor sinners for their mad security! Do they think to find that
tolerable to them which was so heavy to Christ? Nay, the Son of GOD is cast
into a bitter agony, and bloody sweat, under the curse of the law only; and yet
the feeble, foolish creature makes nothing to bear also the curse of the
gospel: the good LORD bring these men to their right minds by repentance, lest
they buy their wit at too dear a rate.

And thus I have shown you somewhat of their misery, who miss of this rest
prepared for the saints. And now, reader, I demand thy resolution, what use
thou will make of all this? Shall it all be lost to thee? Or will thou consider
it in good earnest? Thou have cast by many a warning of GOD, will thou do so by
this also? Take heed what thou do, and how thou resolvest. GOD will not
always stand warning and threatening. The hand of revenge is lifted up; the
blow is coming, and woe to him on whom it lights. Little think thou how
near thou stand to thy eternal state, and how near the pit, thou art dancing
in thy jollity. If thy eyes were but opened, as they will be shortly, thou
would see all this that I have spoken before thine eyes, without stirring
from the place in which thou stand. Do thou throw by the book, and say, it
speaks of nothing but hell and damnation? Thus thou usest also to complain of
the minister; but would thou not have us tell thee of these things? Should
we be guilty of the blood of thy soul, by keeping silent that which GOD has
charged us to make known? Would thou perish in ease and silence, and also
have us to perish with thee, rather than displease thee, by speaking the truth?
If thou will be guilty of such inhuman cruelty, GOD forbid we should be guilty
of such sottish folly!

There are few preachers so simple, but they know that this kind of preaching
is the ready way to be hated of their hearers: and the desire of the savor of
men is so natural, that few delight in such a displeasing way. But I beseech
thee consider, are these things true, or are they not? If they were not true, I
would heartily join with thee against any minister that should offer to preach
them, and to affright poor people when there is no cause. But if these
threatenings be the words of GOD, what a wretch art thou that would not hear
it, or consider it. Why, what is the matter? If thou be sure that thou art one
of the people of GOD, this doctrine will be a comfort to thee: but if thou be
yet unregenerate, methinks thou should be as fearful to hear of heaven as of
hell, except the bare name of heaven or salvation be sufficient. Sure there is
no doctrine concerning heaven in all the scripture that can give thee any
comfort, but upon the supposal of thy conversion; what comfort is it to thee,
to hear that there is a rest remaining to the people of GOD, except thou be one
of them? Nay, what more terrible, than to read of Christ and salvation for
others, when thou must be shut out? Therefore, except thou would have a
minister to preach a lie, it is all one to thee, for any comfort thou have in
it, whether he preach of heaven or hell to thee. His preaching heaven and mercy
to thee, can be nothing else but to entreat thee to seek them; but he can make
thee no promise of it, but upon condition of thy obeying the gospel; and his
preaching hell, is but to persuade thee to avoid it. And is not this doctrine
fit for thee to hear? Indeed if thou were quite past hope of escaping it, then
it were in vain to tell thee of hell, but rather let thee take a few merry
hours whilst thou may; but as long as thou art alive, there is hope of thy
recovery, and therefore all means must be used to awake thee from thy lethargy.

Oh that some son of thunder, who could speak as Paul, till the hearers
tremble, were now to preach this doctrine to thee! Alas! as terrible as you
think I speak, yet is it not the thousandth part of what must be felt; for what
heart can now conceive, or what tongue express the pains of those souls that
are under the wrath of GOD? Ah, that ever blind sinners should wilfully bring
themselves to such unspeakable misery! You will then be crying to JESUS CHRIST,
Oh mercy! Oh pity! Why, I do now in the name of the LORD JESUS cry to thee, Oh
have mercy, have pity upon thine own soul! Shall GOD pity thee, who wilt not be
entreated to pity thyself? If thy horse see but a pit before him, thou can
scarcely force him in; and will thou so obstinately cast thyself into hell,
when the danger is foretold thee! Oh who can stand before the Lord, and who can
abide the fierceness of his anger? Methinks thou should need no more words,
but presently cast away thy sins, and deliver up thyself to Christ. Resolve on
it immediately, and let it be done, that I may see thy face in rest among the
saints. The LORD persuade thy heart to it without longer delay: but if thou be
hardened unto death, and there be no remedy, yet do not say another day, but
that thou wast faithfully warned, and that thou had a friend that would fain
have prevented thy damnation.

CHAP. V. The Second Use reprehending the general Neglect of this Rest, and
exciting to Diligence in seeking it.
I COME now to the second use. If there be so certain and glorious rest, why is
there no more seeking after it? One would think that a man that did but once
hear of such unspeakable glory, and did believe what he hears to be true,
should be transported with desire after it, should almost forget to eat or
drink, and mind and care for nothing else, and speak of and enquire after
nothing, but how to get this treasure! And yet people who hear it daily, and
profess to believe it, do as little mind it, or care, or labor for it, as if
they had never heard of any such thing, or did not believe one word that they
hear.

I shall apply this reproof more particularly to four sorts of men, First the
worldly-minded, who is so taken up in seeking the things below, that he has
neither heart nor time to seek this rest.

May I not well say to these men, as Paul to the Galatians in another case,
foolish sinners! who has bewitched you? It is not for nothing that divines use
to call the world a witch; for ^s in witchcraft, men's lives, senses, goods or
cattle are destroyed by a strange, secret, ^^seen power of the devil, of which
a man can give no natural reason, so here, men will destroy their own souls in
a way qui^e against their own knowledge. Would not a man wonder, that is in his
right senses, to see what riding and running, what scrambling and catching
there is for a thing of naught, while eternal rest lies by neglected! What
contriving and caring, what fighting and bloodshed, to get a step higher in the
world than their brethren, while they neglect the kingly dignity of the saints!
What insatiable pursuit of fleshly pleasures, whilst they look upon the praises
of GOD, which is the joy of angels, as a burden! What unwearied diligence is
there in raising their posterity, enlarging their possessions, gathering a
little silver or gold? Yea, perhaps for a poor living from hand to mouth, while
in the mean time their judgment is drawing near; and yet how it shall go with
them then, or how they shall live eternally, did never put them to one hour's
sober consideration.

What rising up early, fitting up late, laboring and caring year after year,
to maintain themselves and children in credit till they die; but what shall
follow after, that they never think on; and yet these men cry to us, may not a
man be saved without so much ado? How early do they rouse up their servants to
their labor? [Up, come away to work, we have this to do, and that to do;] but
how seldom do they call them [Up, you have your soul to look to, you have
everlasting life to provide for; up to prayer, to the reading of the scripture.]

What a gadding up and down the world is here, like a company of ants upon a
hillock, taking incessant pains to gather a treasure, which death will spurn
abroad, as if it were such an excellent thing to die in the midst of wealth and
honors! Or as if it would be such a comfort to a man in another world, to
think that he was a lord, or a knight, or a gentleman, or a rich man on earth!
What has this world done for its lovers and friends, that it is so eagerly
followed, and painfully sought after, while Christ and heaven stand by, and few
regard them? Or what will the world do for them for the time to come? The
common entrance into it is through anguish and sorrrow. The passage through it
is with continual care and labor. The passage out of it is with the greatest
sharpness and sadness of all. What then does cause men so much to follow and
affect it? O unreasonable bewitched men! Will mirth and pleasure stick close to
you? Will gold and worldly glory prove fast friends to you in the time of your
greatest need? Will they hear your cries in the day of your calamity? If a man
should say to you, as Elias did to Baal's priests, cry aloud: Oh riches, or
honor, now help us! Will they either answer or relieve you? Will they go along
with you to another world, and bribe the Judge, and bring you off clear; or
purchase you a room among the blessed? Why then did so rich a man want a drop
of water to cool his tongue? Or are the sweet morsels of present delight and
honor of more worth than eternal rest? and will they recompense the loss of
that enduring treasure? Can there be the l^^st hope of any of these? What then
is the matter? Is it only a room for our dead bodies that we are so much
beholden to the world for? Why this is the last and longest courtesy that we
shall receive from it. But we shall have this whether we serve it or no; and
even that homely, dusty dwelling it will not afford us always neither; it shall
possess our dust but till the resurrection. How then does the world deserve so
well at men's hands, that they should part with Christ and their salvation to
be its followers? Ah vile deceitful world! how often have we heard thy
faithfullest servants at last complaining, Oh the world has deceived me, and
undone me! And yet succeeding sinners will take no warning.

So this is the first sort of neglecters of heaven which fall under this
reproof.

2. The second sort here to be reproved, are the profane, ungodly, presumptuous
multitude, who will not be persuaded to be at so much pains for salvation, as
to perform the common outward duties of religion. Yea, though they are
convinced that these duties are commanded, yet will they not be brought to the
common practice of them. If they have the gospel preached in the town where
they dwell, it may be they will give the hearing to it one part of the day, and
stay at home the other; or if the master come to the congregation, yet part of
his family must stay at home. If they want the plain and powerful preaching of
the gospel, how sew are there in a whole town who will travel a mile or two to
hear abroad, though they will go many miles to the market for their bodies.

And though they know the scripture is the law of GOD, by which they must be
acquitted or condemned in judgment; and that it is the property of every
blessed man to delight i^ this law, and to meditate in it day and night, yet
(...) they not be at the pains to read a chapter once a (...) nor to acquaint
their families with this doctrine of salvation. But if they carry a bible to
church, and let it lie by them all the week, this is the most use that they
make of it. And though they are commanded to pray without ceasing; and to pray
always and not to faint; to continue in prayer, and watch in the same with
thanksgiving; yet will they not pray constantly with their families, or in
secret. You may hear in their houses two oaths for one prayer. Or if they do
any thing this way, it is usually but a running over a few formal words which
they have got on their tongues' end, as if they came on purpose to make a jest
of prayer, and to mock GOD and their own souls.

Alas, he that only reads in a book that he is miserable, and what his foul
stands in need of, but never felt himself miserable, or felt his several wants,
no wonder if be must also fetch his prayer from his book only, or at farthest
from the strength of his memory. Solomon's request to GOD was, that what prayer
or supplication soever should be made by any man, or by all the people, when
every man shall know his own sore, and his own grief, and shall spread so ^^^is
hands before GOD, that GOD would then hear and forgive, 2 Chronicles. vi. 29, 30. If
these men did thus know and feel every man the sore, and the grief of his own
soul, we should neither need so much to urge them to prayer, nor to teach them
how to perform it. Whereas now they invite GOD to be backward in giving, by
their backwardness in asking; and to be weary of relieving them by their own
being weary of begging; and to be seldom and short in his favors, as they are
in their prayers; and to give them but common and outward favors, as they put
up but common and outside requests. Yea, their cold and heartless prayers
invite GOD to a flat denial: for among men it is taken for granted, that he who
asks ^^^t slightly and seldom, cares not much for what he ^^ks. Do not these
men judge themselves unworthy (...) heaven, who think it not worth their more
constant and earnest requests? If it be not worth asking for, it is worth
nothing. And yet if one should go from house to house, through town and parish,
and enquire at every house as you go, whether they do morning and evening call
their family together, and earnestly seek the LORD in prayer; how few would you
find that constantly and conscientiously practice this duty? If every door were
marked where they do not thus call upon the name of GOD, that his wrath might
be poured out upon that family, our towns would be as places overthrown by the
plague, the people being dead within, and the mark of judgment without. I fear
where one house would escape, ten would be marked out for death; then they
might teach their doors to pray, LORD have mercy upon us; because the people
would not pray themselves. But especially if you could see what men do in their
secret chambers, how few should you find in a whole town that spend one quarter
of an hour, morning and night in earnest supplication to GOD for their souls?
Oh how little do these men set by eternal rest!

Thus do they slothfully neglect all endeavors for their own welfare, except
some public duty in the congregation, which custom or credit does engage them
to. Persuade them to read good books, and they will not be at so much pains.
Persuade them to learn the grounds of religion in some catechism, and they
think it toilsome slavery, fit for schoolboys. Persuade them to sanctify the
Lord's Day, and to spend it wholly in hearing the word, and repeating it with
their families, and prayer and meditation, and to forbear all their worldly
thoughts and speeches; and what a tedious life do they take this to be; and how
long may you preach to them, before they will be brought to it As if they
thought heaven were not worth all this ado.

3. The third sort that fall under this reproof, are those self-cozening,
formal, lazy professors of religion, who will be brought to any outward duty,
but to the inward work they will never be persuaded. They will preach, or hear,
or read, or talk of heaven, or pray customar^ly or constantly in their
families, and take part with the persons and causes that are good, and desire
to be esteemed among the godly, but you can never bring them to the more
spiritual duties; as to be constant and fervent in secret prayer; to be
conscientious in the duty of self-examination, to be constant in meditation, to
be heavenly-minded, to watch constantly over their heart, and words and ways,
to deny their bodily senses and their delights, to mortify the flesh, and not
make provision for it, to fulfill its lusts; to love and heartily forgive an
enemy, and to prefer their brethren heartily before themselves. The outside
hypocrites will never be persuaded to any of these. Above all other, two sorts
there are of these hypocrites.

1. The superficial, opinionative hypocrite. 2. The worldly hypocrite.
The former entertaineth the doctrine of the gospel with joy; but it is only in
the surface of his soul, he never gives the seed any depth of earth. He
changes his opinion, and thereupon enga^eth for religion, as the right way,
but it never melted and new-moulded his heart, nor set up Christ there in full
power and authority: as his religion is but opinion, so is his study, and
conference, and chief business all about opinion. He is usually an ignorant,
proud, bold enquirer and babbler about controversies, rather than an humble
embracer of the known truth, with love and subjection: you may conjecture by
his bold and forward tongue, and conceitedness in his own opinions, and
slighting the judgments and persons of others, and seldom talking of the great
things of Christ with seriousness and humitlity -- that his religion dwells
in the brain, and not in his heart; where the wind of temptation assaults him,
he easily yields, and it carries him away as a feather, because his heart is
empty, and not balanced and established with Christ and grace. If this man's
judgment lead him in the ceremonious way, then does he employ his chief zeal
for ceremonies. If his judgment be against ceremonies, then his strongest zeal
is employed in studying, talking, disputing against them, and censuring the
users of them. For, n^^ having the essentials of christianity, he has only the
mint and cummin, the smaller matters of the law, to lay out his zeal upon. You
shall never hear any humble and hearty bewailings of his soul's imperfections,
or any heart-bleeding acknowledgments of his unkindnesses to Christ, of any
pantings and longings after him, from this man; but that he is of such a
judgment, or such a religion, or society, or a member of such a church: herein
does he gather his greatest comforts; but the inward and spiritual labors of a
christian he will not be brought to.

The like may be said of the worldly hypocrite, who choaketh the doctrine of
the gospel with the thorns of worldly cares and desires. His judgment is
convinced that he must be religious, or he cannot be saved; and therefore he
reads, and hears, and prays, and forsakes his former company and courses; but
because his belief of the gospel-doctrine is but wavering and shallow, he
resolves to keep his hold of present things; and yet to be religious, that so
he may have heaven, when he can keep the world no longer. This man's judgment
may say, GOD is the chief good, but his heart and affections never said so, but
looked upon GOD as to be tolerated rather than the flames of hell, but not
desired before the felicity on earth. In a word, the world has more of his
affections than GOD, and therefore is his god. This he might easily know and
feel, if he would judge impartially, and were but faithful to himself. And
though this man does not gad after novelties in religion, as the former, yet
will he set his sails to the wind of worldly advantage. And as a man whose
spirits are seized on by some pestilential malignity, is feeble and faint, and
heartless in all that he does; so this man's spirits being possessed by the
plague of this malignant, worldly disposition, how faint is he in secret
prayer! How superficial in examination and meditation! How feeble in
heart-watchings, and humbling, mortifying endeavors! How nothing at all in
loving and walking with GOD, rejoicing in him, or desiring him! So that both
these, and many other sorts of lazy hypocrites there are, who though they will
trudge on with you in the easy outside of religion, yet will never be at the
pains of inward and spiritual duties.

4. And even good men themselves deserve this reproof, for being too lazy
seekers of everlasting rest. Alas, what a disproportion is there between our
light and our heat! our professions and prosecution! Who makes that haste, as
if it were for heaven? How still we stand! How idly we work! How we talk, and
jest, and trifle away our time! How deceitfully we do the work of GOD! How we
hear, as if we heard not; and pray, as if we prayed not; and confer, and
examine, and meditate, and reprove sin, as if we did it not; and use the
ordinances, as if we used them not; and enjoy Christ, as if we enjoyed him not;
as if we had learned to use the things of heaven, as the apostle teaches us to
use the world! Who would think that stood by us, and heard us pray in private
or public, that we were praying for no less than everlasting glory? Should
heaven be sought no more earnestly than thus? Methinks we are none of us all in
good sadness for our souls. We do but dally with the work of GOD, and play with
Christ, as children play with their meat when they should eat it; we hang upon
ordinances from day to day, but we stir not ourselves to seek the LORD.

I see a great many very constant in hearing and praying, but they do not hear
and pray as if it were for their lives. Oh, what a frozen stupidity has
benumbed us! The plague of Lot's wife is upon us, as if we were changed into
lifeless and immovable pillars: we are dying, and we know it, and yet we stir
not; we are at the door of eternal happiness or misery, and yet we perceive it
not: death knocks, and we hear it not: Christ calls and knocks, and we hear
not: GOD cries to us, today if you will hear my voice, harden not your hearts.
Work while it is day, for the night comes when none can work. Now ply your
business, now labor for your lives; now lay out all your strength. Now or
never; and yet we stir no more than if we were half asleep. What haste do death
and judgment make! How fast do they come on! They are almost at us, and yet
what little haste make we! The spur of GOD is in our side, we bleed, we groan,
and yet we do not mend our pace. LORD, what a senseless, sottish, earthly,
hellish thing is a hard heart! That we will not go roundly and cheerfully
toward heaven without all this ado! No, nor with it neither? Where is the man
that is serious in his christianity? Methinks men every where make but a trifle
of their eternal state. They look after it but a little by the by; they do not
make it the task and business of their lives.

To be plain with you, I think nothing undoes men so much as complimenting and
jesting in religion. Oh, if I were not sick myself of the same disease, with
what tears should I mix this ink; and with what groans should I express these
sad complaints; and with what heart's grief should I mourn over this universal
deadness! Do the magistrates among us seriously perform their portion of the
work? are they zealous for Gone? do they build up his house? are they tender of
his honor? do they second the word? encourage the good? relieve the oppressed?
compassionate the distressed? and fly at the face of sin and sinners, as being
the disturbers of our peace, and the only cause of all our miseries? do they
study how to do the utmost they can for GOD? to improve their power and parts,
and wealth and honor, and all their interest for the greatest advantage to the
kingdom of Christ, as men that must shortly give an account of their
stewardship? Or do they build their own houses, and seek their advancements,
and contest for their own honors, and do no more for Christ than needs they
must, or than lies in their way, or than is put by others into their hands, or
than stands with the pleasing of their friends, or with their worldly interest?

And how thin are those ministers that are serious in their work! Nay, how
mightily do the very best fail in this! Do we cry out of men's disobedience to
the gospel, in the evidence and power of the Spirit, and deal with sin, as that
which is the fire in our towns and houses; and by force pull men out of this
fire? Do we persuade our people, as those that know the terrors of the LORD
should do? Do we press Christ, and regeneration, and faith, and holiness, as
men that believe indeed, that without these they shall never have life? Do our
bowels yearn over the ignorant, and the careless, and the obstinate multitude,
as men that believe their own doctrine? When we look them in the face, do our
hearts melt over them, lest we should never see their faces in rest? Do we, as
Paul, tell them weeping, of their fleshly and earthly disposition? And teach
them publicly, and from house to house, night and day with tears? And do we
entreat them, as if it were indeed for their lives? That when we speak of the
joys and miseries of another world, our people may see us affected accordingly,
and perceive that we mean as we speak? Or rather, do we not study words? As if
a minister's business were but to tell them a smooth tale of an hour long, and
so look no more after them till the next sermon.

Oh the formal, frozen, lifeless sermons which we daily hear preached upon the
most weighty, piercing subjects in the world! How gently do we handle those
sins, which will handle so cruelly our people's souls! And how tenderly do we
deal with their careless hearts, not speaking to them as men that must be
awakened or damned! We tell them of heaven and hell in such a sleepy tone, and
slight way, as if we were but acting a part in a play; so that we usually
preach our people asleep with those subjects, which one would think should
rather endanger the driving some beside themselves.

In a word, our want of seriousness about the things of heaven, does charm the
souls of men into formality, and has brought them to this customary, careless
hearing, which undoes them. The LORD par^on the great sin of the ministry in
this thing, and, in particular, my own.

And are the people any more serious than magistrates and ministers? How can it
be expected? Reader, look but to thyself, and resolve the question. Ask
conscience, and suffer it to tell thee truly. Have thou set thine eternal rest
before thine eyes as the great business, which thou have to do in this world?
Have thou studied, and cared, and watched, and labored with all thy might,
lest any should take thy crown from thee? Have thou made haste, lest thou
should come too late, and die before the work be done? Has thy heart been
set upon it, and thy desires and thoughts run out this way? Have thou pressed
on through crowds of opposition toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of GOD in Christ Jesus? When you have set your hand to the work of GOD,
have you done it with all your might? Can conscience witness your secret cries,
and groans, and tears? Can your families witness that you have taught them the
fear of the LORD, and warned them all with earnestness and unweariedness to
remember GOD and their souls? Or that you have done but as much for them, as
that damned glutton would have had Lazarus do for his brethren on earth, to
warn them that they come not to that place of torment? Can your ministers
witness that they have heard you cry out, What shall we do to be saved? And
that you have followed them with complaints against your corruptions, and with
earnest enquiries after the LORD? Can your neighbors about you witness, that
you are still learning of them that are able to instruct you? And that you
plainly and roundly reprove the ungodly, and take pains for the saving of your
brethren's souls? Let all these witnesses judge this day between GOD and you,
whether you are in good earnest about eternal rest.

But if yet you cannot discern your neglects, look but to yourselves within
you, without you, to the work you have done: you can tell by his work whether
your servant has loitered, though you did not see him; so you may by
yourselves. Is your love to Christ, your faith, your zeal, and other graces,
strong or weak? What are your joys? What is your assurance? Is all right and
strong, and in order within you? Are you ready to die, if this should be the
day? Do the souls, among whom you have conversed, bless you? Why, judge by
this, and it will quickly appear whether you have been laborers or loiterers.

CHAP. VI. An Exhortation to Seriousness in seeking Rest.
I HOPE, reader, by this time thou art somewhat sensible, what a desperate
thing it is to triste about eternal rest; and how deeply thou have been guilty
of this thyself. And I hope also, that thou dare not now suffer this
conviction to die; but art resolved to be another man for the time to come:
What said thou? Is this thy resolution? If thou were sick of some desperate
disease, and the physician should tell thee, if you will observe but one thing,
I doubt not to cure you, would thou not observe it? Why, if thou will observe
but this one thing for thy soul, I make no doubt of thy salvation; if thou will
now but snake off thy sloth and put to all thy strength, and be a downright
christian, I know not what can hinder thy happiness. As far as thou art gone
from GOD, if thou now return and seek him with thy whole heart, no doubt but
thou shall find him. As unkindly as thou have dealt with JESUS CHRIST, if thou
did but feel thyself sick and d^^d, and seek him heartily, and apply thyself
in good earnest to the obedience of his laws, thy salvation were as sure as if
thou had it already: but as full as the satisfaction of Christ is, as free as
the promise is, as large as the mercy of GOD is; yet if thou do but look on
these, and talk of them, when thou should greedily entertain them, thou will
be never the better for them: and if thou should loiter when thou should
labor, thou will lose the crown. O fall to work then speedily, and seriously,
and bless GOD that thou have yet time to do it: and though that which is past
cannot be recalled, yet redeem the time now by doubling thy diligence.

And because thou shall see I urge thee not without cause, I will here adjoin a
multitude of considerations to move thee: their intent and use is, to drive
thee from delaying, and from loitering in seeking rest. Whoever thou art
therefore, I entreat thee to rouse up thy spirit, and give me awhile thy
attention, and (as Moses said to the people) Set thy heart to all the words
that I testify to thee this day; for it is not a vain thing, but it is for thy
life. Weigh what I here write with the judgment of a man; and the LORD open thy
heart, and fasten his counsel effectually upon thee.

1. Consider, our affections and actions should be answerable to the greatness
of the ends to which they are intended. Now the ends of a christian's desires
and endeavors are so great, that no human understanding on earth can
comprehend them; whether you respect their proper excellency, their exceeding
importance, or their absolute necessity.

These ends are, the glorifying of GOD, the salvation of our own and other
men's souls, in escaping the torments of hell, and possessing the glory of
heaven. And can a man be too much affected with things of such moment? Can he
desire them too earnestly, or love them too violently, or labor for them too
diligently? When we know that if our prayers prevail not, and our labor
succeeds not, we are undone for ever, I think it concerns us to seek and labor
to the purpose. When it is put to the question, whether we shall live for ever
in heaven or in hell? and the question must be resolved upon our obeying the
gospel, or disobeying it, upon the painfulness or the slothfulness of our
present endeavors; I think it is time for us to bestir ourselves, and to leave
our trisling and complimenting with GOD.

2. Consider, our diligence should be answerable to the greatness of the work
which we have to do, as well as to the ends of it.

Now, the works of a christian here are very many, and very great: the soul
must be renewed; many and great corruptions mortified; custom, temptations and
worldly interest must be conquered; flesh must be mastered; life and friends,
and credit, and all must be slighted; conscience must be upon good grounds
quieted; assurance of pardon and salvation must be attained. And though it is
GOD that must give us these, and that freely, without our own merits; yet will
he not give them without our earnest seeking and labor.

Besides, there is a deal of knowledge to be got, for the guiding ourselves,
for defending the truth, for the direction of others, and a deal of skill for
the right managing of our parts: many ordinances are to be used, and duties to
be performed, ordinary and extraordinary; every age, and year, and day, does
require fresh succession of duty; every place we come in, every person we have
to deal with, every change of our condition, does still require the renewing
our labor, and bringing duty along with it: wives, children, servants,
neighbors, friends, enemies, all of them call for duty from us. and all this
of great importance too; so that for the most, if we miscarry in it, it would
prove our undoing.

Judge then yourselves, whether men that have so much business lying upon their
hands, should not bestir them? And whether it be their wisdom either to delay,
or to loiter?

3. Consider, our diligence should be quickened, because of the shortness and
uncertainty of the time allotted us for the performing of all this work, and
the many and great impediments which we meet with. Yet a few days, and we shall
be here no more. Time passes on: many diseases are ready to assault us; we
that now are preaching, and hearing, and talking, and walking, must very
shortly be carried, and laid in the dust, and there left to the worms in
darkness and corruption; we are almost there already; it is but a few days, or
months, or years, and what is that when once they are past? We know not whether
we shall have another sermon, or sabbath, or hour. How then should those bestir
them for their everlasting rest, who know they have so short a space for so
great a work? Besides, every step in the way has its difficulties; the gate is
strait, and the way narrow: the righteous themselves are scarcely saved.
Scandals and discouragements will be still cast before us; and can all these be
overcome by slothful endeavors?

4. Moreover, our diligence should be answerable to the diligence of our
enemies in seeking our destruction. For if we sit still while they are plotting
and laboring; or if we be lazy in our defense, while they are diligent in
assaulting us, you may easily conceive how we are likely to speed. How diligent
is Satan in all kinds of temptations? Therefore, be sober and vigilant, because
your adversary, the devil, as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. How diligent are all the ministers of Satan? False teachers, scorners
at godliness, malicious persecutors, all unwearied; and our inward corruption
the most busy and diligent of all: whatever we are about; it is still refisting
us; depraving our duties, perverting our thoughts, dulling our affections to
good, exciting them to evil: and will a feeble resistance serve our turn?
Should we not be more active for our own preservation, than our enemies for our
ruin?

5. Our affections and endeavors should bear some proportion with the talents
we have received, and means we have enjoyed.

It may well be expected that a horseman should go faster than a footman; and
he that has a swift horse, faster than he that has a slow one. More work will
be expected from a sound man, than from the fick; and from a man at age, than
from a child: and to whom men commit much, from them they will expect the more.

Now the talents which we have received are many and great: the means which we
have enjoyed are very many, and very precious. What people breathing on earth,
have had plainer instructions, or more forcible persuasions, or constant
admonitions, in season and out of season? Sermons, till we have been weary of
them: and sabbaths, till we profaned them! Excellent books in such plenty, that
we knew not which to read! What people have had GOD so near them as we have
had? Or have seen Christ, as it were, crucified before their eyes, as we have
done? What people have had heaven and hell, as it were, opened unto them, as
we? Scarce a day wherein we have not had some spur to put us on. What speed
then should such a people make for heaven? How should they fly that are thus
winged? And how swiftly should they sail that have wind and tide to help them?
Believe it, brethren, GOD looks for more from England, than from most nations
in the world; and for more from you that enjoy these helps, than from the dark
untaught congregations of the land. A small measure of grace beseems not such a
people; nor will an ordinary diligence in the work of GOD, excuse them.

6. vigor of our affections and actions should be answerable to the great cost
bestowed upon us, and to the deep engaging mercies which we have received from
GOD. Surely we owe more service to our master, from whom we have our
maintenance, than we do to a stranger, to whom we were never beholden.

O the cost that GOD has been at for our sakes? The riches of sea and land, of
heaven and earth, has he poured out unto us. All our lives have been filled up
with mercies: we cannot look back upon one hour of it, or one passage in it,
but we may behold mercy. We feed upon mercy, we wear mercy upon our backs, we
tread upon mercy; mercy within us, mercy without us for this life, and for that
to come. O the rate deliverances that we have partaken of, both national and
personal! How often, how seasonably, how fully have our prayers been heard, and
our fears removed? What large catalogues of particular mercies can every
christian rehearse? To offer to number them would be as endless a task, as to
number the stars, or the sands of the shore.

If there be any difference betwixt hell, (where we should have been) and
earth, (where we now are) yea, or heaven, (which is offered to us) then
certainly we have received mercy: yea, if the blood of the Son of GOD be mercy,
then are we engaged to GOD by mercy; for so much did it cost him to recover us
to himself. And should a people of such deep engagements be lazy in their
returns? Shall GOD think nothing too much nor too good for us; and shall we
think all too much that we do for him? Thou that art an observing sensible man,
who know how much thou art beholden to GOD, I appeal to thee, is not a
loitering performance of a few heartless duties, an unworthy requital of such
admirable kindness? For my own part, when I compare my slow and unprofitable
life, with the frequent and wonderful mercies received, it shames me, it
silenceth me, and leaves me inexcusable.

7. Consider, all the relations which we stand in toward GOD, call upon us for
our utmost diligence. Should not the pot be wholly at the service of the
potter, and the creature at the service of his Creator? Are we his children,
and do we not owe him our most tender affections, and dutiful obedience? Are we
the spouse of Christ, and do we not owe him our observance, and our love? If he
be our father, where is his honor? and if he be our master, where is his fear?
We call him Lord and Master, and we do well: but if our industry be not
answerable to our relations, we condemn ourselves in saying, we are his
children, or his servants. How will the hard labor and daily toil that
servants undergo to please their masters* judge and condemn those men who will
not labor so hard for their great master? Surely there is none have a more
honorable master than we, nor can expect such fruit of their labors.

8. How close should they ply their work, who have such attendants as we have?
All the world are our servants, that we may be the servants of GOD. The sun,
and moon, and stars, attend us with their light and influence: the earth, with
all its furniture, is at our service: how many thousand plants, and flowers,
and fruits, and birds, and beasts, do all attend us? The sea with its
inhabitants, the air, the wind, the frost and snow, the heat and fire, the
clouds and rain, all wait upon us while we do our work: yea, the angels are
ministering spirits for us. And is it not an intolerable crime for us to
trifle, while all these are employed to assist us? Nay more; the patience of
GOD does wait upon us: the LORD JESUS CHRIST waits, in the offers of his
blood; the holy Spirit waits, in striving with our backward hearts: besides,
all his servants, the ministers of his gospel, who study and wait, and preach
and wait, and pray and wait upon careless sinners: and shall angels and men,
yea the LORD himself, stand by and look on, while thou do nothing?

O christians, I beseech you, whenever you are on your knees in prayer, or
reproving the transgressors, or exhorting the obstinate, or upon any duty, do
but remember what attendants you have for this work; and then judge how it
behooves you to perform it.

9. How forward and painful should we be in that work, where we are sure we can
never do enough? If there were any danger in over-doing, then it might well
cause men to moderate their endeavors: but we know, that if we could do all,
we were but unprofitable servants; much more when we fail in all.

It is true, a man may possibly preach too much, or hear too much, (though I
have known few that did so) but yet no man can obey or serve GOD too much: one
duty may be said to be too long, when it shuts out another; and then it cease
indeed to be a duty. And all superstition, or worship of our own devising, may
be called a righteousness over much; yet as long as you keep your service to
the rule of the word, you never need to fear being righteous over much: for
else we should reproach the LORD and Lawgiver of the church, as if he commanded
us to do too much.

If the world were not mad with malice, they could never be so blind in this
point as they are: to think that diligence for Christ, is folly and
singularity: and that they who set themselves wholly to seek eternal life, are
but precise Puritans! The time is near, when they will easily confess, that GOD
could not be loved or served too much, and that no man can be too busy to save
his soul: for the world you may easily do too much, but herein (in GOD'S way)
you cannot.

10. Consider, they that trifle in the way to heaven, lose all their labor. If
two be running in a race, he that runs slowest, had as good never run at all:
for he loses the prize, and his labor both. Many, who like Agrippa, are but
almost christians, will find in the end they shall be but almost saved. GOD
has set the rate at which the pearl must be bought; if you bid a penny less,
you had as good bid nothing. As a man that is lifting up some weighty thing, if
he put to almost strength enough, it is as good he put to none at all, for he
does but lose all his labor.

O how many professors of christianity will find this true to their sorrow, who
have had a mind to the ways of GOD, and have kept up a dull task of duty, but
never came to serious christianity? How many a duty have they lost, for want of
doing them thoroughly. Many shall seek to enter and not be able: who, if they
had striven might have been able. O therefore put to a little more diligence
and strength, that all be not in vain that you have done already!

11. Furthermore, we have lost a great deal of time already, and therefore it
is reason that we labor so much the harder. If a traveller sleep, or trifle
out most of the day, he must travel so much the faster in the evening, or fall
short of his journey's end. With some of us our childhood and youth is gone;
with some also their middle age, and the time before us is very uncertain. What
a deal of time have we slept away, and talked away, and played away? What a
deal have we spent in worldly thoughts and labors, or in mere idleness? Though
in likelihood the most of our time is spent, yet how little of our work is
done? And is it not time to bestir ourselves in the evening of our days? The
time which we ha^^ lost can never be recalled; should we not then redeem it by
improving the little which remains? You may receive indeed an equal
recompense with those that have borne the burden and heat of the day, though
you came not in till the last hour; but then you must be sure to labor
diligently that hour. It is enough sure that we have lost so much of our lives.
Let us not now be so foolish as to lose the rest.

12. Consider the greater are your laying-out, the greater will be your
comings-in. Though you may seem to lose your labor at the present, yet the
hour comes when you shall find it with advantage. The seed which is buried and
dead, will bring forth a plentiful increase at the harvest. Whatever you do,
and whatever you suffer, everlasting rest will pay for all. There is no
repenting of labors and sufferings in heaven; none says, would I had spared my
pains and prayed less, or been less strict, and did as the rest of my neihbours
did: there is never such a thought in heaven as these. But on the contrary, it
will be their joy to look back upon their labors, and consider how the mighty
power of GOD did bring them through all. Whoever complained that he came to
heaven at too dear a rate; or that his salvation cost him more labor than it
was worth? We may say of all our labors, as Paul of his sufferings, I reckon
that the sufferings (and labors) of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed. We labor but for a moment, but
we shall rest for-ever. Who would not put forth all his strength for one hour,
when he may be a prince while he lives?

Oh, what is the duty and sufferings for a short life, in respect of endless
joys with GOD? Will not all our rears then be wiped away? and all the sorrows
of our duties forgotten? But yet the LORD will not forget them: for he is not
unjust, to forget our work and labor of love.

13. Consider, violence and laborious striving for salvation, is the way that
the wisdom of GOD has directed us to, as best, and his sovereign authority
appointed us as necessary. Who knows the way to heaven better than the GOD of
heaven? When men tell us that we are too strict, whom do they accuse, GOD, or
us? If we do no more than what we are commanded, nor so much neither; they may
as well say, GOD has made laws which are too strict. Sure if it were a sault,
it would lie in him that commands, and not in us who obey. And dare these men
think that they are wiser than GOD? Do they know better than he, what men must
do to be saved? These are the men that ask us, whether we are wiser than all
the world besides? and yet they will pretend to be wiser than GOD. What do they
less, when GOD bids us take the most diligent course, and they tell us, it is
more ado than needs? Mark well the language of GOD, and see how you can
reconcile it with the language of the world: The kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. Strive to enter in at the strait
gate; for many shall seek to enter in and not be able. Whatsoever the hand
finds to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, or wisdom in the grave, whither thou go. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

This is the constant language of Christ: and which shall I follow, GOD or men;
yea, and that the worst and most wicked men? Shall I think that every ignorant
worldly sot, that can only call a man a Puritan, knows more than Christ, or can
tell GOD how to mend the scriptures? Let them bring all the seeming reason they
can against the holy, violent striving of the saints; and this suffices me to
confute them all, that GOD is of another mind, and he has commanded me to do
much more than I do: and though I could see no reason for it, yet his will is
reason enough to me: I am sure GOD is worthy to govern us, if we were better
than we are. Who should make laws for us, but he that made us? And who should
mark out the way to heaven, but he that must bring us thither? And who should
determine on what conditions we shall be saved, but he that bestows the gift of
solvation? So that let the world, or the flesh, or the devil, speak against a
holy laborious course, this is my answer, GOD has commanded it.

14. Moreover, it is a course that all men in the world either do, or will
approve of. There is not a man that ever was, or is, or shall be, but shall one
day justify the diligence of the saints. And who ^^^ld not go that way, which
every man shall applaud?

It is true, it is now a way every where spoken against, and hated; but let me
tell you, 1. Most that speak against it, in their judgments approve of it; only
because the practice of godliness is against the pleasures of the flesh,
therefore do they, against their own judgments, resist it. They have not one
word of reason against it, but reproaches and railing are their be^^ arguments.
2. Those that are now against it, whether in judgment or passion, will shortly
be of another mind. If they come to heaven, their mind must be changed before
they come there. If they go to hell, their judgment will then be altered,
whether they will or no.


If you could speak with every soul that suffers those torments, and ask,
whether it be possible to be too diligent and serious in seeking salvation, you
may easily conjecture what answer they would return. Take the most bitter
derider or persecutor of godliness, even those that will venture their lives to
overthrow it, if those men do not shortly wish a thousand times that they had
been the most holy, diligent christians on earth, then let me bear the shame of
a false prophet for-ever.

Remember this, you that will be of the opinion and way that most are of: why
will you not be of the opinion then that all will be shortly of? Why will you
be of a judgment which you are sure you shall all shortly change? O that you
were but as wise in this, as those in hell!

15. Consider, They that have been the most serious, painful christians, when
they come to die, exceedingly lament their negligence. Those that have wholly
addicted themselves to the work of GOD, and have made it the business of their
lives, and have slighted the world, and mortified the flesh, and have been the
wonders of the world for their heavenly conversations; yet when conscience is
deeply awakened, how do their failings wound them? Even those that are hated
and derided by the world for being so strict, and are thought to be almost
beside themselves for their extraordinary diligence; yet commonly when they lie
a dying, wish, O that they had been a thousand times more holy, more heavenly,
more laborious for their fouls! What a case then will the negligent world be
in, when their consciences are awakened, when they lie dying, and look behind
them upon a lazy, negligent life; and look before them upon a severe and
terrible judgment? What an esteem will they have of a holy life? For my own
part, I may say as Erasmus, They accuse me for doing too much, but my own
conscience accuses me for doing too little, and being too slow: and it is far
easier bearing the scorns of the world, than the scourges of conscience. The
world speaks at a distane without me, so that though I hear their words, I can
choose whether I will feel them: but my conscience speaks within, at the very
heart, so that every check does pierce me to the quick. Conscience, when it
reprehends justly, is the messenger of GOD: ungodly revilers are the voice of
the devil. I had rather be reproached by the devil for seeking salvation, than
reproved of GOD for neglecting it: I had rather the world should call me
Puritan in the devil's name, than conscience should call me loiterer in GOD's
name. As GOD and conscience are more useful friends than Satan and the world;
so are they more dreadful, irresistible enemies.

And thus, reader, I have showed thee sufficient reason against thy
slothfulness and negligence, if thou be not a man resolved to shut thine eyes,
and to destroy thyself. Yet, lest all this should not prevail, I will add
somewhat more, to persuade thee to be serious in thy endeavors for heaven.

1. Consider, GOD is in good earnest with you; and why then should you not be
so with him? In his commands, he means as he speaks, and will verily require
your real obedience. In his threatenings he is serious, and will make them all
good against the rebellious. In his promises he is serious, and will fulfill
them to the obedient, even to the least tittle. In his judgments he is serious,
as he will make his enemies know to their terror. Was not GOD in good earnest
when he drowned the world, when he consumed Sodom and Gomorrah, when he
scattered the Jews? And very shortly will lay hold on his enemies, particularly
man by man, and make them know that he is in good earnest: especia^^y when it
comes to the great reckoning day. And is it time then for us to dally with GOD?

2. JESUS CHRIST was serious in purchasing our ^^demption. He was serious in
teaching, when he neglected his m^^t and drink, John iv. 32. He was serious in
praying, when he continued all night at it. He was serious in doing good, when
his kindred came and laid hands on him, thinking he had been beside himself. He
was serious in suffering, when he fasted forty days, was tempted, betrayed,
spit on, buffeted, crowned with thorns, sweat blood, was crucified, pierced,
died. There was no jesting in all this: and should we not be serious in seeking
our own salvation?

3. The Holy Ghost is serious in soliciting us for our happiness; his motions
are frequent and pressing, and importunate: he striveth with our hearts. He is
grieved when we resist him: and should not we then be serious in obeying his
motions, and yielding to his suit?

4. How serious and diligent are all the creatures in their service to thee?
What haste makes the sun to compass the world? And how truly does it return at
its appointed hour? So do the moon and other planets. The springs are always
flowing for thy use; the rivers still running; the spring and harvest keep
their times. How hard does thy ox labor for thee from day to day? How
painfully and speedily does thy horse bear thee in travel? And shall all these
be laborious, and thou only negligent? Shall they all be so serious in serving
thee, and yet thou be so slight in thy service to GOD?

5. Consider, the servants of the world and the devil are serious and diligent;
they ply their work continually, as if they could never do enough: they make
haste, and march furiously, as if they were afraid of coming to hell too late:
they bear down ministers, and sermons, and counsel and all before them. And
shall they do more for the devil, than thou will do for GOD? Or be more
diligent for damnation, than thou will be for salvation? Have not thou a better
master? and sweeter employment? and sweeter encouragement and a better reward?

6. There is no jesting in heaven, nor in hell. The saints have a real
happiness, and the damned a real misery; the saints are serious and high in
their joy and praise; and the damned are serious and deep in their sorrow and
complaints. There are no remiss or sleepy praises in heaven; nor any remiss or
sleepy lamentations in hell: all men there, are in good earnest. And should we
not then be serious now? I dare promise thee, the thoughts of these things will
shortly be serious thoughts with thyself. When thou come to death or
judgment, O what deep heart piercing thoughts will thou have of eternity!
Methinks I foresee thee already astonished, to think how thou could possibly
make so light of these things! Methinks I even hear thee crying out of thy
stupidity and madness!

And now having laid thee down these undeniable arguments, I do in the name of
GOD demand ^ay resolution: What say thou? Will thou yield obedience or not?
I am confident thy conscience is convinced of thy duty. Dare thou now go on
in thy common careless course, against the plain evidence of reason and
commands of GOD, and against the light of thy own conscience? Dare thou live
as loosely, and sin as boldly, ^^d pray as seldom, and as coldly as before?
Dare ^^ou now as carnally spend the sabbath, and slumber over the service of
GOD as slightly, and think of thine everlasting state as carelessly as before?
Or do thou not rather resolve to gird up the loins of thy mind, and to set
thy self wholly about the work of thy salvation; and to do it with all thy
might; and to break over all the oppositions of the world, and to slight all
their scorns and persecutions; to cast off the weight that hangs on thee; and
the sin that does so easily beset thee; and to run with patience and speed the
race that is set before thee? I hope these are thy full resolutions: if thou
art well in thy wits, I am sure they are.

Yet because I know the strange obstinacy of the heart of man, and because I
would fain leave these persuasions fastened in thy heart, that so, if it be
possible, thou might be awakened to thy duty, and thy soul might live: I
shall proceed with thee yet a little further: and I once more entreat the^ to
stir up thy attention, and go along with me in the free and sober use of thy
reason, while I propound these following questions: and I command thee from
GOD, that thou resist not conviction, but answer them faithfully, and obey
accordingly.

1. Quest. If you could grow rich by religion, or get lands and lordships
thereby; or if you could get honor or preferment by it in the world; or could
be recovered from sickness by it, or could live for-ever in prosperity on
earth; what kind of lives would you then lead, and what pains would you take in
the service of GOD? And is not the Rest of the saints a more excellent
happiness than all this?

2. Quest. If the law of the land did punish every breach of the sabbath, or
every omission of family duties, or secret duties, or every cold and heartless
prayer, with death: if it were felony or treason to be negligent in worship,
and loose in your lives; what manner of persons would you then be? and what
lives would you lead? And is not eternal death more terrible than temporal?

3. Quest. If it were GOD's ordinary course to punish every sin with some
present judgment, so that every time a man swears, or is drunk, or speaks a
lie, or backbiteth his neighbor, he should be struck dead or blind, or lame,
in the place: if GOD did punish every cold prayer, or neglect of duty with some
remarkable plague; what manner of persons would you be? If you should suddenly
fall down dead like Auanias and Sapphira with the sin in your hands; or the
plague of GOD should seize upon you as upon the Israelites, while their sweet
morsels were yet in their mouths: If but a mark should be set in the forehead
of every one that neglected a duty, or committed a fin; what kind of lives
would you then lead? And is not eternal wrath more terrible than all this?

4. Quest. If you had seen the general dissolution of the world, and all the
pomp and glory of it consumed to ashes; if you saw all on fire about you,
sumptuous buildings, cities, kingdoms, land, water, earth, heaven, all flaming
about your ears: if you had seen all that men labored for, and sold their
souls for, ^one; friends gone; the place of your former abode gone; the history
ended, and all come down; what would such a sight as this persuade you to do?
Why, such a sight thou shall certainly see. I put my question to thee in the
words of the apostle, 2 Pet. iii. Seeing all these things shall be dissolved,
what manner of persons ought you to be in all holy conversation and godliwess,
looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat? As if he should say, we cannot possibly conceive or express what manner
of persons we should be in all holiness and godliness, when we do but think of
the sudden, and certain, and terrible dissolution of all things below.

5. Quest. What if you had seen the process of the judgment of the great day?
If you had seen the judgment set, and the books opened, and the most stand
trembling on the left hand of the judge, and Christ himself accusing them of
their rebellions and neglects, and remembering them of all their former
slightings of his grace, and at last condemning them to perpetual perdition? If
you had seen the godly standing on the right hand, and Jesus Christ
acknowledging their faithful obedience, and adjudging them to the possession of
the joy of their LORD? What manner of persons would you have been after such a
sight as this? Why, this fight thou shall one day see, as sure as thou live.
And why then should not the foreknowledge of such a day awake thee to thy duty?

Quest. What if you had once seen hell open, and all the damned there in their
ceaseless torments, and had heard them crying out of their slothfulness in the
day of their visitation, and wishing that they had but another life to live,
and that GOD would but try them once again? one crying out of his neglect of
duty, and another of his loitering and trisling, when he should have been
laboring for his life? What manner of persons would you have been after such a
sight as this? What if you had seen heaven opened, as Stephen did, and all the
saints there triumphing in glory, and enjoying the end of their labors and
sufferings? What a life would you lead after such a sig^t as this? Why, you
will see this with your eyes before it be long.

7. Quest. What if you had lain in hell but one year, or one day, or hour, and
there felt those torments that now you do but hear of? and GOD should turn you
into the world again, and try you with another lifetime, and say, I will see
whether thou will be yet any better; what manner of persons would you be? If
you were to live a thousand years, would you not gladly live as strictly as the
precisest saints, and spend all those years in prayer and duty, so you might
but escape the torment which you suffered? How seriously then would you speak
of hell! and pray against it! And hear, and read, and watch, and obey! How
earnestly would you admonish the careless to take heed, and look about them to
prevent their ruin! And will not you take GOD'S word for the truth of this,
except you feel it? Is it not your wisdom to do as much now to prevent it, as
you would do to remove it when it is too late? Is it not more wisdom to spend
this life in laboring for heaven, while ye have it, than to lie in torment,
wishing for more time in vain?

And thus I have said enough, if not to stir up the lazy sinner to a serious
working out his salvation, yet at least to silence him, and leave him
inexcusable at the judgment of GOD. If thou can, after reading all this, go
on in the same neglect of GOD, and thy soul, and draw out the rest of thy life
in the same dull and careless course, as thou have hitherto done; and if thou
h^^t so far stupefied thy conscience, that it will quietly suffer thee to
forget all this, and to trifle out the rest of thy time in the business of the
world, when in the meanwhile thy salvation is in danger, and the judge is at
the door; I have then no more to say to thee: it is as good speak to a rock.
Only as we do by our friends when they are dead; and our words and actions can
do them no good, yet to testify our affections we weep and mourn for them: so
will I also do for these souls. It makes my heart even tremble to think, how
they will stand trembling before the LORD! And how confounded and speechless
they will be, when Christ shall reason with them concerning their negligence
and sloth! When he shall say, as the Lord does in Jer. ii. 5.9.11.15. What
iniquity have your Fathers (or you) found in me, that ye are gone far from me,
and have walked after vanity? Did I ever wrong you, or do you any harm, or ever
discourage you from following my service? Was my way so bad that you could not
endure it? or my service so base that you could not stoop to it? Did I stoop to
the fulfilling of the law for you, and could not you stoop to fulfill the easy
conditions of my gospel? Was the world or Satan a better friend to you than I?
Or had they done for you more than I had done? Try now whether they will save
you, or whether they will recompense you for the loss of heaven; or whether
they will be as good to you as I would have been? O! what will the wretched
sinner answer for any of this! But though man will not hear, yet we may have
hope in speaking to GOD -- LORD, smite these rocks till they gush forth waters:
though these ears are deaf, say to them, Ephphatha, be opened: though these
sinners be dead, let that power speak, which sometime said, Lazarus arise! We
know they will be awakened at the last resurrection; O, but then it will be
only to their sorrow! O, thou that did weep and groan over dead Lazarus, pity
these sad and senseless souls, till they are able to weep and groan for, and
pity themselves. As thou have bid thy servants speak, so speak now thyself;
they will hear thy voice speaking to their hearts, that will not hear mine
speaking to their ears. Long have thou knocked at these hearts in vain, now
break the doors, and enter in.

Yet I will add a few more words to good men in particular, to show them why
they above all men should be laborious for heaven; and that there is a great
deal of reason, that though all the world sit still, yet they should abhor that
laziness and negligence, and lay out all their strength on the work of GOD. To
this end, I desire them also to answer soberly to these few questions.

1. Quest. What manner of persons should those be, who have felt the smart of
their negligence, in the new birth, in their several wounds and trouble of
conscien^^ in their doubts and fears, in their various afflictions: they that
have groaned and cried out so often, under the sense and effects of their
negligence, and are like enough to feel it again, if they do not reform it?
Sure one would think they should be slothful no more.

2. Quest. What manner of persons should those be who have bound themselves to
GOD by so many covenants as we have done, and in special have covenanted so often
to be more painful and faithful in his service? At every sacrament; on many
days of humiliation and thanksgiving; in most of our deep distresses and
dangerous sicknesses; we are still ready to bewail our neglects, and to engage
ourselves, if GOD will but try us and trust us once again, how diligent and
laborious we will be, and how we will improve our time, and reprove offenders,
and watch over ourselves, and ply our work; and do him more service in a day,
than we did in a month? The LORD pardon our perfidious covenant breaking; and
grant that our engagements may not condemn us.

3. Quest. What manner of men should they be in duty, who have received so much
encouragement, as we have done? Who have tasted such sweetness in diligent
obedience, as does much more than countervail all the pains; who have so often
had experience of the wide difference between lazy and laborious duty, by their
different issues; who have found all our lazy duties unfruitful; and all our
strivings and wrestlings with GOD successful, so that we were never importunate
with GOD in vain? We who have had so many deliverances upon urgent seeking; and
have received almost all our solid comforts in a way of close and constant
duty: how should we above all men ply our work?

4. Quest. What manner of persons should they be in holiness, who have so much
of the great work yet undone? So many sins in so great strength; graces weak,
sanctification imperfect, corruption still working, and taking advantage of all
our omission? When we are as a boat-man on the water; let him row never so hard
a month together, yet if he do but slack his hand, and think to ease himself,
his boat goes faster down the stream than before it went up: so do our souls,
when we think to ease ourselves by abating our pains in duty. Our time is
short: our enemies mighty: our hindrances many: GOD seems yet at a distance
from many of us: our thoughts of him are dull and unbelieving: our acquaintance
and communion with Christ, is small: and our desires to be with him are as
small. And should men in our case stand still?

5. Quest. Lastly, What manner of persons should they be, on whom the glory of
the great GOD does so much depend? Men will judge of the father by the
children, and of the master by the servants. We bear his image, and therefore
men will measure him by his representation. He is no where in the world so
lively represented, as in his saints: and shall they set him forth as a pattern
of idleness? All the world is not capable of honoring or dishonouring GOD so
much as we: and the least of his honor is of more worth than all our lives.
Seeing then that all these things are so, I charge thee that art a christian,
in my master's name, to consider, and resolve the question, What manner of
persons ought we to be in all holy conve^sation and godliness? And let thy life
answer the question as well as thy tongue.

I have been large^ upon this use, partly because of the general neglect of
heaven, that all sorts are guilty of; partly because men's salvation depends
upon their present striving and seeking; partly because the doctrine of free
grace misunderstood, is lately so abused, to the cherishing of sloth and
security: partly because many eminent men of late do judge, that to work or
labor for life an^ ^^l^ation is mercenary, legal and dangerous; which doctrine
(as I have said before) were it by the owners reduced into practice, would
undoubtedly damn them; because they that seek not, shall not find; and they
that strive not to enter, shall be shut out; and they that labor not, shall
not be crowned: and partly because it is grown the custom, instead of striving
for the kingdom, and contending for the faith, to strive with each other about
uncertain controversies, and to contend about the circumstantials of faith;
wherein the kingdom of GOD does no more consist than in meats or drinks, or
genealogies. Sirs, shall we who are brethren fall out by the way home, and
spend so much of our time about the smaller matters which thousands have been
saved without, but never any one saved by them, while Christ and our eternal
rest are almost forgotten? The LORD pardon and heal the folly of his people!

CHAP. VII. The Third Use. Persuading all Men to try their Title to this Rest;
and directing them how to try, that they may know.
I NOW proceed to the third use; and because it is of very great importance, I
entreat thee to weigh it the more seriously.

Is there such a glorious rest so near at hand? And shall none enjoy it but the
people of GOD? What mean the most of the world then, to live so contentedly
without the assurance of their interest in this rest? And to neglect the trying
of their title to it, when the LORD has so fully opened the blessedness of
that kingdom, which none but obedient believers shall possess, and so fully
expressed those torments which all the rest of the world must eternally suffer? A
man would think now, that they who believe this should never be at any quiet
till they were heirs of the kingdom. Most men say they believe this word of GOD
to be true: how then can they sit still in such an utter uncertainty, whether
ever they shall live in rest or not? LORD what a wonderful madness is this,
that men who k^^w they must presently enter upon unchangeable joy or pain,
should yet live as uncertain what should be their doom, as if they had never
heard of any such state; yea, and live as quietly, and as merrily in this
uncertainty, as if nothing ailed them, and there were no danger!

Are these men alive or dead? Are they waking, or asleep? What do they think
on? Where are their hearts? If they have but a weighty suit at law, how careful
are they to know whether it will go for them, or against them? If they were to
be tried for their lives, how careful would they be to know whether they should
be saved or condemned, especially if their care might surely save them? If they
be dangerously sick, they will enquire of the physician; what think you sir,
shall I escape or no? But for the business of their salvation, they are content
to be uncertain. If you ask most men a reason of their hopes to be saved, they
will say it is because GOD is merciful, and Christ died for sinners, and the
like general reasons, which any man in the world may give as well as they; but
put them to prove their interest in Christ, and the saving mercy of GOD, and
they can say nothing at all; at least nothing out of their hearts and
experience.

If GOD should ask them for their souls, as he did Cain for his brother Abel,
they could return but such an answer as he did. If GOD or man should say to
them, what case is thy soul in, man? Is it regenerate, and pardoned or no? Is
it in a state of life, or a state of death? He would be ready to say, I know
not; am I my soul's keeper. I hope well, I trust GOD with my soul, I shall
speed as well as other men do, I thank GOD I never made any doubt of my
salvation. Thou have the more cause to doubt a great deal, because thou never
did doubt; and yet more because thou have been so careless in thy confidence.
What do these expressions discover, but a wilful neglect of thy own salvation?
As a ship-master that should let his vessel alone, and say, I will venture it
among the rocks, and the waves, and winds; I will trust GOD with it; it will
speed as well as other vessels do. Indeed as well as other men's that are as
careless and idle, but not so well as other men's that are diligent and
watchful. What horrible abuse of GOD is this, for men to pretend they trust
GOD, to cloak their own wilful negligence! If thou did truly trust GOD, thou
would also be ruled by him, and trust him in that way which he has
appointed thee. He requires thee to give all diligence to make thy calling and
election sure, and so to trust him, 2 Pet. i. 10. He has marked thee out a way
by which thou may come to be sure; and charged thee to search and try
thyself, till thou certainly know. Were he not a foolish traveller, that would
go on when he does not know, whether it be right or wrong; and say, I hope I am
right; I will go on and trust GOD? Art not thou guilty of this folly in thy
travels to eternity? Not considering that a little serious enquiry whether the
way be right, might save thee a great deal of labor which thou bestowest in
vain, and must undo again, or else thou will miss of salvation, and undo
thyself. Did I not know what a desperate, blind, carnal heart is, I should
wonder how thou do to keep off continual terrors from thy heart: and
especially in these cases following:

1. I wonder how thou can either think or speak of the dreadful GOD without
exceeding terror and astonishment, as long as thou art uncertain whether he be
thy father or thy enemy, and know not but all his attributes may be employed
against thee. If his saints must rejoice before him with trembling, and serve
him with fear: If they that are sure to receive the immovable kingdom, must yet
serve GOD with reverence and godly fear, because he is a consuming fire: how
terrible should the remembrance of him be to them that know, not but this fire
may for-ever consume them? 2. How do thou think without trembling, upon JESUS
CHRIST? When thou know not whether his blood has purged thy soul, or not?
And whether he will condemn thee, or acquit thee in judgment; nor whether he be
the corner stone and foundation of thy happiness, or a stone of stumbling to
break thee, and grind thee to powder? 3. How can thou open the bible and read
a chapter, or hear a chapter read but it should terrify thee? Methinks every
leaf should be to thee as Belshazzar's writing on the wall, except only that
which draws thee to try and reform: If thou read the promises, thou know not
whether ever they shall be fulfilled to thee, because thou art uncertain of thy
performance of the condition. If thou read the threatenings, for any thing thou
know, thou do read thy own sentence. I do not wonder if thou art an enemy
to plain preaching, and if thou say of it, and of the minister and scripture
itself, as Ahab of the prophet, I hate him for he does not prophesy good
concerning me, but evil. 4. What comfort can thou find in any thing which
thou possessest? Methinks, friends, and honors, and houses, and lands, should
do thee little good, till thou know thou have the love of GOD withal, and shall
have rest with him when thou leavest these. Offer to a prisoner, before he know
his sentence, either music, or clothes, or lands or preferment, and what cares
he for any of these, till he know how he shall escape for his life? Then he
will look after these comforts of life, and not before: for he knows if he must
die the next day, it will be small comfort to die rich or honorable. Even when
thou lie down to take thy rest, methinks the uncertainty of thy salvation
should keep thee waking, or amaze thee in thy dreams, and trouble thy sleep;
and thou should say, as Job in a smaller distress than thine, Job vii. 13,
14. When I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint, then
thou scarest me through dreams, and terrifiest me through visions. 5. What
shift do thou make to think of thy dying hour? Thou know it is hard by,
and there is no avoiding it, nor any medicine found out that can prevent it;
thou know it is the king of terror, and the inlet to thine unchangeable
state. If thou should die this day (and who knows what a day may bring
forth?) thou do not know whether thou shall go strait to heaven or hell: And
can thou be merry till thou art got out of this dangerous state? 6. What
shift do thou make to preserve thy heart from horror, when thou rememberest
the great judgment day, and the everlasting flames? do thou not tremble as
Felix when thou hear of it? and as the elders of the town trembled when
Samuel came to it, saying, come thou peaceably? So methinks thou should do
when the minister comes into the pulpit: and thy heart, whenever thou
meditatest of that day, should meditate terror, and thou should even be a
terror to thyself and all thy friends. If the keepers trembled, and became as
dead men, when they did but see the angels, Matt. xxviii. 3, 4. how can thou
think of living in hell with devils, till thou have got some sound assurance
that thou shall escape it? Or if thou seldom think of these things, the wonder
is as great, what shift thou make to keep those thoughts from thy heart? Thy
bed is very soft, or thy heart is very hard, if thou can sleep soundly in
this uncertain case.
I have showed thee the danger; let me next proceed to show thee the remedy.

If this general uncertainty of the world about their salvation were
remediless, then must it be borne as other unavoidable miseries: but, alas, the
common cause is wilfulness and negligence: men will not be persuaded to use the
remedy, though it be at hand, prescribed to them by GOD himself, and all
necessary helps thereunto provided for them. The great means to conquer this
uncertainty, is self-examination, or the serious and diligent trying of a man's
heart and state by the rule of scripture. But, alas, either men understand not
the nature and use of this duty, or else they will not be at the pains to try.
Go through a congregation of a thousand men, and how few of them will you meet
with, that ever bestowed one hour in all their lives in a close examination of
their title to heaven? Ask thy own conscience, reader, when was the time, and
where was the place, that ever thou solemnly tookedst thy heart to task, as in
the sight of GOD, and examinedst it by scripture, whether it be born again or
not? Whether it be holy or not? Whether it be set most on GOD or on creatures,
on heaven or earth: and did follow on this examination till thou had
discovered thy condition, and so passed sentence on thyself accordingly?

But because this is a work of so high concernment, and so commonly neglected,
I will therefore, 1. Show you, that it is possible by trying, to come to a
certainty. 2. Show you the hindrances that keep men from trying, and from
assurance. 3. I will lay down some motives to persuade you to it. 4. I will
give you some directions how to perform it. 5. And lastly, I will lay you down
some marks out of scripture, by which you may try, and come to an infallible
certainty, whether you are the people of GOD, or no.


And 1. I shall show you that certainty of salvation may be attained, and ought
to be labored for. Which I maintain by these arguments.

1. Scripture tells us we may know, and that the saints before us have known
their justification, and future salvation, 2 Cor. v. 1. Romans viii. 36. Joh.
xxi. 15. 1 John v. 19. and iv. 13. and iii. 14, 24. and ii. 3. 5. Romans viii.
14, 19. Ephesians. iii. 12. I refer you to the places for brevity. 2. If we may be
certain of the premises, then may we also be certain of the conclution. But
here we may be certain of both the premises. For, 1. That whosoever believes
in Christ shall not perish but have everlasting life, is the voice of the
gospel; and therefore that we may be sure of: that we are such believers, may
be known by conscience and internal sense. 3. The scripture would never make
such a wide difference between the children of GOD, and the children of the
devil, and set forth the happiness of the one, and the misery of the other, and
make this difference to run through all the veins of its doctrine, if a man
cannot know which of these two states he is in. 4. Much less would the Holy
Ghost bid us give all diligence to make our calling and election sure, if it
could not be done, 2 Pet. i. 10. 5. And to what purpose should we be so
earnestly urged to examine, and prove, and try ourselves, whether we be in the
faith, and whether Christ be in us, or we be reprobates? 1 Cor. xi. 28. and 1.
Cor. xiii. 5. Why should we search for that which cannot be found? 6. How can
we obey those precepts which require us to rejoice always? 1 These. v. 16. to
call GOD out father, Luke xi. 13. to live in his praises, Psalm. xlix. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, and to long for Christ's coming, Rev. xxii. 17.20. 2 These. i. 10. and to
comfort ourselves with the mention of it, 1 These. iv. 18. which are all the
consequents of assurance? Who can do any of these heartily, that is not in some
measure sure that he is the child of GOD?
The 2d. thing I promised, is, to show you what are the hindrances which keep
men from examination and assurance. I shall, 1. show what hinders them from
trying; and 2. What hinders them from knowing, when they do try, that so when
you see the impediments, you may avoid them.


And, 1. we cannot doubt but Satan will do his part, to hinder us from such a
necessary duty as this: if all the power he has can do it, or all the means
and instruments which he can raise up. He is loath the godly should have that
assurance, and advantage against corruption, which faithful self-examination
would procure them; and for the ungodly he knows, if they should once fall
close to this they would find out his deceits, and their own danger. If they
did but faithfully perform this duty, he were likely to lose most of his
subjects. If the snare be not hid, the bird will escape it: Satan knows how to
angle for souls, better than to show them the hook or line, and to fright them
away with a noise, or with his own appearance.

Therefore he labors to keep them from a searching ministry; or to keep the
minister from helping them to search: or to take off the edge of the word, that
it may not pierce, or to turn away their thoughts, or possess them with
prejudice: Satan is acquainted with all the preparations of the minister; he
knows when he has provided a searching sermon, fitted to the state and
necessity of an hearer; and therefore he will keep him away that day, if it be
possible, or else cast him asleep, or steal away the word by the cares and talk
of the world, or some way prevent its operation.

This is the first hinderance.

Wicked men also are great impediments to poor sinners when they should examine
and discover their estates.

1. Their examples hinder much. When an ignorant sinner sees all his friends
and neighbors do as he does, yea, the rich and learned as well as others, this
is an exceeding great temptation to proceed in his security.

2. The merry company, and discourse of these men do take away the thoughts of
his spiritual state, and make the understanding drunk: so that if the Spirit
had before put into them any jealousy of themselves, or any purpose to try
themselves, these do soon quench all.

3. Also their continual discourse of matters of the world, does damp all these
purposes.

4. Their railings also, and scorning at godly persons, is a very great
impediment to multitudes of souls, and possesses them with such a prejudice
and dislike of the way to heaven, that they settle in the way they are in.

5. Their constant persuasions, allurements, threats, hinder much. GOD does
scarce ever open the eyes of a poor sinner, to see that his way is wrong, but
presently there is a multitude of Satan's apostles ready to flatter him, and
daub, and deceive, and settle him again in the quiet possession of his former
master. What, say they, do you make a doubt of your salvation, who have lived
so well, and done no body harm? GOD is merciful: and if such as you shall not
be saved, GOD help a great many: what do you think is become of all your
forefathers? And what will become of all your friends and neighbors that live
as you do? Will they all be damned? Shall none be saved think you, but a few
strict ones? Come, come, if ye hearken to these books or preachers, they will
drive you to despair, or drive you out of your wits: thus do they follow the
soul that is escaping from Satan, with restless cries, till they have brought
him back: Oh, how many thousands have such charms kept asleep in security, till
death and hell have awakened and better informed them! The LORD calls to the
sinner, and tells him, The gate is strait, the way is narrow, and few find it:
try and examine whether thou be in the faith or no: give all diligence to make
sure in Time. -- And the world cries out clean the contrary, never doubt, never
trouble yourselves with these thoughts: -- I entreat the sinner that is in this
strait, to consider, that it is Christ, and not their fathers, or mothers, or
neighbors, or friends that must judge them: and if Christ condemn them, these
cannot fa^e them: and therefore common reason may tell them, that it is n^^
from the words of ignorant men, but from the word of GOD that they must fetch
their hopes of salvation.

When Ahab would enquire among the multitudes of flattering prophets, it was
his death. They can flatter men into the snare, but they cannot bring them out.
Oh, take the counsel of the Holy Ghost, Ephesians. v. 6, 7. Let no man deceive you
with vain words: for because of these things comes the wrath of GOD upon the
children of disobedience: be not ye therefore partakers with them: but save
yourselves from this untoward generation.

3. But the greatest hindrances are in men's own hearts.

1. Some are so ignorant that they know not what self-examination is, nor what
a minister means when he persuadeth them to try themselves; or they know not
that there is any necessity of it: but think every man is bound to believe that
GOD is his father, and that his sins are pardoned whether it be true or false;
and that it were a great fault to make any question of it: or they do not think
that assurance can be attained: or that there is any such great difference
betwixt one man and another: but that we are all christians, and therefore need
not trouble ourselves any further: or at least they know not wherein the
difference lies; nor how to set upon this searching of their hearts. They have
as gross conceits of that regeneration, which they must search for, as
Nicodemus had; they are like those in Acts xix. 2. that know not whether there
were a Holy Ghost to be received or no.

2. Some are so possessed with self-love and pride, that they will not so much
as suspect any danger to themselves. Like a pround tradesman who scorns the
motion when his friends desire him to cast up his books, because they are
afraid he will break. As some fond parents that have an over-weaning conceit of
their own children, and therefore will not believe or hear any evil of them:
such a fond self-love does hinder men from suspecting and trying their states.

3. Some are so guilty that they dare not try: they are so fearful that they
should find their estates unsound, that they dare not search into them. And yet
they dare venture them to a more dreadful trial.

4. Some are so in love with their sin, and so in dislike with the way of GOD,
that they dare not fall on the trial of their ways, lest they be forced from
the course which they love.

5. Some are so resolved already never to change their present state, that they
neglect examination as a useless thing: before they will turn so precise and
seek a new way, when they have lived so long, and gone so far, they will put
their eternal state to the venture, come of it what will. And when a man is
fully resolved to hold to his way, and not to turn back, be it right or wrong,
to what end should he enquire whether he be right or no?

6. Most men are so taken up with their worldly affairs, and are so busy in
providing for the flesh, that they cannot set themselves to the trying of their
title to heaven: they have another kind of happiness in their eye, which will
not suffer them to make sure of heaven.

7. But the most common impediment is that false faith and hope commonly called
presumption: which bears up the hearts of most of the world, and so keeps them
from suspecting their danger.

Thus you see what abundance of difficulties must be overcome before a man
closely sets upon the examining of his heart.

And if a man break through all these impediments, and set upon the duty, yet,
of those few who enquire after means of assurance, diverse are deceived and
miscarry, especially through these following causes.

1. There is such confusion and darkness in the soul of man, especially of an
unregenerate man, that he can scarcely tell what he does, or what is in him. As
one can hardly find any thing in an house where nothing keeps its place, but
all is cast on an heap together; so is it in the heart where all things are in
disorder, especially when darkness is added to this disorder: so that the heart
is like an obscure dungeon, where there is but a little crevice of light, and a
man must rather grope than see, no wonder if men mistake in searching such an
heart, and so miscarry in judging their estates.

2. Besides, many are resolved what to judge before they try: they use the duty
but to strengthen their present conceits of themselves, and not to find out the
truth of their condition: like a bribed judge, who examines each party as if he
would judge uprightly, when he is resolved which way the cause shall go
beforehand. Just so do men examine their hearts.

3. Also men try themselves by false marks and rules: not knowing wherein the
truth of christianity does consist: some looking beyond, and some short of the
scripture-standard.

Lastly, Men frequently miscarry in this work, by setting on it in their own
strength. As some expect the Spirit should do it without them, so others
attempt it themselves without seeking or expecting the help of the Spirit: both
these will certainly miscarry in their assurance.

CHAP. VIII. Further Causes of doubting among Christians.
BECAUSE the comfort of a christian's life does so much consist in his
assurance of GOD's special love, and because the right way of obtaining it is
so much controverted, I will here proceed a little further in opening to you
some other hindrances which keep us christians from comfortable certainty.

1. One great cause of doubting and uncertainty, is, the weakness of our grace.
A little grace is next to none. Small things are hardly discerned. Most content
themselves with a small measure of grace, and do not follow on to spiritual
strength and manhood. They believe so weakly, and love GOD so little, that they
can scarce find whether they believe and love at all. Like a man in a swoon,
whose pulse and breathing is so weak, that they can hardly be perceived whether
they move at all, and consequently whether the man be alive or dead.

The chief remedy for such would be, to follow on their duty, till their graces
be increased: ply your work: wait upon GOD in the use of his prescribed means,
and he will undoubtedly bless you with increase. Oh that christians would
bestow most of that time in getting more grace, which they bestow in anxious
doubtings whether they have any or none; and that they would lay out those
serious affections in praying, and seeking to Christ for more grace, which they
bestow in fruitless complaints! I beseech thee, take this advice as from GOD!
and then, when thou believe strongly, and love servently, thou can not
doubt whether thou believe and love or not; no more than a man that is burning
hot can doubt whether he be warm: or a man that is strong and lusty can doubt
whether he be alive.

2. Many a soul lies long under doubting, through the imperfection of their
very reason, and exceeding weakness of their natural parts. Grace does usually
rather employ our faculties on better objects, than add to the degree of their
natural strength. Many honest hearts have such weak heads, that they know not
how to perform the work of self-trial: they are not able to argue the case;
they will acknowledge the premises, and yet deny the apparent conclusion. Or if
they be brought to acknowledge the conclusion, yet they do but stragger in
their concession, and hold it so weakly, that every assault may take it from
them. If GOD do not some other way supply to these men the defect of their
reason, I see not how they should have clear and settled peace.

3. Another common cause of doubting and discomfort, is, the secret maintaining
some known sin.

When a man lives in some unwarrantable practice, and GOD has often touched him
for it, and yet he continues it; it is no wonder if this person want both
assurance and comfort. One would think that a soul that is so tender as to
tremble, should be as tender of sinning: and yet sad experience tells us that
it is frequently otherwise: I have known too many such, that would complain and
yet sin, and accuse themselves, and yet sin still, yea and despair, and yet
proceed in sinning: and all arguments and means could not keep them from the
wilful committing of that sin again and again, which yet they themselves did
think would prove their destruction. Yea, some will be carried away with those
sins that seem most contrary to their dejected temper. I have known them that
would fill men's ears with the constant lamentations of their miserable state,
and accusations against themselves, as if they had been the most humble people
in the world; and yet be as passionate in the maintaining their innocence when
another accuses them, and as intolerably peevish, and tender of their
reputation in any thing they are blamed for, as if they were the proudest
persons on earth.

This cherishing sin does hinder assurance these four ways.

1. It does abate the degree of our graces, and so makes them undiscernible. 2.
It obscureth that which it destroys not; for it bears such sway, that grace
is not seen to stir, nor scare heard speak for the noise of this corruption. 3.
It puts out, or darkeneth the eye of the soul, and it benumeth and
stupifieth it. 4. But especially it provokes GOD to withdraw himself, his
comforts and the assistance of the Spirit, without which we may search long
enough before we have assurance. GOD has made a separation betwixt sin and
peace. As long as thou do cherish thy pride, thy love of the world, the
desires of the flesh, or any unchristian practice, thou expectest ^^urance and
comfort in vain. GOD will not encourage thee by his precious gifts in a course
of sinning. This worm will be gnawing upon thy conscience: It will be a
devouring canker to thy consolations. Thou may steal a spark of false comfort
from thy worldly prosperity or delight: or thou may have it from some false
opinions, or from the delusions of Satan; but from GOD thou will have no
comfort. However an Antinomian may tell thee, that thy comforts have no
dependence upon thy obedience, nor thy discomforts upon thy disobedience: and
therefore may speak peace to thee in the course of thy sinning; yet thou shall
find by experience that GOD will not. If any man set up his idols in his heart,
and put the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to a
minister, or to GOD, to enquire for assurance and comfort, GOD will answer that
man by himself, and instead of comforting him, he will set his face against
him, he will answer him according to the multitude of his idols. 5. Another
common cause of want of assurance and comfort, is, when men grow lazy in the
spiritual part of duty. As Dr. Sibbs says truly, "it is the lazy christian
commonly that lacks assurance." The way of painful duty, is the way of
fullest comfort. Chirst carries all our comforts in his hand: if we are out of
that way where Christ is to be met, we are out of the way where comfort is to
be had.
These two ways does this laziness debar us of our comforts.

1. By stopping the fountain, and causing Christ to withhold this blessing from
us. Parents use not to smile upon children in their neglects and disobedience.
So far as the Spirit is grieved, he will suspend his consolations. Assurance
and peace are Christ's great encouragements to faithfulness and obedience: and
therefore (though our obedience do not merit them, yet) they usually rise and
fall with our diligence in duty. They that ha^^ entertained the A^in^^ian
dot^ge to c^^er their i^^^^^ and viciousness, may talk their m^^s^nse agai^^^
(...) at plea^ure, but the laborious christian (...) ^xperience. As prayer must
have fa^^^ (...) ^^^rocure its success besides the (...) of Christ, so must all
other parts of our obedience. He that will say to us in that triumphing day,
Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; will
also comfort his servants in their most affectionate and spiritual duties, and
say, Well done, good and faithful servant, take this foretaste of thy
everlasting joy. It thou grow seldom and customary, and cold in duty,
especially in thy secret prayers to GOD, and yet find no abatement in thy
joys, I cannot but fear that thy joys are either carnal or diabolical.

2. The action of the soul upon such excellent objects does naturally bring
consolation with it. The very act of loving GOD in Christ does bring
inexpress^ble sweetness into the soul. The soul that is best furnished with
grace, when it is not in action, is like a lute well stringed and tuned, which
while it lies still, does make no more music than a common piece of wood: but
when it is taken up and handled by a skilful lutist, the melody is delightful.
Some degree of comfort follows every good action, as heat accompanies fire, and
as beams and influence issue from the sun: which is so true, that the very
heathens upon the discharge of a good conscience have found comfort and peace
answerable. This is praemium ante praemium: a reward before the reward.

As a man therefore that is cold should not stand still and say. I am so cold
that I have no mind to labor, but labor till his coldness be gone, and heat
excited; so he that wants the comfort of assurance, must not stand still, and
say, I am so doubtful and uncomfortable that I have no mind for duty; but ply
his duty, and exercise his graces, till he finds his doubts and discomforts
vanish.

And thus I have shown you the chief causes, why so many christians enjoy so
little assurance and consolation.

CHAP. IX. Containing Directions to Examination, and some Marks of Trial.
I WILL not stand here to lay down the directions necessary for preparation to
this duty, because you may gather them from what is said concerning the
hindrances: for the contraries of those hindrances will be the most necessary
helps. Only before you set upon it, I advise you to the observation of these
rules.

1. Come not with too peremptory conclusions of yourselves beforehand. Do not
judge too confidently before you try. 2. Be sure to be so well acquainted with
the scripture, as to know what is the tenor of the covenant of grace, and what
are the conditions of justification and glorification, and consequently what
are sound marks to try thyself by. 3. Be a constant observer of the temper and
motions of thy heart: most of the difficulty of the work does lie in true and
clear discerning of it. Be watchful in observing the actings both of grace and
corruption, and the circumstances of their actings: as, how frequent? how
violent? how strong or weak were the outward incitements? how great or small
the impediments? what delight, or loathing, or fear, or reluctance did go with
those acts?
1. Empty thy mind of all of all thy other cares and thoughts, that they do not
distract or divide thy mind: this work will be enough at once of itself,
without joining others with it.

2. Then fall down before GOD, and in hearty prayer desire the assistance of
his Spirit, to discover to thee the plain truth of thy condition, and to
enlighten thee in the whole progress of the work.

I will not digress to warn you here of the false rules and marks of trial of
which you must beware. But I will briefly adjoin some marks to try your title
to this rest.

1. Every soul that has a title to this rest, does place his happiness in it,
and make it the ultimate end of his soul. This is the first mark; which is so
plain a truth, that I need not stand to prove it. For this rest consists in
the full and glorious enjoyment of GOD: and he that makes not GOD his ultimate
end, is in heart a pagan and vile idolater.

Let me ask then; do thou truly account it thy chief happiness to enjoy the
LORD in glory, or do thou not? Can thou say with David, The Lord is my
portion? And whom have I in heaven, but thee? And whom in earth that I desire
in comparison of thee? If thou be an heir of rest, it is thus with thee. Though
the flesh will be pleading for its own delights, and the world will be creeping
into thine affection, yet in thy ordinary, settled, prevailing judgment and
affections, thou preferrest GOD before all things in the world.

1. Thou make him the end of thy desires and endeavors: the very reason why
thou hear and prayest, why thou desire to live and breathe on earth, is
this, that thou may seek the LORD. Thou seek first the kingdom of GOD and
its righteousness: though thou do not seek it so zealously as thou should;
yet has it the chief of thy desires and endeavors: and nothing else desired
or preferred before it.

2. Thou will think no labor or suffering too great to obtain it. And though
the flesh may sometimes shrink, yet art thou resolved and content to go through
all.

3. If thou be an heir of rest, thy valuation of it will be so high, and thy
affection to it so great, that thou would not exchange thy title to it, and
hopes of it, for any worldly good whatsoever. If GOD would set before thee an
eternity of earthly pleasure on one hand, and the rest of the saints on the
other, and bid thee take thy choice; thou would refuse the world, and choose
this rest.

But if thou be yet in the flesh, then it is clean contrary with thee: then
do thou in thy heart prefer thy worldly happiness before GOD; and though thy
tongue may say, that GOD is the chief good, yet thy heart does not so esteem
him. For,

1. The world is the chief end of thy desires and endeavour^; thy very heart is
set upon it; thy greatest care and labor is to maintain thy estate, or credit,
or fleshly delights. But the life to come has little of thy care or labor.
Thou did never perceive so much excellency in the unseen glory as to draw thy
heart so after it; but that little pains which thou bestowest that way, it is
but in the second place. GOD has but the world's leaving, and that time and
labor which thou can spare from the world, or those few cold and careless
thoughts which follow thy constant, earnest, and delightful thoughts of earthly
things: neither would thou do any thing at all for heaven, if thou knew
how to keep the world: but lest thou should be turned into hell, when thou
can keep the world no longer, therefore thou will do something.

2. Therefore it is that thou think the way of GOD too strict, and wilt not
be persuaded to the constant labor of walking according to the gospel-rule:
and when it comes to trial, that thou must forsake Christ or thy worldly
happiness, and the wind which was in thy back does turn in thy face, then thou will venture heaven rather than earth, and (as desperate rebels use to say)
thou will rather trust GOD's mercy for thy soul, than man's for thy body; and
so deny thy obedience to GOD.

3. And certainly if GOD would but give thee leave to live in health and wealth
for-ever on earth, thou woul^st think it a better slate than rest: let them
seek for heaven that would, thou would think this thy chiefest happiness.
This is thy case if thou be yet an unregenerate person, and have no title to
the saints rest.

The second mark which I shall give thee, to try whether thou be an heir of
rest, is this:

As thou take GOD for thy chief good, so, Thou do heartily accept of Christ
for thy only Savior and Lord to bring thee to this rest. The former mark was
the sum of the first and great command of the law of nature, [Thou shall love
the Lord thy God.] This second mark is the sum of the come and or condition of
the gospel, [Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.] And the
performance of these two is the whole sum or essence of godliness and
christianity. Observe therefore the parts of this mark, which is but a
definition of faith.

1. Do thou find that thou art naturally a lost, condemned man, for thy
breach of the first covenant? And believe that Jesus Christ is the mediator who
has made a sufficient satisfaction to the law? And hearing in the gospel that
he is offered without exception unto all, do thou heartily consent that he
alone shall be thy Savior? And no further trust to thy duties and works, than
as conditions required by him, and means appointed in subordination to him? Not
looking at them as in the least measure able to satisfy the course of the law,
or as a legal righteousness, nor any part of it? But art content to trust thy
salvation on the redemption made by Christ?

2. Art thou also content to take him for thy only Lord and King, to govern and
guide thee by his laws and Spirit? And to obey him even when he commands the
hardest duties, and those which most cross the desires of the flesh? Is it thy
sorrow when thou breakest thy resolution herein? And thy joy when thou keep
closest in obedience to him? Would thou not change thy Lord and Master for
all the world? Thus it is with every true christian. But if thou be an
unbeliever it is far otherwise. Thou may call Christ thy Lord and thy
Savior: but thou never soundest thyself so lost without him, as to drive thee
to trust him, and lay thy salvation on him alone: or at least thou did never
heartily consent that he should govern thee as thy Lord; nor resign up thy soul
and life to be ruled by him; nor take his word for the law of thy thoughts and
actions. It is like thou art content to be saved from hell by Christ when thou
die: but in the mean-time he shall command thee n^^ further than will stand
with thy credit, or pleasure, or worldly estate and ends. And if he would give
thee leave, thou had far rather live after the world and flesh, than after
the word and Spirit. And though thou may now and then have a motion or
purpose to the contrary; yet this that I have mentioned, is the ordinary desire
and choice of thine heart: and so thou art no true believer in Christ: for
though thou confess him in words, yet in works thou d^^i deny him, being
disobedient, and to every good work a disapprover and a reprobate, Tit. i. 16.
This is the case of those that shall be shut out of the saints rest.

CHAP. X. The Reason of the Saints Afflictions here.
A Further use which we must make of the present doctrine is, To inform us why
the people of GOD suffer so much in this life. What wonder? when you see their
rest does yet remain: they are not yet come to their resting place. We would
all fain have continual prosperity, because it is pleasing to the flesh; but we
consider not the unreasonableness of such desires. We are like children, who if
they see any thing which their appetite desires, cry for it: and if you tell
them that it is unwholesome, or hurtful for them, they are never the more
quieted; or if you go about to heal any sore that they have, they will
notendure you to hurt them, though you tell them, that they cannot otherwise be
healed; their sense is too strong for their reason, and therefore reason does
little persuade them. Even so it is with us when GOD is affticting us: he
gives us reasons why we must bear it, so that our reason is often convinced and
satisfied, and yet we cry and complain still: it is not reason, but ease that
we must have: spiritual remedies may cure the spirit's maladies; but that will
not content the flesh.

But methinks christians should have another palate than that of the flesh, to
try and relish providence by: GOD has given them the Spirit to subdue the
flesh. And therefore I shall here give them some reasons of GOD'S dealing in
their present sufferings, whereby the equity and mercy therein may appear: and
they shall be only such as are drawn from the reference that these afflictions
have to our rest; which being a christian's happiness, and ultimate end, will
direct him in judging of all estates and means.

1. Consider then, That labor and trouble are the common way to rest, both in
the course of nature and of grace. Can there possibly be rest without motion
and weariness? Do you not travel and toil first, and then rest afterward? The
day for labor goes first, and then the night for rest does follow. Why should
we desire the course of grace to be perverted, any more than we would do the
course of nature? GOD did once dry up the sea to make a passage for his people;
and once made the sun in the firmament to stand still: but must he do so
always? Or as often as we would have him? It is his established decree, That
through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven, Acts xiv.
22. And that if we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him, 2 Timothy
ii. 12. And what are we, that GOD'S statutes should be reversed for our
pleasure? As Bildad said to Job, Chap. xviii. 4. Shall the earth be forsaken
for thee? or the rock be removed out of his place? So, must God pervert his
established order for thee?

2. Consider also, That afflictions are exceeding useful to us, to keep us from
mistaking our resting place, and so taking up short of it. A christian's motion
heaven-wards is voluntary, and not constrained. Those means therefore are most
prositable to him, which help his understanding and will in this prosecution.
The most dangerous mistake that our souls are capable of, is, to take the
creature for GOD, and earth for heaven. And yet, alas, how common is this!
Though we are ashamed to speak so much with our tongues, yet how often do our
hearts say, It is best being here! And how contented are we with an earthly
portion! So that I fear, GOD would displease most of us more to afflict us
here, and promise us rest hereafter, than to give us our hearts desire on
earth, though he had never made us a promise of heaven. As if the creature
without GOD, were better than GOD without the creature. Alas, how apt are we,
like foolish children, when we are busy at our sports and worldly employments,
to forget both our father and our home! Therefore it is a hard thing for a rich
man to enter into heaven, because it is hard for him to value it more than
earth, and not think he is well already. Come to a man that has the world at
will, and tell him, This is not your happiness, you have higher things to look
after; and how little will he regard you? But when affliction comes, it speaks
convincingly, and will be heard when preachers cannot.

Sometimes a sincere man begins to be lifted up with applause; and sometimes
being in health and prosperity, he has lost his relish of Christ, and the joys
above; till GOD break in upon his riches, and seatter them abroad, or upon his
children, or upon his conscience, or upon the health of his body, and break
down his mount which he thought so strong: and then when he lies in Manassah's
fetters, or is fastened to his bed with pining sickness, O what an opportunity
has the Spirit to plead with his soul! When the world is worth nothing, then
heaven is worth something.

How often have I been ready to think myself at home, till sickness has roundly
told me, I was mistaken! And how apt yet to fall into the same disease, which
prevails till it be removed by the same cure! If our dear Lord did not put
these thorns into our bed, we should sleep out our lives, and lose our glory.

3. Consider, afflictions are GOD'S most effectual means, to keep us from
straggling out of the way to our rest. If he had not set a hedge of thor^s on
the right hand, and on the left, we should hardly keep the way to heaven: if
there be but one gap open without these thorns, how ready are we to turn out at
it? But when we cannot go astray, but these thorns will prick us, perhaps we
will be content to hold the way. When we grow wanton, or worldly, or proud;
what a notable means is sickness, or other affliction, to reduce us? It is
every christian, as well as Luther, that may call affliction one of his best
schoolmasters. Many a one, as well as David, may say by experience, Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy precepts. Many a thousand
poor recovered sinners may cry, O healthful sickness! O comfortable sorrows! O
gainful losses! O enriching poverty! O blessed day, that ever I was afflicted!
It is not only the pleasant streams, and the green pastures, but his rod and
staff also that are our comfort. Though I know it is the word and Spirit that
do the work; yet certainly the time of suffering is so opportune a season, that
the same word will take them then, which before was scarce observed: it does so
unbolt the door of the heart, that a minister or a friend may then be heard,
and the word may have easier entrance to the affections.

4. Consider, afflictions are GOD'S most effectual means, to make us mend our
pace in the way to our rest. They are his rod, and his spur: what sluggard will
not awake and stir when he feels them? It were well if mere love would
prevail with us, and that we were rather drawn to heaven, than driven: but
seeing our hearts are so bad, that mercy will not do it; it is better we be put
on with the sharpest scourge, than loiter out our time till the doors are shut.

O what a difference is there betwixt our prayers in health and in sickness!
betwixt our prosperity and adversity-repentings! He that before had not a tear
to shed, or a groan to utter, now can sob, and sigh, and weep: he that was wont
to lie like a block in prayer, and scarce minded what he said to GOD: now
affliction presses him down, how earnestly can he beg! How does he mingle his
prayers and his tears! And cry out, what a person he will be, If GOD will but
hear him, and deliver him! Alas! if we did not sometimes feel the spur, what a
slow pace would most of us hold toward heaven!

Seeing then what our vile natures require, why should we be unwilling GOD
should do us good by a sharp means? Sure that is the best dealing for us which
surest and soonest does further us for heaven. I leave thee, christian, to
judge by thy own experience, whether thou do not go more watchfully, and
lively, and speedily in thy way to rest, in thy sufferings, than thou do in
thy more pleasing and prosperous state.

Lastly consider, GOD does seldom give his people so sweet a fore-taste of
their future rest, as in their deep afflictions. He keeps his most precious
cordials for the time of our greatest faintings and dangers. GOD is not so
lavish of his choice favors as to bestow them unseasonably: he gives them at
so fit a time, when he knows they are needful, and will be valued; and when
he is sure to be thanked for them, and his people rejoiced by them. Especially,
when our sufferings are more directly for his cause, then does be seldom fail
of sweetening the bitter cup. Therefore have the martyrs been possessors of the
highest joys, and therefore were they so ambitious of martyrdom. I do not think
that Paul and Silas did ever sing more joyfully, than when they were sore with
scourgings, and fast in the inner prison, with their feet in the stocks. When
did Christ preach such comforts to his disciples, and assure them of his
providing them mansions with himself, but when he was ready to leave them, and
their hearts were sorrowful because of his departure? When did he appear among
them, and say, peace be unto you, but when they were shut up together for fear
of the persecuting Jews? When did Stephen see heaven opened, but when he was
giving up his life for the testimony of Jesus? And though we be never put to
the suffering of martyrdom, yet GOD knows that in our natural sufferings we
need support.

Seeing then that the time of affliction, is the time of our most pure,
spiritual, and heavenly joy, for the most part; why should a christian think it
so bad a time? Is not that our best estate, wherein we have most of GOD? Why
else do we desire to come to heaven? If we look for a heaven of fleshly
delights, we shall find ourselves mistaken. Conclude then, that affliction is
not so bad a state in our way to rest, as the flesh would make it. Are we wiser
than GOD? Does not he know what is good for us better than we? Or is he not as
careful of our good, as we are of our own? Ah woe to us if he were not much
more! And if he did not love us better than we love either him or ourselves!

But let us hear a little what it is that we can object.

1. Oh, says one, I could bear any other affliction save this: if GOD had
touched me in any thing else, I could have undergone it patiently; but it is my
deare^t friend, or child, or wife, or my health itself.

I answer it seems GOD has hit the right vein, where thy most instamed,
distempered blood did lie: it is his constant course to pull down men's idols,
and take away that which is dearer to them than himself. There it is that his
jealousy is kindled; and there it is that the soul is most endangered. If GOD
should have taken from thee that which thou can let go for him, and not that
which thou can not; or have afflicted thee where thou can bear it, and not
where thou can not; thy idol would neither have been discovered nor removed;
this would neither have been a sufficient trial to thee, nor a cure, but have
confirmed thee in thy idolatry.

Object. 2. Oh, but says another, if GOD would but deliver me out of it at
last, I could be content to bear it: but I have an incurable sickness, or I am
like to live and die in poverty, or disgrace, or distress.

I answer, 1. Is it nothing that he has promised, it shall work for thy good?
Romans viii. 28. and that with the affliction he will make a way to escape? that
he will be with thee in it? and deliver thee in the fittest manner and season?

2. Is it not enough that thou art sure to be delivered at death, and that with
so full a deliverance? Oh, what cursed unbelief does this discover in our
hearts! That we would be more thankful to be turned back again into the stormy
sea of the world, than to be safely and speedily landed at our rest! And would
be more glad of a few years inferior mercies at a distance, than to enter upon
the eternal inheritance with Christ! Do we call GOD our chief good, and heaven
our happiness? and yet is it no mercy or deliverance to be taken hence, and put
into that possession?

Object. 3. Oh, but says another, if my affliction did not disable me for
duty, I could bear it; but it makes me useless and utterly unprofitable.

Answ. 1. For that duty which tends to thy own benefit, it does not disable
thee; but is the greatest help that thou can expect. Thou usest to complain
of coldness, and dullness, and worldliness, and security: if affliction will not
help thee against all these, by warning, quickening, rouzing thy spirit, I know
not what will. Sure thou will repent thoroughly, and pray fervently, and mind
GOD and heaven more seriously, either now or never.

2. As for duty to others, and service to the church, it is not thy dety when
GOD does disable thee. He may call thee out of the vineyard in this respect,
even before he call thee by death. If he lay thee in the grave, and put others
in thy place, is this any wrong to thee? So if he call thee out before thy
death, and set others to do the work, should thou not be as well content?
Must GOD do all the work by thee? Has he not many others as dear to him, and
as fit for the employment? But alas, what deceitfulness lies in these hearts!
When we have time, and health, and opportunity to work, then we loiter, and do
our Master but poor service: but when he lays affliction upon us, then we
complain that he disableth us for his work, and yet perhaps we are still
negligent in that part of the work which we can do. So, when we are in health
and prosperity, we forget the public, and are careless of other men's miseries
and wants, and mind almost nothing but ourselves; but when GOD afflict^th us,
though he excite us more to duty for ourselves, yet we complain that he
disableth us for our duty to others: as if on a sudden we were grown so
charitable, that we regard other men's souls more man our own! But is not the
hand of flesh in all this dissimulation, pleading its own cause? What pride of
heart is this, to think that other men cannot do the work as well as we! Or
that GOD cannot see to his church, and provide for his people, without us!

Object. 4. Oh, but says another, it is my friends that are my afflicters:
they disclaim me, and will scarce look at me; they censure me, and backbite me,
and slander me, and look upon me with a disdainful eye; if it were others, I
could bear it, I look for no better from them: but when those that are my
delight, and that I looked for comfort and refreshing from, when those are as
thorns in my sides, who can bear it?

Answ. 1. Whoever is the instrument, the affliction is from GOD, and the
provoking cause from thyself: and were it not fitter that thou look more to GOD
and thyself?

2. Do thou not know, that good men are still sinful in part? and that their
hearts are naturally deceitful, and desperately wicked, as well as others?
Learn therefore a better lesson from the prophet, Mich. vii. 5, 6, 7. Trust not
(too much) in a friend, nor put confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy
mouth from her that lies in thy bosom: but look rather for the LORD, and wait
for the GOD of thy salvation.

3. It is likely thou have given that love and trust to men, which was due only
to GOD; or which thou have denied him: and then no wonder if he chastise thee
by them. If we would use our friends as friends, GOD would make them our helps
and comforts: but when once we make them our gods, by excessive love and trust,
then he suffers them to be our accusers and tormentors: it is more safe to me
to have any creature a satan than a god: to be tormented by them than to
idolize them. Till thou have learned to suffer from the good, as well as the
ungodly, never look to live a contented or comfortable life, nor ever think
thou have truly learned the art of suffering.

Object. 5. Oh but if I had that consolation, which you say GOD reserveth for
our suffering times, I should suffer more contentedly: but I do not perceive
any such thing.

Answ. 1. The more you suffer for righteousness-sake, the more of this blessing
you may expect; and the more you suffer for your own evil-doing, the longer you
must look to stay till that sweetness come. When we have by our folly provoked
GOD to chastise us, shall we presently look that he should fill us with
comfort? That were (as Mr. Paul Bayn says) to make affliction to be no
affliction. What good would the bitterness do us, if it be presently drowned in
that sweetness? It is well in such sufferings, if you have but supporting
grace; and if your sufferings are sanctified to work out your sin.

2. Do you not neglect or resist the comforts which you desire? GOD has filled
precepts and promises, and other of his providence, with matter of comfort: if
you overlook all these, and observe one cross more than a thousand mercies, who
makes you uncomfortable but yourselves? If you resolve you will not be
comfortable as long as any thing aileth your flesh, you may stay till death
before you have comfort.

3. Have your afflictions wrought kindly with you, and fitted you for comfort?
Have they humbled you, and brought you to a faithful confession and reformation
of your beloved sin? and made you set close to your neglected duties? and
weaned your hearts from their former idols? and brought them unfeignedly to
take GOD for their portion and their rest? If this be not done, how can you
expect comfort? Should GOD bind up the sore while it festereth at the bottom?
It is not mere suffering that prepares you for comfort; but the success and
fruit of suffering upon your hearts.

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to those that have got Assurance of this Rest, that
they would do all they possibly can to help others to it.
HAS GOD set before us such a glorious prize as this everlasting Rest, and
made man capable of such an inconceivable happiness? Why then do not all the
children of this kingdom bestir themselves more to help others to the enjoyment
of it? Alas, how little are poor souls about us, beholden to the most of us! We
see the glory of the kingdom, and they do not: we see the misery and torment of
those that miss of it, and they do not: we see them wandering quite out of the
way, and know if they hold on, they can never come there; and they discern not
this themselves. And yet we will not set upon them seriously, and show them
their danger and error, and help to bring them into the way that they may live.
Alas, how few christians are there to be found, that live as men that are made
to do good, and that set themselves with all their might to the saving of
souls! No thanks to us if heaven be not empty, and if the souls of our brethren
perish not for-ever.

But because this is a duty which so many neglect, and so few are convinced
that GOD does expect it at their hands, and yet a duty of so high concernment
to the glory of GOD, and the happiness of men; I will speak of it somewhat the
more largely, and show you, 1. Wherein it does consist. 2. What is the cause
that it is so neglected. 3. Give some considerations to persuade you to the
performance of it, and others to the bearing of it. 4. Apply this more
particularly to some persons whom it does nearly concern.


1. I would have you well understand what is this work which I am persuading
you to. Know then on the negative.

1. It is not to invade the office of the ministry, and every man to turn a
public preacher. I would not have you go beyond the bounds of your calling: we
see by daily experience, what fruits those men's teaching does bring forth, who
run uncalled of GOD, and thrust themselves into the place of public teachers,
thinking themselves the fittest for the work in the pride of their hearts,
while they had need to be taught the very principles of religion: how little
does GOD bless the labors of these self-conceited intruders, even if they be
ordained!

2. Neither do I persuade you to a zealous promoting of factions and parties,
and venting of uncertain opinions, which men's salvation is little concerned
in. Alas, what advantage has the devil always got in the church by this
imposture! The time that should be employed in drawing men's souls from sin to
Christ, is employed in drawing them to opinions and parties: when men are
fallen in love with their own conceits, and think themselves the wisest, how
diligently do they labor to get them followers? as if to make a man a
proselyte to their opinions, were as happy a work as to convert him to Christ!
and when they fall among the lighter, ignorant sort of men, whose religion is
all in the brain, and on their tongue, they seldom fail of success. These men
shall shortly know, that to bring a man to the knowledge and love of Christ, is
another kind of work, than to bring him to be baptized again, or to be of such
a church, or such a side. Unhappy are the souls that are tal^ (...) their
snare; who when they have spent their lives in contending for the
circumstantials of religion, which should have been spent in studying and
loving the LORD JESUS, do in the end reap an empty harvest, suitable to their
empty profession.

3. Nor do I persuade you to speak against men's faults behind their backs, and
be silent before their faces, as the common custom of the world is. To tell
other men of their faults, tends little to their reformation, if they hear it
not themselves. To whisper men's faults to others, as it comes not from love,
or from an honest principle, so usually does it produce no good effect: for if
the party hear not of it, it cannot better him; if he do, he will take it but
as the reproach of an enemy, and not as the faithful counsel of a friend, and
as that which is spoken to make him odious, and not to make him virtuous; it
tends not to provoke to godliness, but to raise contention; for a whisperer
separateth chief friends. And how few shall we find that make conscience of
this horrible sin? or that will confess it, and bewail it, when they are
reprehended for it? especially if men are speaking of their enemies, or those
that have wronged them; or whom they suppose to have wronged them, or if it be
of one that eclipseth their glory, or that stands in the way of their gain or
esteem: or if it be one that differs from them in judgment; or of one that is
commonly spoke against by others; who is it that makes any conscience of back
biting such as these? And you shall ever observe, that the forwarder they are
to back biting, the more backward always to faithful admonishing; and none
speak less of a man's faults to his face, than chose that speak most of them
behind his back.

So far am I from persuading therefore to this preposterous course, that I
would advise you to oppose it wherever you meet with it. See that you never
hear a man speaking against his neighbor behind his back (without some special
cause or call) but presently rebuke him: ask him, whether he has spoke those
things in a way of love to his face? if he has not, ask him, how he dare to
pervert GOD'S prescribed order, who commands to rebuke our neighbor plainly,
and to tell him his fault first in private, and then before witness, till he
see whether he will be won, or not? And how he dare do as he would not be done
by?

The duty therefore that I would press you to is of another nature, and it
consists in these things following:

1. That you get your hearts affected with the misery of your brethren's souls:
be compassionate toward them; yearn after their salvation. If you did
earnestly long after their conversion, and your hearts were fully set to do
them good, it would set you on work, and GOD would usually bless it. 2. Take
all opportunities that possibly you can, to instruct and help them to the
attaining of salvation. And lest you should not know how to manage this work,
let me tell you more particularly what you are herein to do. 1. If it be an
ignorant person you have to deal with, who is an utter stranger to the
mysteries of religion, and to the work of regeneration, the first thing you
have to do, is, to acquaint him with these doctrines: labor to make him
understand wherein man's chief happiness does consist; and how far he was once
possessed of it; and what law and covenant GOD then made with him; and how he
broke it; and what penalty he incurred, and what misery he brought himself into
thereby: teach him what need men had of a Redeemer; and how Christ in mercy did
interpose, and bear the penalty, and what covenant now he has made with man;
and on what terms only salvation is now to be attained; and what course Christ
takes to draw men to himself; and what are the riches and privileges that
believers have in him.
If when he understands these things, he be not moved by them: or if you find
that the stop lies in his will and affections, and in the hardness of his
heart, and in the interest that the flesh and the world have got in him; then
show him the excellency of the glory which he neglects, and the
intolerableness of the loss of it, and the extremity and eternity of the
torments of the damned, and how certainly they must endure them; and how just
it is for their wilful refusals of grace; and how heinous a sin it is to reject
such free and abundant mercy, and to tread under foot the blood of the
covenant: show him the certainty, nearness and terrors of death and judgment,
and the vanity of all things below, which now he is taken up with; and how
little they will bestead him in that time of his extremity. Show him that by
nature he himself is a child of wrath, an enemy to GOD; and by actual sin much
more: show him the vile and heinous nature of sin; the absolute necessity he
stands in of a Savior; the freeness of the promise; the fullness of Christ;
the sufficiency of his satisfaction; his readiness to receive all that are
willing to be his; and the authority and dominion which he has purchased over
us; show him also the absolute necessity of regeneration, faith and holiness,
how impossible it is to have salvation by Christ without these; and what they
are, and the true nature of them.

If when he understands all this, you find his soul enthralled in false
hopes, persuading himself that he is a true believer, and pardoned, and
reconciled, and shall be saved by Christ, and all this upon false grounds,
(which is a common case) then urge him hard to examine his state, show him the
necessity of trying; the danger of being deceived; the commonness and easiness
of mistaking through the deceitfulness of the heart; the extreme madness of
putting it to a blind venture; or of resting in negligent or wilful
uncertainty: help him in trying himself: produce some undeniable evidences from
scripture; ask him whether these be in him or not? Whether ever he round such
workings or dispositions in his heart? Urge him to a rational answer: do not
leave him till you have convinced him of his misery; and then seasonably and
wisely show him the remedy.

If he produce some gifts, or duties, or work, know to what end he does produce
them: if to join with Christ in composing him a righteousness, show him how
vain and destructive they are: if it be by way of evidence to prove his title
to Christ; show him wherein the life of christianity does consist, and how far
he must go further, if he will be Christ's disciple. In the mean-time, that he
be not discouraged with hearing of so high a measure, show him the way by which
he must attain it: be sure to draw him to the use of all means: set him on
hearing and reading the word, calling upon GOD, accompanying the godly:
persuade him to leave his actual sin, and to get out of all ways of temptation;
especially to forsake ungodly company; and to wait patiently on GOD in the use
of means; and show him the strong hopes that in so doing he may have a
blessing; this being the way that GOD will be found in.

If you perceive him possessed with any prejudices against the way of holiness,
show him their falsehood, and with wisdom and meekness answer his objections.

If he be addicted to delay duties he is convinced of, or laziness and
stupidity endanger his soul, then lay it on more powerfully, and set home upon
his heart the most piercing considerations, and labor to fasten them as thorns
in his conscience, that he may find no ease or rest till he change his estate.

But because in all works the manner of doing them is of greatest moment, and
the right performance does much further the success; I will here adjoin a few
directions, which you must be sure to observe in this work of exhortation; for
it is not every advice that uses to succeed, nor any manner of doing it that
will serve the turn. Observe therefore these rules:

1. Set upon the work sincerely, and with right intentions. Let thy end be the
glory of GOD in the party's salvation. Do it not to get a name or esteem to
thyself; or to bring men to depend upon thee; or to get thee many followers: do
not as many parents and masters will do, viz. rebuke their children and
servants for those sins that displease them, and are against their profit or
their humors, as disobedience, unthriftiness, unmannerliness; but never seek
in the right way that GOD has appointed to save their souls. But be sure, the
main end be to recover them from misery, and bring them into the way of eternal
rest.

2. Do it speedily: as you would not have them delay their return, so do not
thou delay to seek their return. You are purposing long to speak to such an
ignorant neighbor, and to deal with such a scandalous sinner, and yet you have
never done it. Alas, he runs on the score all this while; he goes deeper in
debt; wrath is heaping up; sin takes rooting: custom does more fasten him;
engagements to sin grow stronger and more numerous; conscience grows seared;
the heart grows hardened; while you delay, the devil rules and rejoiceth;
Christ is shut out; the Spirit is repulsed; GOD is daily dishonored; his law
is violated; he is without a servant, and that service from him which he should
have; time runs on; the day of visitation hastes; death and judgment are at
the door: and what if the man die and miss of heaven, while you are purposing
to teach him and help him to it? If in case of his bodly distress, you must not
bid him go and come again tomorrow, when you have it by you; how much less may
you delay the succor of his soul? if once death snatch him away he is then out
of the reach of your charity. That physician is no better than a murderer, that
negligently delayeth, till his patient be dead or past cure. Delay in duty is a
great degree of disobedience, though you afterward perform it. It shows an ill
heart that is undisposed to the work. O how many a poor sinner perishes or
grows rooted, and next to incurable in sin, while we are purposing to seek
their recovery! Opportunities last not always. When thou hear that the
sinner is dead, or removed, or grown obstinate; will not conscience say to
thee, how know thou but thou might have prevented the damnation of a
soul? Lay by excuses then, and all lesser business, and obey GOD'S command,
exhort one another daily, while it is called today, lest any be hardined
through the decei^fulness of sin.

3. Let thy exhortation proceed from compassion and love, and let the manner of
it clearly show the person thou dealest with, that it does. It is not jeering,
or scorning, or reproaching a man for his fault, that is a likely way to work
his reformation: nor is it the right way to convert him to GOD, to rail at him,
and vilify him with words of disgrace. Men will take them for their enemies
that thus deal with them: and the words of an enemy are little persuading. Lay
by your passion therefore, and go to poor sinners with tears in your eyes, that
they may see you indeed believe them to be miserable; and that you unfeignedly
pity their case: deal with them with earnest humble entreatings. Let them see
that your very bowels yearn over them, and that it is the very desire of your
hearts to do them good: let them perceive that you have no other end but the
procuring their everlasting happiness; and that it is your sense of their
danger, and your love to their souls that forces you to speak; even because you
know the terrors of the LORD, and for fear lest you should see them in eternal
torments. Say to them, Why, friend, you know it is no advantage of my own that
I seek. The way to please you, and to keep your friendship, were to sooth you
in your own way, or to let you alone; but love will not suffer me to see you
perish, and be silent; I seek nothing at your hands, but that which is
necessary to your own happiness. It is yourself that will have the gain and
comfort, if you come in to Christ. If men would thus go to every ignorant
wicked neighbor they have, and thus deal with them, O what blessed fruit
should we quickly see!

I am ashamed to hear some lazy hypocritical wretches revile their poor
ignorant neighbors, and separate from their company, and judge them unfit for
their society, before ever they once tried them with this compassionate
exhortation! O you little know what a prevailing course this were like to
prove! And how few of the vilest drunkards or swearers would prove so
obstinate, as wholly to reject or despise the exhortations of love! I know it
must be GOD that must change men's hearts! but I know also that GOD works by
means, and when he means to prevail with men, he usually fitteth the means
accordingly, and stirs up men to plead with them in a prevailing way, and so
sets in with his grace, and makes it successful. Certainly, those that have
tried can tell you by experience, that there is no way so prevailing with men,
as the way of compassion and love. So much of these as they discern in your
exhortation, usually so much does it succeed with their hearts; and therefore I
beseech those that are faithful, to practice this course. Alas, we see most
people among us, yea those that would seem godly, cannot bear a reproof that
comes not in meekness and love! if there be the least passion, or relish of
disgrace in it, they are ready to spit in your face. Yea, if you do not sweeten
your reproof with fair words, they cannot digest it, but their heart will rise
up against you, instead of a thankful submission and a reformation. O that it
were not too evident that the Pharisee is yet alive in the breasts of many
thousands that seem religious, even in this one point of bearing plain and
sharp reproof! Thy bind heavy b^r^^^^ and grievons to be borne, and lay them on
men's should (...); but they themselves will not move them with one of their
fingers, Matt. xxiii. 4. So far are they from doing, in this, as they would be
done by.

4. Another direction I would give you, is this: do it with all possible
plainness and faithfulness. Do not dally with men, and hide from them their
misery or danger, or any part of it. Do not make their sins less than they are;
nor speak of them in extenuating language. Do not encourage them in a false
hope, no more than you would discourage the found hopes of the righteous. If
you see his case dangerous, tell him plainly of it: Neighbor, I am afraid GOD
has not yet renewed your soul; and that it is yet a stranger to the great work
of regeneration and sanctification: I doubt you are not yet recovered from the
power of Satan to GOD, nor brought out of the state of wrath which you were
born in, and have lived in: I doubt you have not chosen Christ above all, nor
set your heart upon him, nor unfeignedly taken him for your sovereign Lord. If
you had, sure you durst not so easily disobey him: you could not so neglect him
and his worship in your family and in public: you could not so eagerly follow
the world, and talk of almost nothing but the things of this world, while
Christ is seldom mentioned by you. If you were in Christ, you would become a
new creature; old things would be passed away, and all things would become new:
you would have new thoughts, and new talk, and new company, and new endeavors,
and a new conversation: certainly without these you can never be saved: you may
think otherwise, and hope better as long as you will, but your hopes will
deceive you, and perish with you. Alas! it is not as you will, nor as I will,
who shall be saved, but it is a GOD will; and GOD has told us, that without
holiness none shall see him: and except we be born again, we cannot enter into
his kingdom. And that all that would not have Christ to reign over them, shall
be brought forth and destroyed before him: O therefore look to your state in
time.

Thus must you deal roundly and faithfully with men, if ever you intend to do
them good. It is not hovering at a distance in a general discourse that will
serve the turn: it is not in curing men's souls, as in curing their bodies,
where they must not know their danger, lest it sadden them, and hinder the
cure. They are here agents in their own cure, and if they know not their
misery, they will never bewail it, nor know how much need they have of a
Savior: if they know not the worst, they will not labor to prevent it; but
will sit still or loiter till they drop into perdition, and will trifle out
their time till it be too late: and therefore speak to men, as Christ to the
Pharisees, till they knew that he meant them. Deal plainly, or you do but
deceive and destroy them.

5. And as you must do it plainly, so also seriously, zealously, and
effectually. The exceeding stupidity and deadness of men's hearts is such, that
no other dealing will ordinarily work. You must call loud to awake a man in a
swoon or lethargy. If you speak to the common sort of men, of the evil of their
sin, of their need of Christ, of the danger of their souls, and of the
necessity of regeneration, they will wearily and unwillingly give you the
hearing, and put off all with a sigh, or a few good wishes, and say, GOD
forgive us, we are all sinners, and there is an end. If ever you will do them
good therefore, you must sharpen your exhortation, and set it home, and follow
it, till you have rouzed them up, and made them begin to look about them. Let
them know that thou speak not to them of indifferent things, nor about
children's games, or matters of a few days or years continuance, nor yet about
matters of uncertainty, which may never come to pass: but it is about the
saving and damning of their souls and bodies; and whether they shall be blessed
with Christ, or tormented with devils, and that for-ever and ever; it is, how
to stand before GOD in judgment, and what answer to give, and how they are like
to speed; and this judgment and eternal state they shall very shortly see, they
are almost at it; yet a few more nights and days, and they shall be at that
last day: a few more breaths, they have to breathe, and they shall breathe
their last; and then as certainly shall they see that mighty change, as the
heaven is over their heads, and the earth under their feet. O labor to make
men know, that it is mad jesting about salvation or damnation; and that heaven
and hell are not matters to be played with, or passed over with a few careless
thoughts! It is most certain that one of these days thou shall be either in
everlasting, unchangeable joy or torment; and does it not awake thee? Are there
so few that find the way of death? Is it so hard to escape? so easy to
miscarry? And that wile we fear nothing, but think all is well? And yet you sit
still and trifle! Why, what do you mean? What do you think on? The world is
passing away: its pleasures are fading: its honors are leaving you: its
profits will prove unprofitable to you: heaven or hell are a little before you:
GOD is just, and jealous; his threatenings are true: the great day of his
judgment will be terrible: your time runs on: your lives are uncertain: you are
far behind hand: you have loitered long: your case is dangerous: your souls are
far gone in sin: you are strange to GOD: you are hardened in evil customs: you
have no assurance of comfort to show: if you die tomorrow, how unready a^^
you! And with what terror will your souls go out of your bodies! And do you yet
loiter? Why, consider, GOD stands all this while waiting your leisure: his
patience bears: his justice forbeareth: his mercy entreats you: Christ
stands offering you his blood and merits: you may have him freely, and life
with him: the Spirit is persuading: conscience is accusing and urging you:
ministers are praying for you, and calling upon you: Satan stands waiting when
justice will cut off your lives, that he may have you: this is your time: now
or never. What! had you rather lose heaven than your profits or pleasures? Had
you rather burn in hell, than repent on earth? Had you rather howl and roar
there, than pray day and night for mercy here? Or have devils your tormentors,
than Christ your governor? Will you renounce your part in GOD and glory, rather
than renounce your sins? Do you think a holy life too much for heaven: or too
dear a course to prevent endless misery? Oh friends, what do you think of these
things? GOD has made you men, and end^ed you with reason: do you renounce your
reason where you should chiefly use it? In this manner you must deal roundly
and seriously with men. Alas! it is not a few dull words between jest and
earnest, between sleep and waking, as it were, that will waken an ignorant
dead-hearted sinner. When a dull hearer, and a dull speaker meet together, a
dead heart, and a dead exhortation; it is unlike to have a lively effect. If a
man fall down in a swoon, you will not stand trifling with him, but lay hands
on him presently, and snatch him up, and rub him, and call aloud to him: if a
house be on fire, you will not in a cold strain go to tell your neighbor of
it, or make an oration of the nature and danger of fire; but you will run out
and cry, fire, fire: matters of moment must be seriously dealt with. To tell a
man of his sins so softly as Eli did his sons, or reprove him so gently as
Jehoshaphat did Ahab, Let not the king say so, does usually as much harm as
good. I am persuaded the very manner of some men's reproof and exhortation,
has hardened many a sinner in the way of destruction. To tell them of sin, or
of heaven or hell, in a dull, easy, careless language, does make men think you
are not in good earnest; but scarce think yourselves such things are true. O
sirs, deal with sin as sin, and speak of heaven and hell as they are, and not
as if you were in jest. I confess I have failed much in this myself, the LORD
lay it not to my charge! Lothness to displease men, makes us undo them.

6. Yet lest you run into extremes, I advise you to do it with discretion. Be
as serious as you can; but yet with wisdom. And especially you must be wise in
these things following:

1. In choosing the fittest season for your exhortation; not to deal with men
when they are in a passion, or where they will take it for a disgrace. Men
should observe, when sinners are fittest to hear instructions. Physic must not
be given at all times, but in season. It is an excellent example that Paul
gives us, Gal. ii. 2. He communicated the gospel to them, yet privately to
them of reputation, lest he should run in vain. Some men would take this to be
a sinful complying with their corruption, to yield so far to their pride and
bashfulness, as to teach them only in private, because they would be ashamed to
own the truth in public: but Paul knew how great a hinderance men's reputation
is to their entertaining of the truth, and that the remedy must not only be
fitted to the disease, but also to the strength of the patient, and that in so
doing, the physician is not guilty of favoring the disease, but is
praiseworthy for taking the right way to cure. Means will work easily if you
take the opportunity; when the earth is soft, the plough will enter. Take a man
when he is under affliction, or in the house of mourning, or newly stirred by
some moving sermon, and then set it home, and you may do him some good.
Christian faithfulness does require us, not only to do good when it falls in
our way, but to watch for opportunities. 2. Be wise also in suiting your
exhortation to the quality and temper of the person. All meats are not for all
stomachs: one man will vomit that up which another will digest. 1. If it be a
learned, or ingenious rational man, you must deal more by convincing arguments,
and less by passionate persuasions. 2. If it be one that is both ignorant and
stupid, there is need of both. 3. If one that is convinced, but not converted,
you must use most those means that roase the affections. 4. If they be
obstinate and secure, you must reprove them sharply. 5. If they be of timorous,
tender natures, they must be tenderly dealt with.
A^l cannot bear that rough dealing that some (...). Love and plainness, and
seriousness, take with all: but words of terror some can scarce bear. 3. You
must be wise also in using the aptest expressions. Many a minister does deliver
most excellent matter in such harsh and unseeming language, that it makes the
hearers loath the food that they should live by, and laugh at a sermon that
might make them quake: especially if they be men of curious ears, and carnal
hearts, and have more wit and parts than the speaker. And so it is in private
exhortation as well as public: if you clothe the most amiable truth in the
sordid rags of unbeseeming language, you will make men disdain it, though it be
the offspring of GOD, and of the highest nature. 4. Let all your reproofs and
exhortations be backed with the authority of GOD. Let the sinner be convinced
that you speak not from yourselves or of your own head. Show them the very
words of scripture for what you say: press them with the truth and authority of
GOD; ask them, Whether they believe that this is his word, and that his word is
true. So much of GOD as appears in our words, so much will they take. The
voice of man is contemptible: but the voice of GOD is awful and terrible. Be
sure therefore to make them know, that you speak nothing but what GOD has
spoken first. 5. You must also be frequent with men in this duty of
exhortation; it is not once or twice that usually will prevail. If GOD himself
must be constan^ly solicited, as if importunity could prevail with him when
nothing else can; and therefore requires us always to fray, and not to saint:
the same course, no doubt, will be most provailing with men. Therefore we are
commanded, to exhort one another daily, and with all long-suffering: the fire
is not always brought out of the flint at one stroke: nor men's affections
kindled at the first exhortation. And if they were, yet if they be not
followed, they will soon grow cold again. Weary out sinners with your loving
and earnest entreaties; follow them, and give them no rest in their sin. This
is true charity, and this is the way to save men's souls; and a course that
will afford you comfort upon a review. 6. Strive to bring all your exhortations
to an issue; stick not in the work done, but look after the success. I have
long observed it in ministers and private men, that if they speak never so
convincing words, and yet all their care is over when they have done their
speech, pretending that having done their duty, they leave the issue to GOD:
these men seldom prosper in their labors: but those whose very heart is set
upon the work, and that long to see it take for the hearers conversion, and use
to enquire how it speeds, GOD usually blesses their labors, though more weak.
Labor therefore to drive all your speeches to the desired issue. If you are
reproving sin, cease not till (if it may be) you have got the sinner to promise
you to leave it, and to avoid the occasions of it: if you are exhorting to a
duty, urge the party to promise you presently to set upon it. If you would draw
them to Christ, leave not, till you have made them confess, that their present
state is miserable, and not to be rested in: and till they have subscribed to
the necessity of a change; and promised you to fall close to the use of means.
O that all christians would be persuaded to take this course with all their
neighbors that are yet enslaved to sin, and strangers to Christ! 7. Lastly, Be
sure your example exhort as well as your words. Let them see you constant in
all the duties you persuade them to: let them see in your lives that excellency
above the world, which you persuade them to in your speeches. Let them see by
your constant labors for heaven, that you indeed believe what you would have
the^^ believe.
And thus I have opened to you the first and great part of this duty,
consisting in private exhortation, for the helping of poor souls to this rest,
that have yet no title to it; and I have showed you also the manner how to
perform it. I will now speak a little of the next part.

1. Besides the duty of private admonition, you must do your utmost endeavors
to help men to profit by the public ordinances. And to that end, First, do your
endeavors for the procuring of faithful ministers where they are wanting. This
is GOD'S ordinary means of converting and saving. How shall they hear without a
preacher? Not only for your own sakes herefore, but for the poor miserable ones
about you, do all you can to bring this to pass. Improve all your interest and
diligence to this end. Ride, and go, and seek, and make friends till you
prevail. Who knows how many souls may bless you, who have been converted by
the ministry which you have procured? It is an higher and nobler work of
charity, than if you gave all that you have to relieve their bodies.

How small a matter were it (and yet how excellent a work) for every gentleman
of means in England, to cull out some one or two, or more poor boys in the
country schools, who are the choicest wits, and of the most pious dispositions,
who are poor and unable to proceed in learning; and to maintain them till they
are sit for the ministry? It were but keeping a few superfluous attendants the
less, if they had hearts to it, it were easily spared out of their rich
apparel, or superfluous diet, I dare say, they would not be sorry for it when
they come to their reckoning: one sumptuous feast, or one costly suit of
apparel, would maintain a poor boy a year or two at the university, who perhaps
might come to have more true worth in him, than many a glittering lord, and to
do GOD more service in his church, than ever they did with all their estates
and power.

2. And when you enjoy the blessing of the gospel, you must yet use your utmost
diligence to help poor sold to receive the fruit of it. To which end you must
draw them constantly to hear and attend it: mind them often of what they have
heard: draw them if it be possible, to repeat it in their families; if that
cannot be, then draw them to come to others that do repeat it; that so it may
not die in the hearing. The very drawing of men into the company and
acquainta^^^ of the good man, besides the benefit they have by their
endeavors, is of singular use to the recovery of their souls. It is a means to
take off prejudice, by confuting the world's slanders of the ways and people of
GOD. Use therefore often to meet together, besides the (...) public meeting in
the congregation: not to vent any ^^sound opinions, nor at the time of public
worship; nor yet to separate from the church whereof you are members; but the
work which I would have you meet about, is this, to repeat together the word
which you have heard in public: to pour out your joint prayers for the church
and yourselves: to join in cheerful singing the praises of GOD; to open your
scruples and doubts, and fears, and get resolution; to quicken each other in
love and heavenliness, or holy walking: and all this not as a separated church,
but as a part of the church more diligent than the rest in redeeming time, and
helping the souls of each other heavenward.

3. One thing more I advise you: if you would have souls saved by the
ordinances, labor still to keep the ordinances and ministry in esteem, No man
will be much wrought on by that which he despises. I shall confirm you herein,
not in my own words, but in his that I know you dare not disregard, 1 These. v.
11, 12, 13. Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even
as ye also do: and we beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you,
and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly
in love for their work's sake; and be at peace among yourselves. Obey them that
have the rule ever you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls,
as those that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief: for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. xiii. 17.

Thus you see part of your duty for the salvation of others.

But where shall we find the man, that sets himself to it with all his
might, and that has set his heart upon the souls of his brethren, that they
may be saved.

Let us here a little enquire, what may be the causes of the gross neglect of
this duty, that the hindrances being discovered, may the more easily be
overcome.

1. One hinderance, is, men's own sinfulness and guiltiness. They have not been
ravished themselves with the heavenly delights: how then should they draw
others to seek them? They have not felt the wickedness of their own nature, nor
their loft condition, nor their need of Christ, nor felt the renewing work of
the Spirit: how then can they discover these to others? Ah that this were not
the case of many a learned preacher in England! And the cause why they preach
so frozenly! Men also are guilty themselves of the sins they should reprove;
and this stops their mouths, and makes them ashamed to reprove.

2. Another hinderance, is, a secret infidelity prevailing in men's hearts:
Alas, sirs, we do not sure believe men's misery; we do not believe sure the
threatenings of GOD are true. Did we verily believe that all the uregenerate
and unholy shall be eternally tormented, oh how could we hold our tongues when
we are among the unregenerate: how could we chose but burst out into tears when
we look them in the face, as the prophet did when he looked upon H^zael?
Especially when they are our kindred or friends that are near and dear to us?
Thus does secret unbelief consume the vigor of each grace and duty. Oh
christians, if you did verily believe that your poor neighbor, or wife, or
husband, or child, should certainly lie for-ever in the flames of hell, except
they be thoroughly changed, before death does snatch them hence, would not this
make you cast off all discouragements, and lie at them day and night till they
were persuaded? How could you hold your tongue, or let them alone another day,
if this were soundly believed? If you were sure that any of your dear friends
that are dead, were now in hell, and persuading to repentance would get him out
again, would not you persuade him day and night if he were in hearing? And why
should you not do as much then to prevent it, while he is in your hearing, but
that you do not believe GOD'S word that speaks the danger? Oh were it not for
this cursed unbelief, our own souls and our neighbor's would gain more by us
than they do.

3. This faithful dealing with men for their salvation, is much hindered also
by our want of compassion to men's souls. We are hard-hearted and cruel toward
the miserable; and therefore (as the priest and the Levite did by the wounded
man) we look on them and pass by. O what tender hearts could endure to look
upon a poor, blind, forlorn sinner, wounded by sin and captivated by Satan, and
never once open their mouths for his recovery! What though he be silent, and do
not desire thy help? yet his misery cries aloud; misery is the most effectual
suitor to one that is compassionate: if GOD had not heard the cry of our
miseries before he heard the cry of our prayers, and been moved by his own
pity, before he was moved by our importunity, we might have long enough
continued the slaves of Satan. Alas, what pitiful sights do we daily see! The
ignorant, the profane, the neglecters of Christ and their souls: their sores
are open and visible to all; and yet we do not pity them. You will pray to GOD
for them, in customary duties, that GOD would open the eyes, and turn the
hearts of your friends and neighbors: and why do you not endeavor their
conversion if you desire it? and if you do not desire it, why do you ask it?
Does not your negligence convince you of hypocrisy in your prayers, and of
abusing the most high GOD with your deceitful words? Your neighbors are near
you, your friends are in the house with you, you eat, and drink, and work, and
walk, and talk with them, and yet you say little or nothing to them. Why do you
not pray them to consider and return, as well as pray GOD to convert and turn
them? Have you as often begged of them to think on their ways, and to reform, as
you have taken on you to beg of GOD that they may so do? What if you should see
your neighbor fallen into a pit, and you should presently fall down on your
knees, and pray GOD to help him out, but would neither put forth your hand to
help him, nor once persuade or direct him to help himself, would not any man
censure you to be cruel and hypocritical? What the Holy Ghost says of men's
bodily miseries, I may say much more of the misery of their souls; If any man
sees his brother in need, and shuts up his compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? Or what love has he to his brother's soul?
The charity of our ignorant forefathers may rise up in judgment against us,
and condemn us: they would give all their estates almost, for so many masses or
pardons, to deliver the souls of their friends from a feigned purgatory: and we
will not as much as admonish and entreat them, to save them from the certain
flames of hell.

4. Another hinderance, is, a base man-pleasing disposition that is in us. We
are so loath to displease men, and so desirous to keep in credit and favor with
them, that it makes us neglect our own duty. A foolish physician he is, and a
most unfaithfal friend, that will let a sick man die for fear of troubling him.
And cruel wretches are we to our friends that will rather suffer them to go
quickly to hell, than we will anger them, or hazard our reputation with them.
If they did but fall in a swoon, we would rub them and pinch them, and never
stick at hurting them. If they were distracted, we would bind them with chains,
and we would please them in nothing that tended to their hurt. And yet when
they are beside themselves in point of salvation, and in their madness posting
on to damnation, we will not stop them, for fear of displeasing them. How can
these men be christians, that love the praise and favor of men, more than the
savor of God? John xii. 43. For if they yet seek to please m^n, they are no
longer the servants of Christ, Gal. i. 10. To win them indeed they must become
all things to all men: but to please them to their destruction, and let them
perish, that we may keep our credit with them, is a course so base and
barbarously cruel, that he that has the face of a christian should abhor it.

5. Another common hinderance, is, a sinful bashfulness. When we should labor
to make men ashamed of their sins, we are ourselves ashamed of our duties. May
not these sinners condemn us, when they will not blush to swear or be drunk,
and we blush to tell them of it, and persuade them from it? Sinners will boast
of their sins, and show them in the open streets: and shall not we be as bold
in drawing them from sin? Not that I would have inferiors forget their distance
in admonishing their superiors; but do it with all humility, and submission,
and respect. But yet I would much less have them forget their duty to GOD and
their friends, be they never so much their superiors: it is a thing that must
be done. Bashfulness is unseemly in cases of flat necessity. And indeed it is
not a work to be ashamed of; to obey GOD in persuading men from their sins to
Christ, and helping to save their souls, is not a business for a man to blush
at. Yet, alas, what abundance of souls have been neglected through the
prevailing of this sin! Even the most of us are heinously guilty in this point.
Reader! is not this thy own case? Has not thy conscience told thee of thy duty
many a time, and put thee on to speak to poor sinners, lest they perish? And
yet thou have been ashamed to open thy mouth to them, and so let them alone to
sink or swim; believe me thou will ere long be ashamed of this shame: O read
those words of Christ and tremble: He that is ashamed of me and of my words,
before this adulterous generation, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed before
his Father and the angels.

6. With many also pride is a great impediment. If it were to speak to a great
man, they would do it, so it would not displease him. But to go among a company
of ignorant beggars, or mean persons, and to sit with them in a smoaky nasly
cottage, and there to exhort them from day to day; where is the person that
will do it? Many will much rejoice if they have been instruments of converting
a gentleman (and they have good cause) but for the common multitude, they look
not after them: as if GOD were a respecter of the persons of the rich, or the
souls of all were not alike to him. Alas, these men little consider how long
Christ did stoop to us! When the GOD of glory comes down in flesh to worms, and
goes preaching up and down among them from city to city. Not the silliest
women that he thought too low to confer with: few rich, and noble, and wise are
called. It is the poor that receive the glad tidings of the gospel.

Object. O but, says one, I am of so weak parts, that I am unable to manage an
exhortation; especially to men of strong parts and understanding.

I answer, 1. Set those upon the work who are more able. 2. Yet do not think
that thou art so excused thyself, but use faithfully that ability which thou
have; not in teaching those of whom thou should learn, but in instructing
those that are more ignorant than thyself, and in exhorting those that are
negligent in the things which they do know. If you cannot speak well yourself,
yet you can tell them what GOD speaks in his word. It is not the excellency
of speech that wins the souls; but the authority of GOD manifested by that
speech, and the power of his word in the mouth of the instructor. A weak woman
may tell what GOD says in the plain passages of the word, as well as a learned
man. If you cannot preach to them, yet you can say. Thus it is written. One of
mean parts may remember the wisest of their duty when they forget it.

Object. It is my superior: and is it sit for me to teach or reprove my
betters? Must the wife teach the husband, of whom the scripture bids them
learn? Or must the child teach the parents, whose duty it is to teach them?

I answer, 1. It is sit that husbands should be able to touch their wives, and
parents to teach their children; and GOD expects they should be so, and
therefore commands the inseriors to learn of them. But if they through their
negligence disable themselves, or through their wickedness bring their souls
into such misery, then it is themselves, and not you, that break GOD's order,
by bringing themselves into disability and misery.

Matter of m^re or^ers and manners must be dispensed with in cases of slat
necessity. Though it were your minister, you must teach him in such a case. It
is the part of parents to provide for their children, and not children for
their parents: and yet if the parents fall into want, must not the children
relieve them? It is the part of the husband to dispose of the affairs of the
family and estate: and yet if he be sick and beside himself, must not the wise
do it? The rich should relieve the poor: but if the rich fall into beggary,
they must be relieved themselves. It is the work of a physician to look to the
health of others: and, yet if he fall sick, some body must help him. So must
the meanest servant admonish his master, and the child his parent, and the wise
her husband, and the people their ministers, in cases of necessity. Yet
secondly, let me give you these two cautions here.

1. That you do not pretend necessity when there is none, out of a mere desire
of teaching. There is scarce a more certain discovery of a proud heart, than to
be more desi^^us to teach, than to learn; especially toward those that are
fitter to teach us.

2. And when the necessity of your superiors does call for your advice, yet do
it with all possible humility, modesty, and meekness. Let them discern your
reverence and submission in the humble manner of your addresses to them. Let
them perceive that you do it not out of a mere teaching humor, or proud
self-conceitedness. If a wife should tell her husband of sin in a masterly
railing language; or if a servant reprove his master, or a child his father in
a saucy way, what good could be expected from such reproof? But if they should
meekly and humbly open to him his sin and danger, and entreat him to bear with
them in what GOD commands, and if they could by tears testify their sense of
his case: what father, or master, or husband could take this ill?

Object. But some may say, this will make all as preachers, and cause all to
break over the bounds of their callings.

I answer, 1. This is not taking a pastoral charge of souls, nor making an
office or calling of it, as preachers do.

2. And in the way of our callings, every good christian is a teacher, and has
a charge of his neighbor's soul. Let it be only the voice of a Cain to say, Am
I my brother's keeper? I would one of these men, that are so loath that private
men should teach them, to tell me, what if a man fall down in a swoon in the
streets, though it be your father or superior, would you not take him up
presently, and use all means to recover him? Or would you let him lie and die,
and say, it is the work of the physician, and not mine: I will not invade the
physician's calling. In two cases every man is a physician; first, in case of
necessity, and when a physician cannot be had: and secondly, in case the hurt
be so small, that every man can do as well as the physician. And in the same
two cases, every man must be a teacher.

Object. Some will further object, to put off this duty, that the party is so
ignorant, or stupid, or careless, or rooted in sin, and has been so often
exhorted in vain, that there is no hope.

I answer, How know you when there is no hope? Cannot GOD yet cure him? And
have not many as far gone been cured? Should not a merciful physician use means
while there is life? and is it not inhuman cruelty in you to give up your
friend to the devil as hopeless, upon mere backwardness to your duty, or upon
groundless discouragements? What if you had been so given up yourself when you
were ignorant?

Object. But we must not cast pearls before swine, nor give that which is holy
to dogs.

I answer, That is but a favorable dispensation of Christ for your own safety.
When you are in danger of being torn in pieces, Christ would have you forbear:
but what is that to you that are in no such danger? As long as they will hear,
you have encouragement to speak, and may not cast them off as contemptuous
swine.

Object. O but it is a friend that I have all my dependence on; and by telling
him of his sin and misery, I may lose his love, and so be undone.

I answer, Sure no man that has the face of a christian, will for shame own
such an objection as this. Yet. I doubt, it often prevails in the heart. Is his
love more to be valued than his safety? Or thy own benefit by him than the
salvation of his soul? Or ^^lt thou connive at his damnation, because he is thy
friend? Is that thy best requital of his friendship? Had thou rather he
should burn for-ever in hell, than thou should lose his favor, or the
maintenance thou have from him?

To conclude this use, that I may prevail with every soul that fears GOD, to
use their utmost diligence to help all about them to this blessed rest, let me
entreat you to consider these following motives:

1. Consider, nature teaches the communicating of good, and grace does
especially dispose the soul thereto; the neglect therefore of this work, is a
sin both against nature and grace.

Would you not think that man or woman unnatural, that would let their children
or neighbors famish in the streets, while they have provision at hand? And is
not he more unnatural, that will let his children or neighbors perish
eternally, and will not open his mouth to save them? Certainly this is most
barbarous cruelty. We account an unmerciful, cruel man, a very monster, to be
abhorred of all. Many vicious men are too much loved in the world, but a cruel
man is abhorred of all. Now that it may appear to you what a cruel thing this
neglect of souls is, do but consider these two things. First, how great a work
it is. Secondly, how small a matter it is that thou refusest to do for the
accomplishing so great a work. First, it is to save thy brother from eternal
flames, that he may not there lie roaring in endless remediless torments. It is
to bring him to the everlasting rest, where he may live in inconceivable
happiness with GOD. Secondly, and what is it that you should do to help him
herein? Why, it is to persuade him, and lay open to him his sin, and his duty,
his misery, and the remedy, till you have made him willing to yield to the
offers and commands of Christ. And is this so great a matter for to do, to the
attaining such a blessed end? Is not the soul of a husband, or wife, or child,
or neighbor, worth a few words? It is worth this, or it is worth nothing. If
they lay dying in the streets, and a few words would save their lives, would
not every man say, he was a cruel wretch that would let them perish rather than
speak to them? Even the covetous hypocrite, that James reproves, would give a
few words to the poor, and say, Go and be warmed, and be clothed. What a
barbarous, unmerciful wretch then art thou, that wilt not vouchsafe a few words
of serious, sober admonition, to save the soul of thy neighbor or friend?
Cruelty and unmercifulness to men's bodies, is a most damnable sin; but to
their souls much more, as the soul is of greater worth than the body, and as
eternity is of greater moment than this short time.

Alas! you do not see or feel what case their souls are in, when they are in
hell, for want of your faithful admonition. Little know you what many a soul
may now be feeling, who have been your neighbors and acquaintance, and died in
their sins, on whom you never bestowed one hour's sober advice for preventing
their unhappiness. If you knew their misery, you would now do more to bring
them out of hell: but, alas! it is too late, you should have done it while they
were with you; it is now too late. As one said of physicians, That they were
the most happy men, because all their good deeds and cures were seen above
ground to their praise, but all their mistakes and neglects were buried out of
sight. So I may say to you, many a neglect of yours to the souls about you, may
be now buried with those souls in hell, out of your sight, and therefore now it
does not much trouble you; but alas! they feel it, though you feel it not.
Jeremiah cried out, My bowels, my bowels, I cannot hold my peace, because of a
temporal destruction of his people: and do not our bowels yearn? And can we
hold our peace at men's eternal destruction?

2. Consider, What a rate Christ did value souls at, and what he has done
toward the saving of them: he thought them worth his blood, and shall not we
think them worth the breath of our mouths? Will you not do a little, where he
has done so much?

3. Consider, What a deal of guilt this neglect does lay upon thy soul. First,
thou art guilty of the murder and damnation of all those souls whom thou do
neglect. He that stands by, and sees a man in a pit, and will not pull him
out if he can, does drown him. And he that stands by while thieves rob him,
or murderers kill him, and will not help him if he can, is accessory to the
fact. And so he that will silently suffer men to damn their souls, or will let
Satan and the world deceive them, and not offer to help them, will certainly be
judged guilty of damning them. And is not this a most dreadful consideration? O
sirs, how many souls then have every one of us been guilty of damning! What a
number of our neighbors and acquaintance are dead, in whom we discerned no
signs of sanctification, and we never once plainly told them of it, or how to
be recovered! If you had been the cause but of burning a man's house through
your negligence, or of undoing him, or destroying his body, how would it
trouble you as long as you lived? If you had but killed a man unadvisedly, it
would much disquiet you. We have known those that have been guilty of murder,
that could never sleep quietly after, nor have one comfortable day, their own
consciences did so vex and torment them. O what a heart must thou have, that
have been guilty of murdering such a multitude of precious souls! Remember
this, when thou look thy friend or carnal neighbor in the face; and think
with thyself, can I find in my heart, through my silence and negligence, to be
guilty of his everlasting burning in hell? Methinks such a thought should even
untie the tongue of the dumb.

2. And as you are guilty of their perishing, so are you of every sin which in
the mean-time they commit. If they were converted, they would break off their
course of sinning: and if you did your duty, you know not but they might be
converted. As he that is guilty of a man's drunkenness, is guilty of all the
sins which that drunkenness does cause him to commit: so he that is guilty of a
man's continuing unregenerate, is also guilty of the sins of his unregeneracy.
How many curses and oaths, and other sins of a most heinous nature are many of
you guilty of, that little think of it? You that take much pains for your own
souls, and seem fearful of sinning, would take it ill of one that should tell
you, that you are guilty of weekly, or daily whoredoms, and drunkenness, and
swearing, and lying. And yet it is too true, even beyond all denial, by your
neglect of helping those who do commit them.

3. You are guilty also of all those judgments, which those men's sins bring
upon the town or country where they live. I know, you are not such atheists,
but you believe it is GOD that sends sickness, and famine, and war; and also
that it is only sin that moves him to this indignation. What doubt then is
there, but you are the cause of judgments, who do not strive against those sins
which cause them? GOD has staid long in patience, to see if any would deal
plainly with the sinners of the times, and so free their own souls from the
guilt: but when he sees that there is none, but all become guilty; no wonder
then if he lay the judgment upon all. We have all seen the drunkards, and heard
the swearers, in our streets, and we would not speak to them: we have all lived
in the midst of an ignorant, worldly, unholy people; and we have not spoke to
them with earnestness, plainness, and love; no wonder then if GOD speak in his
wrath both to them and us. Eli did not commit the sin himself, and yet he
speaks so coldly against it, that he must bear the punishment. GOD locketh up
the clouds, because we have shut up our mouths. The earth is grown as hard as
iron to us, because we have hardened our hearts against our miserable
neighbors. The cries of the poor for bread are loud, because our cries against
sin have been so low. Sicknesses run a pace from house to house, and sweep away
the poor unprepared inhabitants, because we swept not out the sin that breeds
them. As Christ said in another case, Luke xix. 40. If these should hold their
peace, the stones would speak: so, because we held our peace at the ignorance,
ungodliness, and wickedness of our places, therefore do these plagues and
judgments speak.

4. Consider, What a thing it will be, to look upon your poor friends in those
flames, and to think that your neglect was a great cause of it! And that there
was a time when you might have done much to prevent it. If you should there
perish with them, it would be no small aggravation of your torment; if you be
in heaven, it would sure be a sad thought, were it possible that any sorrow
could dwell there, to hear a multitude of poor souls there to cry out forever.
O if you would but have told me plainly of my sin and danger, and dealt roundly
with me. I might have escaped all this torment, and been now in rest! O what a
sad voice will this be!

5. Consider, How diligent are the enemies of these poor souls to draw them to
hell. And if no body be diligent in helping them to heaven, what is like to
become of them? The devil is tempting them day and night: their inward lusts
are still working and withdrawing them: the flesh is still pleading for its
delights and profits: their old companions are ready to entice them to sin, and
to disgrace GOD'S ways and people to them, and to contradict the doctrine of
Christ that should save them, and to increase their dislike of holiness.
Seducing teachers are exceeding diligent in sowing tares, and in drawing off
the unstable from the way to life: and shall a seducer be so unwearied in
proselyting poor ungrounded souls to his fancies? And shall not a sound
christian be much more unwearied in laboring to win men to Christ and life?

6. Consider, The neglect of this does very deeply wound when conscience is
awakened. When a man comes to die, conscience will ask him, What good have thou
done in thy lifetime? The saving of souls is the greatest good; What have thou
done toward this? How many have thou dealt faithfully with? I have often
observed, that the consciences of dying men, very much wound them for this
omission. For my own part (to tell you my experience) when ever I have been
near death, my conscience has accused me more for this than for any sin: it
would bring every ignorant, profane neighbor to my remembrance, to whom I
never made known their danger: it would tell me, thou should have gone to
them in private, and told them plainly of their desperate danger, without
bashfulness or daubing, though it had been when thou should have eaten or
slept, if thou had no other time: conscience would remember me, how at such a
time, or such a time. I was in company with the ignorant, or was riding by the
way with a wilful sinner, and had a fit opportunity to have dealt with him, but
did not: or at least did it by halves, and to little purpose. The LORD grant I
may better obey conscience hereafter while I live and have time, that it may
have less to accuse me of at death!

7. Consider, lastly, the happy consequences of this work, where it is
faithfully done: to name some:

1. You may be instrumental in that blessed work of saving souls, a work that
Christ came down and died for, a work that the angels of GOD rejoice in; for,
says the Holy Ghost, If any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him,
let him know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way,
shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. James v. 19,
20. And how can GOD more highly honor you, than to make you instruments in so
great a work? 2. Such souls will bless you here and hereafter. They may be
angry with you at first; but if your words succeed, they will bless the day
that ever they knew you, and bless GOD that sent you to speak to them. 3. It
brings much advantage to yourselves: first, it will increase your graces,
both as it is a course that GOD will bless, and as it is an acting of them in
this persuading of others: he that will not let you lose a cup of water which
is given for him, will not let you lose these greater works of charity;
besides, those that have practiced this duty, must find by experience, that
they never go on more prosperously toward heaven, than when they do most to
help others thither with them: it is not here as with worldly treasure, the
more you give away, the less you have: but the more you give, the more you
have: the setting forth Christ in his fullness to others, will warm your own
hearts; the opening the evil and danger of sin to others, will increase your
hatred of it. Secondly, it will increase your glory as well as your grace, both
as a duty which GOD will reward, ( For they that convert many to righteousness
shall shine as the stars for-ever and ever. Dan. xii. 3.) and also as we shall
there behold them in heaven, and be their associates in blessedness, whom GOD
made us here the instruments to convert. Thirdly, however, it will give us much
peace of conscience, whether we succeed or not, to think that we were faithful,
and did our best to save them, and that we are clear from the blood of all men.
Fourthly, besides, that is a work, that if it succeed does exceedingly rejoice
an honest heart: he that has any sense of GOD's honor, or the least affection
to the soul of his brother, must needs rejoice much at his conversion,
whosoever be the instrument, but especially when GOD makes ourselves the means
of so blessed a work.
For my own part, it is an unspeakable comfort to me, that GOD has made me an
instrument for the recovering of so many from bodily diseases, and saving their
natural lives; but all this is nothing to the comfort I have in the success of
my labors, in the conversion and comfirmation of souls; it is so great a joy
to me, that it drowneth the painfulness of my daily duties, and the trouble of
my daily languishing and bodily griefs. And makes all these, with all
oppositions and difficulties in my work, to be easy: and of all the personal
mercies that ever I received, next to his love in Christ to my soul, I most
joyfully bless him for the plenteous success of my endeavors upon others: O
what fruits then might I have seen, if I had been more faithful, and plied the
work in private and public as I ought! I know we have need to be very jealous
of our deceitful hearts in this point, lest our rejoicing should come from our
pride. Naturally we would every man, be in the place of GOD, and have the
praise of every good work ascribed to ourselves: but yet to imitate our Father
in goodness, and to rejoice in that degree we attain to, is the part of every
child of GOD. I tell you therefore, to persuade you from my own experience,
that if you did but know what a joyful thing it is to be an instrument for the
saving of souls, you would set upon it presently, and follow it night and day
through the greatest discouragements and resistance.

And thus I have showed you what should persuade you to this duty. Let me now
conclude with a word of entreaty: first, to all the godly in general. Secondly,
to some above others in particular.

CHAP. XIV. An Advice to some more particularly to help others to this Rest.
UP then every man that has a tongue, and is a servant of Christ, and do
something of this your Master's work: Why has he given you a tongue but to
speak in his service? And how can you serve him more eminently, than in the
saving of souls? He that will pronounce you blessed at the last day, and
sentence you to the kingdom prepared for you, because you fed him, and clothed
him, and visited him, in his members, will surely pronounce you blessed for so
great a work as the bringing over of souls to his kingdom. He that says, The
poor you have always with you, has left the ungodly always with you, that you
might still have matter to exercise you charity upon. O if you have the hearts
of Christians, or of men in you, let them yearn toward your poor, ignorant,
ungodly and neighbors! Alas, there is but a step betwixt them, and death, and
hell; many hundred diseases are waiting ready to seize them, and if they die
unregenerate, they are lost for-ever. Have you hearts of rock, that cannot pity
men in such a case? If you believe not the word of GOD, how are you christians
yourselves? If you do but believe it, why do you not bestir you to help others?
Do you not care who is damned, so you be saved? If so, you have as much cause
to pity your ownselves; for it is a frame of spirit inconsistent with grace:
should you not rather say, as the lepers of Samaria, is it not a day of glad
tidings, and we sit still, and hold our peace? Has GOD had so much mercy on
you, and will you have no mercy on your poor neighbors? You need not go far to
find objects for your pity: look but into the streets, or into the next house
to you, and you will probably find some. Have you not a neighbor that sets his
heart below, and neglects eternity? What blessed place do you live in, where
there is none such? If there be not some of them in thine own family, it is
well; and yet art thou silent? Do thou live close by them, or meet them in
the streets, or labor with them, or travel with them, or sit still and talk
with them, and say nothing to them of their souls, or the life to come? If
their houses were on fire, thou would run and help them; and will thou not
help them when their souls are almost at the fire of hell? If thou know but
a remedy for their diseases thou would tell it them, or else thou would
judge thyself guilty of their death. Cardan speaks of one that had a receipt
that would dissolve the stone in the bladder, and he makes no doubt but that
man is in hell, because he never revealed it to any before he died: what shall
we say then of them that know the remedy for curing souls, and do not reveal
it; nor persuade men to make use of it? Is it not hypocrify to pray that God's
name may be hallowed, and never endeavor to ^ring men to hallow it? And can
you pray, Let thy kingdom come; and yet never labor for the coming or increase
of that kingdom? Is it not grief to your hearts to see the kingdom of Satan
flourish, and to see him lead captive such a multitude of souls? you say you
are soldiers of Christ: and will you do nothing against his prevailing enemies?
You pray also daily, That his will may be done; and should you not daily then
persuade men to do it? You pray, That God would forgive them their sins, and
that he would not lead them into temptation, but deliver them from evil. And
yet will you not help them against temptations, nor help to deliver them from
the greatest evil? Nor help them to repent and believe, that they may be
forgiven? Alas, that your prayers and your practice should so much disagree!
Look about you therefore, christians, with an eye of compassion on the sinners
about you; be not like the Priest or Levite that saw the man wounded, and
passed by: GOD did not so pass by you, when it was your own case. Are not the
souls of your neighbors fallen into the hands of Satan? Does not their misery
cry out to you, help, help! As you have any compassion toward men in the
greatest misery, help! As you have the hearts of men, and not of tigers in you,
help!

But as this duty lies upon all in general, so upon some more especially,
according as GOD has called or qualified them thereto. To them therefore more
particularly I will address my exhortation: whether they be such as have more
opportunity and advantages for this work, or such as have better abilities to
perform it.

1. All you that GOD has given more learning and knowledge to, or endued with
better utterance than your neigbours; GOD expects this duty especially at
your hand. The strong are made to help the weak, and those that see must direct
the blind. GOD looks for this faithful improvement of your parts and gifts,
which if you neglect, it were better for you that you never had received them:
for they will but further your condemnation, and be as useless to your own
salvation as they were to others.

2. All those that have especially familiarity with some ungodly men, and that
have interest in them, GOD looks for this duty at their hands. Christ himself
did eat and drink with the publicans and sinners, but it was only to be their
physician, and not their companion. GOD might give you interest in them to this
end, that you might be a means of their recovery. They that will not regard the
words of another, will regard a brother, or sister, or husband, or wife, or
near friend: besides that the bond of friendship does engage you to more
kindness and compassion.

3. Physicians that are much about dying men, should in a special manner make a
conscience of this duty: they have a treble advantage. First, they are at hand.
Secondly, they are with men in sickness and dangers, when the ear is more open,
and the heart less stubborn than in time of health. He that made a scorn of
godliness before, will hear counsel then, if ever he will hear it. Thirdly,
besides, they look upon their physician as a man in whose hand is their life:
or who at least may do much to save them, and therefore they will the more
regard his advice. Therefore you that are of this honorable profession, do not
think this a work besides your calling, as if it belonged to none but
ministers; except you think it besides your calling to be compassionate, or to
be christians. Help to fit your patients for heaven, and whether you see they
are for life or death, teach them both how to live and how to die, and give
them some physic for their souls, as you do for their bodies. Blessed be GOD
that very many of the chief physicians of this age have, by their eminent
piety, vindicated their profession from the common imputation of atheism and
profaneness.

4. Another sort that have excellent advantage for this duty, are men that have
wealth and authority, and are of great place or command in the world,
especially that have many who live in dependence on them. O what a world of
good might gentlemen and lords do, that have a great many tenants, and that are
the leaders of the country, if they had but hearts to improve their interest
and advantage! Little do you that are such, think of the duty that lies upon
you in this. Have you not all honor and riches from GOD? Is it not evident
then, that you must employ them for the advantage of his service? Do you not
know who has said, That to whom men commit much, from them they will expect
the more?

You have the greatest opportunities to do good, of most men in the world. Your
tenants dare not contradict you, lest you dispossess them or their children of
their habitations: they fear you more, than the threatenings of the scriptures;
they will sooner obey you than GOD. If you speak to them of GOD. and their
souls, you may be regarded, when even a minister shall be despised. O therefore
as you value the honor of GOD, your own comfort, and the salvation of souls,
improve your interest to the utmost for GOD. Go visit your tenants' and
neighbors houses, and see whether they worship GOD in their families, and
take all opportunities to press them to their duties. Do not despise them,
because they are poor or simple. Remember, GOD is no respecter of persons; your
flesh is of no better metal than theirs; nor will the worms spare your faces or
hearts any more than theirs; nor will your bones or dust bear the badge of your
gentility; you must be all equals when you stand in judgment; and therefore
help the soul of a poor man, as well as if he were a gentleman: and let men see
that you excel others as much in piety, heavenliness, compassion and diligence
in GOD'S work, as you do in riches and honor.

I confess you are like to be singular if you take this course; but then
remember, you shall be singular in glory, for few great, and mighty, and noble
are called.

5. Another sort that have special opportunity to help others to heaven, are
the ministers of the gospel: as they have, or should have more ability than
others, so it is the very work of their calling; and every one expects it at
their hands, and will better submit to their teachers, than to others. I intend
not these instructions so much to teachers, as to others, and therefore I shall
say but little to them; and if all, or most ministers among us were as faithful
and diligent as some, I would say nothing. But because it is otherwise, let me
give these two or three words of advice to my brethren in this office.

1. Be sure that the recovering and saving souls, be the main end of your
studies and preaching. O do not propound any low and base ends to yourselves.
This is the end of your calling, let it be also the end of your endeavors. GOD
forbid that you should spend a week's study to please the people, or to seek
the advancing your own reputations. Dare you appear in the pulpit on such a
business, and speak for yourselves, when you are sent and pretend to speak for
Christ? Set out the work of GOD as skilfully as you can; but still let the
winning of souls be your end, and always judge that the best means, that most
conduces to the end. Do not think that GOD is best served by a neat, starched
oration: but that he is the able, skilful minister, that is best skilled in the
art of instructing, convincing, persuading, and that is the best sermon that is
best in these. Let the vigor also of your persuasions show, that you are
sensible on how weighty a business you are sent. Preach with that seriousness
and fervor as men that believe their own doctrine, and know their hearers must
either be prevailed with, or be damned. What you would do to save them from
everlasting burning, that do while you have the opportunity and price in your
hand, that people may discern you mean as you speak; and that you are not
stage players, but preachers of the doctrine of salvation. Remember what Cicero
faith, That if the matter be never so combustible, yet if you put not fire to
it, it will not burn. And what Erasmus says. That an hot iron will pierce,
when a cold one will not. And if the wise men of the world account you mad, say
as Paul, If we are beside ourselves, it is to God: and remember that Christ was
so busy in doing of good, that his friends themselves begun to lay hands on
him, thinking he had been beside himself, Mark iii.

2. The second and chief word of advice that I would give you, is this: do not
think that all your work is in studies, and in the pulpit. I confess that is
great; but, alas! it is but a small part of your task. You are shepherds and
must know every sheep, and what is their disease, and mark their strayings, and
help to cure them, and fetch them home.

O learn of Paul, Acts xx. 19, 20.31. to preach publicly, and from house to
house, night and day with tears. Let there not be a soul in your charge that
shall not be particularly instructed and watched over. Go from house to house
daily, and enquire how they grow in knowledge and holiness, and on what grounds
they build their hopes of salvation; and whether they talk uprightly and
perform the dut^es of their several relations, and use the means to increase
their abilities. See whether they daily worship GOD in their families, and set
them in a way, and teach them how to do it: confer with them about the
doctrines and practice of religion, and how they receive and profit by public
teaching, and answer all their carnal objections; keep in familiarity with them
that you may maintain your interest in them, and improve all your interest for
GOD. See that no seducers creep in amongst them, or if they do, be diligent to
countermine them, and preserve your people from the infection of heresies and
schisms; or if they be infected, be diligent to procure their recovery; not
with passion and lordliness, but with patience and condescension: as Masculus
did by the Anabaptists, visiting them in prison, where the magistrate had cast
them, and there instructing and relieving them; and though they reviled him
when he came, and called him a false prophet and antichristian seducer that
thirsted for their blood, yet he would not so leave them, till at last by his
meekness and love he had overcome them, and recovered many to the truth, and to
unity with the church.

If any be weak in the faith, receive him, but not to doubtful disputations. If
any be too careless of their duties, and too little savor the things of the
Spirit, let them be pitied, and not neglected: if any walk scandalously and
disorderly, deal with them for their recovery, with all diligence and patience,
and set before them the heinousness and danger of their sin: if they prove
obstinate, after all, then avoid them, and cast them off: if they be ignorant,
it may be your fault as well as theirs; but however, they are fitter to be
instructed than rejected, except they absolutely resuse to be taught. Christ
will give you no thanks for keeping, or putting out such from his school that
are unlearned, when their desire or will is to be taught. I confess it is
easier to shut out the ignorant, than to bestow our pains night and day in
teaching them; but woe to such slothful, unfaithful servants. Who then is a
faithful and a wise servant, whom his lord has made ruler over his household,
to give them their meat in due season, according to every one's age and
capacity? Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so
doing. O be not asleep while the wolf is waking! Let your eye be quick in
observing the dangers and strayings of your people. If jealousies,
heart-burnings, or contentions arise among them, quench them before they break
out into raging, irresistible flames. As soon as you discern any to turn
worldly, or proud, or factious, or self-conceited, or disobedient, or cold, and
slothful in his duty; delay not, but presently make out for his recovery:
remember how many are losers in the loss of a soul.

3. Do not daub, or deal slightly with any; some will not tell their people
plainly of their sins, because they are great men; as if none but the poor
should plainly be dealt with: do not you so, but reprove them sharply, (though
differently and with wisdom) that they may be sound in faith. GOD does
sufficiently engage us to deal plainly; he has bid us speak and fear not: he
has promised to stand by us; and he will be our security. I had rather hear
from the mouth of Balak, GOD has kept thee from honor; or from Ahab, feed him
with the bread and water of affliction; than to hear conscience say, Thou have
betrayed souls to damnation by thy cowardice and silence; or to hear GOD say,
Their blood will I require at thy hands; or to hear from Christ, the judge,
Cast the unprofitable servant into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth; yea, or to hear these sinners cry out against me in eternal
fire, and with implacable rage to charge me with their undoing.

And as you must be plain and serious, so labor to be skilful and discreet,
that the manner may somewhat answer the excellency of the matter. How often have
I heard a stammering tongue, with ridiculous expressions, vain repetitions,
tedious circumlocutions, and unseemly pronunciation, spoil most precious
doctrine, and make the hearers either loath it, or laugh at it! How common are
these extremes, while one spoils the food of life by affectation, and
new-fashioned mincing, and pedantic toys, either setting forth a little and
mean matter with a great deal of froth, and gaudy dressing; or hiding excellent
truths in a heap of vain rhetoric on the other side! How many by their slovenly
dressing, make men loath the food of life, and cast up that which shoul nourish
them! Such novices are admitted into the sacred function, to the hardening of
the wicked, and the disgrace of the work of the LORD; and those that are not
able to speak sense or reason, are made the ambassadors of the most high GOD.

O therefore let me bespeak you my brethren, in the name of the LORD,
especially those that are more young and weak, that you tremble at the
greatness of this holy employment, and run not up into a pulpit as boldly as
into the marketplace: study and pray, pray and study, till you are become
workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, that your
people may not be ashamed, or weary to hear you: but that besides your clear
unfolding the doctrine of the gospel, you may also be masters of your people's
affections. It is a work that requires your most serious searching thoughts:
running, hasty, easy studies, bring forth blind births. When you are the most
renowned doctors in the church of GOD, alas, how little is it that you know, in
comparison of all that which you are ignorant of!

4. Be sure that your conversation be teaching as well as your doctrine. Do not
confute your doctrine by your practice. Be as forward in an holy and heavenly
life, as you are in pressing it on others. Let your discourse be as edifying
and spiritual, as you teach them theirs must be: for evil language give them
good; and blessing for their cursing. Suffer any thing, rather than the gospel
and men's souls should suffer: Become all things (lawful) to all men, if by any
means you may win some. Let men see that you use not the ministry only for a
trade to live by; but that your hearts are set upon the welfare of their souls.
Whatsoever meekness, humility, condescension, or self-denial you teach them
from the gospel, O teach it them also by your undissembled example. This is to
be guides, and pilots, and governors of the church indeed.

What an odious sight is it, to see pride and ambition preach humility! and an
earthly-minded man preach for an heavenly conversation!

Do I need to tell you that are teachers of others, that we have but a little
while longer to preach? And but a few more breaths to breathe? And then we must
come down, and be accountable for our work? Do I need to tell you, that we must
die, and be judged as well as our people? Or that justice is most severe about
the sanctuary? And judgment begins at the house of GOD?

5. The last whom I would persuade to this great work of helping others to the
heavenly rest, is parents, and masters of families. All you that GOD has
entrusted with children or servants, consider what duty lies on you for
furthering their salvation. That this exhortation may be the more effectual
with you, I will lay down several considerations for you seriously to think on.

1. What plain and pressing commands of GOD are there, that require this great
duty at your hand! Deuteronomy. vi. 6, 7, 8. And these words which I command thee this
day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to thy
children, speaking of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou li^st down, and when thou risest up. And how
well is GOD pleased with this in Abraham, Genesis xviii. 17.19. Shall I hide from
Abraham that thing which I do? For I know him, that he will command his
children, and his household after him, that they shall keep the way of the
LORD. Prove. xxii. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it. So that you see it is a work that the LORD of
heaven and earth has laid upon you; and how then dare you neglect it?

2. You will else be witnesses against your own souls: your great care and
pains, and cost for their bodies, will condemn you for your neglect of their
precious souls: you can spend yourselves in toiling and caring for their
bodies, and even neglect your own souls, and venture them sometimes upon
unwarrantable courses, and all to provide for your posterity: and have you not
as much reason to provide for their souls? Do you not believe that your
children must be everlastingly happy or miserable? And should not that be
forethought in the first place?

3. Consider, GOD has made your children to be your charge; yea, and your
servants too: every one will consess they are the minister's charge, and what a
dreadful thing is it for them to neglect them, when GOD has told them, That if
they tell not the wicked of their sin and danger, their blood shall be required
at that minister's hands! and is not your charge as great and as dreadful as
theirs? Have not you a greater charge of your own families than any minister
has? Yea, doubtless, and your duty it is to teach, and admonish, and reprove
them, and watch over them, at your hands else will GOD require the blood of
their souls. The greatest charge it is, that ever you were entrusted with, and
woe to you if you prove unfaithful, and betray your trust, and suffer them to be
ignorant for want of your teaching, or wicked for want of your admonition or
correction.

4. Look into the dispositions and lives of your children, and see what a work
there is for you to do. First, It is not one sin that you must help them
against, but thousands; their name is legion, for they are many: it is not one
weed that must be pulled up, but the field is overspread with them. Secondly,
and how hard is it to prevail against any one of them! They are hereditary
diseases, bred in their natures: they are as near them as the very heart; and
how tenacious are all things of that which is natural! How hard to teach a hare
not to be afraid, or a lion or tiger not to be fierce! Besides, the things you
must teach them, are quite above them; yea, and clean contrary to the interest
and desires of their flesh: how hard is it to teach a man to be willing to be
poor and despised for Christ; to deny themselves, and displease the flesh; to
forgive an enemy; to love those that hate us; to watch against temptations; to
avoid occasions and appearances of evil; to believe in a crucified Savior; to
rejoice in tribulation; to make GOD their delight and love; and to have their
hearts in heaven, while they live on earth! I think none of this is easy, they
that think otherwise, let them try and judge; yet all this must be learned, or
they are undone forever. If you help them not to some trade, they cannot live
in the world; but if they be destitute of these things they shall not live in
heaven. If the mariner be not skilful, he may be drowned; and if the soldier be
not skilful, he may be slain: but they that cannot do the things
abovementioned, will perish for-ever; For without holiness no man shall see
God. O that the LORD would make all you that are parents sensible what a work
and charge does lie upon you! You that neglect this important work, and talk to
your families of nothing but the world, I tell you the blood of souls lies on
you: make as light of it as you will, if you repent not and amend, the LORD
will shortly call you to an account for the guilt of your children's
everlasting undoing.

5. Think with yourselves, what a world of comfort you may have if you be
faithful in this duty: if you should not succeed, yet you have freed your own
souls; and though it be sad, yet you may have peace in your own consciences:
but if you do succeed, the comfort is inexpressible. For, 1. Good children will
be truly loving to their parents; when a little matter will make ungodly
children cast off their very natural affection. 2. Good children will be most
obedient to you; they dare not disobey you, because of the command of GOD,
except you should command them that which is unlawful, and then they must obey
GOD rather than men. 3. And if you should fall into want, they would be most
faithful in relieving you, as knowing they are tied by a double bond of nature
and of grace. 4. And they will also be helpers to your souls, they will be
delighting you with holy conference and actions; when wicked children will be
grieving you with cursing, and swearing, or drunkenness, or disobedience. 5.
But the greatest joy will be when you shall say, Here am I, and the children
thou have given me. And are not all these comforts enough to persuade you to
this duty?


6. Consider further, that the very welfare of church and state lies mainly on
this duty of well-educating children; and without this, all other means are
like to be far less successful. I seriously profess to you, that I verily think
all the sins and miseries of the land may acknowledge this sin for their nurse.
It is not good laws and orders that will reform us, if the men be not good, and
reformation begin not at home; when children go wicked from the hands of their
parents, in every profession they bring this fruit of their education with
them. I tell you seriously, this is the cause of all our miseries in church and
state, even the want of a holy education of children. Many lay the blame on
this neglect, and that; but there is none has so great a hand in it as this.

7. I entreat you that are parents, to consider what excellent advantages you
have above all others for the saving of your children.

1. They are under your hands while they are young, and tender, and flexible;
but they come to ministers when they are grown older, and slif^er, and settled
in their ways, and think themselves too good to be catechized. You have a twig
to bend, and we an oak: you have the young plants of sin to pluck up, and we
the deep-rooted vices. The consciences of children are not so seared with a
custom of sinning, and long resisting grace, as others. You have the soft and
tender earth to plough in, and we have the hard and stony ways, that have been
trodden on by many years practice of evil. We have a double task, first to
unteach them, and then to teach them better; but you have but one. We must
unteach them all that the world, and the flesh, and wicked company, and the
devil have been diligently teaching them in many years. You have them before
they are possessed with prejudice against the truth; but we have them to teach,
when they have many years lived among those that have taught them to think
GOD'S ways to be foolish. Does not the experience of all the world show you the
power of education? What else makes all the children of the Jews to be Jews?
And all the children of the Turks to be Mahometans? And of christians to be in
profession christians? And of each sect or party in religion to follow their
parents? Now what an advantage have you to use all this for the furtherance of
their happiness!

2. Consider also, that you have the affections of your children more than any
others: none in the world has that interest in their hearts as you. You will
receive that counsel from an undoubted friend, that you would not do from an
enemy, or a stranger. Now, your children know you are their friends, and advise
them in love; and they cannot but love you again. Nature has almost
necessitated them to love you. O therefore improve this your interest in them
for their good!

3. You have also the greatest authority over them. You may command them, and
they dare not disobey you, or else it is your own fault, for the most part; for
you can make them obey you in your business; yea, you may correct them to
enforce obedience. Your authority also is the most unquestionable authority in
the world. The authority of kings and parliaments have been disputed, but yours
is past dispute. And therefore if you use it not to bring them to GOD, you are
without excuse.

4. Besides, their dependence is on you for their maintenance. They know you
can either give them, or deny them what you have, and so punish and reward them
at your leisure. But on ministers or neighbors they have no such dependence.

5. Moreover, you that are parents know the temper and inclinations of your
children, what vices they are most inclined to, and what instruction or reproof
they most need: but ministers cannot so well know this.

6. Above all, you are ever with them, and so have opportunity, as you know
their faults, so to apply the remedy. You may be still talking to them of the
word of GOD, and minding them of their state and duty, and may follow and set
home every word of advice, as they are in the house with you, or in the shop,
or in the field. O what an excellent advantage is this, if you have hearts to
use it! Especially you mothers, remember this; you are more with your children
while they are little ones than their fathers: be you therefore still teaching
them as soon as ever they are capable of learning: you cannot do GOD such
eminent service yourselves as men; but you may train up children that may do
it, and then you will have part of the comfort and honor. What a deal of pains
are you at with the bodies of your children more than the fathers? And what do
you suffer to bring them into the world; and will not you be at as much pains
for the saving of their souls? You are naturally of more tender affections than
men; and will it not move you to think that your children should perish
for-ever? Therefore I beseech you, for the sake of the children of your bowels,
teach them, admonish them, watch over them, and give them no rest till you have
brought them to Christ.

And thus I have showed you reason enough to make you diligent in teaching your
children.

Let us next hear what is usually objected against this by negligent men.

Object. 1. We do not see but those children prove as bad as others, that are
taught the scriptures, and brought up so holily; and those prove as honest men,
that have none of this ado with them.

Answ. Who art thou, O man, that disputest against GOD? Has GOD charged you to
teach your children diligently his word, speaking of it as you sit at home, and
as you walk abroad, as you lie down, and as you rise up; and dare you reply,
that it is as good let it alone? Why, this is to set GOD at defiance; and as it
were to spit in his face, and give him the lie. Will you take it well at your
servants, if when you command them to do a thing, they should return you an
answer, that they do not see but it were as good let it alone? Wretched worm!
dare thou thus lift up thy head against the Lord that made thee, and must
judge thee? Is it not he that commands thee? If thou believe that this is the
word of GOD, how dare thou say, It is as good disobey it? This is devilish
pride indeed, when such sottish, sinful dust shall think themselves wiser than
the living GOD.

2. But what if some prove bad that are well brought up? It is not the
generality of them. Will you say that Noah's family was no better than the
drowned world, because there was one Ham in it? Nor David's, because there was
one Absalom? Nor Christ's, because there was one Judas?

3. But what if it were so? Have men need of the less teaching, or the more?
You have more wit in the matters of this world. You will not say, I see many
labor hard, and yet are poor, and therefore it is as good never to labor at
all: You will not say, many that go to school learn nothing, and therefore they
may learn as much though they never go; or many that are great tradesmen break,
and therefore it is as good never to trade at all; or many plough and sow, and
have nothing come up, and therefore it is as good never to plough more. What a
fool were he that should reason thus! And is not he a thousand times worse,
that shall reason thus for men's souls? Peter reasons the clean contrary way,
If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear,
1 Pet. iv. 18. And so does Christ, Luke xiii. 24. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate; for many shall seek to enter, and not be able. Other men's
miscarriages should quicken our diligence, and not make us cast away all. What
should you think of that man that should look over into his neighbor's garden,
and because he sees here and there a nettle or weed among much better stuff,
should say, Why, you may see these men that bestow so much pains in digging and
weeding, have weeds in their garden as well as I that do nothing, and therefore
who would be at so much pains? Just thus does the mad world talk. You may see
now that those that pray, and read, and follow sermons, have their faults as
well as we, and have wicked persons among them as well as we: yea, but that is
not the whole garden, as yours is; it is but here and there a weed, and as soon
as they spy it, they pluck it up, and cast it away.

Object. 2. Some further object, it is the work of ministers to teach both us
and our children, and therefore we may be excused.

Answer 1. It is first your duty, and then the minister's. It will be no excuse
for you, because it is their work, except you could prove it were only theirs.
Magistrates must govern both you and your children: does it therefore follow
that you must not govern them? It belongs to the s^^^^lmaster to correct them,
and does it not belong also to you? There must go many hands to this great
work; as to the building of an house there must be many workmen, one to one
part, and another to another, and one must not leave their part, and say it
belongs to the other: so it is here in the instructing of your children; first,
you must do your work, and then the minister must do his: you must be doing it
privately, night and day; the minister must do it publicly and privately, as
often as he can.

2. But as the case now stands with ministers, they are disabled from doing
that which belongs to their office, and therefore you cannot now cast your work
on them. I will instance but in two things.

First, It belongs to their office to govern the church, and to teach with
authority; and great and small are commanded to obey them, Heb. xiii. 7.17. But
this is unknown, and hearers look on themselves as freemen, that may obey or
not, at their own pleasure. People think we have authority to speak to them
when they please to hear, and no more. Nay, few of the godly themselves
understand the authority that their teachers have over them from Christ: they
know how to value a minister's gifts, but not how they are bound to obey him
because of his office: not that they should obey him in evil, nor that he
should be a final decider of all controversies, nor should exercise his
authority in things of no moment; but as a schoolmaster may command his
scholars when to come to school, and what book to read, and what form to be of,
and as they ought to obey him, and learn of him, and not to set their wits
against his, but to take his word, and believe him as their teacher, till they
understand as well as he, and are ready to leave his school; just so are the
people bound to obey and learn of their teachers. Now this ministerial
authority is unknown, and so ministers are the less capable of doing their
work, which comes to pass, 1. From the pride of man's nature, especially
novices, which makes men impatient of the reins of guidance and command: 2.
From the Popish error of implicit faith; to avoid which we are driven as far
into the contrary extreme: and 3. From the modesty of ministers, that are loath
to show their commission, and make known their authority, lest they should be
thought proud: as if a pilot should let the seamen run the ship whither they
will, for fear of being thought proud in exercising his authority.


Secondly, A far greater clog than this does lie upon ministers, which few take
notice of; and that is, the fewness of ministers, and the greatness of
congregations. In the apostles time every church had a multitude of ministers,
and so it must be again, or we shall never come near that primitive pattern;
and then they could preach publicly, and from house to house: but now, when
there is but one or two ministers to many thousand souls, we cannot teach them
one by one. So that you see, you have little reason to cast your work on the
ministers, but should the ^^^^e help them by your diligence in your several
fam^^^, because they are already so over-burdened.

Object. 3. But some will say, We a^ (...) men and must labor for our living,
and so mu^^, (...) ^^^ildren; we cannot have time to teach them the (...)
^^^es, we have somewhat else for them to do.

Answer, And are not poor men subject (...) GOD, as well as rich? And are they
not christians? And must they not give account of their ways? And have not your
children souls to save or lose, as well as the rich? Cannot you find time to
speak to them as they are at their work? Have you not time to instruct them on
the Lord's day? You can find time to talk idly, as poor as you are; and can you
find no time to talk of the way to life? You can find time on the Lord's day
for your children to play, or walk or talk in the streets, but no time to mind
the life to come. Methinks you should rather say to your children, I have no
lands to leave you; you have no hope of great matters here; be sure therefore
to make the LORD your portion, that you may be happy hereafter; if you could
get riches, they would shortly leave you, but the riches of grace and glory
will be everlasting. Methinks you should say, As Peter, silver and gold I have
none, but such as I have, I give you. The kingdoms of the world cannot be had
by beggars, but the kingdom of heaven may.

O what a terrible reckoning will many poor men have, when Christ shall plead
his cause, and judge them! May not he say, I made the way to worldly honors
inaccessible to you, that you might not look after it for yourselves, or your
children: but heaven I set open, that you might have nothing to discourage you:
I confined riches and honors to a few; but my blood and salvation I offered to
all, that none might say, I was not invited: I tendered heaven to the poor, as
well as the rich: I made no exception against the meanest beggar; why then did
you not come yourselves, and bring your children, and teach them the way to the
eternal inheritance? Do you say you were poor? Why, I did not set heaven to
sale for money; I called those that had nothing, to take it freely; only on
condition they would take me for their Savior and LORD, and give up themselves
to me in obedience and love.

What can you answer Christ, when he shall thus convince you? Is it not enough
that your children are poor and miserable here, but you would have them be
worse for everlasting? If your children were beggars, yet if they were such
beggars as Lazarus, they may be conveyed by angels into the presence of GOD.
But believe it, as GOD will save no man because he is a gentleman, so will he
save no man because he is a beggar. GOD has so ordered it in his providence,
that riches are common occasions of men's damnation, and will you think poverty
a sufficient excuse? The hardest point in all our work is to be weaned from the
world, and in love with heaven; and if you will not be weaned from it, that
have nothing in it but labor and sorrow, you have no excuse. The poor cannot
have time, and the rich will not have time, or they are ashamed to be so
forward: the young think it too soon, and the old too late; and thus most men
instead of being saved, have somewhat to say against their salvation; and when
Christ sends to invite them, they say, I pray thee have me excused. O
unworthy guests of such a blessed feast, and worthy to be turned into
everlasting burnings!

Object. 4. But some will object, we have been brought up in ignorance
ourselves, and therefore we are unable to teach our children.

Answ. Indeed this is the very sore of the land: but is it not a pity that men
should so receive their destruction by tradition? Would you have this course to
go on thus still? Your parents did not teach you, and therefore you cannot
teach your children, and therefore they cannot teach theirs: by this course the
knowledge of GOD would be banished out of the world, and never be recovered.
But if your parents did not teach you, why did not you learn when you came to
age? The truth is, you had no hearts for it; for be that has not knowledge,
cannot value it, or love it. But yet, though you have greatly sinned, it is not
too late, if you will but follow my faithful advice in these four points.

1. Get your hearts deeply sensible of your own sin and misery, because of this
long time which you have spent in ignorance and neglect. Bethink yourselves
when you are alone^ did not GOD make you, and sustai^ you for his (...)? Should
not he have had the youth and strong^^ of your spirits? Did you live all this
time at the door of eternity? What if you had died in ignorance, where had you
been? What a deal of time have you spent to little purpose? Your life is near
done, and your work all undone. You are ready to die, before you have learned
to live. Should not GOD have had a better share of your lives, and your souls
been more regarded and provided for? In the midst of these thoughts, cast down
yourselves in sorrow, as at the feet of Christ; bewail your felly, and beg
pardon and recovering grace.

2. Then think as sadly how you have wronged your children. If an unthrift that
has sold all his lands, will lament it for his children's sake, as well as his
own, much more should you.

3. Next set presently to work, and learn yourselves. If you can read, do; if
you cannot, get some that can; and be much among these that will inst^^ct you:
be not ashamed to be seen among learners, but be ashamed that you had not
learned sooner. GOD forbid you should be so mad, as to say, I am now too old to
learn; except you be too old to serve GOD, and be saved, how can you be too old
to learn to be saved? Why not rather, I am too old to serve the devil and the
world, I have tried them too long to trust them any more. What if your parents
had not taught you any trade to live by? Would not you have set yourselves to
learn, when you had come to age? Remember that you have souls to care for, as
well as your children, and therefore first begin with yourselves.

4. While you are learning yourselves, teach your children what you do know;
and what you cannot teach them yourselves, put them to learn of others that
can: persuade them into the company of those who will be glad to instruct them.
Have you no neighbors that will be helpful to you herein? O do not keep
yourselves strange to them, but go among them, and desire their help, and be
thankful to them, that they will entertain you in their company. GOD forbid
that you should be like those that Christ speaks of, Luke xi. 52. that would
neither enter into the kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer those that would
to enter. GOD forbid you should be such barbarous wretches, as to hinder your
children from being godly, and to teach them to be wicked! If any thing that
walks in flesh may be called a devil, I think it is a parent that hinders his
children from salvation: nay, I will say more, I verily think that in this they
are far worse than the devil. GOD is a righteous judge, and will not make the
devil himself worse than he is: I pray you be patient while you consider it,
and then judge yourselves. They are the parents of their children, and so is
not the devil: do you think then that it is as great a fault in him to seek
their destruction, as in them? Is it as great a fault for the wolf to kill the
lambs, as for their own dams to do it? Is it so horrid a fault for an enemy in
war to kill a child, or for a bear or a mad dog to kill it, as for the mother
to dash its brains against a wall? You know it is not: do you think then that
it is so hateful a thing in Satan to entice your children to fin and hell, and
to discourage and dissuade them from holiness, as it is in you? You are bound
to love them by nature, more than Satan is. O then, what people are those that
will teach their children, instead of holiness, to curse, and swear, and rail,
and back-bite, to be proud and revengeful, to break the Lord's day, and to
despise his ways, to speak wantonly and filthily, to scorn at holiness, and
glory in sin! O when GOD shall ask these children, where learned you this
language and practice? and they shall say, I learned it of my father or mother:
I would not be in the case of those parents for all the world! Alas, is it a
work that is worth the teaching, to undo themselves for-ever? Or can they not
without teaching learn it too easily of themselves? Do you need to teach a
serpent to sting, or a lion to be fierce? Do you need to sow weeds in your
garden? Will they not grow of themselves? To build an house requires skill and
teaching, but a little may serve to set a town on fire: to heal the wounded or
the sick, requires skill; but to make a man sick, or to kill him, requires
but little. You may sooner teach your children to swear, than to pray; and to
mock at godliness, than to be truly godly. If these parents were sworn enemies
to their children, and should study seven years how to do them the greatest
mischief, they could not possibly find out a surer way, than by drawing them to
sin, and withdrawing them from GOD.

I shall therefore conclude with this earnest request to all christian parents
that read these lines, that they would have compassion on the souls of their
poor children, and be faithful to the great trust GOD has put on them. O sirs!
If you cannot do what you would do for them, yet do what you can. Both church
and state, city and country, groan under the neglect of this weighty duty; your
children know not GOD, nor his laws; but take his name in vain, and slight his
worship: and you do neither instruct them, nor correct them, and therefore GOD
does correct both them and you. You are so tender of them, that GOD is the less
tender both of them and you. Wonder not if GOD make you smart for your
childrens sins; for you are guilty of all they commit, by your neglect of doing
your duty to resorm them; even as he that makes a man drunk, is guilty of all
the sin that he commits in his drunkenness. Will you resolve therefore to
set upon this duty, and neglect it no longer? Remember Eli: your children are
like Moses in the basket, in the water, ready to perish if they have not help.
As ever you would not be charged before GOD for murderers of their souls; and
as ever you would not have them cry out against you in everlasting sire, see
that you teach them how to escape it, and bring them up in holiness, and the
fear of GOD.

You have heard that the GOD of heaven does flatly command it; I charge every
one of you therefore, upon your allegiance to him, as you will very shortly
answer the contrary at your peril, that you will neither refuse or neglect this
most necessary work. If you are not willing to do it, now you know it to be so
plain and so great a duty, you are flat rebels, and no true subjects of Christ.
If you are willing to do it, but know not how, I will add a few words of
direction to help you.

1. Teach them by your own example, as well as by your words. Be yourselves
such as you would have them be: practice is the most effectual teaching of
children, who are addicted to imitation, especially of their parents. Lead them
the way to prayer, and reading, and other duties. Be not like base commanders,
that will put on their soldiers, but not go on themselves. Can you expect your
children should be wiser or better than you? Let them not hear those words out
of your mouths, nor see those practices in your lives, which you reprove in
them. Who should lead the way in holiness, but the father and master of the
family? It is a sad time when a master or father will not hinder his family
from serving GOD, (...) will give them leave to go to heaven without him.

I will but name the rest of your direct duty for your family. 1. You must help
to inform their understandings. 2. To store their memories. 3. To rectify their
wills. 4. To quicken their affections 5. To keep tender their consciences. 6.
To restrain their tongues, and help them to skill in gracious speech; and to
reform and watch over their outward conversation.


To these ends, 1. Be sure to keep them, at least, so long at school, till they
can read English. It is a thousand pities a reasonable creature should look
upon a bible, as upon a stone, or a piece of wood. 2. Get them bibles and good
books, and see that they read them. 3. Examine them often what they learn. 4.
Especially spend the LORD'S day in this work, and see that they spend it not in
sports and idleness. 5. Show them the meaning of what they read and learn. 6.
Acquaint them with, and keep them in company, where they may learn good, and
keep them out of that company that would teach them evil. 7. Be sure to cause
them to learn some catechism, containing the chief heads of divinity.


The heads of divinity which you must teach them first, are these:

1. That there is one only GOD, who is a spirit, invisible, infinite, eternal,
almighty, good merciful, true, just, holy. 2. That this GOD is one in three,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 3. That he is the Maker, Maintainer, and Lord of
all. 4. That man's happiness consists in the enjoying of this GOD, and not in
fleshly pleasure, profits, or honors. 5. That GOD made the first man upright
and happy, and gave him a law to keep, with condition, that if he kept it
perfectly, he should live happy for-ever; but if he broke it, he should die. 6.
That man broke this law, and so forfeited his welfare, and became guilty of
death as to himself, and all his posterity. 7. That Christ the Son of GOD did
here interpose, and prevent the full execution, undertaking to die instead of
man, and so redeem him. 8. That Christ hereupon did make with man a better
covenant, which proclaimed pardon of sin to all that did but repent, and
believe, and obey sincerely. 9. That he revealed this covenant and mercy to the
world by degrees: First, in darker promises, prophesies, and sacrifices; then
in many ceremonious types; and then by more plain foretelling by the prophets.
10. That in the fullness of time Christ came and took our nature into union with
his Godhead, being conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the virgin Mary.
11. That while he was on earth, he lived a life of sorrows, was crowned with
thorns, and bore the pains that our sins deserved; at last being crucified to
death, and buried, so satisfied the justice of GOD. 12. That he also preached
to the Jews, and by constant miracles proved the truth of his doctrines before
thousands of witnesses: that he revealed more fully his new covenant, That
whosoever will believe in him, and accept him for their Savior and Lord, shall
be pardoned and saved, and have a far greater glory than they lost; and they
that will not, shall lie under the curse and guilt, and be condemned to the
everlasting fire of hell. 13. That he rose again from the dead, having
conquered death, and took possession of his dominion over all, and so ascended
up into heaven, and there reigns in glory. 14. That before his ascension he
gave charge to his apostles to preach the gospel to all nations and persons,
and to offer Christ, and mercy, and life, to every one without exception, and
to entreat and persuade them to receive him, and that he gave them authority to
send forth others on the same message, and to baptize, and to gather churches,
and confirm, and order them, and settle a course for the succession of
ministers and ordinances to the end of the world. 15. That he also gave them
power to work frequent and evident miracles for the confirmation of their
doctrine; and to annex their writings to the rest of the scriptures, and so to
finish and seal them up, and deliver them to the world as his infallible word,
which none must dare to alter, and which all must observe. 16. That for all his
free grace is offered to the world, yet the heart is by nature so desperately
wicked, that no man will believe and entertain Christ sincerely, except by an
almighty power he be changed and born again; and therefore does Christ send
forth his spirit with his word, which works holiness in our hearts, drawing
us to GOD and the Redeemer. 17. That the means by which Christ works and
preserves this grace, is the word read and preached, together with frequent
fervent prayer, meditation, sacraments, and gracious conference; and it is much
furthered also by special providence keeping us from temptation; sitting
occurrences to our advantage, drawing us by mercies, and driving us by
afflictions; and therefore it must be the great and daily care of every
christian to use faithfully all the ordinances, and improve all providence.
18. That though the new law or covenant be an easy yoke, and there is nothing
grievous in Christ's commands, yet so bad are our hearts, and so strong our
temptations, and so diligent our enemies, that whosoever will be saved, must
strive, and watch, and bestow his utmost care and pains, and deny his flesh,
and forsake all that would draw him from Christ, and herein continue to the
end, and overcome: and because this cannot be done without continual supplies
of grace, whereof Christ is the only fountain, therefore we must live in
continual dependence on him by faith, and know that our life is hid with God in
him. 19. That Christ will thus by his word and spirit gather him a church our
of all the world, which is his body, and spouse, and he their head and husband,
and will be tender of them as the apple of his eyes, and preserve them from
danger, and continue among them his presence and ordinances; and that the
members of this church must live together in entire love and peace, delighting
themselves in GOD, and his worship, and the fore-thoughts of their everlasting
happiness forbearing and forgiving one another, and relieving each other in
need; and all men ought to strive to be of this society: yet will the visible
churches be still mixed of good and bad. 20 That when the full number of these
are called home, Christ will come down from heaven again, and raise all the
dead, and set them before him to be judged; and all that have loved GOD, and
believed in Christ, (...) been willing that he should reign over them, and have
improved their mercies in the day of grace, them he will justify, and sentence
them to inherit everlasting glory; and those that were not such, he will
condemn to everlasting fire: both which sentences shall be then executed
accordingly.


This is the brief sum of t^^ doctrine which you must teach your children.
Though our ordinary creed, called the apostles creed, contain all the absolute
fundamentals; yet in some it is so generally and darkly expressed, that an
explication is necessary.

Then for matter of practice, teach them the meaning of the commandments,
especially of the great commands of the gospel; show them what is commanded and
forbidden, in the first table and in the second, toward GOD and men, in regard
of the inward and outward man. And here show them, 1. The authority commanding,
that is, the Almighty GOD, by Christ the Redeemer. They are not now to look at
the command as coming from GOD immediately, merely as God, or the Creator; but
as coming from GOD, by Christ the Mediator, who is now the Lord of all; seeing
the Father now judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. 2.
Show them the terms on which duty is required, and the ends of it. 3. And the
nature of duties, and the way to perform them aright. 4. And the right order,
that they first love GOD, and then their neighbor; first seek the kingdom of
God and his righteousness. 5. Show them the excellencies and delights of GOD's
service. 6. And the f^at necessity. 7. Especially labor to get all to their
hearts, and teach them not only to speak the words.


And for sin, show them its evil and danger, and watch over them against it.
Especially, 1. The sins that youth is commonly addicted to. 2. And which their
nature and constitution most lead them to. 3. And which the time and place most
strongly tempt to. 4. But especially be sure to kill their killing sins, those
that all are prone to, and are of all most dea^ly; as pride, worldliness,
ignorance, prosaneness, and flesh-pleasing.


And for the manner, you must do all this, 1. Betimes, before sin get rooting.
2. Frequently. 3. Seasonably. 4. Seriously and diligently. 5. Affectionately
and tenderly. 6. And with authority: compelling, where commanding will not
serve; and adding correction, where instruction is frustrated.


And thus I have alone with the use of exhortation, to do our utmost for the
salvation of others. The LORD give men compassionate hearts, that it may be
practiced, and then I doubt not but he will succeed it to the increase of his
church.

End of the Second Part.
THE Saints Everlasting Rest.
PART III. Containing a DIRECTORY for the getting and keeping the Heart in
Heaven, by the diligent Practice of that excellent Duty of MEDITATION.
CHAP. I. Reproving our Expectations of Rest on Earth.
DOES this rest remain? How great then is our sin and folly to seek and expect
it here! Where shall we find the christian that deserves not this reproof?
Surely we may all cry guilty to this. We know not how to enjoy convenient
houses, goods, lands, and revenues, but we seek rest in these enjoyments. We
seldom, I fear, have such sweet and contenting thoughts of GOD and glory, as we
have of our earthly delights. How much rest do we seek in buildings, walks,
apparel, ease, recreation, sleep, pleasing meats and drinks, company, health
and strength, and long life? Nay, we can scarce enjoy the necessary means that
GOD has appointed for our spiritual good, but we are seeking rest in them. Our
books, our preachers, sermons, friends, abilities for duty, do not our hearts
quiet themselves in them, even more than in GOD? Indeed, in words we disclaim,
and GOD has usually the pre-eminence in our tongues and professions: but do we
not desire these more violently when we want them, than we do the LORD himself?
Do we not cry out more sensibly, O my friend, my goods, my health! than, O my
GOD! Do we not miss ministry and means more passionately than we miss our GOD?
Do we not bestir ourselves more to obtain and enjoy these, than we do to
recover our communion with GOD? Do we not delight more in the possession of
these, than we do in the fruition of GOD himself? Nay, are not those mercies
and duties more pleasant to us, wherein we stand at the greatest distance from
GOD? We can read, and study, and confer, preach and hear, day after day,
without much weariness; because in these we have to do with instruments and
creatures: but in secret prayer and conversing with GOD immediately, where no
creature interposeth, how dull, how heartless and weary are we! And if we lose
creatures or means, does it not trouble us more than our loss of GOD? If we
lose but a friend, or health, all the town will hear of it: but we can miss our
GOD and scarce bemoan our misery. Thus it is apparent, we make the creature our
rest. It is not enough, that they are refreshing helps in our way to heaven;
but they must also be made our heaven itself. Reader, I would as willingly make
thee sensible of this sin, as of any sin in the world; for the LORD'S greatest
quarrel with us is in this point. Therefore I most carnestly beseech thee to
press upon thine own conscience these following considerations.

1. It is gross idolatry to make any creature or means our rest: to settle the
soul upon it, and say, now I am well, upon the bare enjoyment of the creature:
what is this, but to make it our God? Certainly, to be the soul's rest is GOD'S
own prerogative. And as it is palpable idolatry to place our rest in riches and
honors; so it is but a more refined idolatry to take up our rest in excellent
means, in the church's prosperity, and in its reformation. When we would have
all that out of GOD, which is to be had only in GOD; what is this but to run
away from him to the creature, and in our hearts to deny him? When we fetch
more of our comfort from the thoughts of prosperity, and those mercies which we
have at a distance from GOD, than from the fore-thoughts of our everlasting
blessedness in him. Are we christians in judgment, and pagans in affection? Do
we give our senses leave to be the choosers of our happiness, while reason and
faith stand by? O how ill must our dear LORD needs take it, when we give him
cause to complain, as sometime he did of our fellow-idolaters, Jer. l. 6. that
we have been lost sheep, and have forgotten our resting place! When we give him
cause to say, my people can find rest in any thing rather than in me! They can
find delight in one another, but none in me; they can rejoice in my creatures
and ordinances, but not in me; yea, in their very labors and duty they seek
for rest, but not in me; they had rather be any where than be with me: are
these their gods? Have these delivered and redeemed them? Will these be better
to them than I have been, or than I would be? If yourselves have but a wife, a
husband, a son, that had rather be any where than in your company, and is never
so merry as when furthest from you, would you not take it ill yourselves? Why
so must our GOD needs do. For what do we but lay these things in one end of the
balance, and GOD in the other, and foolishly prefer them before him? As Elkanah
said to Hannah, Am not I better to thee than ten sons? So when we are longing
after creatures, we may hear GOD say, am not I better than all the creatures to
thee?

2. Consider how thou contradictest the end of GOD in giving these things. He
gave them to help thee to him, and do thou take up with them in his stead? He
gave them that they might be refreshments in thy journey; and would thou now
dwell in thy inn, and go no further? Thou do not only contradict GOD herein,
but losest that benefit which thou might receive by them, yea, and make
them thy great hurt and hinderance. Surely, it may be said of all our comforts
and all ordinances, and the blessedest enjoyments in the church on earth, as
GOD said to the Israelites, of his ark, Numb. x. 33. The ark of the covenant
went before them, to search out for them a resting place. So do all GOD'S
mercies here. They are not that rest, (as John professes he was not the
Christ) but they are voices crying in this wilderness, to bid us prepare; for
the kingdom of GOD, our true rest, is at hand. Therefore to rest here, were to
turn all mercies clean contrary to their own ends, and our own advantages, and
to destroy ourselves with that which should help us.

3. Consider, whether it be not the most probable way, to cause GOD, either,
first, to deny those mercies which we desire; or, secondly, to take from us
these which we enjoy; or, thirdly, to imbitter them, or curse them to us?
Certainly, GOD is no where so jealous as here: if you had a servant whom your
wife loved better than she did yourself, would you not take it ill of such a
wife, and rid your house of such a servant? Why so, if the LORD see you begin
to settle in the world, and say, here I will rest, no wonder if he soon in his
jealousy unsettle you. If he love you, no wonder if he take that from you
wherewith he sees you about to destroy yourselves.

It has been long my observation of many, that when they have attempted great
works, and have just finished them; or have aimed at great things in the world,
and have just obtained them; or have lived in much trouble, and just come to
begin with some content to look upon their condition, and rest in it, they are
near to death and ruin. When a man is once at this language, Soul, take thy
ease; the next news usually is, Thou fool, this night, or this month, or this
year, shall thy soul be required of thee, and then whose shall these things be?
O what house is there where this fool dwells not? Let you and I consider,
whether this be not our own case. Have not I after such an unsettled life, and
after so many longings and prayers for these days! Have not I thought of them
with too much content, and been ready to say, Soul, take thy rest? Have not I
comforted myself more in the fore-thoughts of enjoying these, than of coming to
heaven, and enjoying GOD? What wonder then if GOD cut me off, when I am just
sitting down in this supposed rest? And has not the like been your condition?
Many of you have been soldiers, driven from house and home, endured a life of
trouble and blood, been deprived of ministry and means: did you not reckon up
all the comforts you should have at your return; and glad your hearts with such
thoughts, more than with the thoughts of your coming to heaven? Why, what
wonder if GOD now cross you, and turn some of your joy into sadness? Many a
servant of GOD has been destroyed from the earth, by being over-valued and
over-loved. I pray GOD you may take warning for the time to come, that you rob
not yourselves of all your mercies. I am persuaded, our discontents and
murmurings are not so provoking to GOD, nor so destructive to the sinner, as
our too sweet enjoying, and rest of spirit, in a pleasing state. If GOD has
cross any of you in wife, children, goods, friends, either by taking them from
you, or the comfort of them: try whether this be not the cause; for wheresoever
your desires stop, and you say, now I am well; that condition you make your
god, and engage the jealousy of GOD against it. Whether you be friends to GOD
or enemies, you can never expect that GOD should suffer you quietly to enjoy
your idols.

4. Consider, if GOD should suffer thee thus to take up thy rest here, it were
one of the greatest curses that could befall thee: it were better for thee if
thou never hafst a day of ease in the world; for then weariness might make thee
seek after true rest. But if he should suffer thee to sit down and rest here,
where were thy rest when this deceives thee? A restless wretch thou would be
through all eternity. To have their good things on the earth, is the lot of the
most miserable perishing sinners. Does it become christians then to expect so
much here? Our rest is our heaven; and where we take our rest, there we make
our heaven: and would thou have but such a heaven as this? It will be but a
handful of waters to a man that is drowning, which will help to destroy, but
not to save him.

5. Consider, thou seek rest where it is not to be found, and so wilt lose
all thy labor. I think I shall easily evince this by these clear
demonstrations following:

First, Our rest is only in the full obtaining our ultimate end; but that is
not to be expected in this life. Is GOD to be enjoyed in the best reformed
church here, as he is in heaven? You confess he is not; how little of GOD, (not
only) the multitude of the blind world, but sometimes the saints themselves
enjoy! And how poor comforters are the best ordinances and enjoyments without
GOD! Should a traveller take up his rest in the way? No, because his home is
his journey's en^. When you have all that creatures and means can afford, have
you that you sought for? Have you that you believe, pray, suffer for? I think
you dare not say so. Why then do we once dream of resting here? We are like
little children strayed from home; and GOD is now fetching us home; and we are
readly to turn into any house, stay and play with every thing in our way, and
sit down on every green bank, and much ado there is to get us home.

Secondly, As we have not yet obtained our end, so are we in the midst of
labors and dangers; and is there any resting here? What painful work does lie
upon our hands! Look to our brethren, to our souls, to GOD; and what a deal of
work in respect of each of these, does lie before us! And can we rest in our
labors? Indeed we may ease ourselves sometimes in our troubles; but that is
not the rest we are now speaking of; we may rest on earth, as the ark is said
to rest in the midst of Jordan, J^sh. iii. 13. Or as the angels of heaven are
desired to turn in, and rest them on earth. Genesis xviii. 4. They would have been
loath to have taken up their dwelling there. Should Israel have settled his rest
in the wilderness, among serpents, and enemies, and weariness and famine?
Should Noah have made the ark his home, and been loath to come forth when the
waters were fallen? Should the mariner choose his dwelling on the sea. and
settle his rest in the midst of rocks, and sands, and tempests? Though he may
adventure through all these, for a commodity of worth: yet I think he takes it
not for his rest. Should a soldier rest in the midst of fight, when he is in
the very thickest of his enemies? And are not christians such travelers, such
mariners, such soldiers? Have you not fears within, and troubles without? Are
we not in the thickest of continual dangers? We cannot eat, drink, sleep,
labor, pray, hear or confer, but in the midst of snares; and shall we sit down
and rest here? O christian, follow the work, look to thy danger, hold on to the
end; win the field, and come off the ground, before you think of settling to
rest. I read that Christ when he was on the cross, comforted the converted
thief with this, This day shall thou be with me in paradise: but if he had only
comforted him with telling him, that he should rest there on the cross, would
he not have taken it for a derision? Me^hinks it should be ill resting in the
midst of sicknesses and pains, persecution and distresses; one would think it
should be no contented dwelling for lambs among wolves. I say therefore to
every one that thinks of rest on earth, Arise ye, depart, this is not your
rest.

6. Consult with experience, both other men's and your own; many thousands have
made trial, but did ever one of these find a sufficient rest for his soul on
earth? Delights I deny not but they have found; but rest and satisfaction they
never found: and shall we think to find that which never man could find before
us? Ahab's kingdom is nothing to him, except he had also Naboth's vineyard, and
did that satisfy him when he had obtained it? If we had conquered the whole
world, we should perhaps do as Alexand^r, sit down and weep because there was
never another world to conquer. Go ask honor, is there rest here? Why you may
as well rest on the top of the tempestuous mountains, or in Etna's flames. Ask
riches, is there rest here? Even such as is in a bed of thorns. Enquire of
worldly pleasure and ease, can they give you any tidings of true rest? Even
such as the sish in swallowing the bait; when the pleasure is sweetest, death
is the nearest. Such is the rest that all worldly pleasures afford. Go to
learning, to the purest, plentifullest, powerfullest ordinances, or compass sea
and land to find out the most perfect church; and enquire whether there your
soul may rest? You might happily receive from these an olive branch of hope, as
they are means to your rest, and have relation to eternity; out in regard of
any satisfaction in themselves, you would remain as restless as ever. O how
well might all these answer us, as Jacob did Rachel, Am I instead of God? So
may the highest perfections on earth say, are we instead of GOD? Go take a view
of all estates of men in the world, and see whether any of them have found this
rest. Go to the husbandman, behold his endless labors, his continual care and
toil, and weariness, and you will easily see, that there is no rest: go to the
tradesman, and you shall find the like: if I should send you lower, you would
judge your labor lost: go to the painful minister, and there you will yet more
easily be satisfied; for though his spending, endless labors are exceeding
sweet, yet it is not because they are his rest, but in reference to his
people's, and his own eternal rest: if you would ascend to magistracy, and
enquire at the throne, you would find there is no condition so restless.
Doubtless neither court, nor country, towns or cities, shops or fields,
treasuries, libraries, solitariness, society, studies, or pulpits, can afford
any such thing as this rest. If you could enquire of the dead of all
generations, or if you could ask the living through all dominions, they would
all tell you, here is no rest; and all mankind may say, All our days are
sorrow, and our labor is grief, and our hearts take no rest, Eccles. ii. 23.

If other men's experience move you not, do but take a view of your own: can
you remember the estate that did fully satisfy you? Or if you could, will it
prove a lasting state? For my own part, I have run through several states of
life, and though I never had the necessities which might occasion discontent.
yet did I never find a settlement for my soul; and I believe we may all say of
our rest, as Paul of our hopes, If it were in this life only, we were of all
men most miserable. If then either scripture, or reason, or the experience of
ourselves, and all the world will satisfy us, we may see there is no resting
here. And yet how guilty are the generality of us of this sin! How many halts
and stops do we make, before we will make the Lord our rest! How must GOD even
drive us, and fire us out of every condition, lest we should sit down and rest
there! If he give us prosperity, riches, or honor, we do in our hearts dance
before them, as the Israelites before their calf, and say, Th^se are thy gods,
and conclude it is good being here. If he imbitter all these to us by crosses,
how do we strive to have the cross removed, and are restless till our condition
be sweetened to us, that we may sit down again and rest where we were? If the
Lord, seeing our perverseness, shall now proceed in the cure, and take the
creature quite away, then how do we labor, and care, and cry, and pray, that
GOD would restore it, that we may make it our rest again! And while we are
deprived of its enjoyment, and have not our former idol, yet rather than come
to GOD, we delight ourselves in our hopes of recovering our former state; and
as long as there is the least likelihood of obtaining it, we make those very
hopes our rest: if the poor by laboring all their days, have but hopes of a
fuller estate when they are old (though an hundred to one they die before they
have obtained it) yet do they rest themselves on those expectations. Or if GOD
does take away both present enjoyments, and all hopes of recovering them, how
do we search about from creature to creature, to find out something to supply
the room, and to settle upon instead thereof! Yea, if we can find no supply,
but are sure we shall live in poverty, in sickness, in disgrace, while we are
on earth, yet will we rather settle in this misery, and make a rest of a
wretched being, than we will leave all and come to GOD.

A man would think, that a multitude of poor people, who beg their bread, or
can scarce with their hardest labor have sustenance for their lives, should
easily be driven from resting here, and willingly look to heaven for rest; and
the sick, who have not a day of ease, or any hope of recovery left them. But O
the cursed averseness of our souls from GOD! We will rather account our misery
our happiness, yea that which we daily groan under as intolerable, than we will
take up our happiness in GOD. If any place in hell were tolerable, the soul
would rather take up its rest there, than come to GOD. Yea, when he is bringing
us over to him, and has convinced us of the worth of his ways and service, the
last deceit of all is here, we will rather settle upon those ways that lead to
him, and those ordinances that speak of him, and those gifts which flow from
him, than we will come clean over to himself.

Marvel not that I speak so much of resting in these; beware lest it prove thy
own case: I suppose thou art so convinced of the vanity of riches and honor,
and pleasure, that thou can more easily disclaim these: but for thy spiritual
helps, thou look on these with less suspicion, and think thou can not
delight in them too much, especially seeing most of the world despise them, or
delight in them too little. But does not the increase of those helps dull thy
longings after heaven? I know the means of grace must be loved and valued; and
he that delights in any worldly thing more than in them, is not a christian:
but when we are content with duty instead of GOD, and had rather be at a sermon
than in heaven; and a member of a church here, than of that perfect church, and
rejoice in ordinances but as they are part of our earthly prosperity: this is a
sad mistake.

So far rejoice in the creature as it comes from GOD, or leads to him, or
brings thee some report of his love: so far let thy soul take comfort in
ordinances as GOD does accompany them, or gives himself unto thy soul by them:
still remembering, when thou have even what thou do most desire, yet this is
not heaven; yet these are but the first fruits. It is not enough that GOD
allows us all the comfort of travelers, and accordingly to rejoice in all
his mercies, but we must set up our staff as if we were at home. While we are
present in the body, we are absent from the LORD; and while we are absent from
him, we are absent from our rest. If GOD were as willing to be absent from us,
as we from him, and if he were as loath to be our rest, as we are loath to rest
in him, we should be left to an eternal restless separation. In a word, as you
are sensible of the sinfulness of your earthly discontents, so be you also of
your irregular contents, and pray GOD to pardon them much more. And above all
the plagues and judgments of GOD on this side hell, see that you watch and pray
against this [of settling any where short of heaven, or reposing your souls on
any thing below GOD.] Or else, when the bough which you tread on breaks, and
the things which you rest upon deceive you, you will perceive your labor all
lost, and your highest hopes will make you ashamed. Try if you can persuade
Satan to leave tempting, and the world to cease troubling and seducing; if you
can bring the glory of GOD from above, or remove the court from heaven to
earth, and secure the continuance of this through eternity, then settle
yourselves below, and say, Soul, take thy rest here; but till then admit not
such a thought.

CHAP. II. Motives to Heavenly-mindedness.
WE have now by the guidance of the word of the LORD, and by the assistance of
his Spirit, showed you the nature of the rest of the saints; and acquainted you
with some duties in relation thereto: We come now to the close of all, to press
you to the great duty which I chiefly intended when I begun this subject.

Is there a rest, and such a rest remaining for us? Why then are our thoughts
no more upon it? Why are not our hearts continually there? Why dwell we not
there in constant contemplation? Ask your hearts in good earnest, What is the
cause of this neglect? Has the eternal GOD provided us such a glory, and
promised to take us up to dwell with himself? And is not this worth the
thinking on? Should not the st^^^gest desires of our hearts be after it; and
the daily delights of our souls be there? Can we forget and neglect it? What is
the matter? Will not GOD give us leave to approach this light? Or will he not
suffer our souls to taste and see it? Then what mean all his earnest
invitations? Why does he so condemn our earthly-mindedness, and command us to
set our affections above? If the fore-thoughts of glory were forbidden fruits,
perhaps we should be sooner drawn unto them. Sure I am, where GOD has
forbidden us to place our thoughts and our delights, thither it is easy enough
to draw them. If he say, love not the world, nor the things of the world, we
dote upon it nevertheless. How unweariedly can we think of vanity, and day
after day employ our minds about it! And have we no thoughts of this our rest?
How freely and how frequently can we think of our pleasures, our friends, our
labors, our flesh, our studies, our news; yea, our very miseries, our wrongs,
our sufferings, and our fears! But where is the christian whose heart is on
this rest? What is the matter? Why are we not taken up with the views of glory,
and our souls more accustomed to these delightful meditations? Are we so full
of joy that we need no more; or is there no matter in heaven for our joyous
thoughts; or rather, are not our hearts carnal and blockish? Earth will tend to
earth. Had we more spirit, it would be otherwise with us. As St. Augustine cast
by Cicero's writings, because they contained not the name of Jesus; so let us
humble and cast down these sensual hearts, that have in them no more of Christ
and glory. As we should not own our duties any further than somewhat of Christ
is in them, so should we no further own our hearts: and as we should delight in
the creatures no longer than they have reference to Christ and eternity, so no
further should we approve of our own hearts. Why did Christ pronounce his
disciples eyes and ears blessed, but as they were the doors to let in Christ by
his works and words into their heart? Blessed are the eyes that so see, and the
ears that so hear, that the heart is thereby raised to this heavenly frame.
Sirs, so much of your hearts as is empty of Christ and heaven, let it be filled
with shame and sorrow, and not with ease.

But let me turn my reprehension to exhortation, that you would turn this
conviction into reformation. And I have the more hope, because I here address
myself to men of conscience, that dare not wilfully disobey GOD; yea, because
to men whose portion is there, whose hopes are ther^ and who have forsaken all
that they may enjoy this glory; and shall I be discouraged from persuading such
to be heavenly-minded? If you will not hear and obey, who will? Whoever thou
art therefore that read these lines, I require thee, as thou tenderest thine
allegiance to the God of heaven, as ever thou hopest for a part in this glory,
that thou presently take thy heart to task; chide it for its wilful strangeness
to GOD; turn thy thought from the pursuit of vanity, bend thy sold to study
eternity; habituate thyself to such contemplations, and let not those thoughts
be seldom and cursory, but settle upon them; dwell here, bathe thy soul in
heaven's delights; drench thine affections in these rivers of pleasure; and if
thy backward soul begin to flag, and thy thoughts to fly abroad, call them
back, hold them to their work, put them on, bear not with their laziness; and
when thou have once tried this work, and followed on till thou have got
acquainted with it, and kept a close guard upon thy thoughts till they are
accustomed to obey, thou will then find thyself in the suburbs of heaven, and
as it were in a new world; thou will then find that there is sweetness in the
work and way of GOD, and that the life of christianity is a life of joy: thou will meet with those abundant consolations which thou have prayed, and panted,
and groaned after, and which so few christians obtain, because they know not
the way to them, or else make not conscience of walking in it.

You see the work now before you: this, this is that I would fain persuade you
to practice: let me bespeak your consciences in the name of Christ, and command
you by the authority I have received from Christ, that you faithfully set upon
this duty, and fix your eye more steadfastly on your rest. Do not wonder that I
persuade you so earnestly: though indeed if we were truly reasonable men, it
would be a wonder that men should need so much persuasion to so sweet and plain
a duty: but I know the employment is high, the heart is earthly, and will still
draw back; the temptations and hindrances will be many and great, and
therefore I fear all these persuasions are little enough: say not, We are
unable to set our own hearts on heaven, this must be the work of GOD: therefore
all your exhortation is in vain. I tell you, though GOD be the chief disposer
of your hearts, yet next under him you have the greatest command of them
yourselves, and a great power in the ordering of your own thoughts, and
determining your own wills: though without Christ you can do nothing, yet under
him you may do much, and must do much, or else you will be undone through your
neglect: do your own parts, and you have no cause to distrust whether Christ
will do his.

I will here lay down some considerations, which if you will but deliberately
weigh with an impartial judgment, I doubt not will prove effectual with your
hearts, and make you resolve upon this excellent duty.

1. Consider, a heart set upon heaven, will be one of the most unquestionable
evidences of a true work of saving grace upon thy soul. Would you have a sign
infallible, not from me, or from the mouth of any man, but from the mouth of
Jesus Christ himself, which all the enemies of the use of marks can lay no
exceptions against? Why here is such a one, Mast. vi. 21. Where your treasure
is, there will your heart be also. Know once assuredly where your heart is, and
you may easily know that your treasure is there. GOD is the saints treasure and
happiness: heaven is the place where they fully enjoy him: a heart therefore
set upon heaven, is no more but a heart set upon GOD, desiring this full
enjoyment: and surely a heart set upon GOD through Christ, is the truest
evidence of saving grace. External actions are the easiest discovered; but
those of the heart are the surest evidences. When thy learning will be no good
proof of thy grace; when thy knowledge, thy duties, and thy gifts will fail
thee, when arguments from thy tongue and thy hand may be confuted; then will
this argument from the bent of thy heart prove thee sincere. Take a poor
christian that can scarce speak English about religion, that has a weak
understanding, a failing memory, a stammering tongue, yet his heart is set on
GOD, he has chosen him for his portion, his thoughts are on eternity, his
desires there, his dwelling there; he cries out, O that I were there! he takes
that day for a time of imprisonment, wherein he has not taken one refreshing
view of eternity. I had rather die in this man's condition, than in the case of
him that has the most eminent gifts, and is most admired for parts and duty,
whose heart is not taken up with GOD. The man that Christ will find out at the
last day, and condemn for want of a wedding garment, will he be that wants this
frame of heart. The question will not then he, how much you have known or
talked? but, how much have you loved, and where was your heart? Why then, as
you would have a sure testimony of the love of GOD, and a sure proof of your
title to glory, labor to get your hearts above. GOD will acknowledge you love
him, when he sees your hearts are set upon him. Get but your hearts once truly
in heaven, and without all question yourselves will follow. If sin and satan
keep not thence your affections, they will never be able to keep away your
persons.

2. Consider, a heavenly mind is a joyful mind: this is the nearest and the
truest way to comfort; and without this you must needs be uncomfortable. Can a
man be at the fire, and not be warm? or in the sunshine, and not have light?
Can your heart be in heaven, and not have comfort? What could make such frozen
uncomfortable christians, but living so far as they do from heaven? And what
makes others so warm in comforts, but their frequent access so near to GOD?
When the sun in the spring draws near our part of the earth, how do all things
congratulate its approach! The earth looks green and casts off her mourning
habit; the trees shoot forth; the plants revive; the birds sing; the face of
all things smiles upon us, and all the creatures below rejoice. If we would but
keep these hearts above, what a spring would be within us; and all our graces
be fresh and green! How would the face of our souls be changed, and all that is
within us rejoice! How should we forget our winter-sorrows, and withdraw our
souls from our sad retirements! How early should we rise (as these birds in the
spring) to sing the praise of our great Creator! O christian! get above;
believe it, that region is warmer than this below. Those that have been there
have found it so, and those that have come thence have told us so; and I doubt
not but thou have sometimes tried it thyself. I dare appeal to thy own
experience: when is it that you have largest comforts? Is it not after such an
exercise as this, when thou have got up thy heart, and conversed with GOD, and
talked with the inhabitants of the higher world, and viewed the mansions of the
saints and angels, and filled thy soul with the fore-thoughts of glory? If thou
know by experience what this practice is, I dare say thou know what
spiritual joy is. If it be the countenance of GOD that fills us with joy, then
they that most behold it, must be full est of these joys. If you never tried
this, nor lived this life of heavenly contemplation, I never wonder that you
walk uncomfortably, and know not what the joy of the saints means: can you have
comforts from GOD, and never think of him? Can heaven rejoice you when you do
not remember it? Does any thing in the world glad you, when you think not on
it? Whom should we blame then, that we are so void of consolation, but our own
negligent unskilful hearts? GOD has provided us a crown of glory, and promised
to set it shortly on our heads, and we will not so much as think of it: he
holds it out to us, and bids us behold and rejoice; and we will not so
much as look at it. What a perverse course is this, both against GOD and our
own joys!

I confess, though in fleshly things the presenting a comforting object is
sufficient to produce an answerable delight, yet in spirituals we are more
disabled: GOD must give the joy itself, as well as afford us matter for joy:
but yet withal, it must be remembered, that GOD does work upon us as men, and
in a rational way does raise our comforts: he enableth and exciteth us to mind
these delightful objects, and from thence to gather our own comforts; therefore
he that is most skilful and painful in this gathering art, is usually the
fullest of the spiritual sweetness. It is by believing that we are filled with
joy and peace; and no longer than we continue our believing. It is in hope that
the saints rejoice, yea, in this hope of the glory of GOD; and no longer than
they continue hoping. And here let me warm you of a dangerous snare, an opinion
which will rob you of all your comfort: some think, if they should thus fetch
in their own by believing and hoping, and work it out of scripture-promises by
their own thinking and studying, then it would be a comfort only of their own
hammering out (as they say) and not the genuine joy of the Holy Ghost. A
desperate mistake, raised upon a ground that would overthrow almost all duty,
as well as this; which is their setting the workings of GOD'S spirit and their
own spirits in opposition, when their spirits must stand in subordination to
GOD'S: they are conjunct causes, cooperating to the producing of one and the
same effect. GOD'S spirit works our comforts by setting our own spirits at
work upon the promises, and raising our thoughts to the place of our comforts.
As you would delight a covetous man by showing him money, (...) a voluptuous
man with fleshly delights; so GOD uses to delight his people, by taking them
as it were by the hand, and leading them into heaven, and showing them himself,
and their rest with him. GOD uses not to cast in our joys while we are idle,
or taken up with other things. It is true, he sometimes does it suddenly, but
usually in the aforesaid order: and his sometimes sudden, extraordinary casting
of comforting thoughts in our hearts, should be so far from hindering
endeavors in a meditating way, that it should be a singular motive to quicken
us to it; even as a taste given us of some cordial, will make us desire and
seek the rest. GOD feeds not saints as birds do their young, bringing it to
them, and putting it in their mouth, while they lie still in the nest, and only
gape to receive it: but as he gives to man the fruits of the earth, the
increase of our land in corn and wine, while we plough and sow, and weed, and
water, and dung, and dress, and then with patience expect his blessing; so does
he give the joys of the soul. Yet I deny not, that if any should think to work
out his own comforts by meditation, as to attempt the work in his own strength,
the work would prove to be like the workman, and the comfort he would gather
would be like both; even mere vanity; even as the husbandman's labor without
the sun, and rain, and blessing of GOD.

So then you may easily see, that close meditation on the matter and cause of
your joy, is GOD'S way to procure solid joy. For my part, if I should find my
joy of another kind, I should be very prone to doubt of its sincerity. If I
find a great deal of comfort, and know not how it came, nor upon what rational
ground it was raised, nor what considerations feed and continue it, I should be
ready to question whether this be from GOD. Our love to GOD should not be like
that of fond lovers, who love violently, but they know not why. I think a
christian's joy should be rational joy, and not to rejoice and know not why. In
some extraordinary case, GOD may cast in such an extraordinary kind of joy; yet
it is not his usual way. And if you observe the spirit of most uncomfortable
christians, you will find the reason to be their expectation of such kind of
joys; and accordingly are their spirits variously tossed, and inconstantly
tempered: when they meet with such joys, then these are cheerful and lifted up;
but because these are usually short-lived, therefore they are straight as low
as hell. And thus they are tossed as a vessel at sea, up and down, but still in
extremes; whereas alas, GOD is most constant, Christ the same, heaven the same,
and the promise the same; and if we took the right course for fetching in our
comfort from these, sure our comforts would be more settled and constant, though
not always the same. Whoever thou art therefore that read these lines, I
entreat thee in the name of the LORD, and as thou valuest the life of constant
joy, and that good conscience which is a continual feast, that thou would
seriously set upon this work, and learn the art of heavenly-mindedness, and
thou shall find the increase an hundred fold, and the benefit abundantly exceed
thy labor.

3. Consider, a heart in heaven will be a most excellent preservative against
temptations, and a powerful means to save the conscience from the wounds of
sin: GOD can prevent our sinning, though we be careless, and sometimes does;
but this is not his usual course; nor is this our safest way to escape. When
the mind is either idle, or ill employed, the devil needs not a greater
advantage: if he find but the mind empty, there is room for any thing that he
will bring in; but when he finds the heart in heaven, what hope that his
motions should take? Let him entice to any forbidden course, the soul will
return Nehemiah's answer, I am doing a great work, and cannot come, Neh. vi. 3.
Several ways will this preserve us against temptation. First, By keeping the
heart employed. Secondly, By clearing the understanding, and confirming the
will. Thirdly, By pre-possessing the affections. Fourthly, By keeping us in the
way of GOD's blessing.

First, By keeping the heart employed: when we are idle, we tempt the devil to
tempt us; as it is an encouragement to a thief, to see your doors open, and
nobody within; and as we use to say, Careless persons make thieves; so it will
encourage Satan, to find your hearts idle: but when the heart is taken up with
GOD, it cannot have time to hearken to temptations: it cannot have time to be
lustful and wanton, ambitious or worldly.

If you were but busied in your lawful callings, you would not be so ready to
hearken to temptations: much less if you were busied above with GOD: will you
leave your plough and harvest in the field? Or leave the quenching of a fire in
your houses, to run hunting of butterflies? Would a judge rise, when he is
sitting upon life and death, to go and play among the boys in the streets? No
more will a christian, when he is busy with GOD, give ear to the alluring
charms of Satan. The love of GOD is never idle; it works great things where
it truly is; and when it will not work, it is not love. Therefore being still
thus working, it is still preserving.

Secondly, A heavenly mind is freest from sin, because it is of clearest
understanding in spiritual matters. A man that is much in conversing above,
has truer and livelier apprehensions of things concerning GOD and his soul,
than any reading or learning can beget: though perhaps he may be ignorant in
diverse controversies, and matters that less concern salvation; yet those truths
which must establish his soul, and pr^serve him from temptation, he knows far
better than the greatest scholars; he has so deep an insight into the evil of
sin, the vanity of the creature, the brutishness of sensual delights, that
temptations have little power on him; for these earthly vanities are Satan's
baits, which with the clear-sighted have lost their force. In vain (says
Solomon) the net is spread in the sight of any bird. And in vain does Satan lay
his snares to ontrap the soul that plainly sees them. When the heavenly mind is
above with GOD, he may from thence discern every danger that lies below: nay,
if he did not discover the snare, yet were he likelier far to escape it than
any others. A net or bait that is laid on the ground, is unlikely to catch the
bird that flies in the air; while she keeps above, she is out of the danger,
and the higher the safer; so it is with us. Satan's temptations are laid on the
earth, earth is the place, and earth is the ordinary bait: how shall these
ensnare the christian, who has left the earth and walks with GOD?

Do you not sensibly perceive, that when your hearts are seriously fixed on
heaven, you become wiser than before? Are not your understandings more solid;
and your thoughts more sober? Have you not truer apprehensions of things than
you had? For my own part, if ever I be wise, it is when I have been much above,
and seriously studied the life to come: methinks I find my understanding after
such contemplations, as much to differ from what it was before, as I before
differed from a fool or an idiot: when my understanding is weakened and
befooled with common employment, and with conversing long with the vanities
below, methinks a few sober thoughts of my Father's house, and the blessed
provision of his family in heaven, does make me (with the prodigal) to come to
myself again. Surely, when a christian withdraws himself from his earthly
thoughts, and begins to converse with GOD in heaven, he is as Nebuchadnezzar,
taken from the beasts of the field to the throne, and his understanding
returns to him again. O when a christian has had but a glimpse of eternity,
and then looks down on the world again, how does ^e say to his laughter, Thou
art mad! And to his vain mirth, What d^st thou? How could he even tear his
flesh, and take revenge on himself for his folly! How verily does he think that
there is no man in Bedlam so mad, as wilful sinners, and lazy betrayers of
their own souls, and unworthy ^ighters of Christ and glory!

Do you not think (except men are stark devils) that it would be a harder
matter to entice a man to sin, when he lies a dying, than it was before? If the
devil, or his instruments, should then tell him of a cup of sack, of merry
company, or of a stage play, do you think he would then be so taken with the
m^tion? If he should then tell him of riches, or honors, or show him cards, or
dice, or a whore, would the temptation (think you) be as strong as before?
Would he not answer, Alas! what is all this to me, who must presently appear
before GOD, and give account of all my life, and straightways be in another
world? Why, if the apprehension of the nearness of etern^ty will work such
strange effects upon the ungodly, and make them wiser than to be deceived so
easily, as they were wont to be in time of health; what effects would it work
in thee, if thou could always dwell in the views of GOD, and in lively
thoughts of thine everlasting state? Surely, a believer, if he improve his
faith, may have truer apprehensions of the life to come, in the time of his
health, than an unbeliever has at the hour of his death.

Thirdly, a heavenly mind is fortified against temptations, because the
affections are pre-possessed with the delights of another world. When the soul
is not affected with good, though the understanding never so clearly apprehend
the truth, it is easy for Satan to entice that soul. Mere speculations (be they
never so true) which sink not into the affections, are poor preservatives
against temptations. He that loves most, and not he that knows most, will
easiest resist the motions of sin. There is in a christian a kind of spiritual
taste, whereby he knows these things, besides his mere reasoning power: the
will does as sweetly relish goodness, as the understanding does truth; and here
lies much of a christian's strength. If you should dispute with a simple man,
and labor to persuade him that sugar is not sweet, or that wormwood is not
bitter; perhaps you might by sophistry over-argue his mere reason, but yet you
could not persuade him against his sense; whereas a man that has lost his
taste, is easier deceived for all his reason. So it is here. When thou have had
a fresh delightful taste of heaven, thou will not be so easily persuaded from
it: you cannot persuade a very child to part with his apple, while the taste of
its sweetness is yet in its mouth.

O that you would be persuaded to be much in feeding on the hidden manna, and
to be frequently tasting the delights of heaven! It is true, it is a great way
off from our sense, but faith can reach as far as that. How would this raise
thy resolutions, and make thee laugh at the fooleries of the world, and scorn
to be cheated with such childish toys! What if the devil had set upon Paul when
he was in the third heaven? Could he then have persuaded his heart to the
pleasures, or profits, or honors of the world? Though the Israelites below may
be enticed to idolatry, and from eating and drinking to rise up to play; yet
Moses in the mount with GOD will not do so: and if they had been where he was,
and had but seen what he there saw, perhaps they would not so easily have
sinned. O if we could keep our souls continually delighted with the sweetness
above, with what disdain should we spit out the baits of sin!

Fourthly, Whilst the heart is set on heaven, a man is under GOD's protection;
and therefore if Satan then assault him, GOD is more engaged for his defense.

Let me entreat thee then, if thou be a man that is haunted with temptation (as
doubtless thou art, if thou be a man) if thou perceive thy danger, and would
fain escape it; use much this powerful remedy, keep close with GOD by a
heavenly mind; and when the temptation comes, go straight to heaven, and turn
thy thoughts to higher things; thou shall find this a surer help than any
other. Follow your business above with Christ, and keep your thoughts to their
heavenly employment, and you sooner will this way vanquish the temptation, than
if you argued or talked it out with the tempter.

4. Consider, the diligent keeping of your hearts on heaven, will preserve the
vigor of all your graces, and put life into your duties. It is the heavenly
christian, that is the lively christian: it is our strangeness to heaven that
makes us so dull: it is the end that quickens all the means; and the more
frequently and clearly this end is beheld, the more vigorous will all our
motions be. How does it make men unweariedly labor, and fearlessly venture,
when they do but think of the gainful prize! How will the soldier hazard his
life, and the mariner pass through storms and waves! How cheerfully do they
compass sea and land, when they think of an uncertain perishing treasure! O
what life then would it put into a christian's endeavors, if he would
frequently think of his everlasting treasure! We run so slowly, and strive so
lazily, because we so little mind the prize. When a christian has been tasting
the hidden manna, and drinking of the streams of the paradise of GOD, what life
does this put into him! How servent will his spirit be in prayer, when he
considers that he prays for no less than heaven!

Observe but the man who is much in heaven, and you shall see he is not like
others; there is somewhat of that which he has seen above, appears in all
his duty and conversation: nay, take but the same man immediately when he is
returned from these views of bliss, and you may easily perceive he excels
himself. If he be a preacher, how heavenly are his sermons! What clear
descriptions, what high expressions has he of that rest! If he be a private
christian, what heavenly conference, what heavenly prayers, what an heavenly
carriage has he! May you not even hear in a preacher's sermons, or in the
private duties of another, when they have been most above? When Moses had been
with GOD in the mount, it made his face shine, that the people could not behold
him. If you would but set upon this employment, even so it would be with you:
men would see the face of your conversation shine, and say, Surely he has been
with God!

It is true, a heavenly nature goes before this heavenly employment; but yet
the work will make it more heavenly: there must be life, before we can feed;
but our life is continued and increased by feeding. Therefore, let me inform
thee, if thou lie complaining of deadness and dullness, that thou can not love
Christ, nor rejoice in his love; that thou have no life in prayer, nor any
other duty, and yet never triedst this quickening course, or at least art
careless and inconstant in it; thou art the cause of thy own complaints; thou
dullest thine own heart; thou deniest thyself that life which thou talkest of.
Is not thy life hid with Christ in God? Whither must thou go but to Christ for
it? And whither is that, but to heaven, where he is? Thou will not come to
Christ that thou may have life. If thou would have light and heat, why art
thou then no more in the sunshine? If thou would have more of that grace
which flows from Christ, why art thou no more with Christ for it? Thy strength
is in heaven, and thy life in heaven, and there thou must daily fetch it, if
thou will have it. For want of this recourse to heaven, thy soul is as a candle
that is not lighted, and thy duties as a sacrifice which has no fire. Fetch
one coal daily from this altar, and see if thy offering will not burn. Light
thy candle at this flame, and feed it daily with oil from hence, and see if it
will not gloriously shine: keep close to this reviving fire, and see if thy
affections will not be warm. Thou bewailest thy want of love to GOD (and well
thou may, for it is a heinous crime, a killing sin) why, lift up thy eye of
faith to heaven, behold his beauty, contemplate his excellencies, and see
whether his amiableness will not fire thy affections, and his goodness ravish
thy heart. As the eye does incense the sensual affections, by gazing on
alluring objects; so does the eye of faith in meditation inflame our affections
toward our LORD, by gazing on that highest beauty. Whoever thou art, that art
a stranger to this employment, be thy parts and profession ever so great, let
me tell thee, thou spendest thy life but in trisling or idleness; thou seem
to live, but thou art dead: I may say of thee, as Seneca of idle Vacia. Sci
latere, vivere nescis; thou know how to lurk in idleness, but how to live
thou know not. And as the same Seneca would say, when he passed by that
sluggard's dwelling, Ibi situs est Vacia; so it may be said of the^ there lies
such a one, but not there lives such a one, for thou spendest thy days liker to
the dead than the living. One of Draco's laws to the Athenians was, That he who
was convicted of idleness, should be put to death: thou do execute this on
thy own soul, whilst by thy idleness thou destroyest its life.

Thou may many other ways exercise thy parts, but this is the way to exercise
^hy graces: they all come from GOD as their fountain, and lead to GOD as their
end, and are exercised on GOD as their chief object: so that GOD is their all
in all. From heaven they come, and to heaven they will direct and move thee.
And as exercise maintains appetite, strength and liveliness to the body; so
does it also to the soul. Use limbs, and have limbs, is the known proverb. And
use grace and spiritual life in these heavenly exercises, and you shall find it
quickly cause their increase. The exercise of your mere abilities of speech
will not much advantage your graces; but the exercise of these heavenly gists,
will inconceivably help the growth of both: for as the moon is then most full
and glorious, when it does most directly face the sun; so will your souls be
both in gifts and graces, when you most nearly view the face of GOD. This will
feed your tongue with matter, and make you abound and everflow, both in
preaching, praying, and confering. Besides the sire which you fetch from heaven
for your sacrisices, is no false or strange fire. As your liveliness will be
much more; so it will be also more sincere.

The zeal which is kindled by your meditations on heaven, is most like to prove
an heavenly zeal; and the liveliness of the spirit which you setch from the
face of GOD, must needs be the divinest life. Some men's fervency is drawn only
from their books, and some from stinging affliction, and some from the mouth of
a moving minister, and some from the encouragement of an attentive auditory:
but he that knows this way to heaven, and derives it daily from the pure
fountain, shall have his soul revived with the water of life, and enjoy that
quickening which is the saint's peculiar: by this faith thou may offer Abel's
sacrifice, more excellent than that of common men, and by it obtain witness
that thou art righteous, GOD testifying of thy gifts, Heb. xi. 4. When others
are ready, as Baal's priests, to beat themselves, and cut their flesh, because
their sacrifices will not burn: then if thou can get but the spirit of Elias,
and in the chariot of contemplation soar aloft, till thou approachest near to
the quickening spirit, thy soul and sacrifice will gloriously flame, though the
flesh and the world should cast upon them the water of all their enmity. Say
not now, how shall we get so high? Or how can mortals ascend to heaven? For
faith has wings, and meditation is its chariot; its office is to make absent
things as present. Do you not see how a little piece of glass, if it do but
rightly face the sun, will so contract its beams and heat, as to set on fire
that which is behind it, which without it would have received but little
warmth? Why thy faith is as the burning glass to thy sacrifice, and meditation
sets it to face the sun; only take it not away too soon, but hold it there a
while, and thy soul will feel the happy effect.

If we could get into the holy of holies, and bring thence the name and image
of GOD, and get it closed up in our hearts, this would enable us to work
wonders; every duty we performed would be a wonder; and they that heard would
be ready to say, Never man spoke as this man speaks. The Spirit would possess
us, as those flaming tongues, and make us every one speak (not in the variety
of the confounded languages, but) in the primitive pure language of Canaan, the
wonderful works of GOD. We should then be in every duty, whether prayer,
exhortation, or brotherly reproof, as Paul was at Athens, his spirit was
stirred within him; and should be ready to say, as Jeremiah did, Jer. xx. 9.
His word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones; and I was weary
with forbearing, and I could not stay.

Christian reader, art thou not thinking when thou see a lively believer, and
hear his melting prayers, and ravishing discourse; O how happy a man is
this! O that my soul were in his state! Why, I here direct and advise thee from
GOD. Try this course, and set thy soul to this work, and thou shall be in as
good a case. Wash thee frequently in this Jordan, and thy dead soul shall
revive, and thou shall know there is a GOD in Israel; and that thou may live
a vigorous and joyous life, if thou neglect not thine own mercies. If thou
truly value this strong and active frame of spirit, show it by thy present
attempting this heavenly exercise. Thou have heard the way to obtain this life
in thy soul, and in thy duties; if thou will yet neglect it blame thyself.

But alas, the multitude of professors come to a minister, just as Naaman came
to Elias; they ask us, how shall I overcome a hard heart, and get strength and
life of grace? But they expect that some easy means should do it; and think we
should cure them with the very answer to their question, and teach them a way
to be quickly well: but when they hear of a daily trading in heaven, and
constant meditation on the joys above; this is a greater task than they
expected, and they turn their backs, as Naaman to Elias, or the young man on
Christ. Will not preaching, and praying, and conference serve (say they)
without this dwelling still in heaven? I entreat thee, reader, beware of this
folly; fall to the work: the comfort of spiritual health will countervail all
the trouble. It is but the flesh that repines, which thou know was never a
friend to thy soul. If GOD had set thee on some grievous work, should thou
not have done it for the life of thy soul? How much more when he does but
invite thee to himself?

5. Consider, the frequent believing views of glory are the most precious
cordial in all afflictions. 1. To sustain our spirits, and make our sufferings
far more easy. 2. To stay us from repining. And 3. To strengthen our
resolutions, that we forsake not Christ for fear of trouble.
A man will more quietly endure the lancing of his sores, when he thinks on the
ease that will follow. What then will not a believer endure, when he thinks of
the rest to which it tends? What if the way be never so rough, can it be
tedious if it lead to heaven? O sweet sickness, sweet reproaches,
imprisonments, or death, which is accompanied with these tastes of our future
rest! Believe it, thou will suffer heavily, thou will die most sadly, if thou
have not at hand the foretastes of this rest. Therefore as thou will then be
ready with David to pray, Be not far from me, for trouble is near: so let it be
thy chief care not to be far from GOD and heaven, when trouble is near, and
thou will find him a very present help in trouble.

All sufferings are nothing to us, so far as we have the foresight of this
salvation. No bolts, nor bars, nor distance of place can shut out these
supporting joys, because they cannot confine our faith and thoughts, although
they may confine our flesh. Christ and faith are spiritual, and therefore
prisons and banishments cannot hinder their intercourse. Even when persecution
and fear has shut the doors, Christ can come in, and stand in the midst, and
say, Peace be unto you. It is not the place that gives the rest, but the
presence and beholding of Christ in it. If the Son of GOD will walk with us in
it, we may walk safely in the midst of those flames, which shall devour those
that cast us in: why then, keep thy soul above with Christ; be as little as may
be out of his company, and then all conditions will be alike to thee. What made
Moses choose affliction with the people of God, rather than enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season? He had respect to the recompense of reward. Yea, our LORD
himself did fetch his encouragements to sufferings from the foresight of his
glory: for to this end he both died and rose, and revived, that he might be
Lord both of the dead and living, Romans xiv. 9. Even Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

6. Consider, It is he that has his conversation in heaven, who is the
profitable christian to all about him: with him you may take sweet counsel, and
go up to the celestial house of GOD. When a man is in a strange country, far
from home, how glad is he of the company of one of his own nation! How
delightful is it to them to talk of their country, of their acquaintance, and
the affairs of their home! Why, with a heavenly christian thou may have such
discourse; for he has been there in the spirit, and can tell thee of the glory
and rest above. To discourse with able men, of clear understandings, about the
difficulties of religion, yea, about languages and sciences, is both pleasant
and profitable; but nothing to this heavenly discourse of a believer. O how
refreshing are his expressions! How his words pierce the heart! How they
transform the hearers! How does his doctrine drop as the rain, and his speech
distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers
upon the grass; while his tongue is expressing the name of the Lord, and
ascribing greatness to his God! This is the man who is as Job, when the candle
of God did shine upon his head, and when by his light he walked through
darkness: when the secret of God was upon his tabernacle, and when the Almighty
was yet with him: then the ear that heard him, did bless him; and the eye that
saw him, give witness to him, Job xxix. 3, 4, 5, 11. Happy the people that have
an heavenly minister: happy the children and servants that have an heavenly
father or master; happy the man that has heavenly associates; if they have but
hearts to know their happiness. This is the companion, who will watch over thy
ways, who will strengthen thee when thou art weak; who will cheer thee when
thou art drooping, and comfort thee with the same comforts, wherewith he has
been so often comforted himself. This is he that will be blowing the spark of
thy spiritual life, and always drawing thy soul to GOD, and will be saying to
thee, as the Samaritan woman, Come and see one that has told me all that ever
I did, one that has ravished my heart with his beauty, one that has loved our
souls to the death: is not this the Christ? Is not the knowledge of GOD and him
eternal life? Is it not the glory of the saints to see his glory? If thou
travel with this man on the way, he will be directing and quickening thee in
thy journey to heaven: if thou be buying or selling, or trading with him in the
world, he will be counselling thee to lay out for the inestimable treasure: if
thou wrong him, he can pardon thee, remembering that Christ has not only
pardoned great offenses to him, but will also give him this invaluable portion.
This is the christian of the right stamp; this is the servant that is like his
LORD; these be the innocent that save the island, and all about them are the
better where they dwell. I fear the men I have described are very rare; but
were it not for our shameful negligence, such men might we all be!

CHAP.III. Containing some Hindrances of Heavenly-mindedness.
AS thou valuest the comforts of a heavenly conversation, I here charge thee
from GOD, to beware most carefully of these impediments.

1. The first is, the living in a known sin. Observe this. What havoc will this
make in thy soul! O the joys that this has destroyed! The blessed communion
with GOD, that this has interrupted! The ruins it has made amongst men's
graces! The duties that it has hindered! And above all others, it is an enemy
to this great duty.

I desire thee in the fear of GOD, stay here a little, and search thy heart.
Art thou one that has used violence with thy conscience? Art thou a wilful
neglecter of known duties, either public or private? Art thou a slave to thine
appetite, in eating or drinking, or to any other commanding sense? Art thou a
seeker of thine own esteem, and a man that must needs have men's good opinion?
Art thou a peevish or passionate person, ready to take fire at every word, or
every supposed slight? Art thou a deceiver of others in thy dealing; or one
that has set thyself to rise in the world? Not to speak of greater sins, which
all take notice of. If this be thy case, I dare say, heaven and thy soul are
very great strangers; I dare say, thou art seldom with GOD, and there is little
hope it should be better, as long as thou continuest in these transgressions:
these beams in thine eyes will not suffer thee to look to heaven; these will be
a cloud between thee and GOD. How should thou take comfort from heaven, who
takes so much pleasure in the lusts of the flesh? Every wilful sin will be to
thy comforts as water to fire; when thou think to quicken them, this will
quench them; when thy heart begins to draw near to GOD, this will presently
fill thee with doubting. Besides it does utterly indispose thee, and disable
thee to this work; when thou should wind up thy heart to heaven, it is
biassed another way; it is entangled, and can no more ascend in divine
meditation, than the bird can fly whose wings are clipped, or that is taken in
the snare. Sin does cut the very sinews of the soul; therefore I say of this
heavenly life, as Mr. B^lton says of prayer, Either it will make thee leave
sinning, or sin will make thee leave it, and that quickly too: for these cannot
continue together. If heaven and hell can meet together, then may thou live
in thy sin, and in the tastes of glory. If therefore thou find thyself guilty,
never doubt but this is the cause that estrangeth thee from heaven; and take
heed lest it keep out thee, as it keeps out thy heart. Yea, if thou be a man
that hitherto have escaped, and know no reigning sin in thy soul, yet let
this warning move thee to prevention, and stir up a dread of this danger in thy
spirit, especially resolve to keep from the occasions of sin, and, as much as
possible, out of the way of temptations.

2. A second hinderance carefully to be avoided, is, an earthly mind: for you
may easily conceive, that this cannot stand with an heavenly mind. GOD and
mammon, earth and heaven. cannot both have the delight of thy heart. This makes
thee like Ans^lm's bird, with a stone tied to the foot, which as often as she
took flight, did pluck her to the earth again. If thou be a man that have
fancied to thyself, some happiness t^ ^e found on earth, and beginnest to taste
a sweetness in gain, and to aspire after an higher estate, and art driving on
thy design; believe it, thou art marching with thy back upon Christ, and art
posting apace from this heavenly life. Has not the world that from thee, which
GOD has from the believer? When he is blessing himself in GOD, and rejoicing
in hope of the glory to come; then thou art blessing thyself in thy prosperity.

It may be thou hold on thy course of duty, and prayest as often as thou did
before; it may be thou keep in with good ministers, and with good men, and
seem as forward in religion as ever: but what is all this to the purpose?
Mock not thy soul, man; for GOD will not be mocked. Thine earthly mind may
consist with thy common duties; but it cannot consist with this heavenly duty.
I need not tell thee this, if thou would not be a traitor to thy own soul:
thou know thyself how seldom and cold, how cursory and strange thy thoughts
have been of the joys hereafter, ever since thou did trade so eagerly for the
world.

Methinks I even perceive thy conscience stir now, and tell thee plainly, that
this is thy case: hear it, man! O hear it now; lest thou hear it in another
manner when thou would be full loath. O the cursed madness of many that seem
to be religious! who thrust themselves into the multitude of employments, and
think they can never have business enough, till they are so loaded with
labors, and clogged with cares, that their souls are as unfit to con^erse with
GOD, as a man to walk with a mountain on his back. And when all is done, and
they have lost that heaven they might have had upon earth, they take up a few
rotten arguments to prove it lawful, and then they think that they have salved
all. They miss not the pleasures of this heavenly life, if they can but quiet
their consciences, while they fasten upon lower and baser pleasures:

For thee, O christian! who have tasted of these pleasures, I advise thee, as
thou valuest their enjoyment, as ever thou would taste of them any more, take
heed of this gulf of an earthly mind: For if once thou come to this, that
thou will be rich, thou fallest into temptation, and a snare, and into diverse
foolish and hurtful lusts. Keep these things as thy upper garments still loose
about thee, that thou may lay them by whenever there is cause: but let GOD
and glory be next thy heart, yea, as the very blood and spirit by which thou
live: still remember that of the Spirit, The friendship of the world is
enmity with God: whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. And, love not the world, nor the things in the world: if any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. This is plain dealing;
and happy he that faithfully receives it.

3. A third hinderance which I must advise thee to beware, is, the company of
ungodly and sensual men. Not that I would dissuade thee from necessary
converse, or from doing them any office of love: nor would I have thee conclude
them to be dogs and swine, that so thou may evade the duty of reproof; nor
yet to judge them such at all, before thou art certain they are such indeed.

But it is the unnecessary society of ungodly men, and familiarity with
unprofitable companions, though they be not so apparently ungodly, that I
dissuade you from. It is not only the open profane, the swearer, the drunkard,
that will prove hurtful to us; but dead-hearted formalists, or persons merely
civil and moral, or whose conference is empty, unsavory, and barren, may much
divert our thought from heaven. As mere idleness, and forgetting GOD, w^^ ^eep
a soul as certainly from heaven, as a profane, li^^^tious, fleshly life: so
also will useless company a surely keep our hearts from heaven, as the company
of men more dissolute and profane. Alas! our dullness and backwardness is such,
that we have need of the most constant and powerful helps: a clod, or a stone
that lies on the earth, is as prone to arise and fly in the air, as our hearts
are to move toward heaven. You need not hold them from flying up to the skies;
it is sufficient that you do not help them. If our spirits have not great
assistance, they may easily be kept from flying aloft, though they never should
meet with the least impediment. O think of this in the choice of your company:
when your spirits need no help to lift them up, but as the flames, you are
always mounting upward, and carrying with you all that is in your way, then you
may indeed be less careful of your company; but till then be careful therein.
As it is reported of a lord that was near his death, and the doctor that prayed
with him read over the litany, For all wom^n laboring with child, for all sick
persons, and young children, etc. From lightning and tempest; from plague,
pestilence, and famine; from battle and murder, and from sudden death. Alas!
says he, what is this to me, who must presently die? So may thou say of such
men's conference; alas! what is this to me, who must shortly be in rest? What
will it advantage thee to a life with GOD, to hear where the fair is such a
day, or how the market goes, or what weather it is, or is like to be, or when
the moon changed, or what news is stirring? What will it conduce to the raising
thy heart Godward, to hear that this is an able minister, or that an able
christian, or that this was an excellent sermon, or that is an excellent book;
to hear a discourse of baptisms, ceremonies, the order of GOD'S decrees, or
other such controversies of great difficulty, and less importance? Yet this,
for the most part, is the sweetest discourse that you are likely to have of a
formal dead-hearted professor. If thou had newly been warming thy heart with
the joys above, would not this discourse quickly freeze it again? I appeal to
the judgment of any man that has tried it, and makes observations on the
frame of his spirit.

4. A fourth hinderance to heavenly conversation, is, disputes about lesser
truths, and especially when a man's religion lies only in his opinions; a sure
sign of an unsanctified soul. If sad examples be regarded, I need say the less
upon this. It is legibly written in the faces of thousands; it is visible in
the complexion of our deceased nation. They are men least acquainted with a
heavenly life, who are the violent disputers about the circumstantials of
religion: he whose religion is all in his opinions, will be most frequently and
zealously speaking his opinions: and he whose religion lies in the knowledge
and love of GOD in Christ, of that time when he shall enjoy GOD and Christ. As
the body does languish in consuming fevers, when the native heat abates within,
and an unnatural heat inflaming the external parts succeeds; so when the zeal
of a christian does leave the internals of religion, and fly to externals, or
inferior things, the soul must need consume and languish. Yea, though you were
sure your opinions were true, yet when the chief of your zeal is turned
thither, and the chief of your conference there laid out, the life of grace
decays within.

Therefore let me advise you that aspire after this joyous life, spend not your
thoughts, your time, your zeal, or your speeches upon quarrels that less
concern your souls: but when others are feeding on husks or shells, or on this
heated food which will burn their lips, far sooner than warm and strengthen
their hearts; then do you feed on the joys above. I could wish you were all
understanding men, able to defend every truth of GOD; but still I would have
the chief to be chiefly studied, and none to shoulder out your thoughts of
eternity: the least controverted points are usually most weighty, and of most
necessary use to our souls.

5. As you value the comforts or a heavenly life, take heed of a proud and
lofty spirit. There is such an antipathy between this sin and GOD, that thou will never get thy heart near him, as long as this prevails in it. If it cast
the angels from heaven that were in it, it must needs keep thy heart estranged
from it. If it cast our first parents out of paradise, and separated between
the LORD and us, it must needs keep our hearts from paradise, and increase the
cursed separation from our GOD. The delight of GOD is an humble soul, even him
that is contrite, and trembles at his word: and the delight of an humble soul
is in GOD: and sure where there is mutual delight, there will be freest
admittance, and heartiest welcome, and most frequent converse. Well then, art
thou a man of worth in thine own eyes? And very tender of thine esteem with
others? Art thou one that much valuest applause and feel delight when thou
hear of thy great esteem with men; and art dejected when thou hear that
men slight thee? Do thou love those most who best honor thee; and does thy
heart bear a grudge at those that thou think undervalue thee? Will thou not
be brought to shame thyself, by humble confession when thou have sinned against
GOD, or injured thy brother? Art thou one that honor the rich? and think
thyself somebody if they value and own thee? but look strangely at the poor,
and art almost ashamed to be their companion? Art thou unacquainted with the
deceitfulness and wickedness of thy heart? Or know thyself to be vile only
by reading, not by feeling thy vileness? Art thou readier to defend thyself and
maintain thine innocence, than to accuse thyself, or confess thy fault? Can
thou hardly hear a close reproof, or plain-dealing without difficulty and
distaste? Art thou readier in thy discourse to teach than to learn; and to
dictate to others, than to hearken to their instructions? Art thou bold and
confident of thy own opinions, and little suspicious of the weakness of thy
understanding? but a slighter of the judgment of all that are against thee? Is
thy spirit more disposed to command than to obey? Art thou ready to censure the
doctrine of thy teachers, the actions of thy rulers, and the persons of thy
brethren? And to think, if thou were a judge, thou would be more just; or if
thou were a minister, thou would be more fruitful and more faithful? If these
symptoms be in thy heart, beyond doubt thou art a proud person. Thou art
abominably proud; there is too much of hell abiding in thee, for thee to have
any acquaintance at heaven: thy sold is too like the devil, to have any
familiarity with GOD.

I entreat you be very jealous of your souls in this point: there is nothing
will more estrange you from GOD: I speak the more of it, because it is the most
common and dangerous sin, and most promoting the great sin of infidelity: you
would little think what humble carriage, what exclaiming against pride, what
self-accusing may stand with this devilish sin of pride. O christian, if thou
would live continually in the presence of thy LORD, and lie in the dust, he
would thence take thee up; descend first with him into the grave, and thence
thou may ascend with him to glory. Learn of him to be meek and lowly, and
then thou may taste of this rest to thy soul. Thy soul else will be as the
troubl^d sea, which cannot rest: and instead of these sweet delights in GOD,
thy pride will fill thee with perpetual disquietness.

6. Another impediment to this heavenly life is, laziness, and slothfulness of
spirit: and I verily think for knowing men, there is nothing hinders more than
this. If it were only the exercise of the body, the moving of the lips, the
bending of the knee; then men would as commoly step to heaven, as they go a few
miles to visit a friend; yea, if it were to spend our days in numbering beads,
and repeating certain words and prayers, or in the outward parts of duties
commanded by GOD, yet it were comparatively easy: further, if it were only in
the exercise of parts and gifts, it were easier to be heavenly-minded. But it
is a work more difficult than all this: to separate our thoughts and affections
from the world; to draw forth all our graces in their order, and exercise each
on its proper object, to hold them to this, till the work does thrive and
prosper in their hands; this is the difficult task. Heaven is above thee, the
way is upwards; do thou think, who art a feeble sinner, to travel daily this
steep ascent without a great deal of labor and resolution? Can thou get that
earthly heart to heaven, and bring that backward mind to GOD, while thou lie
still, and take thine ease? If lying down at the foot of the hill, and
looking toward the top, and wishing we were there, would serve the turn, then
we should have daily travelers for heaven. But the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. There must be violence used to get
the first fruits, as well as to get the full possession. Do thou not feel it
so, though I should not tell thee? Will thy heart get upwards except thou drive
it? Do thou find it easy to dwell in the delights above? It is true, the work
is sweet, and no condition on earth so desirable; but therefore it is that our
hearts are so backward, especially in the beginning, till we are acquainted
with it. O how many who can easily bring their hearts to ordinary duties, as
reading, hearing, praying, conferring, could never yet in all their lives,
bring them, and keep them to an heavenly contemplation one half hour together!
Con^i^e, here, reader, as before the LORD, whether this be not thine own case.
Thou have known that heaven is all thy hopes; thou know thou must shortly be
turned hence, and that nothing below can yield thee rest; thou know also
that a strange heart, a seldom and careless thinking of heaven, can fetch but
little comfort thence: and do thou yet for all this let slip thy
opportunities, when thou should walk above, and live with GOD? Do thou
commend the sweetness of an heavenly life, and yet did never once try it
thyself? But as the sluggard that stretched himself on his bed, and cried, O
that this were working! So do thou live at thy case, and say, O that I could
get my heart to heaven! How many read books, and hear sermons, in expectation
to hear of some easy course, or to meet with a shorter cut to comforts, than
ever they are like to find? And if they can hear of none from the preachers of
truth, they will snatch it with rejoicing from the teachers of falsehood; and
presently applaud the excellency of the doctrine, because it has fitted their
lazy temper; and think there is no other doctrine will comfort the soul,
because it will not comfort it with hearing and looking on. And while they
pretend enmity only to the law, they oppose the easier conditions of the
gospel, and cast off the burden which all must bear that find rest to their
souls: the LORD of light and spirit of comfort, show these men in time, a surer
way for lasting comfort. It was an established law among the Argi, That if a
man were perceived to be idle and lazy, he must give an account before the
magist rate, how he came by his victuals and maintenance: and sure, when I see
these men lazy in the use of GOD'S appointed means for comfort, I cannot but
question how they come by their comforts: I would they would examine it
thoroughly themselves; for GOD will require an account of it from them.
Idleness, and not improving the truth in painful duty, is the common cause of
men's seeking comfort from error: even as the people of Israel, when they had
no comfortable answer from GOD, because of their own sin and neglect, would run
to seek it from the idols of the heathens: so when men are false-hearted, and
the Spirit of truth denies them comfort, because they deny him obedience, they
will seek it from a lying spirit.

My advice to such a lazy sinner, is this: as thou art convicted that this work
is necessary to thy comfort, so resolvedly set upon it: if thy heart draw back,
and be undisposed, force it on with the command of reason; and if thy reason
begin ^o dispute the work, force it with producing the command of GOD; and
quicken it with the consideration of thy necessity, and the other motives
before propounded: and let the inforcements that brought thee to the work, be
still in thy mind to quicken thee in it. Do not let such an incomparable
treasure lie before thee, while thou lie still with thy hand in thy bosom:
let not thy life be a continual vexation, which might be a continual feast, and
all because thou will not be at the pains. When thou have once tasted the
sweetness of it, and a little used thy heart to the work, thou will find the
pains thou take abundantly recompensed. Only sit not still with a
disconsolate spirit, while comforts grow before thine eyes. Neither is it a few
formal, lazy, running thoughts, that will fetch thee this consolation from
above: no more than a few lazy formal words will prevail with GOD instead of
fervent prayer. I know Christ is the fountain, and I know this, as every other
gift, is of GOD: but yet if thou ask my advice, how to obtain these waters of
consolation; I must tell thee, there is something also for thee to do: the
gospel has its conditions, and works, though not such impossible ones, as the
law; Christ has his yoke and his burden, though easy, and thou must take it
up, or thou will never find rest to thy soul. I know so far as you are
spiritual, you need not all this striving and violence, but that is but in
part, and in part you are carnal; and as long as it is so, there is no talk of
ease. It was the Parthians custom, that none must give their children any meat
in the morning, before they saw the sweat on their faces; and you shall find
this to be GOD'S most usual course, not to give his children the taste of his
delights, till they begin to sweat in seeking after them. Therefore lay them
both together, and judge whether an heavenly life, or thy case be better; and
make the choice accordingly. Yet this let me say, thou need not expend thy
thoughts more than now thou do; it is but only to employ them better: I press
thee not to busy thy mind much more than thou do; but to busy it upon better
and more pleasant objects. Employ but so many serious thoughts every day, upon
the excellent glory of the life to come, as thou now employest on the affairs
in the world: nay, as thou daily losest on vanities, and thy heart will be at
heaven in a short space.

7. It is also a dangerous hinderance, to content ourselves with the mere
preparatives to this heavenly life, while we are strangers to the life itself:
when we take up with the mere studies of heavenly things, and the notions and
thoughts of them in our brain, or the talking of them with one another, as if
this were all that makes us heavenly people. There is none in more danger of
this snare, than those that are much in public duty, especially preachers of
the gospel. O how easily may they be deceived here, while they do nothing more
than read of heaven, and study of heaven, and preach of heaven, and pray, and
talk that GOD would reveal to our hearts the danger of this snare! Alas, all
this is but mere preparation: this is not the life we speak of, though it is a
help thereto. I entreat every one of my brethren in the ministry, that they
search and watch against this temptation: this is but gathering the materials,
and not the erecting the building: this is but gathering manna for others, not
eating and digesting ourselves; as he that sits at home may study geography,
and draw most exact descriptions of countries, and yet never see them, nor
travel toward them: so may you describe to others the joys of heaven, and yet
never come near it in your own hearts: if you should study of nothing but
heaven while you lived, and preach of nothing but heaven to your people, yet
might your own hearts be strangers to it: we are under a more subtle temptation
than other men, to draw us from this heavenly life: if our employments lay at a
greater distance from heaven, we should not he so apt to be thus deluded: but
when we find ourselves employed upon nothing else, we are easier drawn to take
up here. Studying and preaching of heaven is liker to an heavenly life, than
thinking and talking of the world is, and the likeness it is that may deceive
us: this is to die the most miserable death, even to famish ourselves, because
we have bread on our tables, and to die for thirst while we draw water for
others: thinking it enough that we have daily to do with it, though we never
drink it.

CHAP. IV. Some general Helps to Heavenly-mindedness.
HAVING thus showed thee what hindrances will resist thee in the work. I shall
now lay down some positive helps. But first, I expect that thou resolve against
the forementioned impediments, that thou read them seriously, and avoid them
faithfully, or else thy labor will be all in vain; thou do but go about to
reconcile light and darkness, Christ and Belial, heaven and hell in thy spirit;
I must tell thee also, that I expect thy promise, faithfully to set upon the
helps which I prescribe thee; and that the reading of them will not bring
heaven into thy heart, but in their constant practice the Spirit will do it.

As thou valuest then these fore-tastes of heaven, make conscience of
performing these following duties.

1. Know heaven to be the only treasure, and labor to know what a treasure it
is; be convinced that thou have no other happiness, and be convinced what
happiness is there: if thou do not soundly believe it to be the chief good,
thou will never set thy heart upon it; and this conviction must fink into thy
affections: for if it be only a notion, it will have little operation.

2. Labor as to know heaven to be the only happiness, so also to be thy
happiness. Though the knowledge of excellency and suitableness may stir up that
love which works by desire, yet there must be the knowledge of our interest
or propriety, to the setting at work our love of complacency. We may confess
heaven to be the best condition, though we despair of enjoying it; and we may
desire and seek it, if we see the obtainment to be but probable; but we can
never delightfully rejoice in it, till we are persuaded of our title to it.
What comfort is it to a man that is naked, to see the rich attire of others?
Or, to a man that has not a bit to put in his mouth, to see a feast which he
must not taste of? What delight has a man that has not a house to put his
head in, to see the sumptuous buildings of others? Would not all this rather
increase his anguish, and make him more sensible of his misery? So, for a man
to know the excellencies of heaven, and not to know whether he shall ever enjoy
them, may well raise desire to seek it, but it will raise but little joy and
content.

3. Another help to the fore-taste of rest is this: labor to apprehend how
near it is; think seriously of its speedy approach. That which we think is near
at hand, we are more sensible of than that which we behold a^ a distance. When
we hear of war or famine in another country, it troubles us not so much; or if
we hear it prophesied of a long time hence, so if we hear of plenty a great way
off, or of a golden age that shall fall out, who knows when, this never
rejoiceth us. But if judgments or mercies draw near, then they affect us. This
makes men think on heaven so insensibly, because they conceit it at a great
distance: they look on it as twenty, or thirty, or forty years off; and this it
is that dulls their sense. As wicked men are fearless and senseless of
judgment, because the sentence is not speedily executed; so are the good
deceived of their comforts, by supposing them further off than they are. How
much better were it to receive the sentence of death in ourselves, and to look
on eternity as near at hand? Surely, reader, thou stand at the door, and
hundreds of diseases are ready waiting to open the door and let thee in. Are
not the thirty or forty years of thy life that are past, quickly gone? Are they
not a very little time when thou look back on them? And will not all the
rest be shortly so too? Do not days and nights come very thick? Do thou not
feel that building of flesh to shake, and perceive thy house of clay to totter?
Look on thy glass, see how it runs: look on thy watch, how fast it gets;
what a short moment is between us and our rest; what a step is it from hence to
everlastingness! While I am thinking and writing of it, it hastes near, and I
am even entering into it before I am aware. While thou art reading this, it
posteth on, and thy life will be gone as a tale that is told. May thou not
easily foresee thy dying time, and look upon thyself as ready to depart? It is
but a few days till thy friends shall lay thee in the grave, and others do the
like for them. If you verily believed you should die tomorrow, how seriously
would you think of heaven tonight! The true apprehensions of the nearness of
eternity, does make men's thoughts of it quick and piercing; put life into
their fears and sorrows, if they be unfit: and into their desires and joys, if
they have assurance of its glory.

4. Another help to this is, to be much in serious discoursing of it,
especially with those that can speak from their hearts. It is pity (says Mr.
Bolton) that christians should ever meet together, without some talk of their
meeting in heaven: it is pity so much precious time is spent in vain discourses
and useless disputes, and not a sober word of heaven. Methinks we should meet
together on purpose to warm our spirits with discoursing of our rest. To hear a
minister or private christian set forth that glorious state, with power and
life from the promises of the gospel, methinks should make us say, as the two
disciples, Did not our hearts burn within us, while he was opening to us the
scripture? While he was opening to us the windows of heaven? Get then together
fellow christians, and talk of the affairs of your country and kingdom, and
comfort one another with such words. This may make our hearts revive within us,
as it did Jacob's to hear the message that called him to Cashen, and to see the
chariots that should bring him to Joseph. O that we were furnished with skill
and resolution to turn the stream of men's common discourse to these more
sublime and precious things! And when men begin to talk of things unprofitable,
that we could tell how to put in a word for heaven.

5. Another help is this, make it thy business in every duty, to wind up thy
affections nearer heaven. A man's seize from GOD are answerable to his
own desires and ends: that which he sincerely seeks he finds; GOD'S end in the
institution of his ordinances was, that they be as so many stepping-stones to
our rest, and as the stairs by which (in subordination to Christ) we may daily
ascend unto it in our affections: let this be thy end in using them, as it was
GOD'S end in ordaining them; and doubtless they will not be unsuccessful. Men
that are separated by sea and land, can yet by letters carry on great trades,
even to the value of their whole estate: and may not a christian in the wise
improvement of duties, drive on this happy trade for rest? Come not therefore
with any lower ands to duties: renounce formality, customariness and applause.
When thou kneelest down in secret or public prayer, let it be in hope to get
thy heart neater GOD before thou risest off thy knees: when thou openest the
(...) or other books, let it be with this hope, to meet with some passage of
divine truth, and some such blessing; of the Spirit with it, as may raise thine
affections nearer heaven: when thou art setting thy foot out of thy door to go
to the public worship, say, I hope to meet with somewhat from GOD that may
raise my affections before I return; I hope the Spirit will give me the
meeting, and sweeten my heart with those celestial delights; I hope that Christ
will appear to me in the way, and shine about me with light from heaven, and
let me hear his instructing and reviving voice, and cause the scales to fall
from mine eyes, that I may see more of that glory than I ever yet saw; I hope
before I return to my house, my LORD will take my heart in hand, and bring it
within the view of rest, and set it before his Father's presence, that I may
return, as the shepherds from the heavenly vision, glorifying and praising GOD.
Remember also to pray for thy teacher, that GOD would put some divine message
into his mouth, which may leave an heavenly relish on thy spirit.

If these were our ends, and this our course when we set to duty, we should not
be so strange as we are to heaven.

6. Another help is this: make an advantage of every object thou see, and of
every passage of Divine Providence, and of every thing that befa's in thy
labor and calling, to mind thy soul of its approaching rest. As all
providence an creatures are means to our rest, so do they point us to that as
their end. Every creature has the name of GOD and of our final rest written
upon it, which a considerate believer may as truly discern, as he can read upon
a hand in a crossway the name of the town or city it points to. This spiritual
use of creatures and providence is GOD'S great end in bestowing them on man;
and he that overlooks this end, must needs rob GOD of his chief praise, and
deny him the greatest part of his thanks. This relation that our present
mercies have to our great eternal mercies, is the very quintessence and spirit
of all these mercies; therefore do they lose the very spirit of all their
mercies, and take nothing but the husks, who overlook this relation, and draw
not forth the sweetness of it in their contemplations. GOD's sweetest dealings
with us would not be half so sweet as they are, if they did not intimate some
further sweetness. As ourselves have a fleshly and spiritual use, and are
fitted to the nourishing of both our parts. He that receives the carnal part
and no more, may have his body comforted by them, but not his soul. O therefore
that christians were skilled in this art! You can open your bibles, and read
there of GOD and of glory: O learn to open the creatures, and the several
passages of Providence, to read of GOD and glory there. Certainly by such a
skilful improvement we might have a fuller taste of Christ and heaven, in every
bit we eat, and in every draught we drink, than most men have in the use of the
sacrament.

If thou prosper in the world, let it make thee more sensible of thy perpetual
prosperity: if thou be weary of thy labors, let it make thy thoughts of rest
more sweet: if things go cross with thee, let it make thee more carnestly
desire that day, when all thy sufferings and sorrows shall cease. Is thy body
refreshed with food or sleep? remember the inconceivable refreshings with
Christ. Do thou hear any news that makes thee glad? remember what glad
tidings it will be to hear the ^^and of the trump of GOD, and the absolving
sentence of Christ our judge. Art thou delightning the s^^f in the society of
the saints? remember the everlasting amiable society thou shall have with
perfected saints in rest. Is GOD communicating himself to thy spirit? remember
that time when thy joy shall be full. Do thou hear or feel the tempest of
wars, or see any cloud of blood arising? remember the day that thou shall be
housed with Christ, where there is nothing but ealmness and amiable union, and
where we shall solace ourselves in perfect peace, under the wings of the prince
of peace. Thus you may see what advantages to an heavenly life every condition
and creature does assord us, if we have but hearts to apprehend and improve
them.

7. Another singular help is this: be much in that angelical work of praise. As
the most heavenly spirits will have the most heavenly employment, so the more
heavenly the employment, the more will it make the spirit heavenly: though the
heart be the fountain of all our actions, yet do those actions, by a kind of
reflection, work much on the heart from whence they spring: the like also may
be said of our speeches. So that the work of praising GOD, being the most
heavenly work, is likely to raise us to the most heavenly temper. This is the
work of those saints and angels, and this will be our own everlasting work: if
we were more taken up in this employment now, we should be liker to what we
shall be then. When Aristotle was asked what he thought of music, he answers
Jovem neque canere, neque citharam pulsare; that Jupiter did neither sing, nor
play on the harp; thinking it an unprofitable art to men, which was no more
delightful to GOD. But christians may better argue from the like ground, that
singing of praise is a most profitable duty, because it is as it were so
delightful to GOD himself, that he has made it his people's eternal work;
(...) they shall sing the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb. As desire,
and faith, and hope, are of shorter continuance than love and joy; so also
pro^ching, and prayer, and sacraments, and all means for confirmation, and
expression of faith and hope, shall cease, when our thanks and praise, and
triumphant expressions of love and joy shall abide for-ever. The liveliest
emblem of heaven that I know upon earth is, when the people of GOD in the deep
sense of his excellency and bounty, from hearts abounding with love and joy,
join together both in heart and voice, in the cheerful and melodious singing of
his praises. Those that deny the use of singing, disclose their unheavenly
unexperienced hearts, as well as their ignorant understandings. Had they felt
the heavenly delights that many of their brethren in such duties have felt,
they would have been of another mind! And whereas they are wont to question,
whether such delights be genuine, or any better than carnal or delusive? surely
the very relish of GOD and heaven that is in them, the example of the saints in
scriture, whose spirits have been raised by the same duty, and the command of
scripture for the use of this means, one would think should quickly destroy the
controversy. And a man may as truly say of these delights, as of the testimony
of the Spirit, that they witness themselves to be of GOD.

Little do we know how we wrong ourselves, by shutting out of our prayers the
praises of GOD, or allowing them so narrow a room as we usually do. Reader, I
entreat thee, remember this: let praises have a larger room in thy duties: keep
ready at hand matter to feed thy praise, as well as matter for confession and
petition. To this end study the excellencies and goodness of the LORD, as
frequently as thy own necessities and vileness; study the mercies which thou
have received, and which are pr^^^sed; both their own worth and their
aggravating circumstances, as often as thou studiest the sins thou have
committed. O let GOD'S praise be much in your mouths. Seven times a day did
David praise him: yea, his praise was continually of him. As he that offers
praise, glorifieth GOD, so does he most rejoice and glad his own soul. Offer
therefore the sacrifice of praise continually: in the midst of the church let
us sing his praise.

I confess, to a man of a languishing body, where the heart faints, and the
spirits are feeble, the cheerful praising of GOD is more difficult; because the
body is the soul's instrument, and when it lies unstringed, or untuned, the
music is likely to be accordingly. Yet a spiritual cheerfulness there may be
within, and the heart may praise, if not the voice. But where the body is
strong, the spirits lively, and the heart cheerful, and the voice at command,
what advantage have such for this heavenly work? With what alacrity may they
sing forth praises? O the madness of healthful youth that lay out this vigor
of body and mind upon vain delights, which is so sit for the noblest work of
men! And O the sinful folly of many who drench their spirits in continual
sadness, and waste their days in complaints and groans, and so make themselves
unfit for this sweet and heavenly work! that when they should join with the
people of GOD in his praise, and delight their souls in singing to his name,
they are studying their miseries, and so rob GOD of his praise, and themselves
of their solace. But the greatest destroyer of our comfort in this duty is our
sticking in the tune and melody, and suffering the heart to be all the while
idle, which should perform the chief part of the work.

8. Another thing I will advise you to is this: be a careful observer of the
drawings of the Spirit, and fearful of quenching its motions, of resisting its
workings: if ever thy soul get above this earth, and get acquainted with this
living in heaven, the Spirit of GOD must be to thee as the chariot to Elijah;
yea, the very living principle by which thou must move and ascend to heaven. O
then grieve not thy guide, quench not thy life: if thou do, no wonder if thy
soul be at a loss; you little think how much the life of all your graces
depends upon your ready and cordial obedience to the Spirit: when the Spirit
urges thee to secret prayer, and thou refusest obedience; when he forbids thee
a known transgression, and yet thou will go on; when he tells thee which is
the way, and which not, and thou will not regard, no wonder if heaven and thy
soul be strange: if thou will not follow the Spirit while it would draw thee to
Christ, and to duty; how should it lead thee to heaven, and bring thy heart
into the presence of GOD? O what bold access shall that soul find in its
approaches to the Almighty, that is accustomed to a constant obeying of the
Spirit! And how backward, how dull, and strange, and ashamed will he be to
these addresses, who has long used to break away from the spirit that would
have guided him! I beseech thee learn well this lesson, and try this course;
let not the motions of thy body only, but the thoughts of thy heart be at the
Spirit's beck. Do thou not feel sometimes a strong impulsion to retire from
the world, and draw near to GOD? O do not thou disobey, but take the offer, and
hoist up sail while thou may have this blessed gale. When this wind blows
strongest, thou go fastest, either backward or forward. The more of this
Spirit we resist, the deeper will it wound, and the more we obey, the speedier
is our pace; as he goes heaviest that has the wind in his face, and he easiest
that has it in his back.

CHAP. V. A Description of heavenly Contemplation.
THE main thing intended is yet behind, and that which I aimed at when I set
upon this work. All that I have said is but the preparation to this. I once
more entreat thee therefore, as thou art a man that make conscience of a
revealed duty, and that dare not wilfully resist the Spirit, as thou valuest
the high delights of a saint, and as thou art faithful to the peace and
prosperity of thine own soul, that thou diligently study the directions
following; and that thou speedily and faithfully put them in practice: I pray
thee therefore, resolve before thou read any further, and promise here as
before the LORD, that if the following advice be wholesome to thy soul, thou will seriously set thyself to the work, and that no laziness of spirit shall
take thee off, nor lesser business interrupt thy course, but that thou will
approve thyself a doer of this word, and not an idle hearer only. Is this thy
promise, and will thou stand to it? Resolve, man, and then I shall be
encouraged to give thee my advice; only try it thoroughly, and then judge: if in
the faithful following of this course thou do not find an increase of all thy
graces, and art not made more serviceable in thy place; if thy soul enjoy not
more fellowship with GOD, and thy life be not fuller of pleasure, and thou have
not comfort readier by thee at a dying hour, and when thou have greatest need;
then throw these directions back in my face, and exclaim against me as a
deceiver for-ever: except GOD should leave thee uncomfortable for a little
season, for the more glorious manifestation of his attributes, and thy
integrity; and single thee out as he did Job, for an example of constancy and
patience, which would be but a preparative for thy fuller comfort. Certainly
GOD will not forsake this his own ordinance, but will be found of those that
thus diligently seek him. GOD has, as it were, appointed to meet thee in this
way: do not thou fail to give him the meeting, and thou shall find by
experience that he will not fail.

The duty which I press upon thee so earnestly, I shall now describe: it is the
set and solemn acting of all the powers of the soul upon this most perfect
object (rest) by meditation.

I will a little more fully explain the meaning of this description, that so
the duty may lie plain before thee. 1. The general title that I give this duty
is (meditation): not as it is precisely distinguished from cogitation,
consideration, and contemplation; but as it is taken in the larger and usual
sense for cogitation on things spiritual, and so comprehending consideration
and contemplation.

That meditation is a duty of GOD'S ordaining, not only in his written law, but
also in nature itself, I never met with the man that would deny: but that it is
a duty constantly practiced, I must, with sorrow, deny: it is in word confessed
to be a duty by all, but by the constant neglect denied by most: and (I know
not by what fatal security it comes to pass, that) men that are very tender
conscienced toward most other duties, yet as easily overslip this, as if they
knew it not to be a duty at all; they that are presently troubled if they omit
a sermon, a fast, a prayer in public or private, yet were never troubled that
they have omitted meditation, perhaps all their lifetime to this very day:
though it be that duty by which all other duties are improved, and by which the
soul digesteth truths, and draws forth their strength for its nourishment.
Certainly, I think, that as a man is but half an hour taking into his stomach
that meat which he must have seven or eight hours to digest; so a man may take
into his understanding and memory more truth in one hour, than he is able well
to digest in many. Therefore GOD commanded Jushua, That the book of the law
should not depart out of his mouth, but that he should meditate therein day and
night: that he might observe to do according to that which is written therein.
As digestion is the turning of the food into chyle and blood, and spirits and
flesh; so meditation rightly managed, turns the truths received and
remembered into warm affection, raised resolution, and holy conversation.
Therefore what good those men are likely to get by sermons or providence, who
are unaccustomed to meditation, you may easily judge. And why so much preaching
is lost among us, and men can run from sermon to sermon, and yet have such
languishing starved souls, I know no truer cause than their neglect of
meditation. If men heard one hour and meditated seven; if they did as
constantly digest their sermons as they hear them, they would find another kind
of benefit by sermons, than the ordinary sort of christians do.

But because meditation is a general word, and it is not all meditation that I
here intend, I shall therefore lay down the difference whereby this I am urging
is discerned from all other sorts of meditation. And the difference is taken
from the act, and from the object of it.

From the act, which I call the set and solemn acting of all the powers of the
soul.

1. I call it the acting of them, for it is action that we are directing you in
now, and not dispositions; yet these also are necessarity presupposed: it must
be a soul that is qualified for the work, by the supernatural grace of the
Spirit, which must be able to perform this heavenly exercise. It is a work of
the living, and not of the dead: it is a work or all other the most spiritual,
and therefore not to be well performed by a heart that is merely carnal. 2. I
call this meditation the acting of the powers of the soul, meaning the soul as
rational. It is the work of the soul; for bodily exercise does here profit but
little. The soul has its labor and its ease, its business and its idleness,
as well as the body; and diligent students are usually as sensible of the
labor and weariness of their spirits, as they are of that of the members of
the body. This action of the soul is it I persuade thee to. 3. I call it the
acting of ALL the powers of the soul, to difference it from the common
meditation of students, which is usually the mere employment of the brain. It
is not a bare thinking that I mean, nor the mere use of invention or memory,
but a business of a higher and more excellent nature.
The understanding is not the whole soul, and therefore cannot do the whole
work: as GOD has made several parts in man, to perform their several offices
for his nourishment and life; so has he ordained the faculties of the soul to
perform their several offices for his spiritual life: so the understanding must
take in truths, and prepare them for the will, and it must received them, and
commend them to the affections: the best digestion is in the bottom of the
stomach; the affections are as it were the bottom of the soul, and therefore
the best digestion is there: while truth is but a speculation swimming in the
brain, the soul has not taken fast hold of it; Christ and heaven have various
excellencies, and therefore GOD has formed the soul with a power of diverse
ways of apprehending, that so we might be capable of enjoying those
excellencies.

What good could all the glory of heaven have done us? or what pleasure should
we have had in the goodness of GOD himself, if we had been without the
affections of love and joy, whereby we are capable of being delighted in that
goodness? So also, what strength or sweetness can thou receive by thy
meditations on eternity, while thou do not exercise those affections which
are the senses of the soul, by which it must receive this strength and
sweetness?

This is it that has deceived christians in this business: they have thought
meditation is nothing but the bare thinking on truths, and the rolling of them
in the understanding and memory, when every schoolboy can do this.

Therefore this is the great task in hand, and this is the work that I would
set thee on; to get these truths from thy head to thy heart; that all the
sermons which thou have heard of heaven, and all the notions thou have
conceived of this rest, may be turned into the blood and spirit of affection,
and thou may feel them revive thee, and warm thee at the heart, and may so
think of heaven, as heaven should be thought on.

If thou should study nothing but heaven while thou live, and should have
thy thoughts at command, to turn them hither on every occasion, and yet
should proceed no further than this; this were not the meditation that I
intended: as it is thy whole soul that must possess GOD hereafter, so must the
whole in a lower manner, possess him here. I have shown you in the beginning of
this treatise, how the soul must enjoy the LORD in glory, to wit, by knowing,
by loving, by joying in him: why, the very same way must thou begin thy
enjoyment here.

So much as thy understanding and affections are sincerely acted upon GOD, so
much do thou enjoy him: and this is the happy work of this meditation. So
that you see here is somewhat more to be done, than barely to remember and
think of heaven: as running, and such like labors, do not only stir a hand or
foot, but strain and exercise the whole body; so does meditation the whole soul.

As the whole was filled with sin before, so the whole must be filled with GOD
now: as St. Paul says of knowledge, and gifts, and faith to remove mountains,
that if thou have all these without love, thou art but as a sounding brass, or
as a tinkling cym^^l, so I may say of the exercise of these, if in this work of
meditation, thou exercise knowledge, and gifts, and faith of miracles, and not
love and joy, thou do nothing; if thy meditation tends to fill thy note-book
with notions and good sayings concerning GOD, and not thy heart with longings
after him, and delight in him, for aught I know thy book is as much a christian
as thou.

I call this meditation set and solemn, to difference it from that which is
occasional. As there is prayer which is solemn, when we set ourselves wholly to
the duty; and prayer which is sudden and short, commonly called ejaculations,
when a man in the midst of other business, does send up some brief request to
GOD: so also there is meditation solemn, when we apply ourselves only to that
work; and there is meditation which is short and cursory, when in the midst of
our business we have some good thoughts of GOD in our minds. And as solemn
prayer is either first set, when a christian observing it as a standing duty,
does resolvedly practice it in a constant course; or secondly, occasional, when
some unusual occasion does put us upon it at a season extraordinary: so also
meditation.

Now, though I would persuade you to that meditation which is mixed with your
common labors, and to that which special occasions direct you to; yet these
are not the main things which I here intend: but that you would make it a
constant standing duty, as you do hearing, and praying, and reading the
scripture, and that you would solemnly set yourselves about it, and make it for
that time your whole work, and intermix other matters no more with it, than you
would do with praying, or other duties. Thus you see, what kind of meditation
it is that we speak of, wiz. the set and solemn acting of all the powers of the
soul.

The second part of the difference is drawn from its object, which is rest, or
the most blessed estate of man in his everlasting enjoyment of GOD in heaven.
Meditation has a large field to walk in, and has as many objects to work
upon, as there are matters, and lines, and words in the scriptures, as there
are known creatures in the whole creation, and as there are particular
discernable passages of Providence in the government of persons and actions
through the world: but the meditation that I now direct you in, is only of the
end of all these, and of these as they refer to that end: it is not a walk from
mountains to valleys, from sea to land, from kingdom to kingdom, from planet to
planet; but it is a walk from mountains and valleys to the holy mount Sion;
from sea and land to the land of the living; from the kingdoms of this world,
to the kingdom of saints; from earth to heaven; from time to eternity. It is a
walking upon the sun, and moon, and stars; it is a walk in the garden and
paradise of GOD. It may seem far off; but spirits are quick: whether in the
body, or out of the body, their motion is swift; they are not so heavy or dull
as these earthly lumps, nor so slow of motion as these clods of flesh. I would
not have you cast off your other meditations; but surely as heaven has the
pre-eminence in perfection, so should it have the pre-eminence also in our
meditation: that which will make us most happy when we possess it, will make us
most joyful when we meditate upon it; especially when that meditation is a
degree of possession, if it be such affecting meditation as I here describe.

You need not here be troubled with fear, lest studying so much on these high
matters should make you mad. If I set you to meditate as much on sin and wrath,
and to study nothing but judgment and damnation, then you might fear such an
issue: but it is heaven, and not hell, that I would persuade you to walk in; it
is joy, and not sorrow, that I persuade you to exercise. I would urge you to
look on no deformed object, but only ^p^n the ravishing glory of saints, and
the unspeakable excellencies of the GOD of glory, and the beams that stream
from the face of his Son. Are these sad thoughts? Will it distract a man to
think of his happiness? Will it distract the miserable to think of mercy? Or
the captive or prisoner, to foresee deliverance? Neither do I persuade your
thoughts to matters of great difficulty, or to study knotty controversies of
heaven, or to search out things beyond your reach. If you should thus set your
wit upon the tenters, you might quickly be distracted indeed: but it is your
affections more than your inventions that must be used in this heavenly
employment we speak of. They are truths which are commonly known, which your
souls must draw forth and feed upon. The resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting, are articles of your creed, and not nicer controversies. Methinks
it should be liker to make a man mad, to think of living in a world of woe, to
think of abiding among the rage of wicked men, than to think of living with
Christ in bliss: methinks, if we be not mad already, it should sooner distract
us, to hear the tempests and roaring waves, to see the billows, and rocks, and
sands, and gulphs, than to think of arriving safe at rest. But wisdom is
justified of all her children. Knowledge has no enemy but the ignorant. This
heavenly course was never spoke against by any, but those that never either
knew it, or used it. I more fear the neglect of men that do approve it. Truth
loses more by loose: friends, than by sharpest enemies.

CHAP. VI. The fittest Time and Place for this Contemplation, and the
Preparation of the Heart unto it.
THUS I have opened to you the nature of this duty; I proceed to direct you in
the work; where I shall, first, show you how you must set upon it; secondly,
how you must behave in it; and thirdly, how you shall shut it up. I advise
thee, 1. Somewhat concerning the time. 2. Somewhat concerning the place. And 3.
Somewhat concerning the frame of thy spirit.


And 1. for the time, I advise thee that as much as may be, it be set and
constant. Proportion out such a part of thy time to the work.

Stick not at their scruple, who question the stating of times as
superstitious: if thou suit out thy time to the advantage of the work, and
place no religion in the time itself; thou need not to fear lest this be
superstition. As a workman in his shop will have a set place for every one of
his tools, or else when be should use it, it may be to seek; so a christian
should have a set time for every ordinary duty, or else when he should practice
it, it is ten to one but he will be put by it. Stated time is a hedge to duty,
and defends it against many temptations to omission. GOD has stated none but
the LORD'S day himself; but he has left it to be stated by ourselves,
according to every man's condition and occasions, lest otherwise his law should
have been a burden or a snare. Yet has he left us general rules, which by the
use of reason, and christian prudence, may help us to determine the fittest
times.

It is as ridiculous a question of them that (...) Where scripture commands to
pray so often, or at (...) hours? as if they asked, Where the scripture commands
that the church stand in such a place? (...) pulpit in such a place? or my seat
in such a (...) or where it commands a man to read the scriptures with a pair
of spectacles?

Most that I have known to argue against a stated time, have at last grown
careless of the duty itself, and showed more dislike against the work than be
time. If GOD gave me so much money or wealth, and tell me not how much in
scripture such a poor man must have, nor how much my family, nor how much in
clothes, and how much in expenses: is it not lawful, yea, and necessary, that I
make the division myself, and allow to each the due portion? So if GOD does
bestow on me a day or week of time, and give me such and such work to do in
this time, and tell me not how much I shall allot to each work; certainly I
must make the division myself, and proportion it wisely and carefully too.
Though GOD has not told you at what hour you shall rise in the morning, or at
what hours you shall eat and drink; yet your own reason, and experience will
tell you, that ordinarily you should observe a stated time. Neither let the
fear of customariness and formality deter you from this. This argument has
brought the LORD'S supper from once a week to once a quarter, or once a year;
and it has brought family duties with too many of late, from twice a day to
once a week, or once a month.

I advise thee therefore, if well thou may, to allow this duty a stated time,
and be as constant in it, as in hearing and praying: yet be cautious in
understanding this. I know this will not prove ever, man's duty: some have not
themselves and their (...) command, and therefore cannot set their hours; such
are, most servants, and many children of poor parents; and many are so poor,
that the necessity of their families will deny them this freedom. I do not
think it the duty of such to leave their labors for this work just at certain
set times, no nor for prayer. Of two duties we must choose the greater, though
of two sins we must choose neither. I think such persons were best to be
watchful, to redeem time as much as they can, and take their vacant
opportunities as they fall, and especially to join meditation and prayer, as
much as they can, with the labors of their callings. There is no such enmity
between laboring, and meditating or praying in the spirit, but that both may
be done together; yet I say, as Paul in another case, if thou can be free,
use it rather. Those that have more spare time, I still advise, that they keep
this duty to a stated time. And indeed it were no ill husbandry, nor point of
folly, if we did so by all other duties; if we considered the ordinary works of
the day, and suited out a fit season and proportion of time to every work, and
fixed this in our memory and resolution, or wrote it in a table, and kept it in
our closets, and never broke it but upon unexpected and extraordinary causes:
if every work of the day had thus its appointed time, we should be better
skilled, both in redeeming time, and performing duty.

2. I advise thee also, concerning thy time for this duty, that as it be
stated, so it be frequent: just how often it should be, I cannot determine,
because men's conditions may vary it: but in general, that it be frequent, the
scripture requires, when it mentions meditating continually, and day and
night. Circumstances of our condition, may much vary the circumstance of our
duties. It may be one man's duty to hear or pray oftener than another, and so
it may be in this of meditation: but for those that can conveniently omit other
business, I advise, that it be once a day at least. Though scripture tells us
not how often in a day we should eat or drink; yet prudence and experience will
direct us twice or thrice a day.

Those that think they should not tie themselves to order and number of duties;
but should then only meditate or pray, when they find the Spirit provoking them
to it, go upon uncertain and unchristian grounds. I am sure, the scripture
provokes us to frequency, and our necessity secondeth the voice of scripture;
and if through my own neglect, or resisting the Spirit, I do not find it so
excite me, I dare not therefore disobey the scripture, nor neglect the
necessities of my own soul. I should suspect that spirit which would turn my
soul from constancy in duty: if the Spirit in scripture bid me meditate or
pray, I dare not forbear it, because I find not the spirit within me to second
the command: if I find not incitation to duty before, yet I may find assistance
while I wait in performance. I am afraid of laying my corruptions upon the
Spirit, or blaming the want of the Spirit's assistance, when I should blame the
backwardness of my own heart; nor dare I make one corruption a plea for
another; nor urge the inward rebellion of my nature, as a reason for the
outward disobedience of my life; and for the healing of my nature's
backwardness, I more expect that the Spirit of Christ should do it in a way of
duty, than in a way of disobedience and neglect of duty. Men that fall on duty
according to the frame of their spirit only, are like our ignorant vulgar, who
think their appetite should be the only rule of their eating; when a wise man
judges by reason and experience, lest when his appetite is depraved, he should
either surfeit or famish. Our appetite is no sure rule for our times of duty;
but the word of GOD in general, and our spiritual reason, experience,
necessity, and convenience in particular, may truly direct us.

Three reasons especially should persuade thee to frequency in this meditation
on heaven.

1. Because seldom conversing with him will breed a strangeness betwixt thy
soul and GOD: frequent society breeds familiarity, and familiarity increases
love and delight, and makes us bold and confident in our addresses. This is
the main end of this duty, that thou may have acquaintance and fellowship
with GOD therein; therefore if thou come but seldom to it, thou will keep
thyself a stranger still, and so miss of the end of the work. 2. Seldomness
will make thee unskilful in the work, and strange to the duty, as well as to
GOD. How clumsily do men set their hands to a work they are seldom employed in!
whereas frequency will habituate thy heart to the work, and thou will better
know the way in which thou daily walk, yea, and it will be more easy and
delightful also: the hill which made thee pant and blow at the first going up,
thou may run up easily when thou art once accustomed to it. 3. And lastly,
Thou will lose that heat and life by long intermissions, which with much ado
thou did obtain in duty. If thou eat but a meal in two or three days, thou will lose thy strength as fast as thou gettest it: if in holy meditation thou
get near to Christ, and warm thy heart with the fire of love, if thou then turn
away, and come but seldom, thou will soon return to thy former coldness.
It is true, the intermixed use of other duties may do much to the keeping thy
heart above, especially secret prayer: but meditation is the life of most other
duties; and the view of heaven is the life of meditation.

3. Concerning the time of this duty, I advise thee, that thou choose the most
seasonable time. All things are beautiful in their season. Unseasonableness may
lose thee the fruit of thy labor; it may raise disturbances and difficulties
in the work; yea, it may turn a duty to sin; when the seasonableness of a duty
does make it easy, does remove impediments, does embolden us to the
undertaking, and ripen its fruit.

The seasons of this duty are either, First, ordinary: or, Secondly,
extraordinary.

First, The ordinary season of your daily performance cannot be particularly
determined, otherwise GOD would have determined in his word. Men's conditions
of employment, and freedom, and bodily temper, are so various, that the same
may be a seasonable hour to one, which may be unseasonable to another. If thou
be a servant, or an hard labourer, that thou have not thy time at command, thou
must take that season which thy business will best afford: either as thou
sit in the shop at thy work, or as thou travellest on the way, or as thou
lie waking in the night. Every man best knows his own time, even when he has
the least to hinder him in the world: but for those whose necessities tie them
not so close, but that they may choose what time of the day they will, my
advice to such is, that they carefully observe the temper of their body and
mind, and mark when they find their spirits most active and fit for
contemplation, and pitch upon that as the stated time. Some men are freest for
duties when they are fasting, and some are then unfittest of all. Every man is
the meetest judge for himself. The time I have always found fittest for myself,
is, the evening, from sunsetting to the twilight; and sometime in the night
when it is warm and clear.

The LORD'S day is a time exceeding seasonable for this exercise. When should
we more seasonably contemplate on rest, than on that day which does typify it
to us? Neither do I think that typifying use is ceased, because the antitype is
not fully come. However it being a day appropriated to worship and spiritual
duties, we should never exclude this duty, which is so eminently spiritual. I
think verily this is the chief work of a christian sabbath, and most agreeable
to the intent of its positive institution. What fitter time to converse with
our LORD, than on that day which he has appropriated to such employment, and
therefore called it the LORD'S day? What fitter day to ascend to heaven, than
that on which our LORD did arise from earth, and fully triumph over death and
hell, and take possession of heaven before us?

Two sorts of christians I would entreat to take notice of this especially.

1. Those that spend the LORD'S day only in public worship; either through the
neglect of meditation or else by their overmuch exercise of the public,
allowing no time to private duty: though there be few that offend in this kind;
yet some there are, and a hurtful mistake to the soul it is. They will grow but
in gifts, if they exercise but their gifts in outward performances. 2. Those
that have time on the LORD'S day for idleness and vain discourse, and find the
day longer than they know how well to spend: were these but acquainted with
this duty of contemplation, they would need no other recreation; they would
think the longest day short enough, and be sorry that the night had shortened
their pleasure.
Secondly, For the extraordinary performance, these following are seasonable
times.

1. When GOD does extraordinarily revive thy spirit. When GOD has enkindled
thy spirit with fire from above, it is that it may mount aloft more freely. It
is a choice part of a christian's skill, to observe the temper of his own
spirit, and to observe the gales of grace, and how the Spirit of Christ does
move upon his. Without Christ we can do nothing: therefore let us be doing when
he is doing; and be sure not to be out of the way, nor asleep when he comes. A
little labor will set thy heart a going at such a time, when another time thou
may take pains to little purpose.

2. When thou art cast into troubles of mind, through sufferings, or fear, or
care, or temptations, then it is seasonable to address thyself to this duty.
When should we take our cordials, but in our times of fainting? When is it more
seasonable to walk to heaven, than when we know not in what corner on earth to
live with comfort? Or when should our thoughts converse above, but when they
have nothing but grief to converse with below?

Another fit season for this heavenly duty, is, when the messengers of GOD
summon us to die; when either our gray hairs, or our languishing bodies, or
some such forerunners of death, tell us that our change cannot be far off;
when should we more frequently sweeten our souls with the believing thoughts of
another life, than when we find that this is almost ended and when flesh is
raising fears and terrors? Surely no m^n have greater need of supporting joys
than dying men; and those joys must be fetched from our eternal joy.

It now follows that I speak a word of the fittest place. Though GOD is every
where to be found, yet some places are more convenient than others.

1. As this is a private and spiritual duty, so it is most convenient that thou
retire to some private place; our spirits had need of every help, and to be
freed from every hinderance in the work. For occasional meditation I give thee
not this advice; but for set and solemn duty, I advise, that thou withdraw
thyself from all society, that thou may awhile enjoy the society of Christ.

And as I advise thee to a place of retiredness; so also that thou observe more
particularly, what place or posture best agrees with thy spirit; whether
within door, or without; whether sitting still, or walking. I believe Isaac's
example in this also, will direct us to the place and posture which will best
suit with most, as it does with me, viz. His walking forth to meditate in the
field at the even-tide. And Christ's own example gives us the like direction.
Christ was used to a solitary garden; and though he took his disciples thither
with him, yet did he separate himself from them for more secret devotions.

I am next to advise thee somewhat concerning the preparations of thy heart.
The success of the work does much depend on the frame of thy heart. When man's
heart had nothing in it that might grieve the Spirit, then was it the
delightful habitation of his Maker. GOD did not quit his residence there, till
man did repel him by unworthy provocations. There grew no strangeness, till the
heart grew sinful, and too loathsome a dungeon for GOD to delight in. And were
this soul restored to its former innocence, GOD would quickly return to his
former habitation: yea, (...) far as it is renewed and repaired by the Spirit,
the LORD will yet acknowledge it his own, and Christ will manifest himself unto
it, and the Spirit will take it for its temple and residence. So far as the
soul is qualified for conversing with GOD, so far it does actually enjoy him.
Therefore keep thy heart with all diligence, for from thence are the issues of
life.

More particularly, when thou set on this duty, 1. Get thy heart as clear
from the world as thou can; wholly lay by the thoughts of thy business, of
thy troubles, of thy enjoyments, and of every thing that may take up any room
in thy soul. Get thy soul as empty as possibly thou can, that so it may be
the more capable of being filled with GOD. It is a work that will require all
the powers of thy soul, if they were a thousand times more capacious and active
than they are, and therefore you have need to lay by all other thoughts and
affections while you are busied here.

2. Be sure thou set upon this work with the greatest seriousness that possibly
thou can. Customariness here is a killing sin. There is no trifling in holy
things; GOD will be sanctified of all that draw near him. These spiritual
duties are the most dangerous, if we miscarry in them, of all. The more they
advance the soul, being well used, the more they destroy it, being used
unfaithfully; as the best meats corrupted are the worst.

To help thee therefore to be serious when thou set on this work; First,
labor to have the deepest apprehensions of the presence of GOD, and of the
incomprehensible greatness of the majesty which thou appreachest. Think with
what reverence thou should approach thy Maker: think thou art addressing
thyself to him, that made the w^^lds with the word of his mouth; that upholds
the earth as in the palm of his hand; that keeps the sun, and moon, and heaven
in their courses; that bounds the raging sea with the sands, and says,
Hitherto go, and no further: thou art going to converse with him, before whom
the earth will quake, and devils tremble; before whose bar thou must shortly
stand, and all the world with thee, to receive their doom. O think, I shall
then have lively apprehensions of his majesty: my drowsy spirits will then be
wakened: why should I not now be roused with the sense of his greatness, and
the dread of his name possess my soul.

Secondly, Labor to apprehend the greatness of the work which thou attemptest,
and to be deeply sensible both of its weight and height. If thou were pleading
for thy life at the bar of a judge, thou would be serious; and yet that were
but a trifle to this: if thou were engaged in such a work as David was against
Goliath, whereon the kingdom's deliverance depended, in itseif considered, it
were nothing to this. Suppose thou were going to such a wrestling as Jacob's;
suppose thou were going to see the sight which the three disciples saw in the
mount; how seriously, how reverently would thou both approach and behold! If
some angel from heaven should but appoint to meet thee, at the time and place
of thy contemplation, how apprehensively would thou go to meet him! Why,
consider then with what a spirit thou should meet the LORD, and with what
seriousness and dread thou should daily converse with him.

Consider also the blessed issue of the work. If it succeed, it will be an
admission of thee into the presence of GOD, a beginning of thy eternal glory on
earth; a means to make thee live above the rate of other men, and admit thee
into the next room to the angels themfelves; a means to make thee live and die
both joyfully and blessedly: so that the prize being so great, thy preparation
should be answerable.

CHAP. VII. What Affections must be acted, and by what Considerations and
Objects, and in what Order.
TO draw the heart nearer the work; the next thing to be discovered, is, What
powers of the soul must here be acted, what affections excited, what
considerations are necessary thereto, and in what order we must proceed.

1. You must go to the memory, which is the magazine or treasury of the
understanding, thence you must take forth those heavenly doctrines which you
intend to make the subject of your meditation. For the present purpose, you may
look over any promise of eternal life in the gospel; any description of the
glory of the saints, of the resurrection of the body, and life everlasting:
some one sentence concerning those eternal joys, may afford you matter for many
years meditation; yet it will be a point of wisdom here, to have always a stock
of matter in your memory, that so when we should use it, we may bring forth out
of our treasury things new and old. If we took things in order, and observed
some method in respect of the matter, and did meditate first on one truth
concerning eternity, and then another, it would not be amiss. And if any should
be barren of matter through weakness of memory, they may have notes or books of
this subject for their furtherance.

2. When you have fetched from your memory the matter of your meditation, your
next work is to present it to your judgment: open there the case as fully as
thou can, set forth the several ornaments of the crown, the several dignities
belonging to the kingdom, as they are partly laid open in the beginning of this
book: let judgment deliberately view them over, and take as exact a survey as
it can; then put the question, and require a determination. Is there happiness
in all this, or not? Is not here enough to make me blessed? Can he want any
thing, who fully possesses GOD? Is there any thing higher for a creature to
attain? Thus urge thy judgment to pass an upright sentence, and compel it to
subscribe to the perfection of thy celestial happiness, and to lea^e this
sentence as under its hand upon record.

Thus exercise thy judgment in the contemplation of thy rest; thus magnify and
advance the LORD in thy heart, till an holy admiration has possessed thy soul.

3. But the great work, which you may either premise, or subjoin to this as you
please, is, to exercise thy belief of the truth of thy rest; and that both in
respect of the truth of the promise, and also the truth of thy own interest and
title. As unbelie^ does cause the languishing of all our graces; so faith would
do much to revive and actuate them, if it were but revived and actuated itself.

If we did soundly believe that there is such a glory, that within a few days
our eyes shall behold it: O what passions would it raise within us! Were we
theroughly persuaded, that every word in the scripture concerning the
inconceivable joys of the kingdom, and the inext re^^ible blessedness of the
life to come, were the very word of the living GOD, and should certainly be
performed to the smalle^ (...) ^^^ishing apprehensions of that (...) would it
actuate every affection (...) ^^^^port us with joy, upon the (...) If I were as
verily persuaded, tha^ (...) those great things of eternity, pro^^ (...) as I
am, that this is a chair that I sit (...) is paper that I write on; would it
not (...) ^it within me? Would it not make (...) despise the world? and even
f^^get to sleep, or to (...) and say, as Christ, I have m^at to eat that ye
(...) of. O sirs, you little know what a thorough belief. would work.

Therefore let this be a chief part of thy business in meditation. Read over
the promises: stady all confirming providence. Call forth thine own
experiences: remember the scriptures already fulfilled both to the church and
saints in the former ages, and eminently to both in this present age, and those
that have been fulfilled particularly to thee.

Set before your faith, the freeness and the universality of the promise:
consider GOD'S offer, and urge it upon all, that he has accepted from the
conditional covenant no man in the worl^, nor will exclude any from heaven, who
will accept of his offer. Study also the gracious disposition of Christ, and
his readiness to welcome all that will come: study all the evidences of his
love, which appeared in his sufferings, in his preaching the gospel, in his
condescension to sinners, in his easy conditions, in his exceeding patience,
and in his urgent invitations: do not all these discover his readiness to save?
Did he ever manifest himself unwilling? Remember also his faithfulness to
perform his engagements. Study also the evidences of his love in thyself; look
over the works of his grace in thy soul: if thou do not find the degree which
thou desire, yet deny not that degree which thou find. Remember what
discoveries of thy state thou have made formerly in the work of
self-examination. Remember all the former testimonies of the Spirit; and all
the sweet feelings of the favor of GOD: and all the prayers that he has heard
and granted; and all the preservations and deliverances; and all the progress
of his Spirit, in his workings on thy soul, and the disposals of Providence,
conducing to thy good; and vouchsafing of means, the directing thee to them,
the directing of ministers to meet with thy state, the restraint of those sins
that thy nature was most prone to. Lay these all together, and then think with
thyself, whether all these do not testify the good will of the LORD concerning
thy salvation? And whether thou may not conclude with Sampson's mother, when
her husband thought they should surely die, If the Lord were pleased to kill
us, be would not have received an offering at our hands, neither would he have
showed us all these things; nor would, as at this time, have told us such
things as these, Judges xiii. 22, 23.

2. When the meditation has thus proceeded about the truth of thy happiness
the next part of the work is to meditate of its goodness; that when the
judgment has determined, and faith has apprehended, it may then pass on to
raise the affections.

1. The first affection to be acted, is love; the object of it, is goodness:
here then, is the reviving part of thy work: go to thy memory, thy judgment,
and thy faith; and from them produce the excellencies of thy rest; take out a
copy of the record of the Spirit in scripture, and another of the sentence
registered in thy spirit, whereby the transcendent glory of the saints is
declared: present these to thy affection of love; open to it the cabinet that
contains the pearl; show it the promise, and that which it assures; thou
need not look on heaven through a multiplying glass: open but one casement,
that love may look in; give it but a glimpse of the back parts of GOD, and thou will find thyself presently in another world: do but speak out, and love can
hear: do but reveal these things, and love can see: it is the brutish love of
the world that is blind; divine love is exceeding quick-sighted. Let thy faith,
as it were, take thy heart by the hand, and show it the sumptuous buildings of
thy eternal habitation, and the glorious ornaments of thy Father's house; show
it those mansions which Christ is preparing, and display before it the honors
of the kingdom: let faith lead thy heart into the presence of GOD, and draw as
near as possibly thou can, and say to it, Behold, the Anci^nt of Days; the
Lord Jehovah, whose name is I AM: this is he who made the worlds with his word;
this is the cause of all causes, the spring of action, the fountain of life,
the ^^rst principle of the creatures' motions* who upholds the earth, who
rules the nations, who disposes of events, and subdueth his foes; who
governs the depths of the great waters, and boundeth the rage of her swelling
waves; who rules the winds, and moves the orbs, and causes the sun to run
its race, and the several planets to know their courses: this is he that loved
thee from everlasting, that formed thee in the womb, and gave thee this soul;
who brough^ thee forth, and showed thee the light, and ranked thee with the
chief of his earthly creatures; who endued thee with thy understanding, and
beautified thee with his gifts; who maintains thee with life, and health, and
comforts; who gave thee thy preferments, and dignified thee with thy honors,
and differenced thee from the most miserable and vilest of men. Here. O here is
an object worthy thy love; here thou may^t be sure thou can not love too
much: this is the LORD that has blessed thee with his benefits, that has
spread thy table in the sight of thine enemies, and caused thy cup to overflow.
This is he that angels and saints praise, and the host of heaven must magnify
for-ever.

Thus do thou expatiate in the praises of GOD, and open his excellencies to
thine own heart, till thou feel the life begin to stir, and the fire in thy
breast begin to kindle: as gazing upon the dusty beauty of flesh does kindle
the fire of carnal love; so this gazing on the glory and goodness of the LORD
will kindle spiritual love. What though thy heart be rock and flint, this often
striking may bring forth the fire; but if yet thou feel not thy love to
work, lead thy heart further, and show it yet more; show it the Son of the
living GOD, whose name is Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: show it the King of saints on the
throne of his glory, who is, and was, and is to come; who lives and was dead,
and behold, he lives for evermore, who has made thy peace by the blood of his
cross, and has prepared thee, with himself, an habitation of peace; his office
is to be the great peacemaker; his kingdom is a kingdom of peace; his gospel
is the tidings of peace; his voice to thee now is the voice of peace: draw near
and behold him: do thou not hear his voice? He that called Thomas to come
near, and to see the print of the nails, and to put his finger into his wounds,
he it is that calls to thee, come near and view the LORD thy Savior, and be
not faithless, but believing; Peace be unto thee, fear not, it is I; he that
calls, behold me, behold me; to a rebellious people that called not on his
name, does call out to thee a believer to behold him; he that calls to them who
pass by, to behold his sorrow in the day of his humiliation, does call now to
thee to behold his glory in the day of his exaltation: look well upon him: do
thou not know him? Why, it is he that brought thee up from the pit of hell: it
is he that reversed the sentence of thy damnation; that bore the curse which
thou should have borne, and restored thee to the blessing that thou had
forfeited, and purchased the advancement which thou must inherit for-ever; and
yet do thou not know him? Why, his hands were pierced, his head was pierced,
his sides were pierced, his heart was pierced with the sting of thy sins, that
by these marks thou may always know him: do thou not remember when he found
thee lying in thy blood, and took pity on thee, and dressed thy wounds, and
brought thee home, and said unto thee, live? Have thou forgotten since be
wounded himself to cure thy wounds, and let out his own blood to stop thy
bleeding? Is not the passage to his heart yet standing open? If thou know him
not by the face, the voice, the hands; if thou know him not by the tears and
bloody sweat, yet look nearer, thou may know him by the heart; that
broken-healed heart is his, that dead-revived heart is his, that pitying,
melting heart is his; doubtless it can be none but his. Love and compassion are
its certain signatures; this is he, even this is he, who would rather die than
thou should die, who chose thy life before his own, who pleads his blood
before his Father, and makes continual intercession for thee. If he had not
suffered, O! what had thou suffered? What had thou been if he had not
redeemed thee? Whither had thou gone, if he had not recalled thee? There was
but one step between thee and hell, when he stepped in and bore the stroke; he
slew the bear, and rescued the prey; he delivered thy soul from the roaring
lion: and is not here fuel enough for love to feed on? Does not this loadstone
snatch thy heart, and almost draw it forth from thy breast? Can thou read the
history of love any further at once? Does not thy throbbing heart here stop to
ease itself; and do thou not, as Joseph, seek for a place to weep in? Or do
not the tears of thy love bedew these lines? Go then, for the field of love is
large, it will yield thee f^esh contents for-ever, and be thine eternal work to
behold and love; thou need not then want work for thy present meditation.

Have thou forgotten the time when thou wast weeping, and he wiped the tears
from thine eyes? when thou want bleeding, and he wiped the blood from thy soul?
when pricking cares and fears did grieve thee, and he did refresh thee and draw
out the thorns? Have thou forgotten when thy folly wounded thy soul, and the
venomous guilt seized upon thy heart? when he sucked forth the mortal poison
from thy soul, though therewith he drew it into his own?

I remember it is written of good M^lancthon, that, when his child was removed
from him, it pierced his heart to remember, how he once sat weeping with the
infant on his knee, and how lovingly it wiped the tears from the father's eyes:
how then should it pierce thy heart to think how lovingly Christ has wiped
away thine! O how often has he found thee sitting weeping, like Hagar, while
thou gave up thy state, thy friends, thy life, yea, thy soul for lost; and he
opened to thee a well of consolation, and opened thine eyes also that thou
may see it? How often has he found thee in the posture of Elias, sitting under
the tree forlorn and solitary, and desiring rather to die than to live; and he
has spread thee a table from heaven, and sent thee away refreshed, and
encouraged? How often has he found thee as the servant of Elias, crying out,
Alas! what shall we do, an h^st does compass the city? And he has opened thine
eyes to see more for thee than against thee, both in regard of the enemies of
thy soul and the b^dy. How often has he found thee in such a passion as J^^as,
in thy peevish frenzy, weary of thy life; and he has not answered passion with
passion, though he might have done well to be angry, but has mildly reasoned
thee out of thy madness, and said, Do thou well to be angry, or to repine
against me? How often has he set thee on watching and praying, or repenting and
believing, and when he has returned, has found thee fast asleep? and yet he
has not taken thee at the worst, but instead of an angry aggravation of thy
fault, he has covered it over with the mantle of love, and prevented thy
overmuch sorrow with a gentle excuse, The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak. He might have done by thee, as Epaminondas by his soldier, who finding
him asleep upon the watch, run him through with his sword, and said, Dead I
found thee, and dead I leave thee: but he rather chose to awake thee more
gently, that his tenderness might admonish thee, and keep thee watching. How
often has he been traduced in his cause, or name, and thou have, like Peter,
denied him (at least by thy silence) whi^st he has stood in sight? Yet all the
revenge he has taken, has been a heart-melting look, and a silent remembering
thee of thy fault by his countenance. How often has conscience haled thee before
him, as the Pharisees did the adulterous woman; and laid most heinous crimes to
thy charge? And when thou have expected to hear the sentence of death, he has
shamed away the accusers, and put them to silence, and said to thee, Neither do
I condemn thee; go thy way, and sin no more.

And art thou not yet transported with love? Can thy heart be cold when thou
think of this, or can it hold when thou rememberest those boundless
compassions? Rememberest thou not the time when he met thee in thy duties; when
he smiled upon thee, and spoke comfortably to thee? when thou did sit under
his shadow with great delight, a^^ when his fruit was sweet to thy taste? when
he brought thee to his banqueting house, and his banner over thee was love?
when his left hand was under thy head, and with his right hand he did embrace
thee? And do thou not yet cry out, Stay me, comfor^ me, for I am sick of
love? Thus I would have thee deal with thy hear^; thus hold forth the goodness
of Christ, to thy affections; plead thus the case with thy frozen soul, till
thou say as David in another case, My heart was hot within me.

If these arguments will not rouse up thy love, thou have more of this nature
at hand: thou have all Christ's personal excellencies to study; thou have all
his particular mercies to thyself; thou have all his sweet and near relations
to thee, and thou have the happiness of thy perpetual abode with him hereafter.
All these offer themselves to thy meditation, with all their several branches.
Only follow them close to thy heart, ply the work, and let in not cool: deal
with thy heart, as Christ did with Peter, when he asked thrice over, Love
thou me? till he was grieved, and answer, Lord, thou know s^ that I love thee.
So say to thy heart, love thou the LORD? and ask it the second time, and urge
it the third time, love thou the LORD? till thou grieve it, and shame it out
of its stupidity, and it can truly say, thou know that I love him.

2. The next affection to be excited is desire. The object of it is goodness
not yet attained. This being so necessary an attendant of love, and being
excited much by the same considerations, I suppose you need the less direction,
and therefore I shall touch but briefly on this; if love be hot, desire will
not be cold.

When thou have thus viewed the goodness of the LORD, and considered the
pleasures that are at his right hand, the^ (...) ^^^tation thus: think with
thyself, where have I been, what have I seen? O the incomprehensible
astonishing glory! O the rare transcendent beauty! O blessed souls that now
enjoy it! that see a thousand times more clearly, what I have seen but darkly
at this distance, and scarce discern through the interposing clouds! What a
difference is there betwixt my state and theirs! I am sighing, and they are
singing: I am sinning, and they are pleasing GOD: I ha^^ an ulcerated soul,
like the loathsome bodies of Job or Lazarus, but they are perfect and without
blemish: I am here entangled in the love of the world, when they are taken up
with the love of GOD: I live indeed amongst the means of grace, and I posses
the fellowship of my fellow-be-lievers; but I have none of their immediate
views of GOD, none of that fellowship that they possess: they have none of my
cares and fears; they weep not in secret; they languish not in sorrows; all
tears are wined away from their eyes. O what a feast has my says beheld, and
what a famine is yet in my spirit! I have seen a glimpse of the court of GOD,
but alas. I stand but as a beggar at the doors, when the souls of my companions
are admitted in. O blessed souls! I may not, I dare not envy your happiness; I
rather rejoice in my brethren's prosperity, and am glad to think of the day
when I shall be admitted into your fellowship. But O that I were so happy as to
be in your place; not to displace you, but to rest there with you. Why must I
stay and groan, and weep, and wait? My LORD is gone, he has left this earth,
and is entered into his glory: my brethren are gone, my friends are there, my
house, my hope, my all is there: (...) must I stay behind to sojourn here! What
precious, (...) have left this earth! If the saints were all here, if Christ
were here, then it were no grief for me to stay: but when my soul is so far
distant from my GOD, wonder not if I now complain; an ignorant Micah will do so
for his idol, and shall not my soul do so for GOD? And yet if I had no hope of
enjoying, I would go and hide myself in the deserts, and spend my days in
fruitless wishes: but seeing it is the promised land, the state I must be
advanced to myself, and my soul draws near, and is almost at it, I will live
and long; I will look and desire: I will breathe out, How long, LORD, how long!
How long, LORD holy and true, will thou suffer this soul to pant and groan! and
wilt not open and let him in, who waits and longs to be with thee!

Thus, reader, let thy thoughts aspire: thus whet the desires of thy soul by
meditation; till thy soul long (as David's for the waters of Bethlehem) and
say, O that one would give me to drink of the wells of salvation! and till thou
can say as he, I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord!

3. The next affection to be acted, is hope. This is of singular use to the
soul. It helps exceedingly to support it in sufferings; it encourages it to
adventure upon the greatest difficulties; it firmly establishes it in the most
shaking trials, and it mightily enlivens the soul in duties.

Let faith then show thee the truth of the promise, and judgment the goodness
of the thing promised; and what then is wanting for the raising thy hope? Show
thy soul from the word and from the mercies, and from the nature of GOD, what
possibility, yea, what probability, yea, what certainty thou have of possessing
the crown. Think thus, and reason thus with thy own heart: why should I not
confidently and comfortably hope, when my soul is in the hands of so
compassionate a Savior, and when the kingdom is at the disposal of so
bounteous a GOD? Did he ever manifest any backwardness to my good, or discover
the least inclination to my ruin? Has he not sworn to the contrary to me in
his word, that he delights not in the death of him that dies, but rather that
he should repent and live? Have not all his dealings with me witnessed the
same? Did he not mind me of my danger, when I never feared it? And why was
this, if he would not have me to escape it? Did he not mind me of my happiness,
when I had no thoughts of it? And why was this, but that he would have me to
enjoy it? I have been ashamed of my hope in the arm of flesh, but hope in the
promise of GOD makes not ashamed: I will say therefore in my greatest
sufferings, The Lord is my portion, therefore will I hope ^n him. The Lord is
good to them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him; it is good that I
both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. The Lord will not
cast off for-ever; but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion
according to the multitude of his mercies. Though I languish and die, yet will
I hope; for he has said, The righteous has hope in his death. Though I must
lie down in dust and darkness, yet there my flesh shall rest in hope. And when
my flesh has nothing in which it may rejoice, yet will I keep the rejoicing of
hope firm to the end.

4. The last affection to be acted, is joy. This is the end of all the rest;
love, desire, hope, tend to the raising of our joy. And is it nothing to have a
deed of gift from GOD? Are his infallible promises no ground of joy? Is it
nothing to live in daily expectation of entering into the kingdom? Is not my
assurance of being glorified one day, a sufficient ground for inexpressible
joy? Is it no delight to the heir of a kingdom, to think of what he must
hereafter possess, though at present he little differ from a servant? Am I not
commanded to rejoice in hope of the glory of God?

Here take thy heart once again as it were by the hand; bring it to the top of
the highest mount; show it the kingdom of Christ, and the glory of it: say to
it, All this will thy Lord bestow upon thee, who have believed in him, and been
a worshipper of him. It is the Father's good pleasure to give thee this
kingdom. See thou this astonishing glory above thee? Why all this is thy own
inheritance. This crown is thine, these pleasures are thine, because thou art
Christ's, and Christ is thine; when thou were married to him, thou had all
this with him.

Thus take thy heart into the land of promise; show in the pleasant hills and
fruitful valleys; show it the clusters of grapes which thou have gathered, and
by those convince it that it is a blessed land, flowing with better than milk
and honey: enter the gates of the holy city, walk through the streets of the
New Jerusalem, walk about Si^n, go round about her, tell the towers thereof,
mark well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that thou may tell it to thy
soul: The foundation is garnished with precious stones; the twelve gates are
twelve pearls; the street of the city is pure gold, as it were transparent
glass; there is no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the
^mple of it. It has no need of sun or moon to shine in it, for the glory of
God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, and the nations of them
which are saved shall walk in the light of it. This is thy rest, O my soul, and
this must be the place of thy everlasting habitation: Let all the sons of Sion
then rejoice, and the daughters of Jerusalem be glad; for great is the Lord,
and greatly is he praised in the city of our God: beautiful for situation, the
joy of the whole earth is mount Sion; God is known in her palaces for a refuge.

Yet proceed: the soul (says Austin) that loves, ascends frequently, and runs
familiarly through the streets of the heavenly Jerusalem, visiting the
patriarchs and prophets, saluting the apostles, and admiring the armies of
martyrs and confessors. So do thou lead on thy heart as from street to street,
bringing it into the palace of the great King; lead it, as it were, from
chamber to chamber; say to it, here must I lodge, here must I live, here must I
love, and be beloved. I must shortly be one of this heavenly choir, I shall
then be better skilled in the music; among this blessed company must I take my
place; my tears will then be wiped away: there it is that trouble and
lamentation cease, and the voice of sorrow is not heard: O when I look upon
this glorious place, what a dungeon, methinks, is earth! O what a difference
betwixt a man feeble, pained, groaning, dying, rotting in the grave, and one of
these triumphant, blessed, shining saints! Here shall I drink then of the river
of pleasure, the streams whereof make glad the city of God. For the Lord will
create a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered; we shall be glad
and rejoice for-ever in that which he creates; for he will create Jerusalem, a
rejoicing, and her people a joy: and he will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in
his people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the
voie of crying; there shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man
that has not filled his days.

Why do I not then arise from the dust, and lay aside my sad complaints, and
cease my mourning? Why do I not trample down vain delights, and feed upon the
foreseen delights of glory? Why is not my life a continual joy; and the savor
of heaven perpetually upon my spirit?

I do not place any flat necessity in thy acting all the forementioned
affections in this order at one time, or in one duty: perhaps thou may
sometime ^^el some one of thy affections more flat than the rest, and so to
have more need of exciting: or thou may find one stirring more than the rest,
and so think it more seasonable to help it forward; or if thy time be short,
thou may work upon one affection one day, and upon another the next, as thou
find cause; all this I leave to thy o^^ prudence.

CHAP. VIII. Some Advantages and Helps, for raising the Soul by Meditation.
THE next part of this directory, is to show you what advantages you should
take, and what helps you should use, to make your meditations of heaven more
quickening, and to make you taste the sweetness that is therein. For this is
the main work, that you may not stick in a bare thinking, but may have the
lively sense of all upon your hearts: and this you will find to be the most
difficult part of the work. It is easier to think of heaven a whole day, than
to be lively and affectionate in those thoughts one quarter of an hour.
Therefore let us yet a little further consider what may be done, to make your
thoughts of heaven piercing, affecting thoughts.

It will be a point of spiritual prudence, and a singular help to the
furthering of faith, to call in our senses to its assistance: if we can make us
friends of those usual enemies, and make them instruments of raising us to GOD,
which are the usual means of drawing us from GOD, we shall perform a very
excellent work. Sure it is both possible and lawful to do something in this
kind; for GOD would not have given us either senses themselves, or their usual
objects, if they might not have been serviceable to his own praise, and helps
to raise us to the apprehension of higher things: and it is very considerable,
how the Holy Ghost does condescend, in the phrase of scripture, in bringing
things down to the reach of sense; how he sets forth the excellencies of
spiritual things in words that are borrowed from the objects of sense.
Doubtless, if such expressions had not been best, and to us necessary, the Holy
Ghost would not have so frequently used them: he that will speak to man's
understanding, must speak in man's language, and speak that which he is capable
to conceive.

1. Go to then; when thou set thyself to meditate on the joys above, think
on them boldly as scripture has expressed them: bring down thy conceivings to
the reach of sense. Excellency withou familiarity, does more amaze than delight
us; but love and joy are promoted by familiar acquaintance: when we go about to
think of GOD and glory without these spectacles, we are lost, and have nothing
to fix our thoughts upon; we set GOD and heaven so far from us, that our
thoughts are strange, and we look at them as things beyond our reach, and are
ready to say, that which is above is nothing to us: to conceive no more of GOD
and glory, but that we cannot conceive them; and to apprehend no more, but that
they are past apprehension, will produce no more love but this, to acknowledge
that they are so far above us that we cannot love them, and no more joy but
this, that they are above our rejoicing. And therefore put Christ no further
from you, than he has put himself, lest the divine nature be again
inaccessible. Think of Christ as in our own nature glorified; think of our
follow-saints as men there perfected; think of the city and state as the Spirit
has expressed it, only with caution. Suppose thou were now beholding this city
of GOD, and that thou had been a companion with John in his survey of its
glory, and had seen the thrones, the majesty, the heavenly hosts, the shining
splendour which he saw: draw as strong suppositions as may be from thy sense for
the helping of thy affections: it is lawful to suppose we did see for the
present, that which GOD has in prophesies revealed, and which, we must really
see in more unspeakable brightness before long. Suppose therefore with thyself
thou had been that apostle's fellow-traveller into the celestial kingdom, and
that thou had seen all the saints in their white robes, with palms in their
hands: suppose thou had heard those songs of Moses, and of the Lamb; or did
even now hear them praising and glorifying the living GOD: if thou had seen
these things indeed, in what a rapture would thou have been! And the more
seriously thou put this supposition to thyself, the more will the
meditation elevate thy heart.

I would not have thee, as the Papists, draw them in pictures, nor use such
ways to represent them. This, as it is a course forbidden by GOD, so it would
but seduce and draw down thy heart: but get the liveliest picture of them in
thy mind that possibly thou can; meditate on them, as if thou were all the
while beholding them, and as if thou were even hearing the hallelujahs; till
thou can say, methinks I see a glimpse of the glory! Methinks I hear the
shouts of joy and praise! Methinks I even stand by Abraham and David, Peter and
Paul, and more of these triumphing souls! Methinks I see the Son of GOD
appearing in the clouds, and the world standing at his bar to receive their
doom! Methinks I hear him say, Come ye blessed of my Father; and see (...) go
rejoicing into the (...) of their Lord! My very dreams of these things have
deeply affected me; and should not these just suppositions affect me much more?
What if I had seen with Paul those unutterable things; should I not have been
exalted (and that perhaps above measure) as well as he? What if I had stood in
the room of Stephen, and seen heaven opened, and Christ sitting at the right
hand of GOD? Surely that one sight was worth the suffering his storm of stones.
O that I might but see what he did see, though I also suffered what he did
suffer! What if I had seen such a sight as Michaiah saw? The Lord sitting upon
his throne, and all the hosts of heaven standing on his right ^and on his left.
Why these men of GOD did see such things; and I shall shortly see far more than
ever they saw, till they were loosed from the flesh, as I must be. And thus you
see how the familiar conceiving of the state of blessedness, as the Spirit has
in a condescending language expressed it, and our strong suppositions raised
from our bodily senses, will further our affections in this heavenly work.

2. There is yet another way by which we may make our senses serviceable to us,
and that is, by comparing the objects of sense with the objects of faith; and
so forcing sense to afford us that medium, from whence we may conclude the
transcendent worth of glory, by arguing from sensitive delights as from the
less to the greater. And here for your further assistance, I shall furnish you
with some of these comparative arguments.

And 1. You must strongly argue with your hearts, from the corrupt delights of
sensual men. Think then with yourselves, when you would be sensible of the
(...): is it such a delight to a sinner to do wickedly? And will it not be
delightful indeed to live with GOD? Has a drunkard such delight in his cups
and companions, that the very fears of damnation will not make him forsake
them? Sure then there are high delights with GOD! If the way to hell can afford
such pleasure, what are the pleasures of the saints in heaven?

2. Compare also the delights above, with the lawful delights of sense. Think
with thyself, how sweet is food to my taste when I am hungry! Especially, as
Isaac said, that which my soul loves. What delight has the taste in some
pleasant fruits, in some well relished meats! O what delight then must my soul
have in feeding upon Christ the living bread! and in eating with him at his
table in his kingdom! How pleasant is drink in the extremity of thirst! Then
how delightful will it be to my soul to drink of that fountain of living water,
which whosoever drinks shall thirst no more!

3. Compare also the delights above with the delights that are found in natural
knowledge: This is far beyond the delights of sense, and the delights of heaven
are further beyond it. Think then, can an Archimedes be so taken up with his
mathematical invention, that the threats of death cannot take him off? Should I
not much more be taken up with the delights of glory, and die with these
contemplations fresh upon my soul; especially when my death will perfect my
delights? But those of Archimedes die with him. What a pleasure is it to dive
into the secrets of nature! to find out the mysteries of arts and sciences! If
we make but any new discovery in one of these, what singular pleasure do we
find therein! Think then what high delights there are in the knowledge of GOD
and Christ! If the face of human learning be so beautiful, that sensual
pleasures are to it but base and brutish; how beautiful then is the face of
GOD! When we light on some choice and learned book, how are we taken with it!
we could read and study it day and night; we can leave meat, and drink, and
sleep to read it: what delights then are there at GOD'S right hand, where we
shall know in a moment more than any mortal can know!

4. Compare also the delights above, with the delights of morality, and of the
natural affections. What delight had many sober heathens in the practice of
moral duties; so that they took him only for an honest man who did well through
the love of virtue, and not only for fear of punishment: yea, so highly did
they value virtue, that they thought the chief happiness of man consisted in
it. Think then what excellency there will be in that rare perfection which we
shall be raised to in heaven; and in that uncreated perfection of GOD which we
shall behold! What sweetness is there in the exercise of natural love; whether
to children, to parents, to yoke-fellows or to friends! The delight which
special, faithful friends find in loving and enjoying one another, is a most
pleasing, sweet delight: even Christ himself, as it seems, had some of this
kind of love; for he had one disciple whom he especially loved. Think then, if
the delights of cordial friendship be so great, what delights shall we have in
the friendship of the MOST HIGH? and in our mutual amity with Jesus Christ? and
in the dearest love and comfort with the saints? Surely this will be a closer
and stricter friendship than ever was betwixt any friends on earth; and these
will be more lovely and desirable friends than any that ever the sun beheld;
and both our affections to our Father, and our Savior, but especially his
affection to us, will be such as here we never knew; as spirits are so far more
powerful than flesh, that one angel can destroy an host, so also are their
affections more strong and powerful; we shall then love a thousand times more
strongly and sweetly than now we can; and as all the attributes and works of
GOD are incomprehensible, so is the attribute and work of love: he will love ^s
many thousand times more, than we even at the perfectest, are able to love him:
what joy then will there be in this mutual love!

5. Compare also the excellencies of heaven with those glorious works of the
creation which our eyes now behold. What a deal of wisdom, and power, and
goodness appears in and through them to a wise observer! What a deal of the
majesty of the great Creator does shine in the face of this fabric of the
world! Surely his works are great and admirable, sought out of them that have
pleasure therein. This makes the study of natural philosophy so pleasant,
because the works of GOD are so excellent: what rare workmanship is in the body
of a man! yea, in the body of every beast! which makes the anatomical studies
so delightful. What excellency in every plant we see! in the beauty of flowers!
in the nature, diversity and use of herbs! in fruits, in roots, in minerals,
and what not! But especially if we look to the greater works; if we consider
the whole body of this earth, and its creatures, and inhabitants; the ocean of
waters, with its motions and dimensions, the variation of the seasons, and of
the face of the earth; the intercourse of spring and fall, of summer and
winter; what wonderful excellency do these contain! Why, then think if these
things which are but servants to sinful man, are yet so full of mysterious
worth; what is that place where GOD himself does dwell, prepared for the just
who are perfected with Christ!

When thou walk forth in the evening, look upon the stars, in what number
they bespangle the firmament: if in the day time, look up to the glorious sun;
view the wide-expanded heavens, and say to thyself, what glory is in the least
of yonder stars! What a vast, what a resplendent body has yonder moon, and
every planet! What an inconceivable glory has the sun! Why, all this is
nothing to the glory of heaven. Yonder sun must there be laid aside as useless;
for it would not be seen for the brightness of GOD. I shall live above all
yonder glory: yonder sun is but darkness to the luster of my Father's house; I
shall be as glorious as that sun myself.

So think of the rest of the creatures. This whole earth is but my Father's
footstool; this thunder is nothing to his dreadful voice; these winds are
nothing to the breath of his mouth: so much wisdom and power as appear in
these; so much, and far more greatness, and goodness, and delight, shall I
enjoy in the actual fruition of GOD. Surely, if the rain which rains, and the
sun which shines on the just and unjust, be so wonderful, the sun then which
must shine on none but saints and angels, must needs be wonderful and ravishing
in glory.

6. Compare the things which thou shall enjoy above, with the excellency of
those admirable works of Providence, which GOD does exercise in the church, and
in the world. What glorious things has the LORD wrought! And yet we shall see
more glorious than these. Would it not be an astonishing sight, to see the sea
stand (...) a wall on the right hand, and on the left, and the people of Israel
pass safely through, and Pharaoh and his people swallowed up? If we had seen
the rock to gush forth streams, or manna or quails rained down from heaven, or
the earth open and swallow up the wicked; would not all these have been
wondrous, glorious sights? But we shall see far greater things than these. And
as our sights shall be more wonderful, so also they shall be more sweet: there
shall be no blood or wrath intermingled; we shall not then cry out as David,
who shall stand before this holy Lord God? Would it not have been an
astonishing sight to have seen the sun stand still in the firmament? Why, we
shall see when there shall be no sun to shine at all; we shall behold for-ever
a sun of more incomparable brightness. Were it not a brave life, if we might
still live among wonders and miracles; and all for us, and not against us? If
we could have drought or rain at our prayers, as Elias; or if we could call
down fire from heaven, to destroy our enemies; or raise the dead to life, as
Elisha; or cure the diseased, and speak strange languages, as the apostles:
alas, these are nothing to the wonders which we shall see and possess with GOD,
and all those wonders of goodness and love! We shall possess that pearl and
power itself, through whose virtue all these works were done; we shall
ourselves be the subjects of more wonderful mercies than any of these. Jonas
was raised but from a three day's burial, from the belly of the whale in the
deep ocean; but we shall be raised from many years rotteness and dust, and that
dust exalted to a sun-like glory, and that glory perpetuated to all eternity.
What say thou? Is not this the greatest of miracles or wonders? Surely, if we
observe but common providence, the motions of the sun, the tides of the sea,
the standing of the earth, the warming it, the watering it with rain as a
garden, the keeping in order a wicked confused world, with multitudes of the
like; they are all very admirable, but then to think of the Sion of GOD, of the
vision of the divine Majesty, of the comely order of the heavenly host; what an
admirable sight must that needs be! O what rare and mighty works have we seen!
what clear discoveries of an almighty arm! what magnifying of weakness! what
casting down of strength! what wonders wrought by most improbable means! what
turning of tears and fears into safety and joy! such hearing of earnest
prayers, as if GOD could have denied us nothing! All these were wonderful
works; but what are these to our full deliverance! to our final conquest! to
our eternal triumph! and to that great day of great things!

7. Compare also the mercies which thou shall have above, with those particular
providence which thou have enjoyed thyself. If thou be a christian indeed,
thou have, if not in thy book, yet certainly in thy heart, many favors upon
record; the very remembrance and rehearsal of them is sweet; how much more
sweet was the actual enjoyment? But all these are nothing to the mercies which
are above. Look over the excellent mercies of thy youth, the mercies of thy
riper years, the mercies of thy prosperity and of thy adversity, the mercies of
thy several places and relations: are they not excellent and innumerable? Can
not thou think on the several places thou have lived in, and remember that they
have each had their several mercies? The mercies of such a place, and such a
place; and all of them very rich and engaging mercies? O how sweet was it to
thee, when GOD resolved thy last doubts! when he overcame and silenced thy
fears and unbelief! when he prevented the inconveniences of thy life, which
thy own counsel would have cast thee into! when he eased thy pains, when he
healed thy sickness, and raised thee up as from the very grave! Were not all
these precious mercies? Alas, these are but small things for thee in the eyes
of GOD; he intends thee far greater things than these, even such as these are
scarce a taste of. It was a choice mercy that GOD has so notably answered thy
prayers, and that thou have been so often and evidently a prevailer with him: but
O think, are all these so sweet and precious, that my life would have been a
perpetual misery without them! Has his providence lifted me so high on earth,
and his merciful kindness made me great? How sweet then will the glory of his
presence be! And how high will his eternal love exalt me! And how great shall I
be made in communion with his greatness! If my pilgrimage and warfare have such
mercies; what shall I find in my home, and in my triumph? If I have had so much
in this strange country, at such a distance from him; what shall I have in
heaven, in his immediate presence?

8. Compare the joy which thou shall have in heaven, with that which the saints
of GOD have found in the way to it, and in the foretastes of it: when thou
see a heavenly man rejoice, think what it is that so affects him. It is the
property of fools to rejoice in toys; but the people of GOD are wiser, they
know what it is that makes them glad. When did GOD reveal himself to any of his
saints, but the joy of their hearts was answerable to the revelation? When
Moses had been talking with GOD in the mount, it made his visage so shining and
glorious, that the people could not endure to behold it; but he was sain to put
a veil upon it: no wonder then if the face of GOD must be veiled, till we come
to that state where we shall be capable of beholding him, when the veil shall
be taken away, and we all beholding him with open face, shall be changed into
the same image from glory to glory. Alas, what are the back parts which Moses
saw from the elefts of the rock, to that open face which we shall behold
hereafter! What is that revelation to John in Patmos, to this revelation which
we shall have in heaven! How short does Paul's vision come of the saints'
vision above with GOD! How small a part of the glory which we must see, was
that which so transported Peter in the mount! I confess these were all
extraordinary foretastes; but little to the full, beatifical vision. When David
foresaw the resurrection of Christ and of himself, how did it make him brake
forth and say. Therefore my heart was glad, and my glory rejoiceth, my flesh
also shall rest in hope. Think then, if the foresight can raise such ravishing
joy, what will the actual possession do? How often have we read and heard of the
dying saints, who when they had scarce strength and life to express them, have
been as full of joy as their hearts could hold? And when their bodies have been
under the extremities of their sickness, yea, ready to feel the pangs of death,
have yet had so much of heaven in their spirits, that their joy has far
surpassed their sorrows? And if a spark of this fire be so glorious, and that
in the midst of the sea of adversity; what then is that sun of glory itself?

9. Compare also the glory of the heavenly kingdom, with the glory of the
church on earth, and of Christ in his state of humiliation; and you may easily
conclude, if Christ standing in the room of sinners, was so wonderful in
excellencies, what is Christ at the Father's right hand? And if the church,
under her sins and enemies, has so much beauty; she will have much more at the
marriage of the Lamb. How wonderful was the Son of GOD in the form of a
servant! When he is born, the heavens must proclaim him by miracles; a new star
must appear in the firmament, and fetch men from remote parts of the world to
worship him in a manger; the angels and heavenly host must declare his
nativity, and solemnize it with praising and glorifying GOD: when he sets upon
his office, his whole life is a wonder; water turned into wine, thousands fed
with five loaves and two fishes, the lepers cleansed, the sick healed, the lame
restored, the blind receive their sight, the dead raised: if we had seen all
this, should we not have thought it wonderful? The most desperate diseases
cured with a touch, with a word; the blind eyes with a little clay and spittle;
the devils departing by legions at command; the winds and the seas obeying his
word: are not all these wonderful? Think then, how wonderful is his celestial
glory! If there be such cutting down of boughs, and spreading of garments, and
crying, hosanna, to one that comes into Jerusalem riding on an ass; what will
there be when he comes with his angels in his glory? If they that hear him
preach the gospel of the kingdom, have their hearts turned within them, that
they turn and say, Never man spoke like this man; then sure they that behold
his majesty in his kingdom, will say, There was never glory like this glory. If
when his enemies come to apprehend him, the word of his mouth does cast them
all to the ground; if when he is dying, the earth must tremble, the veil of the
temple rend, the sun in the firmament hide its face, and the dead bodies of the
saints arise: O what a day will it be, when he will once more shake, not the
earth only, but the heavens also, and remove the things that are shaken! when
this sun shall be taken out of the firmament, and be everlastingly darkened
with the brightness of his glory! when the dead must all rise and stand before
him; and all shall acknowledge him to be the Son of God, and every tongue
confess him to be Lord and King! If when he rises again, the grave and death
have lost their power, and the angels of heaven must roll away the stone, and
astonish the watchmen till they are as dead men, and send the tidings to his
dejected disciples; if the bolted doors cannot keep him out; if the sea be as
firm ground for him to walk on; if he can ascend to heaven in the sight of his
disciples, and send the angels to forbid them gazing after him: O what power,
and dominion, and glory then is he now possessed of! and must we ever possess
with him!

Yet think further, are his very servants enabled to do such miracles when he
is gone from them? Can a few poor fishermen, and tent-makers, cure the lame and
blind, and sick? open prisons, destroy the disobedient, and raise the dead? O
then what a world will that be, where every one can do greater works than
these! It were much to have the devils subject to us; but more to have our
names written in the book of life. If the very preaching of the gospel be
accompanied with such power, that it will pierce the heart, and discover its
secrets, bring down the proud, and make the stony sinner tremble; if it can
make men burn their books, sell their lands, bring in the price, and lay it
down at the preacher's feet; if it can make the spirits of princes stoop, and
the kings of the earth resign their crowns, and do their homage to Jesus
Christ; if it can subdue kingdoms, and convert thousands, and turn the world
thus upside down; if the very mention of the judgment and life to come, can
make the judge on the bench to tremble: what then is the glory of the kingdom
itself? What an absolute dominion have Christ and his saints! And if they have
this power and honor in the day of their abasement, what will they have in
their full advancement?

10. Compare the mercies thou shall have above, with the mercies which Christ
has here bestowed on thy soul; and the glorious change which thou shall have
at last, with the gracious change which the Spirit has wrought on thy heart.
Compare the comforts of thy glorification, with the comforts of thy
sanctification. There is not the smallest grace in thee which is genuine, but
is of greater worth than the riches of the Indies; nor a hearty desire and
groan after Christ, but is more to be valued than the kingdoms of the world; a
renewed nature is the very image of GOD; scripture calls it, Christ dwelling
in us, and the Spirit of GOD dwelling in us: it is a beam from the face of GOD
himself; it is the seed of GOD remaining in us; it is the only inherent beauty
of the rational soul; it enobleth man above all nobility; it fitteth him to
understand his Maker's pleasure, to do his will, and to receive his glory:
think then with thyself, if this grain of mustard seed be so precious, what is
the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God? If a spark of life be so
much, how glorious then is the fountain and end of this life! If we are even
now said to be like God, and to b^ar his image, and to be holy as he is holy;
sure we shall then be much liker GOD, when we are perfectly holy, and without
blemish. Is the desire of heaven so precious a thing! what then is the thing
itself? Is love so excellent! what then is the beloved? Is our joy in
foreseeing and believing so sweet! what will be the joy in the full possession?
O the delight that a christian has in the lively exercise of some of these
affections! What good does it to his very heart, when he can feelingly say, he
loves his Lord! Yea, even those troubling passions of sorrow and fear, are yet
delightful, when they are rightly exercised: how glad is a poor christian when
he feels his heart melt, and when the thoughts of sinful unkindness will
dissolve it! Even this sorrow does yie^d him matter of joy: O what will it then
be, when we shall do nothing but know GOD, and love, and rejoice, and praise,
and all this in the highest perfection! What a comfort is it to my doubting
soul, when I have a little assurance of the sincerity of my graces! How much
more will it comfort me, to find that the Spirit has safely conducted me, and
left me in the arms of JESUS! What a change was it that the Spirit made upon my
soul, when he first turned me from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto GOD! To be taken from that horrid state of nature, wherein myself
and my actions were loathsome to GOD, and the sentence of death was passed upon
me, and the Almighty took me for his utter enemy; and to be presently numbered
among his saints, and called his friend, his servant, his son, and the sentence
revoked which was gone forth; O what a change was this! To be taken from that
state wherein I was born, and had lived so many years, and if I had so died I
had been damned for-ever; and to be justified from all these crimes, and freed
from all these plagues, and put into the title of an heir of heaven, O what an
astonishing change was this! How much greater will that glorious change then
be! beyond expressing! beyond conceiving! How often, when I have thought of this
change in my regeneration, have I cried out, O blessed day! and blessed be the
LORD that I ever saw it! How then shall I cry out in heaven, O blessed
eternity! and blessed be the LORD that brought me to it! Was the mercy of my
conversion so exceeding great, that the angels of GOD did rejoice to see it?
Sure then the mercy of my salvation will be so great, that the same angels will
congratulate my felicity. This grace is but a spark that is raked up in the
ashes; it is covered with flesh from the sight of the world; but my everlasting
glory will not be under a b^shed, but upon a hill, even upon Sion, the mount of
GOD.

CHAP. IX. How to manage and watch over the Heart through the whole Work.
THE last part of this directory, is, to guide you in managing your hearts
through this work, and to show you wherein you had need to be exceeding
watchful. I have showed before, what must be done with your hearts in your
preparations to the work, and in your setting upon it: I shall new show it you,
in respect of the time of the performance. Our chief work will here be, to
discover to you the danger, and that will direct you to the remedy. Let me
therefore acquaint you beforehand, that whenever you set upon this heavenly
employment, you shall find your own hearts your greatest hinderer, and they
will prove false to you in one or all of these sour degrees. First, they will
hold off, that you will hardly get them to the work; or else they will betray
you by their idleness in the work, pretending to do it, when they do it not; or
they will interrupt the work, by their frequent excursions, and turning aside
to every object; or they will spoil the work by cutting it short, and be gone
before you have done any good at it. Therefore I forewarn you, as you value the
invaluable comfort of this work, faithfully resist these four dangerous evils.

1. Thou shall find thy heart as backward to this, as to any work in the world.
O what excuses it will make! what evasions it will find out! and what delays,
when it is never so much convinced! Either it will question, whether it be a
duty or not; or, if it be so to others, yet whether it be so to thee? It will
take up any thing like reason to plead against it; or, if thy heart have
nothing against the work, then it will trifle away the time in delays, and
promise this day and the next, but still keep off; or lastly, if thou will not
be so baffled with excuses or delays, thy heart will give thee a flat denial,
and oppose its own unwillingness to thy reason; thou shall find it draw back
with all the strength it has. I speak all this of the heart so far as it is
carnal; for so far as it is spiritual, it will judge this work the sweetest in
the world.

But take up the authority which GOD has given thee, command thy heart; if it
rebel, use violence with it; if thou be too weak, call in the Spirit of Christ
to thine assistance; he is never backward to so good a work, nor will deny his
help in so just a cause: GOD will be ready to help thee, if thou be not
unwilling to help thyself. Say unto him, "LORD, thou gave my reason the
command of my thoughts and affections; the authority I have received over them,
is from thee, and now, behold they refuse to obey thine authority; thou
command me to set them to the work of heavenly meditation, but they rebel
and stubbornly refuse the duty; will thou not assist me to execute that
authority which thou have given me? O send down thy Spirit and power, that I
may enforce thy commands, and effectually compel them to obey thy will."

And thus doing, thou shall see thy heart will submit; its resistance will be
brought under; and its backwardness will be turned to compliance.

2. When thou have got thy heart to the work, beware lest it delude thee by a
loitering formality; lest it say, I go, and go not; lest it trifle out the
time, while it should be effectually meditating. When thou have perhaps but an
hour's time for meditation, the time will be spent before thy heart will be
serious. This doing of duty, as if we did it not, does undo as many as the flat
omission of it. To rub out the hour in a ba^e lazy th^nking of heaven, is but
to lose that hour, and delude thyself. What is to be done in this case? Why, do
here also as you do by a loitering servant; keep thine eye always upon thy
heart; look not so much to the time it spends in the duty, as to the work
that i^ done: you can tell by his work, whether your servant has been painful:
ask, what affections have yet been acted? How much am I yet got nearer heaven?
Verily many a man's heart must be followed as close in this duty of meditation,
as an ox at the plough, that will go no longer than you are calling or
scourging; if you cease driving but a moment, the heart will stand still.

I would not have thee of the judgment of those who think that while they are
so backward, it is better let it alone; and that if mere love will not bring
them to the duty, the service is worse than the omission: these men un^erstand
not, First, that this argument would certainly cashier all spiritual obedience;
nor do they understand well the corruptness of their own natures; nor that
their sinful undisposedness will not suspend the commands of God; not one sin
excuse another; especially they little know the way of GOD to excite their
affections; and that the love which should compel them, must itself be first
compelled, in the same sense as it is said to compel: love I know is a most
precious grace, and should have the chief interest in all our duties; but there
are means appointed by GOD to procure this love; and shall I not use those
means, till I can use them from love? that were to neglect the means, till I
have the end. Must I not seek to procure love, till I have it already? There
are means also for the increasing of love where it is begun, and means for
exciting it where it lies dull; and must I not use these means, till it is
increased and excited? Fall upon the work, till thou art constrained to love;
and then love will constrain thee to further duty.

3. As thy heart will be loitering, so will it be diverting. It will be turning
aside like a careless servant, to talk with every one that passes by: when
there should be nothing in thy mind, but the work in hand; it will be thinking
of thy calling, or of thy afflictions, or of every bird, or tree, or place thou
secst, or of any impertinency, rather than of heaven. The cure here is the same
with that before; to use watchfulness and violence with your own imaginations,
and as soon as they step out, to chide them in. Drive away these birds of prey
from thy sacrifice, and strictly keep thy heart to the work thou art upon.

4. Lastly, Be sure also to look to thy heart in this, that it cut not off the
work before the time, and run not away through weariness, before it have leave.
Thou shall find it exceeding prone to this. Thou may easily perceive it in
other duties: if in secret thou set thyself to pray, is not thy heart urging
thee still to cut it short? Do thou not frequently find a motion to have
done? Art thou not ready to be up, as soon almost as thou art down on thy
knees? So it will be also in thy contemplations of heaven; as fast as thou
gettest up thy heart, it will be down again; it will be weary of the work; it
will be minding thee of other business to be done, and stop thy heavenly walk,
before thou art well warm. What is to be done in this case also? Why the same
authority and resolution which brought it to the work, and observed it in the
work, must hold it to it, till the work be done. Stick to the work till thy
graces be acted, thy affections raised, and thy soul refreshed with the
delights above; or if thou can not obtain these ends at once, ply it the
closer the next time, and let it not go till thou feel the blessing. Blessed is
that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing.

Thus I have directed you in this work of heavenly contemplation, and led you
into the path where you may walk with GOD. But because I would bring it down to
the capacity of the meanest, and help their memories who are apt to let slip
the former particulars, I shall he e contract the whole, and lay it before you
in a narrower compass. But still I wish thee to remember, it is the practice of
a duty that I am directing thee in, and therefore if thou will not practice it,
do not read it.

The sum is this, as thou make conscience of praying daily, so do thou of
meditation; and more especially on the joys of heaven. To this end, set apart
one hour or half hour every day, wherein thou may lay aside all worldly
thoughts, and with all possible seriousness and reverence, as if thou were to
speak with GOD himself, or to have a sight of Christ, or of that blessed place;
so withdraw thyself into some secret place, and set thyself wholly to the
following work: if thou can, take Isaac's time and place, who went forth into
the field in the evening to meditate: but if thou be a servant or poor man that
cannot have that leisure, take the fittest time and place that thou can,
though it be when thou art private about thy labors.

When thou set to the work ^^^ok up toward heaven, let thine eye lead thee
as near as it can; remember that there is thine everlasting rest; study its
excellency, study its reality, till thy unbelief be silenced, and thy faith
prevail: if thy judgment be not yet drawn to admiration, use those sensible
helps and advantages which were even now laid down. Compare thy heavenly joys
with the choicest on earth, and so rise up from sense to faith; if this mere
consideration prevail not, then plead the case with thy hearts preach upon this
text of heaven to thyself; convince, inform, confute, instruct, reprove,
examine, admonish, encourage, and comfort thy own soul from this celestial
doctrine; draw forth those several considerations of thy rest, on which thy
several affections may work, especially that affection or grace which thou
intendest to act. If it be love which thou would act, show it the loveliness
of heaven, and how suitable it is to thy condition: if it be desire, consider
thy absence from this lovely object: if it be hope, consider the possibility
and probability of obtaining it: if it be courage, consider the singular
assistance and encouragements which thou may receive from GOD, the weakness
of the enemy, and the necessity of prevailing: if it be joy, consider its
excellent, ravishing glory, thy interest in it, and its certainty, and the
nearness of the time when thou may possess it. Urge these considerations
home to thy heart; whet them with all possible seriousness upon each affection:
if thy heart draw back, force it to the work; if it loiter, spur it on; if it
step aside, command it in again; if it would slip away, and leave the work, use
thine authority; keep it close to the business, till thou have obtained thine
end; stir not away, if it may be, till thy love flame, till thy joy be raised,
or till thy desire or other graces be lively. Call in assistance also from GOD,
mix ejaculations with thy soliloquies; till having seriously pleaded the case
with thy heart, and reverently pleaded the case with GOD, thou have pleaded
thyself from a clod to a flame, from a forgetful sinner to a mindful lover:
from a lover of the world, to a thirster after GOD; from a fearful coward, to a
resolved christian. In a word, what will not be done one day, do it the next,
till thou have pleaded thy heart from earth to heaven; from conversing below,
to a walking with GOD; and till thou can lay thy heart to rest, as in the
bosom of Christ; in this meditation of thy full and everlasting rest.

CHAP. X. An Example of this heavenly Contemplation, for the Help of the
Unskilful.
REST! How sweet a word is this to mine ears! Methinks the sound does turn to
substance, and having entered at the ear, descended down to my very heart;
methinks I feel it stir and work, and that through all my parts and powers, but
with a various work upon my various parts. To my wearied senses and languid
spirits, it seems a quieting, powerful opiate; to my dulled powers, it is
spirit and life; to my dark eyes, it is both eye salve, and a prospective; to
my taste, it is sweetness; to mine ears, it is melody; to my hands and feet, it
is strength and nimbleness: methinks I feel it digest as it proceeds, and
increase my native heat and moisture, and lying as a reviving cordial of my
heart, from thence does send forth lively spirits, which beat through all the
pulses of my soul. Rest! not as the stone that rests on the earth, nor as these
clods of flesh shall rest in the grave; so our beasts must rest as well as we;
nor is it the satisfying of our fleshly lusts, nor such a rest as the carnal
world desires: no, no; we have another kind of rest than these: rest we shall
from our labors, which were but the way and means to rest: but yet that is the
smallest part: O blessed rest, where we shall never rest day nor night, crying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath! where we shall rest from sin, but not
from worship! from suffering and sorrow, but not from solace! O blessed day,
when I shall rest with GOD! when I shall rest in the arms and bosom of my LORD!
when I shall rest in knowing, loving, rejoicing, and praising! when my perfect
soul and body together, shall in these perfect actings perfectly enjoy the most
perfect GOD! when GOD also, who is love itself, shall perfectly love me! and
rejoice over me with joy and singing, as I shall rejoice in him! How near is
that most blessed joyful day? it comes apace; even he that comes will come, and
will not tarry: though my LORD seem to delay his coming, yet a little while and
he will be here: what is a few hundred years when they are over? How surely
will his sign appear! and how suddenly will be seize upon the careless world!
Even as the lightning that shines from east to west in a moment. He who is gone
hence, will even so return: methinks I hear the voice of his foregoers!
Methinks I see him in the clouds, with the attendance of his angels in majesty
and glory! O poor s^cure sinners, what will you now do? where will you hide
yourselves? or what shall cover you? Mountains are gone, the earth and heavens
that were, are p^^^^^ away, the devouring fire has consumed all, except
yourselves, who must be the fuel for-ever: O that you could consume as soon as
the earth, and melt away as did the heavens! Ah, these wishes are now but vain;
the Lamb himself would have been your friend, he would have loved you, and
ruled you, and now have saved you; but you would not then, and now it is too
late: never cry, LORD, LORD: too late, too late, man: why do thou look about?
can any save thee? Whither do thou run? can any hide thee? O wretch, that
have brought thyself to this! Now blessed are ye that have believed and obeve^;
this is the end of your faith and patience; this is that for which ye prayed
and waited: do you now repent your sufferings and sorrows? your self-denying
and holy walking? are your tears of repentance now bitter or sweet? O see how
the Judge does smile upon you! there is love in his looks; the titles of
redeemer, husband, head, are written in his amiable face: hark! does he not
call you? he bids you stand here on his right hand; fear not, for there he sets
his sheep: O joyful sentence pronounced by his mouth! Come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world!
See how your Savior takes you by the hand; the door is open; the kingdom is
his, and therefore yours: there is your place before his throne: the Father
receives you as the spouse of his Son, he bids you welcome to the crown of
glory; never so unworthy, crowned you must be: this was the project of free
redeeming grace, the purpose of eternal love. O blessed grace! O blessed love!
O the frame that my soul shall then be in! but I cannot express it, I cannot
conceive it!

This is that joy which was procured by sorrow; this is that crown which was
procured by the cross: my LORD did weep, that now my tears might be wiped away;
he did bleed, that I might now rejoice; he was forsaken, that I might not now
be forsaken; he did then die, that I might now live. This weeping, wounded
LORD, shall I behold; this bleeding Savior shall I see, and live in him that
died for me. O free mercy that can exalt so vile a wretch! free to me, though
dear to Christ! here must I live with all these saints! O comfortable meeting
of my old acquaintance, with whom I prayed, and wept, and suffered; with whom I
speak of this day and place! I see the grave could not contain you, the sea and
earth must give up their dead; the same love has redeemed and saved you also:
this is not like our cottages of clay, our prisons, or earthly dwellings: this
voice of joy is not like our own complainings, our groans, our sighs, our
impatient moans; nor this melodious praise like our scorns and revilings, nor
like the oaths and curses which we heard on earth: this body is not like the
body we had, nor this soul like the soul we had, nor this life like the life
that then we lived; we have changed our place, we have changed our state, our
clothes, our thoughts, our looks, our language; we have changed our company for
the greater part, and the rest of our company is changed itself; before we were
weak and despised, but now how glorious! Where are now our different judgments,
our divided spirits? Now we are all of one judgment, of one name, of one heart,
of one house, and of one glory. O sweet reconcilement! O happy union! which
makes us first to be one with Christ, and then one with ourselves! Now our
differences shall be dashed in our teeth no more, nor the gospel reproached
through our folly. O my soul, thou shall no more lament the sufferings of the
saints; never more condole the church's ruins; never bewail thy suffering
friends, nor lie wailing over their deathbeds, or their graves: thou shall
never suffer thy old temptations from Satan, the world, or thy own flesh; thy
body will no more be such a burden to thee; thy pains and sicknesses are all
now cured; thou shall be troubled with weakness and weariness no more; thy head
is not now an aching head, nor thy heart now an aching heart; thy hunger and
thirst, and cold and sleep, thy labor and study are all gone. O what a mighty
change is this! from the dunghill to the throne; from a body as ^ile as the
carrion in the ditch, ^^ab^dy as bright as the s^n in the firmament! from all
my doubts and fears, to this p^ssession which has put ^^e out of dou^t! from
all my fearful thoughts of death, to this most blessed joyful life! O what a
change is this! farewell sin and suffering forever: now welcome most holy,
heavenly nature; which as it must be ^mployed in beholding the face of GOD, so
is it full of GOD alone, delighted in nothing but him. O who can question the
love which he does so sweetly taste? or doubt of that which with such joy he
feels? Farewell repentance, confession and supplication; farewell hope and
faith; and welcome love, and joy, and praise. I shall now have my harvest
without ploughing or sowing; my wine without the labor of the vintage; my joy
without a preacher or a promise, even all from the face of GOD himself.
Whatever mixture is in the streams, there is nothing but pure joy in the
fountain. Here shall I be incircled with eternity, and come forth no more: here
shall I live, and ever live; and praise my LORD, and ever, ever praise him. My
face will not wrinkle, nor my hair be gray; but this mortal has put on
immortality, and this corruptible incorruption, and death is swallowed up in
victory: O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? The date
of my lease will no more expire, nor shall I lose my joys through fear of
losing them. When millions of ages are past, my glory is but beginning; and
when millions more are past, it is no nearer ending. Every day is all noontide,
and every month is May or harvest, and every year is there a jubilee, and every
age is full manhood; and all this but one eternity. O blessed eternity! the
glory of my glory! the perfection of my perfection!

Ah drowsy, earthly, blockish heart, how coolly do thou think of this
reviving day! Do thou sleep when thou think of eternal rest? art thou
hanging earthward, when heaven is before thee? Had thou rather sit thee down
in dung, than walk in the court of the presence of GOD? Do thou now remember
thy worldly business? Art thou thinking of thy delights? Wretched heart! is it
better to be there, than above with GOD? is the company better? are the
pleasures greater? come away, make no excuse, make no delay; GOD commands, and
I command thee, come away; gird up thy loins; ascend the mount, and look about
thee with seriousness and with faith. Look thou not back upon the way of the
wilderness, except it be when thine eyes are dazzled with the glory, or when
thou would compare the kingdom with that howling desert, that thou may
more sensibly perceive the mighty difference. Fix thine eye upon the sun
itself, and look not down to earth as long as thou art able to behold it;
except it be to discern more easily the brightness of the one by the darkness
of the other. Yonder is thy Father's glory: yonder must thou dwell when thou
leavest this earth; yonder must thou remove, O my soul, when thou departest
from this body; and when the power of thy LORD has raised it again, and joined
thee to it, yonder must thou live with GOD for-ever. There is the glorious new
Jerusalem, the gates of pearl, the foundations of pearl, the streets and
pavements of transparent gold. See thou that sun which lights all the
world? Why, it must be taken down as useless there, or the glory of heaven will
darken it, and put it out; even thyself shall be as bright as yonder shining
sun; God will be the sun, and Christ the light, and in his light shall thou
have light.

O wretched heart! has GOD made thee a promise of rest, and will thou come
short of it, and shut out thyself through unbelief? Thine eyes may fail thee,
thy ears deceive thee, and all thy senses prove delusions, sooner than a
promise of GOD can delude thee. Thou may be surer of that which is written in
the word, than if thou see it with thy eyes, or feel it with thy hands. Art
thou sure thou live? or sure that this is the earth which thou stand on?
Art thou sure thine eyes see the sun? As sure is all this glory to the saints,
as sure shall I be higher than yonder stars, and live for-ever in the holy
city, and joyfully sound forth the praise of my Redeemer, if I be not shut out
by the evil heart of unbelief, causing me to depart from the living God.

And is this rest so sweet, and so sure? O then, what means the careless world!
Do they know what it is they so neglect? Did they ever hear of it? or are they
yet asleep? Do they know for certain that the crown is before them, while they
thus si^ still, or follow trifles, when they are hasting so fast to another
world, and their eternal happiness lies at stake? Were there left one spark of
reason, they would never sell their rest for toil, their glory for worldly
vanities. Ah, poor men! that you would once consider what you hazard, and then
you would scorn these tempting baits. O blessed for-ever be that love, that
has rescued me from this mad bewitching darkness!

Draw nearer yet, O my soul; bring forth thy strongest love; here is matter for
it to work upon: O see what beauty presents itself! Is it not exceeding lovely?
Is not all the beauty in the world contracted here? Is not all other beauty
deformity to it? Do thou need to be persuaded now to love? Here is a feast
for thine eves: a feast for all the powers of thy soul: do thou need to be
entreated to feed upon it? Can thou love a little shining earth? Can thou
love a walking piece of clay? And can thou not love that GOD, that Christ,
that glory, which is so truly and unmeasurably lovely? Thou can love thy
friend because he loves thee: and is the love of friends like the love of
Christ? Their weeping or bleeding for thee does not ease thee nor stay the
course of thy tears or blood: but the tears and blood that fell from thy LORD,
have all a sovereign, healing virtue, and are waters of life, and balsam to thy
fainting sores. O my soul! if love deserve, and should procure love, what
incomprehensible love is here before thee! Pour out all the store of thy
affections here: and all is too little. O that it were more! Let him be first
served, that served thee first: let him have the strength of thy love, who
parted with strength and life in love to thee: if thou have any to spare when
he has his part, let it be imparted then to standers by. See what a sea of
love is here before thee: east thyself into this ocean of his love: fear not
though it seem a furnace of fire, and the hottest that was ever kindled upon
earth, yet it is the sire of love and not of wrath; a fire most effectual to
extinguish fire; never intended to consume, but to glorify thee: venture into
it then in thy believing meditations, and walk in these flames with the Son of
GOD: when thou art once in, thou will be sorry to come forth again. O my soul!
what want thou here to provoke thy love? Do thou love for excellency? Why
thou see nothing below but baseness, except as they relate to thy enjoyments
above. Yonder is the Gosben, the region of light; this is a land of palpable
darkness. Yonder stars, that shining moon, the radiant sum, are all but as the
lanthorns hanged out at thy Father's house to light thee while thou walk in
the dark streets of the earth: but little do thou know the glory that is
within! Do thou love for suitableness? Why what person more suitable than
Christ? his godhead, his manhood, his fullness, his freeness, his willingness,
his constancy; do all proclaim him thy most suitable friend. What state more
suitable to thy mercy, than that of mercy? Or to thy sinfulness and baseness,
than that of honor and persection? What place more suitable to thee than
heaven? Thou have had a sufficient trial of this world: do thou find it agree
with thy nature or desires? Are these common abominations, these heavy
sufferings, these unsatisfying vanities, suitable to thee? Or do thou love
for interest and near relation? Where have thou better interest than in heaven?
or where have thou nearer relation than there? Do thou love for acquaintance
and familiarity? Why though thine eyes have never seen the LORD, yet he is
never the further from thee. If thy son were blind, yet he would love thee his
father, though he never saw thee. Thou have heard the voice of Christ to thy
very heart, thou have received his benefits: thou have lived in his bosom, and
art thou not ye acquainted with him? It is he that brought thee seasonably and
safely into the world: it is he that nursed thee in thy tender infancy, and
helped thee when thou could not help thyself: he taught thee to go, to speak,
to read, to understand: he taught thee to know thyself and him: he opened thee
that first window whereby thou saw into heaven: have thou forgotten since
thy heart was careless, and he did quicken it, and make it yield? When it was
at peace, and he did trouble it? And broken, till he did heal it again? Have
thou forgotten the time, nay, the many times when he found thee in secret, all
in tears; when he heard thy sighs and groans, and left all to come and comfort
thee? When he came in upon thee, and took thee up, as it were in his arms, and
asked thee, poor soul, what aileth thee? Do thou weep, when I have wept so
much? Be of good cheer: thy wounds are saving, and not deadly. It is I that
have made them, who mean thee no hurt: though I let out thy blood, I will not
let out thy life.

Methinks I remember yet his voice, and feel those arms that took me up: how
gently did he handle me! How carefully did he dress my wounds, and bind them
up! Methinks I hear him still saying, though thou have dealt unkindly with me,
yet will not I do so by thee; though thou have set light by me and all my
mercies; yet both I and all are thine; what would thou have, that I cannot
give thee? and what do thou want, that I cannot give thee! If any thing in
heaven and earth will make thee happy, it is all thine own: would thou have
pardon? thou shall have it, I freely forgive thee all the debt: would thou
have grace and peace? thou shall have them both: would thou have myself?
behold I am thine, thy friend, thy Lord, thy husband, and thy head: would
thou have the Father? I will bring thee to him; and thou shall have him in and
by me. -- These were my LORD'S reviving words: these were the melting, healing,
quickening passages of love. After all this, when I was doubtful of his love,
methinks I yet remember his convincing arguments. -- Have I done so much to
testify my love, and yet do thou doubt? Have I made thy believing it the
condition of enjoying it, and yet do thou doubt? Have I offered thee myself
so long, and yet do thou question my willingness to be thine? What could I
have done more than I have done? At what dearer rate should I tell thee that I
love thee? Read the story of my bitter passion, will thou not believe that it
proceeded from love? Did I ever give thee cause to be so jealous of me? or to
think so hardly of me, as thou do? Have I made myself in the gospel a lion to
thine enemies, and a lamb to thee; and do thou so overlook my lamb-like
nature? Have I set mine arms and heart there open to thee, and will thou not
believe but they are shut? If I had been willing to let thee perish, I could
have done it at a cheaper rate: what need I follow thee with so long patience,
and entreating? What, do thou tell me of thy wants; have I not enough for me
and thee? and why do thou tell me of thy unworthiness, and thy sin? I had not
died, if man had not sinned: if thou were not a sinner, thou were not for me;
if thou were worthy thyself, what should thou do with my worthiness? Did I
ever invite the worthy and righteous? or did I ever save or justify such? or is
there any such on earth? Have thou nothing? art thou lost and miserable? art
thou helpless and forlorn? do thou believe that I am a sufficient Savior?
and would thou have me? why then take me. Lo, I am thine; if thou be willing,
I am willing, and neither sin not devils shall break the match.

These, O these were the blessed words which his Spirit from his gospel spoke
unto me, till he made me cast myself at his feet, yea, into his arms, and cry
out, "My Savior and my Lord, thou have broke my heart, thou have revived my
heart, thou have overcome, thou have won my heart, take it, it is thine: if
such an heart can please thee, take it: if it cannot, make it as thou would
have it."

Thus, O my soul, may thou remember the sweet familiarity thou have had with
Christ; therefore if acquaintance will cause affection, O then knit thy heart
unto him; it is he that has stood by thy bed of sickness, that has cooled thy
heats, and eased thy pains, and refreshed thy weariness, and removed thy fears;
he has been always ready, when thou have earnestly sought him; he has given
thee the meeting in public and in private; he has been found of thee in the
congregation, in thy house, in thy chamber, in the field, in the way as thou
wast walking, in thy waking nights, in thy deepest dangers. If bounty and
compassion be an attractive of love, how unmeasurably then am I bound to love
him! All the mercies that have filled up my life tell me this; all the places
that ever I did abide in, every condition of life that I have passed through,
all my employments, and all my relations, every change that has befallen me,
all tell me, that the fountain is overflowing goodness.

LORD, what a sum of love am I indebted to thee, and how does my debt
continually increase! How should I love again for so much love! But what! shall
I dare to think of making thee requital, or of recompensing all thy love with
mine? Will my mite requite thee for thy golden mines? or mine, which is
nothing, or not mine, for thine which is infinite and thine own? Shall I dare
to contend in love with thee? or set my borrowed spark, against the sun of
love? Can I love as high, as deep, as broad, as long as love itself; as much as
he that made me, and that made me live, that gave me all that little which I
have? Both the heart, the fire, the fuel, and all were his: as I cannot match
thee in the works of thy power, nor make, nor preserve, nor guide the world; so
why should I think any more of matching thee in love? no, LORD, I yield, I am
overcome; O blessed conquest! go on victoriously, and still prevail, and
triumph in thy love; the captive of love shall proclaim thy victory, when thou
leadest me in triumph from earth to heaven, from death to life, from the
tribunal to the throne, myself, and all that see it, shall acknowledge that
thou have prevailed, and all shall say, Behold, how he loved him! -- Yet let me
love thee, in subjection to thy love as thy redeemed captive, though I cannot
reach thy measure.

O, my soul, begin it here; be sick of love now, that thou may be well with
love there; Keep thyself now in the love of God, and let neither life nor
death. nor any thing separate thee from it, and thou shall be kept in the
fullness of love for-ever; for the LORD has prepared a city of love, a place
for the communicating of love to his chosen, and those that love his name shall
dwell there.

Away then, O my drowsy soul, from this world's uncomfortable darkness! The
night of thy ignorance and misery is past, the day of glorious light is at
hand: this is the daybreak betwixt them both: though thou see not yet the s^n
itself appear, methinks the twilight of promise should revive thee! Come forth
then, and leave these earthly cells, and hear thy LORD that bids thee rejoice,
and again rejoice! Thou have la^n here long enough in thy prison of flesh,
where Satan has been thy jailer, where cares have been thy irons: add fears
thy scourge, and the bread and water of affliction thy food: where sorrows have
been thy lo^ging, and a carnal, hard, unbelieving heart the iron gates and bars
that have kept thee in, that thou could scarce have leave to look through the
lattices, and see one glimpse of the immortal light: the angel of the covenant
now calls thee, and strikes thee, and bids thee arise and follow him: up, O my
soul, and cheerfully obey, and thy bolts and bars shall all fly open; do thou
obey, and all will obey; follow the Lamb which way ever he leads thee: art thou
afraid, because thou know not whither? Can the place be worse than where
thou art? Should thou fear to follow such a guide? Can the sun lead thee to a
state of darkness? Or can he misread thee that is the light that light the
every man that comes into the world? Will he lead thee to death, who died to
save thee from it? Or can he do thee any hurt, who for thy sake did suffer so
much? Follow him and he will show thee the paradise of GOD, he will give thee a
sight of the new Jerusalem, he will give thee a taste of the tree of life: thy
winter is past, and will thou house thyself still in earthly thoughts; and
confine thyself to drooping and dullness?

Come forth, O my drooping soul, and lay aside thy winter, mourning robes; let
it be seen in thy believing joys and praise, that the day is appearing, and the
spring is come; and as now thou see thy comforts green, thou shall shortly
see them white and ripe for harvest; and then thou. who art now called forth to
see and taste, shall be called forth to reap, and gather, and take possession.
Shall I suspend and delay my joys till then? Should not the joys of the spring
go before the joys of harvest? Is the heir in no better a state than the slave?
My LORD has taught me to rejoice in the hope of his glory, and to see it
through the bars of a prison, and even when I am persecuted for
righteousness-sake, when I am reviled, and a^l manner of evil said against me
f^r his s^ke, then he has commanded me to rejoice and be exceeding glad,
beca^se of this my great reward in heaven. How justly is an unbelieving heart
poss^s^ed by sorrow, and made a prey to cares and fears, when itself does
create them, and thrust away its offered peace and joy! I know it is the
pleasure of my bounteous LORD, that none of his family should want comfort, nor
live such a poor and miserable life, nor look with such a famished dejected
face. I know he would have my joys exceed my sorrows; and as much as he
delights in the humble and contrite, yet does he more delight in the soul as it
delights in him. Has my LORD spread me a table in this wilderness, and
furnished it with promises of everlasting glory, and set before me angels food,
and broached for me the side of his beloved Son, that I might have a better
wine than the blood of the grape? Does he so importunately invite me to sit
down, and draw forth my faith, and feed, and spare not? Nay, has he furnished
me to that end with reason and says, and a rejoicing disposition? And yet is
it possible that he should be unwilling I should rejoice? Never think it, O my
unbelieving soul; nor dare charge him with thy uncomfortable heaviness, who
offers thee the foretaste of the highest delight that heaven can afford, and
GOD can bestow. Does he not bid thee delight thyself in the Lord? and promise
to give thee the desires of thy heart? Has he not charged thee to rejoice
evermore? Yea is sing aloud, and shout for joy?

Away you cares and fears! away you importunate sorrows! stay here below,
whilst I go up and see my rest. The way is strange to me, but not to Christ.
There was the eternal dwelling. of his glorious Deity: and thither has he also
brought his glorified flesh. It was his work to purchase it; it is his work to
prepare it, and to prepare me for it, and to bring me to it. The eternal GOD of
truth has given me his promise, his seal, and his oath to assure me, that
believing in Christ I shall not perish, but have everlasting life: thither
shall my soul be speedily removed and my body shortly follow. And can my tongue
say, that I shall shortly and surely live with GOD, and yet my heart not leap
within me? Can I say it believingly, and not rejoicingly? Ah faith! how do I
perceive thy weakness? ah unbelief! if I had never known it before, how
sensibly do I now perceive thy malicious tyranny? But were it not for thee,
what abundance might I have? The light of heaven would shine into my heart, and
I might be as familiar there as I am on earth.

Come away my soul then, stand not looking on that grave, nor turning those
bones, not reading thy lesson in the dust: those lines will soon be wiped out:
but lift up thy head and look to heaven, and read thy instructions in those
fixed stars: or yet look higher than those eyes can see, into that foundation
which stands sure, and see thy name written in the books of life. What if an
angel should come from heaven and tell thee, that there is a mansion prepared
for thee; that it shall certainly be thine own, and thou sha^t possess it
for-ever; would not such a message make thee glad? and do thou make light of
the infallible word of promises which were delivered by the Spirit, and by the
LORD himself?

What delight have I found in my private studies, especially when they have
prospered to the increase of knowledge! Methinks I could bid the world
farewell, and immure myself among my books, and look forth no more (were it a
lawful course) but shut the door upon me, and among those divine souls employ
myself in sweet content, and pity the rich and great ones that know not
happiness. Sure then it is a high delight indeed, which in the lap of eternity
is enjoyed!

If the queen of Sheba came from Aethiopia to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
see his glory; O how gladly should I pass from earth to heaven, to see the
glory of that eternal majesty; and to attain myself that height of wisdom, in
comparison of which the most learned on earth are but fools and idiots! If the
heaven of glass which the Persian emperor framed, were so glorious a piece, and
the heaven of silver which the emperor Ferdinand sent to the great Turk,
because of their rare artificial representations and motions, what will the
heaven of heavens be, which is not formed by the art of man, nor beautified
like these childish toys, but it is the matchless palace of the great King,
built by himself for the residence of his glory, and the perpetual
entertainment of his beloved saints!

I cannot here enjoy my parents, or my beloved friends without some delight;
what will it then be to live in the perpetual love of GOD! For brethren here to
live together in unity how good and pleasant a thing is it! To see a family
live in love; husbands, wives, parents, children, s^^^ants, doing all in love
to one another! O then, what a blessed society will be the family of heaven and
those peaceable inhabitants of the new Jerusalem! Where is no division, nor
disaffection, nor strangeness, nor deceitful friendship; never an angry thought
or look, never an unkind expression, but all one in Christ, who is one with the
Father, and live in the love of love himself.

Awake then, O my drowsy soul, and look above this world of sorrow! Have thou
borne the yoke of afflictions from thy youth, and so long felt the smarting
rod, and yet can no better understand its meaning? Is not every stroke to
drive thee hence? and is not the voice like that to Elijah, what do thou
here, up and away. Do thou forget that sure prediction of the LORD, In the
world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace. The first thou have
found true by long experience; and of the latter thou have had a small
foretaste; but the perfect peace is yet before, which till it be enjoyed cannot
be clearly understood.

Ah, my LORD, I feel thy meaning; it is written in my flesh; it is engraven in
my bones: my heart thou aimest at: thy rod does drive, thy silken cord of love
does draw; and all to bring it to thyself: can such a heart be worth thy
having? Make it so, Lord, and then it is thine: take it to thyself, and then
take me. I can but reach it toward thee, and not unto thee: I am too low; and
it is too dull: this clod has life to stir, but not to rise: as the feeble
child to the tender mother, it looks up to thee, and stretches out the
hands, and fain would have thee take it up. Indeed. LORD, my soul is in a
strait, and what to choose I know not, but thou know what to give: to depart
and be with thee, is best, but yet to be in the flesh seems needful. Thou
know I am not weary of thy work; I am willing to stay while thou will here
employ me, and to dispatch the work which thou have put in my hands: but I
beseech thee stay no longer when this is done; and while I must be here, let me
be still amending and ascending; make me still better, and take me at the best.
I dare not be so impatient of li^ing, as to importune thee to cut off my time,
and urge thee to snatch me hence: nor yet would I stay when my work is done;
and remain under thy feet, while they are in thy bosom: I am thy child as well
as they; Christ is my head as well as theirs; why is there then so great a
distance? I acknowledge the equity of thy ways; though we are all children, yet
I am the prodigal, and therefore meeter in this remote country to feed on
husks, while they are always with thee, and possess thy glory: but they were
once in my condition, and I shall shortly be in theirs: they were of the lowest
form, before they came to the highest; they suffered before they reigned; they
came out of great tribulation, who now are standing before thy throne: and
shall not I be content to come to the crown as they did? and to drink of their
cup before I sit with them in the kingdom? I am contented, O my LORD, to stay
thy time, and go thy way, so thou will exalt me also in thy season, and take me
into thy barn when thou see me ripe. In the mean-time I may desire, though I
am not to repine; I may believe and wish, though not make sinful haste; I am
content to wait, but not to lose thee: and when thou see me too contented
with thine abse^^e, quicken then my dull desires, and blow up the dying spark
of love; and leave me not till I am able unfeignedly to cry out, As the heart
pants after the brooks, and the dry land thirsts for water-streams, so
thirsts my soul after thee, O God: when shall I come and appear before the
living God? What interest has this empty world in me? and what is there in it
that may seem so lovely, as to entice my desires and delight in thee, or to
make me loath to come away? Draw forth my soul to thyself by the secret power of
thy love, as the sunshine in the spring draws forth the creatures from their
winter-cells; meet it half way, and entice it to thee, as the loadstone does
the iron: dispel the clouds that hide from me thy love, or remove the scales
that hinder mine eyes from beholding thee: for only the beams that stream from
thy face, and the taste of thy salvation, can make a soul unfeignedly say,
Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace.

Send forth thy convoy of angels for my departing soul, and let them bring it
among the perfect spirits of the just, and let me follow my dear friends that
have died in Christ before; and when my friends are crying over my grave, let
my spirit be reposed with thee in rest, and when my corpse shall lie there
rotting in the dark, let my soul be in the inheritance of the saints in light.
And O thou that numberest the hairs of my head, number all the days that my
body lies in the dust; thou that writest all my members in thy book, keep an
account of all my scattered bones; and hasten, O my Savior, the time of thy
return; send forth thine angels, and let that dreadful; joyful trumpet sound;
delay not, left the living give up their hopes; delay not, left earth should
grow like hell, and left thy church by divisions be crumbled to dust; delay
not, lest thine enemies get advantage of thy flock, and lest pride and
hypocrify, and sensuality, and unbelief, should prevail against thy little
remnant, and share among them thy whole inheritance, and when thou come thou
find not faith on the earth; delay not, lest the grave should boast of victory,
and refuse to deliver up thy due. O hasten that great resurrection day! when
thy command shall go forth, and none shall disobey; when the sea and earth
shall yield up their hostages, and all that sleep in the grave shall awake, and
the dead in Christ shall first arise: when the seed that thou sowedst
corruptible, shall come forth incorruptible; and graves that received but
rottenness, and retained but dust, shall return the^ glorious stars and suns:
therefore dare I lay down my carcass in the dust, entrusting it, not to a
grave, but to thee, and therefore my flesh shall rest in hope, till thou raise
it to the everlasting rest. Return, O LORD, how long! O let thy kingdom come!
thy desolate bride says come; for thy Spirit within her says come. who
teaches her thus to pray with groanings which cannot be expressed: the whole
creation says come, waiting to be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the sons of GOD: thyself has said, Surely I come,
amen, even, so come, Lord Jesus.

The CONCLUSION.
THUS, reader, I have given thee my best advice for the attaining and
maintaining an heavenly conversation. The manner is imperfect, and too much my
own; but for the main matter, I received it from GOD. From him I deliver it
thee, and his charge I lay upon thee, that thou entertain and practice it. If
thou can not do it fully, do it as thou can; only be sure thou do it
seriously and frequently. If thou will believe a man that has made some small
trial of it, thou shall find it will make thee another man, and elevate thy
soul, and clear thy understanding, and leave a pleasant savor upon thy heart;
so that thy own experience will make thee confess, that one hour thus spent
will more effectually revive thee, than many in bare external duties; and a day
in these contemplations will afford thee truer content, than all the glory and
riches of the earth. Be acquainted with this work, and thou will be acquainted
with GOD: thy joys will be spiritual and lasting; thou will have comfort in
life, and comfort in death: when thou have neither wealth nor health, nor the
pleasures of this world, yet will thou have comfort: comfort without the
presence or help of any friend, without a minister, without a book, when all
means are denied thee, or taken from thee, yet may thou have vigorous, real
comfort. Thy graces will be active and victorious; and the daily joy which is
thus fetched from heaven, will be thy strength: thou will be as one that
stands on the top of an exceeding high mountain; he looks down on the world
as if it were quite below him; how small do the fields, and woods, and
countries seem to him? cities and towns seem but little spots. Thus despicably
will thou look on all things here below: the greatest princes will seem but as
grasshoppers, and the busy, contentious, covetous world, but as heaps of ants.
Men's threatenings will be no terror to thee; nor the honors of this world any
strong enticement; temptations will be harmless, as having lost their strength;
and afflictions less grievous, as having lost their sting; and every mercy will
be better known and relished.

Reader, it is (under GOD) in thy own choice now, whether thou will live this
blessed life or not; and whether all this pains which I have taken for thee,
small prosper or be lost. If it be lost through thy laziness. (which GOD
forbid) thou will prove the greatest loser thyself.

O man, what have thou to mind, but GOD and heaven? art thou not almost out of
this world already? do thou not look every day, when one disease or other
will let out thy soul? does not the bier stand ready to carry thee to the
grave? and the worms wait to feed upon thy face and heart? what if thy pulse
must beat a few strokes more? and what if thou have a sew more breaths to
fetch, before thou breathe thy last? and what if thou have a few more nights to
sleep, before thou sleep in the dust? Alas, what will this be, when it is gone?
and is it not almost gone already? Shortly thou will see thy glass run out, and
say thyself, my life is done! my time is gone! there is nothing now, but heaven
or hell: where then should thy heart be now, but in heaven? Did thou but know
what a dreadful thing it is to have a doubt of heaven, when a man lies dying,
it would rouse thee up.

O what a life might men live, if they were but willing and diligent! GOD would
have our joys to be far more than our sorrows; yea, he would have us to have no
sorrow, but what tends to joy: and no more than our sins have made necessary
for our good. How much do those christians wrong GOD and themselves, that
either make their thoughts of GOD the inlet of their sorrows, or let these
offered joys He by, as neglected or forgotten! Some there be that say, it is
not worth to much time and trouble, to think of the greatness of the joys
above. But as these men obey not the command of GOD, which requires them to
have their affections on things above; so do they wilfully make their own lives
miserable, by refusing the delights that GOD has set before them. And yet if
this were all, it were a smaller matter; if it were but loss of their comforts,
I would not say much: but see what abundance of other mischiefs follow the
absence of these heavenly delights.

First, It will damp, if not destroy, our very love to GOD: so deeply as we
apprehend his exceeding love to us, and his purpose to make us eternally happy,
so much will it raise our love: love to GOD and delight in him, are still
conjunct. They that conceive of GOD as one that desires their blood and
damnation, cannot heartily love him.

Secondly, It will make us have rare and unpleasing thoughts of GOD; for our
thoughts will follow our love and delight. Did we more delight in GOD than in
any thing below, our thoughts would as freely run after him, as they now run
from him.

Thirdly, And it will make men have as rare and unpleasing speech of GOD; for
who will care for talking of that which he has no delight in? What makes men
still talking of worldliness or wickedness, but that these are more pleasant to
them than GOD?

Fourthly, Men will have no delight in the service of GOD, when they have no
delight in GOD, nor any sweet thoughts of heaven, which is the end of their
services. No wonder if such christians complain, that they are still backward
to duty; that they have no delight in prayer, in sacraments, or in scripture
itself: if thou could once delight in GOD, thou would easily delight in
duty; especially that which brings thee into the nearest converse with him;
but till then, no wonder if thou be weary of all.

Fifthly, This want of heavenly delight will leave men under the power of every
affliction; they will have nothing to comfort them, and ease them in their
sufferings, but the empty, ineffectual pleasures of the flesh; and when that is
gone, where then is their delight?

Sixthly, It will make them fearful and unwilling to die: for who would go to a
GOD, or a place that he has no delight in? Or who would leave his pleasure
here, except it were to go to better? But if men take delight in GOD whilst
they live, they will not tremble at the tidings of death.

If GOD would persuade you now to make conscience of this duty, and help you in
it by the blessed influence of his Spirit, you would not change your lives with
the greatest prince on earth. But I am afraid, if I may judge of your hearts by
the backwardness of my own, that it will prove a hard thing to persuade you to
the work. Pardon my jealousy; it is raised upon too many and sad experiments.
What say you? Do you resolve on this heavenly course or no? Will you let go all
your sinful pleasures, and daily seek these higher delights? I pray thee,
reader, consider of it, and resolve on the work before thou go further. Let
thy family perceive, let thy neighbors perceive, let thy conscience perceive,
yea, let GOD perceive it, that thou art a man that have thy conversation in
heaven. GOD has now offered to be thy daily delight; thy neglect is thy
refusal. Take heed what thou do: refuse this, and refuse all: thou must have
heavenly delights, or none that are lasting. GOD is willing thou should daily
walk with him, and fetch in consolation from the everlasting fountain: if thou
be unwilling, bear the loss; and when thou lie dying, then seek for comfort
where thou can. O how is the unseen GOD neglected, and the unseen glory
forgotten! and all for want of that faith which is the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things that are not s^en.

But for you whose hearts GOD has weaned from all things here below, I hope
you will fetch one walk daily in the new Jerusalem! GOD is your love, and your
desire; and I know you would fain be more acquainted with your Savior, and I
know it is your grief that your hearts are not more near him; and that they do
no more passionately love and delight in him. As ever you would enjoy your
desires, try this life of meditation on your everlasting rest.

O thou, the merciful Father of spirits, the attractive of love, and ocean of
delights, draw up these drossy hearts unto thyself, and keep them there till
they are spiritualized and refined, and second these thy servant's weak
endeavors, and persuade those that read these lines, to the practice of this
delightful, heavenly work. O suffer not the soul of thy most unworthy servant
to be a stranger to those joys which he unfoldeth to thy people, or to be
seldom in that way which he has marked out to others; but O keep me while I
tarry on this earth, in daily, serious breathings after thee, and in a
believing, affectionate walking with thee; and when thou come, O let me be
found so doing, not hiding my talent, nor serving my flesh, nor yet asleep with
my lamp unfurnished, but waiting and longing for my LORD'S return: that those
who shall read these directions, may not reap only the fruit of my studies, but
the breathings of my active hope and love: that if my heart were open to their
view, they might there read the same most deeply engraven with a beam from the
face of the Son of GOD; and not find vanity or lust, or pride within, where the
words of life appear without; that so these lines may not witness against me;
but proceeding from the heart of the writer, may be effectual through thy grace
upon the heart of the reader, and so be the savor of life to both.

GLORY be to GOD in the highest: on earth peace: good will toward men.

FINIS.
CONTENTS. THE SAINTS EVERLASTING REST.
HEB. iv. 9. There remains therefore a Rest to the People of God.


PART I.
CHAP I. THIS Rest defined PAGE 7 CHAP II. What this Rest pre-supposeth PAGE 13
CHAP III. What this Rest contains PAGE 17 CHAP IV. The four great
Preparatives to our Rest PAGE 31 CHAP V. The Excellencies of our Rest PAGE 44
CHAP VI. The People of God described PAGE 71 The Conclusion PAGE 84
PART II.
CHAP I. The inconceivable Misery of the Ungodly in the Loss of this Rest PAGE
85 CHAP II. The Aggravation of the Loss of Heaven to the Ungodly PAGE 91 CHAP
III. They shall lose all Things comfortable as well as Heaven PAGE 106 CHAP IV.
The Greatness of the Torments of the Damned discovered PAGE 113 CHAP V. The
second Use. Reprehending the general Neglect of this Rest, and exciting to
Diligence in seeking it PAGE 125 CHAP VI. An Exhortation to Seriousness in
seeking Rest PAGE 138 CHAP VII. The thind Use. Persuading all men to try their
Titles to this Rest; and directing them how to try, that they may know PAGE 162
CHAP VIII. Further Causes of Doubting among Christians PAGE 175 CHAP IX.
Containing Directions to Examination, and some Marks of Trial PAGE 180 CHAP X.
The Reason of the Saints Afflictions here PAGE 185 CHAP XI. An Exhortation to
those that have got Assurance of this Rest, that they would do all that
possibly they can to help others to it PAGE 195 CHAP XII. An Advice to some
more particularly to help others to this Rest PAGE 231
PART III.
CHAP I. Reproving our Expectations of Rest on Earth PAGE 263 CHAP II. Motives
to Heavenly-mindedness PAGE 275 CHAP III. Containing some Hindrances of
Heavenly-mindedness PAGE 297 CHAP IV. Some general Helps to Heavenly-mindedness
PAGE 309 CHAP V. A Description of heavenly Contemplation PAGE 319 CHAP VI. The
fittest Time and Place for this Contemplation, and the Preparation of the Heart
unto it PAGE 328 CHAP VII. What Affections must be acted, and by what
Considerations, and Objects, and in what Order PAGE 339 CHAP VIII. Some
Advantages and Helps for raising the Sout by Meditation PAGE 354 CHAP IX. How
to manage and watch over the Heart through the whole Work PAGE 369 CHAP X. An
Example of this heavenly Contemplation, for the Help of the Unskilful PAGE 375
The Conclusion PAGE 39^

