PROPOSAL, FOR PRINTING BY SUBSCRIPTION, THE SECOND AND THIRD VOLUMES OF THE
HISTORY of NEW HAMPSHIRE.
BY JEREMY BELKNAP, A M.
VOLUME II.
A continuation of the civil and military history of the PROVINCE, (from the
period where the FIRST volume ends) through the successive administrations of
the Governors, GEORGE VAUGHAN, SAMUEL SHUTE, JOHN WENTWORTH, WILLIAM BURNET,
JONATHAN BELCHER, BENNING WENTWORTH and JOHN WENTWORTH; to the termination of
the British government in New Hampshire; and from thence through the American
Revolution.

VOLUME III.
A geographical description of the STATE; with sketches of its natural History,
Productions, Improvements and present state of Society and Manners, Laws and
Government. To be illustrated by a Map.

CONDITIONS.
I. Each volume will contain about five hundred pages, and in respect to paper,
page and type, will be, as nearly as possible, similar to the first, the
workmanship of which is universally admired.

II. The price of each volume will be, one French crown in sheets; one dollar
and a quarter stitched in blue; and one dollar and a half bound and lettered.

III. As the whole risque and expense of the publication falls on the AUTHOR,
every subscriber is requested to advance ONE DOLLAR. Without this aid the work
cannot be prosecuted.

Some copies of the FIRST volume may be had at the same rate, to be paid for on
delivery.

Gentlemen who have these papers in their hands are desired to return them to
the Author, or to ISAIAH THOMAS, Esquire. of Worcester, by the 31 st of March next.

(...), Boston, December 21, 1790.

We the subscribers have advanced the several sums prefixed to our names, and
promise to take the number of copies annexed thereto, and pay the balance on
delivery of the books.

Cash advanced. For the whole Set, three volumes. Cash advanced. For the Second
and Third volumes only.


