THE LIBERAL SUPPORT OF Gospel Ministers, OPENED AND INCULCATED.

By ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR of a CHURCH in MIDDLEBOROUGH.

The Labourer is worthy of his Reward.

1 TIMOTHY v. 18. BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, at No. 53, in Cornhill. MDCCXC.

AT a time when public credit is sunk very low, and our highest Rulers are
loudly complained of, all men among us may justly be alarmed; for a Government
divided against itself, is brought to desolation; and every city or house
divided against itself, shall not stand. And God says, Them that honor me, I
will honor, and they who despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. And as the
gospel ministry, and its free support, are the chief means of glorifying God in
the world, it is hoped that the following attempt to promote the same, will be
heartily received.

Middleborough, Aug. 21, 1790.
THE LIBERAL SUPPORT OF GOSPEL MINISTERS; OPENED AND INCULCATED.
1 COR. ix. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel.


THIS is as plain an ordinance of God as any he ever instituted; and it is as
distinct from the ordinances of men, as heaven is from earth. The ordinances of
men, enforced by the sword, are to defend the persons and property of all
impartially, and to punish such as work ill to their neighbors; but the
ordinances of the gospel are for begetting and promoting faith and love in the
souls of men, so as to act toward God and their neighbors from heavenly
motives. Therefore pure religion is an infinite blessing to mankind; and false
pretenses to it, produce infinite mischiefs. This has been experienced in all
ages, and in all countries. Fear and love are the great principles of human
actions; but they were divided by the fall, and the devil has held men in
bondage through fear of death. And nothing can unite these two principles, but
faith in the death and merits of Christ, our great high priest and king in
heaven. His kingdom is not of this world, and therefore the world have no right
to use force about his ministers. This will more fully appear, if we consider
what the gospel is, who are the true preachers of it, and what is intended by
living of the gospel.

1. What is the gospel? It is a pure revelation from God, of salvation through
his Son, by the power of the Holy Ghost. It is by the seed of the woman, who
has bruised the serpent's head. Truth and love form the character of Christ
and his children; and deceit and cruelty form the character of the devil and
his children; and God has put enmity between them. Genesis iii. 15. This appeared
in the old world between Cain and Abel; and between the seed of Cain and the
seed of Seth. After the flood the church descended in the line of Shem, until
Abraham was called out of Chaldea, and received the promise of the descent of
the church in his seed, until Christ came, in whom all the families of the
earth should be blessed. And when he received the bloody sign of circumcision,
it was a seal to him of the righteousness of the faith which he before had in
Christ, who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. Romans iv. 11 -- 23. Gal. iii. 10 -- 22. Circumcision was a type
of the death of Christ, and of a change of heart by his word and spirit.
Therefore he said of the remnant who are saved, The Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart and with all thy soul, that thou may live. -- The word
is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it.
And an inspired apostle says, That is the word of faith which we preach, that
if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. Deuteronomy. xxx. 6 -- 14. Romans x. 6 -- 10. Abraham had no right
to circumcise any person that was not born in his house, until he had bought
him as servant with money; and he was an eminent type of the Son of God, who
purchased the church with his own blood. Therefore the gospel says, Awake,
awake, put on strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem the
holy city; for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised
and the unclean. -- Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O
Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of
Zion: for thus says the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for naught, and ye shall
be redeemed without money. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings
of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God reigns?
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Isaiah lii. 1 -- 3, 7.
Romans x. 15 -- 17. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness;
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.
Bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable unto all things,
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy
iii. 16. iv. 8. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
John iii. 20, 21. The gospel is a pure revelation from God, which the angels
saw more of when God was manifest in the flesh, than they ever did before; and
the promises of grace belong only to those who believe in and obey the Son of
God. We come therefore to inquire,

II. Who are the true preachers of the gospel. In the first place, they are all
taught of God, without which no man can come to his Son. John vi. 44, 45. When
he came as the light of the world, none received him but they who were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
John i. 9 -- 14. No man can say that Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. 1 Cor. xii. 3. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of
his. Romans viii. 9. Without it he is not a Christian, but a blind leader of the
blind. He who has not a single eye to God, to learn and do his will, is full
of darkness. Matt. vi. 21 -- 23. An evil bias blinds the eyes of the wise, and
perverts the words of the righteous; and how much more the unrighteous, who
were never born again? In the second place, all true ministers of Christ,
receive special gifts from him, for the great work to which they are called. A
good natural capacity for teaching, and human learning and accomplishments;
especially a good acquaintance with language, and with the best methods of
conveying our ideas to others, are of great importance in these affairs. Yet
all these, without an honest heart, enable men to do the more mischief, both in
the world, and in the church of God. Therefore we read of the slight of men,
and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, in the same
chapter which assures us, that our ascended Lord gives gifts for pastors and
teachers, who speak the truth in love. Ephesians. iv. 11 -- 16. In the third place,
the apostle Peter says, As every man has received the gift, even so minister
the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any
man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do
it as of the ability which God gives; that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ. The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an
elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed; feed the flock of God which is among you, taking
the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre,
but of a ready mind; neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being
ensamples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive a crown of glory that fades not away. Likewise ye younger, submit
yourselves unto the elder: yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be
clothed with humility; for God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the
humble. 1 Peter iv. 10, 11. v. 1 -- 5. Here we may see, that all true ministers
of Christ, are regenerate persons, and have received special gifts from him for
that work, with a command to be faithful stewards thereof, as they can answer
it to him in the great day. They are leaders in the church, who are all to act
as a united community, and to be subject one to another, as they would expect
the grace of God to direct and assist them, and not to be resisted by him, as
all the proud are. The name Clergy, which ministers have arrogated to
themselves, came from the word which is here translated heritage; and ministers
have acted as lords over God's heritage, by assuming the power of church
government unto themselves, as the priests had under the law, who could turn a
king out of the temple. 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 18. And in this way the mother of
harlots has reigned over the kings of the earth. Rev. xvii. 18. She has
assumed the power of disposing of crowns and countries at her pleasure, while
she has claimed a succession of church power from the apostles, which none but
ministers could give or take away. America has been divided, and filled with
blood and slavery, from that hellish claim of power. But the Apostle Peter was
so far from claiming any such power, that he allows none to be priests in the
church of Christ, but those who are born again, not of corruptible seed, but
incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides forever. And to this
royal priesthood, and holy nation, he says, Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. 1 Peter i. 23. ii. 9 -- 13. But when men
invaded the prerogative of the Lord Jesus Christ, he and John said, Whether it
be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge
ye: for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. Acts iv.
19, 20. And John says, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this
the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil. 1 John, iii.
9, 10. And when our Lord sent his gospel into the wide field of the world, he
commanded his servants to let these two sorts of children grow together
therein, until he should come to judgment, and cast the wicked into hell, and
take his saints to heaven. Matt. xiii. 24 -- 30, 37 -- 43. While he requires
his church to exclude all men who are fornicators, or covetous, or idolaters,
or railers, or drunkards, or extortioners, from their communion. Purging out
these evils, is the antitype of putting away all leavened bread out of their
houses, in the time of the passover. 1 Cor. v. 7 -- 13. But by confounding
church and world together, the holy government which Christ appointed in his
church, has been long trodden under foot. This will more plainly appear, if we
consider,

III. What is intended by living of the gospel. As Jesus Christ is the only
HEAD of his church, all the ordinances and commandments of men therein, is
will worship. And his command to his church is, Whatsoever ye do, in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father
by him. Col. ii. 10, 19 -- 23. iii. 17. Covetous men, who privily brought in
damnable heresies, were self-willed, under the name of liberty. 2 Peter, ii. 1
-- 3, 10, 19. They sinned wilfully against the laws, blood and spirit of
Christ. Heb. x. 26 -- 29. And all such use force to support religious teachers,
or else they refuse to support them any further than suits their inclinations.
Men who love self above God and their neighbors, heap to themselves teachers,
having itching ears; and they turn away their ears from the truth, and are
turned unto fables. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 5, iv. 1 -- 4. But God said unto Aaron,
Thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priest's office for every thing of
the altar, and within the vail, and ye shall serve: I have given your priest's
office unto you as a service of gift; and the stranger that comes nigh, shall
be put to death. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thee
the charge of mine heave-offerings, of all the hallowed things of the children
of Israel; unto thee have I given them, by reason of the anointing, and to thy
sons by an ordinance forever. Numb. xviii. 7, 8. The ointment with which they
were anointed, was of such a sacred composition, that God said, Whosoever shall
make like unto that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people,
Exodus xxx. 38. But the holy Spirit, wherewith Christ and his saints are
anointed, is infinitely more sacred. It brings souls to know the truth, and
that no lie is of the truth. All deceit is of the spirit of antichrist. 1 John,
ii. 20 -- 27. And if it were not for that spirit, the laws of Christ would be
plain, which say, Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things,
live of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are
partakers with the altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the gospel should live of the gospel. Ye have been called unto liberty;
only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts. Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Let
him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good
things. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that
shall he also reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting. Gal. v. 13, 24, vi. 2 -- 8. Let the elders that rule well be
counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and
doctrine; for the scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads
out the corn; and the labourer is worthy of his reward. 1 Timothy v. 17, 18.

As the gospel is a pure revelation from God, living of the gospel cannot mean
a living by the laws of men, enforced by the sword. Neither can it mean, that
the bodies of ministers should live upon spiritual food. To communicate unto
them in all good things, cannot mean only good words and fair speeches, neither
can a reward for labor, mean alms to the poor. Yet the world is full of these
absurd imaginations. Teaching the fear of God by the precepts of men, has made
them deaf and blind to the voice and light of revelation. But the day is
coming, when he says, The deaf shall hear the words of the book, and the eyes
of the blind shall see cut of obscurity, and out of darkness; the meek also
shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in
the holy One of Israel: for the terrible one is brought to naught, and the
scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off; that make a
man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves in the gate,
and turn aside the just for a thing of naught. Isaiah xxix. 13 -- 21. This
prophecy was verified when Christ came in the flesh. Mat. xi. 6, xv. 7 -- 9.
And it will have a much more glorious accomplishment, when he shall reign with
his saints upon earth. But the glory of that reign is described in such bright
figures, that many put it beyond the resurrection of the body. Though, as the
coming of Elijah meant the coming of John the Baptist, in the spirit and power
of Elias, so I believe that the resurrection of the souls of the old martyrs,
means the raising of their spirit and power in the churches, who would yield to
death, rather than neglect obedience to the commandments of Jesus Christ. Mal.
iv. 6. Luke i. 17. Rev. xii. 11, 17. xx. 4 -- 6. The words of scripture ought
ever to be regarded, comparing spiritual things with spiritual. 1 Cor. ii. 13.
But confounding natural and spiritual things together, erected mystery Babylon.
The Son of God was within the Jewish church, when he warned her leaders against
looking elsewhere for his Kingdom; but he is now at the right hand of the
Father, making his people willing by the power of his gospel; and he will
strike through kings in the day of his wrath, and wound the heads over many
countries. Luke xvii. 21. Acts ii. 29 -- 39. Psalm cx. 1 -- 6. Rev. xix. 11 --
21. But from the word within, many have imagined that they were to follow a
rule within themselves, above what is written. Scornful men of old said, We
have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us; for we have
made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves. Isaiah xviii.
14 -- 16. To be carnally minded is death, and deceit came from hell; and all
men who think to secure themselves by their own doings, are in covenant with
death, and at agreement with hell. Israel followed after the law of
righteousness, but did not attain to it, because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the deeds of the law; for they stumbled at that
stumbling-stone, as it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and
rock of offense: and whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Romans
viii. 6 -- 9.ix. 31 -- 33. Hearing and doing the sayings of Christ, is the only
way for any to build upon the Rock. Mat. vii. 24. All others make lies their
refuge. The death of Christ broke down the middle wall of partition between
Jews and Gentiles; and says our apostle, Through him we both have access by one
Spirit unto the Father. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners,
but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together, grows
unto an holy temple in the Lord; in whom you also are builded together for an
habitation of God through the Spirit. Ephesians. ii. 18 -- 22.

The apostles are set before the prophets, both in the first building of the
Christian church, and also in her triumph over Babylon. Rev. xviii. 20. The
Hebrew church was constituted of the household of Abraham, and the Christian
church of the household of God. And as it is adultery for a woman to love any
others above her husband, and to admit them into his place; so it is for any to
call themselves Christians, while they refuse to be governed wholly by the laws
of Christ. He is the firstborn among many brethren. And to enforce his laws,
an inspired apostle says, Ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to
the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven,
and to God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and
to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things than that of Abel. See that ye refuse not HIM THAT
SPEAKS; for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape, if we turn away from HIM THAT SPEAKS FROM HEAVEN:
Whose voice then shook the earth; but now he has promised, saying, Yet once
more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once more,
signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are
made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. Wherefore we
receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming
fire. Romans viii. 28 -- 30. Heb. xii. 22 -- 29. Hag. ii. 6 -- 9. Is not my word
like as a fire? says the Lord; and like a hammer that breaks the rock in
pieces? Therefore behold, I am against the prophets, says the Lord, that steal
my words, every one from his neighbor. Jer. xxiii. 29, 30. Thou that preachest
a man should not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man should not
commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, do
thou commit sacrilege? Romans ii. 21, 22. All the treasures of the first city
which Israel took in Canaan, were consecrated unto God; and they could not
stand before their enemies, until they put away, in the valley of Achor, the
accursed practice of stealing and dissimulation about those sacred things.
Joshua vi. 19, vii. 11, 26. And when God received believing Gentiles into his
church, with his elect among the Jews, he made the valley of Achor a resting
place for them; and he said to the unbelievers, The Lord God shall slay thee,
and call his servants by another name; that he who blesses himself in the
earth, shall bless himself in the God of truth, and he that swears in the
earth, shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are
forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes. Isaiah lxv. 1, 2, 9 -- 16.
And after charging Israel with playing the harlot, for going after others for a
worldly living, God said, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness,
and speak comfortably unto her; and I will give her her vineyard's from thence,
and the valley of Achor for a door of hope. -- And I will sow her unto me in
the earth, and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy, and I
will say to them who were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall
say, Thou art my God. Hosea ii. 5, 14, 15, 23. And these prophecies are
expressly applied to souls who were effectually called, from among Jews and
Gentiles. Romans ix. 24 -- 26, x. 20, 21. To those who were born again. 1 Peter,
i. 23, ii. 9, 10. All Christians have the Spirit of truth, who will guide them
into all truth. John xvi. 13. And to distinguish the disciples of Christ by any
name which men have invented, is a carnal practice. 1 Cor. iii. 3. When the
Jews were carried into Babylon, the command was, Hear the word of the Lord, O
ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that scatters
Israel, will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd does his flock. In those
days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the
children's teeth are set on edge. But every one shall die for his own iniquity,
every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. Behold
the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I
made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them
out of the land of Egypt (which my covenant they break, although I was an
husband unto them, says the Lord:) but this shall be the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel, After those days, says the Lord, I will put my
law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; for
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Jer.
xxxi. 10, 29 -- 34. Upon which an inspired apostle says, In that he says, A
new covenant, he has made the first old. Now that which decays and waxes
old, is ready to vanish away. He takes away the first, that he may establish
the second. Heb. viii. 8 -- 13, x. 9. Circumcision in the flesh, was the first
covenant with Abraham and his seed, and circumcision in the heart is the
second. And when the martyr Stephen was accused of holding that Jesus of
Nazareth would destroy their temple at Jerusalem, and change the customs which
Moses delivered unto Israel, he recited many facts concerning their nation, and
then said, The most High dwells not in temples made with hands; as says the
prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye
build me? says the Lord; or what is the place of my rest? has not my hand
made all these things? Ye stiffnecked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye
do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Acts vii. 8, 48
-- 51. In the prophecy referred to, God says, To this man will I look, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And
concerning Jews and Gentiles, he says, I will take of them for priests, and for
Levites, says the Lord. For as the new heavens and the new earth which I will
make, shall remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your name
remain. Isaiah lxvi. 1, 2, 21, 22.

Now we are to remember, that the seed of Aaron, and all the tribe of Levi,
were hallowed to God, in the room of all the firstborn in Israel. None but the
lawful seed of Aaron were priests, to make atonement for sin; and that was not
to be done for any presumptuous man. Every man also who should act
presumptuously, against the sentence of their priest and judge, in the place of
God's sanctuary, was to die without mercy. Number. iii. 1 -- 13. xv. 30. Deuteronomy.
xvii. 8 -- 12. The priest was to give sentence in such cases, by the Urim and
Thummim; but these were lost in the Babylonian captivity; after which no priest
was allowed to eat of the most holy things, who could not show a register of
his lawful descent from Aaron, until a priest stood up with Urim and Thummim.
Ezra ii. 61 -- 63. The words signify light and perfection. The ark of the
testimony, the mercy-seat, the cloud of glory thereon, with the fire from
heaven upon the altar, were also lost in the Babylonian captivity; but the
spirit of them all was restored by Jesus, who through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, to purge our consciences from dead works
to serve the living God. We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat,
which serve the tabernacle. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of
praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his
name. But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. Christ is of an order above Levi or Abraham, whose
covenants he has disannulled. Heb. vii. 1 -- 22. ix. 14. xiii. 10 -- 16. And
the great apostle of the Gentiles says, We are not sufficient of ourselves to
think any thing as of ourselves, but all our sufficiency is of God; who also
has made us able ministers of the new testament, not of the letter, but of the
spirit; for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. 2 Cor. iii. 5, 6.
So our Lord says, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing:
the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. John vi.
63. And they who are thus quickened, are the only church of the firstborn,
under the gospel. All the first fruits in Israel, were also consecrated unto
God. Exodus xxii. 29. Therefore another apostle says, Of his own will begat he
us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
creatures. James i. 18. The sovereign will of God is the cause, the word of
truth is the means, and an entire devotedness to God is the end of the gospel
dispensation.

From Abraham unto the death of Christ, peculiar religious privileges were
confined to certain families. Even the preaching of the gospel was limited to
the house of Israel, which is now free for all nations. Matt. x. 6. xxviii. 19.
Therefore none have any reason to say, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and
the children's teeth are set on edge; for all the privileges of the covenant of
grace are personal, as they were not before the death of Christ. Lot was a
righteous man, as well as Abraham; but the Israelites were not allowed to
invade the possessions of the children of Lot, nor to receive them into the
church of God. Deuteronomy. ii. 17. -- 19. Number. xxiii. 9. The first son of Abraham was
cast out of the church, for mocking at the joy of faith; and the unregenerate
do the like to this day. Genesis xxi. 8 -- 12. Gal. iv.22 -- 29. Esau profanely
sold his birthright; and he found no place of repentance afterward. And the
envy of his posterity brought ruin upon their country, while electing love
continued with a remnant of the seed of Jacob. Genesis xxv. 29 -- 34.xxvii. 38.
Heb. xii. 16, 17. Ezekiel. xxxv. 11. Mal. i. 2, 3. Romans ix. 7 -- 13. xi. 5. And in
the church of Israel, Reuben lost his birthright, by defiling his father's bed;
and some of his tribe perished in the gainsaying of Korah. Genesis xlix. 3, 4.
Number. xvi. 1 -- 3. The birthright was Joseph's, who did wonders in Egypt, and
Joshua led Israel into Canaan; yet, because Ephraim became the head of an
idolatrous kingdom, they were divorced, and never returned from captivity as a
nation, but only as individuals. And though Judah prevailed above his brethren,
and of him came the chief ruler; yet the crown was taken from the house of
David, for their wickedness, and was not restored until Jesus came to wear it.
And for rejecting him, the Jews will be of the synagogue of satan, until they
shall come to believe in Christ, and to know his love to his church. 1 Chronicles.
v. 1, 2. Jer. iii. 8. Ezekiel. xxi. 25 -- 27. Luke i. 31 -- 33. Rev. iii. 9. The
Hebrew and Christian churches, are the two candlesticks, into which God poured
the oil of his grace, by his precepts to direct their way, and by his promises
to support their souls, in holding up light to the world, who hate it, because
it torments their consciences. The writings of Moses are the only records that
any men have of the first creation, of the primitive state of man, of his fall,
and of the promises of grace to the fathers, from Adam to his time. And the law
of Moses was given, to expose the nature and infinite evil of sin, and to point
sinners to the Son of God, who only can save from the guilt and power of it.
Therefore the inspired apostle of the Gentiles says, The law entered, that the
offense might abound; but where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: that
as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. And to guard against the
imagination, that free salvation by grace, would encourage men to continue in
sin, he said, To whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are
to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.
Romans v. 20, 21. vi. 1, 16. Christ was made a curse for us, that we might
receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. And all men are bewitched, who
claim the promises of grace in any other way. Gal. iii. 1, 10 -- 14. Yet after
the power of the devil was broken in the Roman empire, by the power of the
gospel, men who were the servants of sin, assumed the place of the Son of God
in his church, so as to be lawgivers and judges for all in religious affairs.
And as he takes all that is done to his word, and to his saints, as done to
himself, he says, He that despised Moses' law, died without mercy, under two or
three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God! Heb. x. 28, 29. His person
never was trodden under foot; but the Gentiles tread the holy city under foot
forty and two months, while the beast continues, who at last kills the two
witnesses. Rev. xi. 2 -- 10. xiii. 5. And as Lordship is of the Gentiles, but
is excluded from the church of Christ, I take the holy city to mean the
government of his church, which men have trampled upon. Mark x. 42, 43. Instead
of obeying the Lord Jesus Christ, so that his grace might reign through
righteousness, ungodly men turned his grace into lasciviousness, in imitation
of Cain, Balaam and Core. Jude 4 -- 11. The way of Cain, was to worship God
without faith in the blood of the Lamb, and to kill Abel because God accepted
his believing worship, and did not accept Cain's will worship. Heb. xi. 4. 1
John iii. 7 -- 12. The error of Balaam was loving the world above God, and
counselling a king to entice Israel into sin, for an earthly reward. The
Midianites who did it, were of the seed of Abraham, as well as the Israelites,
but not of that church. A sword was held up before Balaam to warn him of his
danger; and he was finally slain with the sword. Genesis xxv. 2. Number. xxii. 31.
xxiii. 9. xxxi. 8, 16. And Christ will slay all, with the sword of his mouth,
who love the wages of unrighteousness, except they repent. 2 Peter ii. 15, 16.
Rev. ii. 14 -- 16. xix. 11 -- 21. Korah raised a rebellion in Israel against
the government which God had established therein, under Moses and Aaron, who
were eminent types of Christ. Number. xvi. 1 -- 3. For Moses truly said unto the
fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren,
like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that prophet
shall be destroyed from among the people. Acts iii. 22, 23. Moses verily was
faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which
were to be spoken after; but Christ as a Son over his own house; whose house
are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
the end. And of the priesthood, it is said, No man takes this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron: so also, Christ glorified
not himself, to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my
Son, today have I begotten thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a
priest forever after the order of Melchisedec. Heb. iii. 5, 6. v. 4 -- 6. When
the first king of Israel presumed to violate a known command of God, and then
thought to atone for it by sacrifices, Samuel said unto him, Rebellion is as
the sin of witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry: because
thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being
king. 1 Samuel xv. 23. And by such sorceries have all nations been deceived. Rev.
xviii. 23. When kings shall become nursing fathers, and queens nursing mothers
to the church of Christ, they will bow down to his authority therein. Isaiah
xlix. 23. And then we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. But we are commanded to withdraw from perverse disputers, who suppose
that gain is godliness. 1 Timothy ii. 2. vi. 5. And what clearer evidence can we
have of this character, than a refusal to allow the church of Christ to be
governed wholly by his laws, and to have each soul act in all religious affairs
out of a good conscience toward God? He never united the offices of priest and
king in any one tribe of Israel. But all souls who are born again, are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that they
should show forth the praises of him who has called them out of darkness into
his mavelous light. And to them it is said, So is the will of God, that with
welldoing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not
using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God. 1
Peter i. 23. ii. 9 -- 16. All persons who are washed in the blood of Christ,
are made kings and priests unto God and his Father, and they shall reign on the
earth. Rev. i. 5, 6. v. 10. And who will dare to oppose the reign of Christ
with his saints! Men who love themselves above God and their neighbors, are
ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore
the apostle Paul said to Timothy, Continue thou in the things which thou have
learned and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them; and
that from a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation; through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 7, 14 -- 17.
And the apostle Peter, when speaking of the longsuffering of God with sinners,
and of the new heavens and new earth wherein dwells righteousness, says of
the writings of his beloved brother Paul, In which are some things hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other scriptures, unto their own destruction. a Peter iii. 15, 16.

All men who love self above God and their neighbors, are unlearned and
unstable, and are not able to come to the knowledge of the truth, let them have
ever so great human accomplishments. No man can come to Christ, but he who has
learned of the Father. John vi. 44, 45. How earnest then should each one be, to
be taught of God? For Jesus says, All things are delivered unto me of my
Father; and no man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto
me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my
yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls; for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Matt.
xi. 27 -- 30. His yoke is the covenant of grace, wherein he says, I will put my
laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. Heb. viii. 10. Which is as much above the covenant
of circumcision, as Sarah was above Hagar, or as Jerusalem which is above, and
is free, is superior to men who are in the bondage of corruption. Gal. iv. 25,
26. Romans viii. 16 -- 21. The pure gospel commission was given to the eleven,
who were all regenerate persons; to whom Jesus said, All power is given unto me
in heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them
to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you
always even unto the end of the world. Amen. Mat. xxviii. 16 -- 20. No man who
is not born again, so as to love Christ, and to observe all his commandments,
has any more right to this promise, than a thief has to any promise of
government, which he had stolen out of a public office; or than a whore has to
support from an honest husband, when she loves and goes after others for a
temporal living. In this way the church of Israel played the harlot. And God
faid, As troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in
the way by consent; for they commit lewdness. Hosea ii. 5 -- 8. vi. 9. Lest
thou should ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable that thou can
not know them. Prove. v. 6. Abraham has been set up as the head of the covenant
of grace, whose seed were to destroy all the inhabitants of Canaan, when their
iniquity should be full. But when Israel was required to do it, ten spies said,
We be not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we. And
above six hundred thousand men laid their carcases in the wilderness, because
they would not believe and obey God in that work. And all men who refuse to
believe in and obey the Son of God, will fall after the same example of
unbelief. Genesis xv. 6, 16. Number. xiii. 31. Heb. iii. 6 -- 11.iv. 11 -- 16. He
commands us to mortify our members which are upon the earth; fornication,
uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which
is idolatry: for which thing's sake the wrath of God comes on the children of
disobedience. Mark ix. 43 -- 48. Col. iii. 5, 6. But no sooner was Christianity
acknowledged by earthly rulers, than idolatry was established by law. And all
the world wondered after the beast, who received his power from the devil; and
they said, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? The
whore sits upon a scarlet-colored beast. Rev. xiii. 1 -- 4. xviii. 3 -- 5. And
her ways are so moveable, that from Abraham she is gone to old Adam, to prove
salvation by works, and not by grace. Sin and death came upon all the children
of Adam by a just sentence of law; but righteousness and life came to all
believers by a free gift of grace. The judgment was by one to condemnation; but
the free gift is of many offenses unto justification. For if by one man's
offense, death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace,
and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. For
as by one, man's disobedience, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of
one, shall many be made righteous. Romans v. 12 -- 19. Little children let no man
deceive you: he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous.
1 John iii. 7. But multitudes are so much deceived, as to deny that we were
made sinners, by the offense of Adam, or that we can be made righteous, by
receiving the gift of Christ's perfect righteousness. And the deception is now
carried so far, that salvation for all men, by their own doings and sufferings,
in time or eternity, is more daringly proclaimed from London and Boston, than
it is from Rome. Yea, their scheme includes the salvation of devils also; and
are we not in Babylon! No persons in the church of Rome would swear falsely, or
commit murder for her interests, without a promise from her ministers of help
to get their souls out of purgatory. Cruel superstitions were thereby carried
to an amazing length. But deceit and cruelty, under religious pretenses, has
now brought forth infidelity, and a contempt of revelation, any further than
will suit the inclinations of men. A profession of faith, without a life of
holiness, is but a dead body. The devils believe that there is one God, and
they tremble before the Son of God. James ii. 19 -- 26. Mat. viii. 29.
Therefore all men who can make use of the holy scriptures, for worldly
purposes, without serving the Son of God with fear, and rejoicing with
trembling, have not so much faith as the devils have. Psalm ii. 6 -- 12. Acts
iv. 25, 26. Our Lord was crucified by hypocrites and infidels; and his two
witnesses are killed and rejoiced over in the same city, which spiritually is
called Sodom and Egypt. The Sodomites were for defiling all men who came into
their city, and Egypt refused to let the church go and serve God, according to
his own institutions. And how full is the world of this impurity and tyranny!
Rev. xi. 7 -- 10. Pharaoh never claimed a greater power over Israel, than to
bind them in all cases whatsoever. And since we have been delivered from the
secular power of foreign nations, we are daily enticed by men who refuse to
allow us free liberty to serve God according to his institutions, without
injuring any person in the world. Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto
them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure. Titus i. 15. Therefore
the command is, Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord,
and touch not the unclean thing. 2 Cor. vi. 14 -- 18. He also says, Strive to
enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able. When once the master of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know
you not whence you are: then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in
thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. But he shall say, I tell
you, I know you not whence you are; DEPART from me, all ye workers of iniquity.
There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. And they shall
come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and from the south,
and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. And behold, there are last which
shall be first, and there are first which shall be last. Luke xiii. 24 -- 30.

The holy city lies foursquare, and each gate is of one pearl. And Jesus says,
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For without are
dogs, and forcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes a lie. Rev. xxi. 13, 16, 21. xxii. 14, 15. Many
good men have supposed that this new Jerusalem will be a state of absolute
perfection; but will there be nations to be healed by the tree of life, and
kings of the earth to bring their glory and honor into the holy city, in a
state of absolute perfection? God says, In that day shall this song be sung in
the land of Judah, We have a strong city, salvation will God appoint for walls
and for bulwarks. Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps
the truth may enter in. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee. The Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising. For brass I will bring gold,
and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I
will also make thy officers peace, and thine exacters righteousness. Violence
shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders;
but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gales praise. The sun shall be
no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee; but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy
glory. Isaiah xxvi. 1 -- 3. lx. 3, 17 -- 19. Now compare these passages with
Rev. xxi. 16 -- 27. xxii. 1 -- 5. Our Lord gives the characters of the blessed,
and says to them, Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill,
cannot be hid. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking goodly
pearls; who when he had found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all
that he had and bought it. Matt. v. 3 -- 14. vii. 6. xiii. 45, 46. And can any
man be at a loss about what he means by the pearl? For he says, Whosoever he be
of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple. Luke
xiv. 33. I am the door; by me if any man enter in he shall be saved, and shall
go in and out and find pasture. I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no
man comes unto the Father but by me. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall
abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in
his love. John x. 9. xiv. 6. xv. 10. None have any right in his church but they
who are converted, and who act as little children. And no complaint is to be
received against any member, until he has had two opportunities to speak for
himself, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established. And the church is the highest judicature upon earth, to determine
all religious matters. And says Jesus, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall
be bound in heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. Matt. xviii. 3 -- 18. Therefore when some ministers of the devil had
got into the church of Corinth, and intended to destroy the character of the
apostle who gathered it, if possible, he refused to receive any support from
thence, until he could come and have the matter tried by that church, according
to the laws of Christ. But as a faithful discharge of duty is a great
privilege, he said, Forgive me this wrong. 2 Cor. xi. 12 -- 15. xii. 13. xiii.
1. But I have known men who were for using force in religious matters, that
have brought the first of these passages to prove that it was a mark of the
devil's ministers to preach freely. And others turn the same argument against
all ministers who inculcate the laws of Christ for the support of his
ministers. And these opposite parties, in all nations, have bought and sold the
faithful, who have been the support of public credit, by which blood and
slavery have been carried round the world in galleys and gallant ships. But
when the laws of Christ shall be duly executed in his church, they will not be
able to strengthen their masts, nor to spread their sails. Then the cry will be
heard, Alas! alas! no man buyeth of our merchandise any more! Isai. xxxiii. 20
-- 23. Rev. xviii. 6 -- 20. Men have bought and sold the saints for slaves, and
also the souls of other men, who have been deceived by false teachers. 2 Peter
ii. 3. The priests of invented worship were of the lowest of the people. 1
Kings, xii. 31. xiii. 33.2 Kings, xvii. 32. Christ is the great light of the
world; and of all who turn not to him, it is said, The ancient and honorable,
he is the head; and the prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail. Isaiah ix.
1 -- 7, 15. Matt. iv. 16. False teachers in the Roman empire were the tail of
the dragon, who crucified Christ, and persecuted all who kept his commandments.
And the beast and the false prophet, with the devil who deceived them, will be
cast into the burning lake together. Rev. xii. 3, 4, 17. xix. 30. xx. 10. And
will any men yield to deceit and cruelty any longer! As long as natural birth,
or a purchase with money, could bring any into the church, all adulterers and
idolaters were to die without mercy. Levit. xx. 10. Deuteronomy. xiii. 6 -- 11. And
covetousness and luxury are adultery and idolatry. Col. iii. 5. Phil. iii. 2,
19. Therefore God says, Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of God. James iv. 4. The builders of Babel
said, Let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven, and
let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of all the
earth. Genesis xi. 4. And Babylon has her name from thence; and where is the
nation who are not trying to get to heaven by their own works, and to make
themselves a name upon earth! Yet grievous wolves, and perverse schismatics,
have been hold together therein by the sword, directly against the word of
God's grace, which says, It is more blessed to give than to receive. Acts xx.
28 -- 35. It is blessed to receive, when we receive all our comforts from God,
as the purchase of the blood of his Son. But it is more blessed to give;
because when we do it as faithful stewards, we lay up treasures in everlasting
habitations, which will be enjoyed with infinite pleasure, when they who had
all their good things in this life, will not have a drop of water to cool their
tormented tongues. Luke xvi. 9, 25. They who trust in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy; and are ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, for the good of others, lay up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy vi. 17 -- 19. Like the olive, the fig tree, and the vine, they esteem the
doing of good to their neighbors, above any command over their bodies or
estates; while the unbeliever, like the bramble, says, Come and put your trust
in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the
cedars of Lebanon. Judges ix. 7 -- 15. The tongues of men who would be many
masters, set on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell. James
iii. 1 -- 6. Therefore our Lord says, As ye would that men should do to you, do
ye also to them likewise. For every tree is known by his own fruit; for of
thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush gather they grapes. A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is good;
and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is evil; for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. And why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say! Luke vi. 31, 44 -- 46.

How piercing will this question be in the last day to the disobedient! The
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it first
begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? and
if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? I Peter iv. 17, 18. The church is the only house of God upon earth; and
it should ever be governed wholly by the revealed will of God. And in all
expenses, both to the poor, and to support gospel ministers, we should
communicate freely, out of love to the Son of God, who, though he was rich, yet
for our fakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be rich. And
there ought to be an equality in the church, as there was in the church of
Israel, when they knew that their bread came from heaven every day. 2 Cor.
viii. 5 -- 15. Exodus xvi. 18. And how happy should we live, if our hearts and
our treasure were in heaven, according to the command of Christ? Luke xii. 14,
22 -- 34. Here he sets a sacred guard against having his church intermeddle
with the work of civil rulers. And an inspired apostle says, I have written
unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a
fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. For what have I to do to judge
them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? but them that
are without, God judges: therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked
person. For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged; but when we
are judged we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with
the world. I Cor. v. 11 -- 13.xi. 31, 32. And shall we yet confound the church
with the world, which is mystery Babylon? Surely men of low degree are vanity,
and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity. Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in
robbery: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them. God has spoken
once; twice have I heard this, that POWER belongs unto God. Also unto thee, O
Lord, belongs MERCY; for thou renderest to every man according to his work.
Psalm lxii. 9 -- 12.

And when will men believe and obey him! In the year 1533, the parliament of
England revolted from the church of Rome, and set up their king as head of the
church. But they retained the baptisms and laying on of hands, which they
received in the church of Rome; and also the bloody principles of supporting
their worship by force, and of destroying all men who opposed such an exercise
of power, as far as they could extend their sword. And Great Britain has acted
upon these principles, until she is so much lighter than vanity, as scarcely to
be able to pay the interest of her national debt. And though the power and
mercy of God delivered America from her tyranny; yet deceit and cruelty is
still exercised among us, under religious pretenses. The framers of the
Massachusetts Constitution, in 1780, opened a door for Roman catholics to
become lawgivers and judges for us, about soul-guides; to justify which, they
said to the people, "Your Delegates did not conceive themselves to be vested
with power to set up one denomination of Christians above another; for Religion
must at all times be a matter between God and individuals." In which they allow
men to be Christians, who hold the Pope of Rome to be the head of the universal
church upon earth. And though every man who takes a seat in our Legislature,
solemnly swears to renounce all foreign jurisdiction, "civil, ecclesiastical or
spiritual;" yet many ministers are supported by force among us, who hold their
succession of Christianity from the church of Rome; all which is as opposite to
true Religion, which is ever a matter between God and individuals, as Belial is
to Jesus Christ. Yea, how can such worship be supported by force, without
perjury! Christ says, With what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. Mat. vii. 2. Great
deceit has been used in New England, under religious pretenses, by different
denominations; and how loud are their complaints now against our chief Rulers
in America! To love the wages of unrighteousness, is madness. 2 Peter ii. 15,
16. This love moved the inhabitants of Munster in Germany, to set up a king as
head of their church, and to support their worship with the sword, the same
year in which England was guilty of like madness. But because the people of
Munster were soon destroyed or enslaved, all men in Europe and America, who
have refused to put baptism before a personal profession of faith in Christ,
have been reproached with the madness of Munster. So the whore in Egypt,
accused Joseph of the crime he avoided, and because he avoided it: But of
deceit and cruelty under the mask of Religion, good old Jacob said, O my soul,
come not thou into their secret: unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou
united. Genesis xxxiv. 25 -- 29. xxxix. 17, 18. xlix. 5 -- 7. And Moses says,
Their vine is the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah: their grapes
are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Their wine is the poison of
dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. To me belongs vengeance, and
recompense, their foot shall slide in due time. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 32 -- 35. Upon
which Paul says, Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in
the sight of all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give
place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the
Lord. Romans xii. 17 -- 19. And Peter said to a man who thought to get power in
the church by money, Thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. Acts viii. 19, 23. Deceit is the poison of asps. Romans iii. 13.

And it is as real robbery to neglect the ordinances of God, as it is to force
people to support teachers who will not trust his influence for a temporal
living. He curses the blessings of all men who are partial in the law. Mal.
ii. 2, 9. iii. 7 -- 11. Therefore his faithful watchmen say, Pray for us; for
we trust we have a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.
Heb. xiii. 18. Officers are never called priests in the church of Christ, in
distinction from the rest of his children. Apostles, and elders, and brethren,
was the style of his first church. Acts xv. 23. And one apostle said
afterward, The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder. 1
Peter v. 1. And another said, Let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy
of double honor, especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. For --
the labourer is worthy of his reward. 1 Timothy v. 17, 18. Honesty requires a
reward for labor, as much as charity does alms for the poor; and it is
Babylonian confusion to hold them to be one and the same thing. Our Lord will
judge all at last, according to their behavior in this life toward his
members and ministers. Mat. xxv. 31 -- 46. Luke x. 7 -- 16. His ministers are
soldiers, as well as laborers. 2. Tim. ii. 3 -- 7. And who goes a warfare any
time at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit
thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? if we
have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap your
carnal things? 1 Cor. ix. 7 -- 11. Let each person consider how he can answer
these questions to the Son of God, who only can give us safety and happiness,
in time or eternity.

FINIS.

