CIRCULAR LETTER, FROM THE Warren Baptist Association, Held at STURBRIDGE,
Massachusetts State, September 8th and 9th, 1789, addressed by their Committee
to the Churches in connection, and sent with their Minutes to the corresponding
Associations.
WE the committee who were appointed to revise and abridge the manuscript of
the Rev. Mr. Backus, on the support of the ministers of the gospel, being at a
distance from such other, found that we should be obliged to detain the minutes
too long from the press, by attending to the business of our appointment, have
therefore reprinted an extract from a sermon on that subject, which was
preached by a worthy minister of our denomination in England 168^, which we
have taken from Mr. ^each's metaphors, p. 259, and we hope will be acceptable
to the churches. We pray God that old truths may have new effects, 1 Cor. ix.
14 Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should
live of the gospel.

'These words call not only for the maintenance of ministers, (...) for such a
plentiful contribution, as may make them par^^^ers with you in all good things.
If God bless the congregation with a plentiful portion of this world's goods,
it is their ^^ty to make their minister a party with them in their flourishing
condition. And considering the place and employment he is (...) and the service
he attends, it would be extremely unworthy (...) think you have done enough, if
his pressing necessities be an^^ered, while you abound in superfluities. If the
congregation (...) poor, their minister must be content to be poor with them,
(...), rejoice to approve himself a minister of Christ, by hunger and
nakedness, if the providence of God call him thereto: but whilst it is in the
power of your hand to provide better for him, (...) expects it from you, and,
be not deceived, God is not mocked, ^^ither will he suffer his commands to be
slighted and evaded, wihout rendering a just rebuke to the offender; for
whatsoever (...) man sows, that shall he also reap.

'Now that you may the better understand how far you are concerned in this
duty, before I proceed to the further pressing (...) it, let me put you in
remembrance;

'1. That a minister is bound to attend wholly and only upon his calling in the
ministry, and not to entangle himself in the affairs of life, that he may
please him by whom he is called to his spiritual warfare; and nothing but real
necessity may dispense with the contrary. His whole time and strength is little
enough to be employed in the work and service he is called to. He must give
himself to the ministry of the word, and prayer, and continue in reading,
meditation, etc. as a man wholly devoted to the gospel service; and is
therefore, by his call to the ministry, secluded from those ways and means of
providing for his own subsistence, as the trades and secular employments of
others furnish them with, that his mind, by the cares of worldly business, may
not be diverted from that study of God's word, and care of souls, which the
duty of his station engages him to. And if he may not expose himself to the
careful thoughts that accompany worldly business, though tending to his own
profit, certainly it is no way meet, that he should be left to conflict with
the cares of a necessitous condition, whilst those he ministers to have means
to prevent it.

2. It is no less the duty of a minister than of other men, to provide for his
family, and (what lies in him) to take care of his wife and children, that they
may not be exposed to a thousand miseries and temptations, when he is gone. I
confess, of all men in the world, a covetous, raking temper worst becomes a
minister; but we greatly mistake, if we think he must divest himself of the due
affection of an husband toward his wife, or of a father toward his children;
or, that these fruits thereof, which are justly esteemed commendable in others,
should be a fault in him.

3. An elder, or bishop is under a special charge to use hospitality, and (...)
in himself a pattern of charity, and compassionate bounty to poor souls; and if
it be his duty to be hospitable and charitable in an eminent degree, then
without controversy the people are concerned to endeavor that he may be
capable of giving proof of this grace in him, by the exercise of it as there is
occasion.

'These things being premised, I shall show you, that you lie under the
strongest obligation imaginable to this duty; '1. By the law of nature. '2. By
the express command and appointment of Christ. '3. On the account of the great
and manifest evil and inconvenience, that follows the neglect thereof.


'First; The law and light of nature obliges you to it, as to (...) matter of
equity and justice. And from hence our apostle takes his first plea, in 1 Cor.
9, 7. etc. Who go^th a warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats
not of the milk of the flock? The ministry is a warfare, undertaken at the
command of Christ, for the service of your souls; and it is as reasonable that
the minister should receive a supply of outward things from you, as that a
faithful soldier should receive his pay from his captain, at the charge of the
commonwealth, for whose good he militates, Shall a man feed a flock (as a
pastor does) and be denied to eat of the milk of that flock, which it is his
work to keep and feed? Or, is it consistent with common justice, to deprive a
man of the fruit of that Vineyard, which is planted and manured by his own
labor? Such is the case, in respect of maintenance, between a minister and the
people. -- It is not your charity that I ask for him, but justice and debt that
I plead for: he is employed in your service, and of right should live upon your
charge; nay, you have called him off from other business, and therefore his
maintenance is due from you, as is the wages of your servant, though I fear
some give more to the meanest servant in their house, than they are willing to
do to their minister. Certainly, if you choose as you ought, your ministers are
not of the lowest of the people, but may be allowed to have a share of parts,
common prudence, and ability for business, with other men; and could manage
trades, or fall into other employments, and get estates as well as you, if they
were not devoted to a better service: and must they needs be devoted to
necessities and misery, in the same hour that they (...) upon the ministry? my
brethren, this ought not to be. Let your ministers have as good a treatment at
least, as the law provided for the ox that treads out the corn, who might not
be muzzled. Neither was this written for the sake of oxen; for, does God take
care of oxen? or were there no higher end of this law, than that the brute
creature should not be abused? certainly there was; And for your sakes no doubt
was this written, that he that ploweth, should plow in hope; and he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope: for if we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?

'Secondly; The Lord has not lest us to argue this only from general
principles of reason, and common equity; but to put the matter beyond dispute,
has superadded his express command Thus he provided for his ministers in the
time of the law, which the Apostle urges in the next place, 1 Cor. 9.13. Do ye
(...) know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of
the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? God
did no sooner separate the Levites to the service of the sanctuary, but he by
law provided for their subsistence; and though they were but one tribe in
twelve, yet the tenth of the increase of the whole land was given to them.
besides the first fruits and offerings, and diverse other advantages; so that
their lot might equal, yea, exceed that of their brethren. This law is now
abrogated, and we pretend to no right of tithing your estates; but the equity
of it can never cease; neither has Christ left gospel ministers to the wide
world, but has made provision for them also, so far as the interest of his
command will go with them that profess his name; for so it follows v. 14. Even
so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should live of
the gospel. The labourer is still worthy of his hire, and not the less worthy,
because he labors in the gospel. Though indeed (if men did fully come up to
their duty, yet still) the charge of gospel worship will appear very
inconsiderable, when compared with that of the law; for were that my business,
I think I could demonstrate, that the fifth part of their estates was yearly to
be spent in things relating to the temple service. And if we are sensible of
the great privilege and blessing of the gospel, on higher accounts than merely
the ease of those burdens, we shall never think much to defray the moderate
charge of a gospel ministry, in such a manner as to give reputation to our
profession.

'Thirdly: That you may prevent the evil and inconvenience that follows the
neglect of this duty, it concerns you cheerfully to practice it: I might have
said, evils and inconveniences, as of many, for many there are, and those of
easy observation to an unprejudiced eye; but it is the discouragement of study,
which at present I chiefly aim at. That study must needs be discouraged (I
intend the study of theology) by the people's neglect to make a comfortable
provision for their ministers, is too evident to require a proof. Who will
apply himself to gather and lay up those stores of solid learning, which are
needful to a minister, when he can expect to purchase nothing to himself but
poverty and distress thereby? or how shall a minister be capable to furnish
himself with universal knowledge of things relating to this work, that has no
means for providing for his own information, or no time free from cares and
worldly business? and the disadvantage of this will at last fall to the share
of the people that (...) administers unto. He that considers that the (...)
were originally written in Hebrew and Greek, must have an hard forehead, if he
deny the usefulness of learning to a minister; besides many other things there
are that call for it, in reference to the opening of the scriptures, which I
cannot now insist upon. And it is not without diligent and continued study,
that the deep things of God can be searched out, and so proposed to you, as to
enrich your mind with the clear and solid knowledge of them. I confess a little
learning, and less study, may furnish a man with such a discourse, as may
please some weak persons, that judge of a sermon by the loudness of the voice,
and affectionate sentences, or can fancy themselves to be fed with the ashes of
jingling words, and cadency of terms in a discourse. But alas! the seeming
warmth of affection that is stirred up by such means, is as short lived as a
land flood that has no spring to feed it. He that will do the souls of his
people good, and approve himself a pastor after God's own heart, must feed them
with knowledge and understanding, and endeavor to maintain a constant zeal and
affection in them, by well informing their judgments, and such an opening of
the mind of God from the scriptures as may command their consciences -- and
this is not to be expected, but from him that labors in his study, as well as
in the pulpit. Mistake me not; I know the success and fruit of all the studies
and labors of men that preach in the gospel, is from the grace and power of
the Holy Ghost, but the assistance of the spirit is to be expected by us in the
way of our duty. These things might be yet applied more home to my present
purpose; but perhaps some will think there is too much (...) already (though I
heartily wish more were not needful) and my time calls me to put a period to
this exercise.'

Two questions yet remain to be considered, which belong to this important
subject, viz. 1. In what method may this duty be discharged. 2. To what penalty
are members of churches subjected, who, though able, refuse to obey this law of
Jesus Christ?


First, by what method may the churches support the gospel ministry? answer,
every church is at liberty to choose its own method. There are three methods
which we beg leave to mention.

1. By a voluntary subscription. But it has been found by long experience that
this is not the most eligible. It is an easy thing for a man to sign his name
to a paper, but it has been found extremely difficult, and in many instances
impossible to (...) money that had been subscribed. Hence many ministers have
contracted debts for the support of their families in confidence of the money
subscribed, who have been unable to pay them; and thereby their feelings and
their characters have been wounded.

2. A second method is by raising a fund in the respective churches, and
appropriating the annual interest of it to the maintenance of the gospel
ministry. There are many ways by which such funds may be raised, which will be
easy to the people, viz. By weekly, monthly, or quarterly associations of the
friends of religion, who may spend their time at such meetings on some doctrine
or practice in the churches, and at each meeting throw into a common stock 1 s.
2 s. more or less as they shall agree among themselves. However small this fund
may appear at the beginning, it will in time increase so much as to become a
matter of importance. Such persons as have it in their power may give while
living, or bequeath at their death certain sums deposited in the standing fund.
-- Thus some of our churches to the westward support the gospel.

A third method is by a voluntary assessment upon the estates of each member of
the congregation. Let a list of property be given in to the society, and each
person's proportion of the expense be ascertained by it; in this case, there
will be an equality, for each member of the society will bear his part of the
burden. Nor can we think that any but the covetous will object to it. No man in
this case will pay more than he can afford, according to his estate.

2. To what penalty do those members of churches subject themselves, who,
though able, refuse to obey this law of Christ? answer, they fly in the face of
divine authority; and are guilty of an act of disobedience to the command of
Jesus Christ; and an act of injustice to their minister, as observed in the
extract; therefore we believe that they ought to be dealt with as any other
delinquent members. Most certainly they walk disorderly. If they loved their
adorable master and his cause; they would not refuse to support it according to
their ability.

Those persons who go from other societies to save their money ought to find no
protection among the Baptist churches, and we must believe this is their
motive, if they refuse to pay their proportion of the expense of the gospel
among us.

Signed in behalf of the Association, ELIJAH CODDING, Moderator, THOMAS GAIR,
Clerk.


A brief ACCOUNT of the BAPTIST DENOMINATION, within the FOURTEEN STATES of
NORTH AMERICA.
No Associations. States in which the Chhs. lie. T. of holding Assoc Ghhs Min
Memb. For circa, or about
1 Rowdoinham Massachusetts Sept c 8 c 8 c. 500 2 New Hampshire Mass. N.
Hampshire 2d. Wed. June 8 7 490 3 Woodstock Vermont, Mass. N H 4th Wed Sept 24
14 910 4 Vermont N. H. Vermont, N Y 1st. Wed. Oct. 10 6 480 5 Warren N. H.
Mass. R. I. Con. Tuesday after. 1st. Wed. Sep. 41 25 3300 Close Communionists,
who make laying on of hands a requisite to communion.
6 Rhode Island Mass. Rhode Island 3d. Frid. Sept. 12 15 c. 450 Mixed
Communionists, who will commune with Paedobaptists and (...) exercise of
7 Groton Mass. R. I. Connecticut 3d. Frid. June 11 8 c. 1400 8 Stonington R.
Island, Connecticut 3d. Tuesd. Oct. 13 10 950 9 Danbury Connecticut, New York
4th Wed. Sept 12 8 c 820 10 Shaftsbury Mass. Vermont, N. Y. 1st. Wed. June 14
10 1130 11 Philadelphia Con N Y. N Jersey Penn. Del Maryld. 1st. Tues. Oct 55
40 3500 12 Salisbury Del. Maryld. Virginia 3d Sa. Aug V 3d Sat. Oc. M 14 5 ^100
Churches not belonging to any association.
13 Redstone Ohio river, Pennsylvania uncertain 9 c. 8 c. 800 Seventh day
Baptist.
14 South Kentucky Virginia do. c. 12 c. 15 3000 15 North ditto do. 4th F. May
Oct 12 c. 10 16 Ketockton Maryland, Virginia 1st Sat. Oct. 12 10 700 17
Choppawamsick do. 2d Sat. Sept 12 6 700 18 Orange District do. 2d Frid. Oct. 31
22 c. 4300 19 Dover ditto do. 1st Fr. May Oct. 26 36 c. 4700 20 Upper ditto
Virginia, N. Carolina 1st Sa. May Oct. 18 c. 10 800 21 Middle ditto do. 3d Sat
May Oct 25 24 c 2000 22 Lower ditto and Kebukey do. 3d Sat May 51 45 c. 5300
North Carolina 3d Sat. Oct 23 Roanoke ditto Virginia, N. Carolina 4th Sat. May
Oct 18 18 c. 1500 24 Sandy Creek North Carolina 1st Sat. Aug 4th Sat. Oct 14 10
c. 1050 25 Upper do. 4th Sat. Aug. 11 c. 10 c 500 26 Bethel do. and S. Carolina
2d Sat. Aug 16 c. 9 c 900 27 Charleston do. 4th Sat. Oct 20 17 1895 28 Georgia
Georgia and do. 3d Sat. May Oct. 30 22 2640 538 427 45670 150 100 8000 15 12
2000 Sum Total 7^3 539 55670

N. B. The times of holding the associations are mentioned; but it is to be
observed that whereas it is mentioned 1st, 2d, 3d, 4th Saturday in such a month,
it ought in many cases to be Saturday before the 1st, 2d, 3d 4th Sunday in the
month. The associations in the northern states are holden generally two days,
but in the southern states at least three.

The ministers ascertained are all ordained, but there are as many more
licensed preachers. The numbers consist of members in full communion, but the
adherents a^^ supposed to be four times as many, or 200,000 more.

This statement was principally collected in October 1789, by John Asplund in
Southampton, Virginia, who devotes himself entirely to traveling, in order to
dispense the gospel, and to be acquainted with the state of the baptists in
America. He will (if God permits) give a more perfect account of all the
churches -- their name -- constitution -- what state and county they lie in --
what associations they belong to -- their pastors -- licensed preachers --
order, and number of members in full communion -- their time of monthly and
quarterly meetings. Also an account of the associations; their constitutions,
plan and sentiments. This book he intends to publish within eight (...) nine
months. (...) is requested that the leading ministers from every association
(...) send him some intelligence, that the work may be useful.

CHARLESTON (S. C.) PRINTED by T. B. BOWEN, No. 38, Bay.


