Mr. BENTLEY'S SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT THE STONE CHAPEL IN BOSTON, SEPTEMBER 12, 1790.

BY WILLIAM BENTLEY, A. M. PASTOR of the Second Congregational Church in SALEM.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE HEARERS.

BOSTON: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, at No. 53, Cornhill. MDCCXC.

A SERMON.
MATTHEW VII. 21. NOT EVERY ONE THAT SAYS UNTO ME, LORD, LORD, SHALL ENTER
INTO THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN; BUT HE THAT DOES THE WILL OF MY FATHER, WHO IS IN
HEAVEN.


THE ingenuous simplicity, which recommends the doctrines and precepts of Jesus
Christ, forms a very pleasing evidence of his design to reform the world.
Should an impartial stranger consider the history of his religion at its most
favorable periods, he could hardly imagine that it had so pure an origin; that
the language of condescension, and the simple precepts of life, inspired by an
hope of immortality, could produce various and contending sects, who had lost
all affection for each other, had neglected the best virtues of life, and had
built their hopes of glory on zeal and contention. Still the melancholy proofs
of such conduct have not prevented the belief, that nothing could be more
benevolent than the character of Jesus Christ. Every thing kind flowed from his
lips. He was born in humble life, and never rose in his distinctions beyond
what humble life could suggest and comprehend. Affection was recommended in
every discourse; points never debated with passion; the history of his
religion, so offensive to his countrymen, intimated in parables; and every idea
of limited design excluded from his heart. Is it not time to recur to the
instructions of this wise friend of mankind, and to accept them uncorrupted by
traditions, creeds or councils? Should a preacher appear in this assembly, of
venerable piety, of simple manners, and with all the marks of humble birth, and
declare, as the introduction to his religious service, a zeal for the most
important moral truths, and declare that by their fruits men should be known;
and to our text should he subjoin, Many will say to me, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name done many wonderful works, and then I
will profess to them, I never knew you; and should he close with the memorable
words which represented only those who obeyed his precepts as founded on a
rock; could you suppose his design mysterious, or his doctrine partial, or
illiberal? Judge ye then of yourselves, what is right.

Let us then, in the consideration of the text, endeavor to obtain the most
obvious sense of the several expressions, that we may be sure of the general
sentiment they contain.

What could he have intended, in saying, that many would say, Lord, Lord? The
words subjoined, very fully explain the intention. He that does the will of my
Father, shall be preferred. And the pretensions of such persons are cited in
the next verse, in which the exercise of even supernatural powers is considered
as in itself unavailing. We have corresponding expressions in Paul, who
considered distinctly, all the evident endowments, of which the mind is
capable, both miraculous and natural, and declared them insufficient without
charity, which he defined to be practical godliness, to deserve the christian
character. They then, who cry, Lord, Lord, are they who do not obey the gospel,
how far so ever they may go in pretentions of affection for it. Though they
hold the first ranks, and the first gifts in the church; if they have the most
commanding eloquence in delivering truth to others, or the most availing
external sanctity, to gain them respect and confidence: Yea, if God should even
supernaturally endue them for the most noble ends of his providence; yet, if
they have not a right, moral temper, the whole shall not avail to place them
among the meanest of those who have been obedient. What a check this is to the
presumptuous, to the uncharitable, to the hypocritical, and to the unfaithful!
Heaven and happiness were not designed by God as the exclusive rights of
learned priests, or ingenious doctors; they are the end which God has proposed
for all mankind, and are therefore, by the same means, attainable by all men.
Riches and honors cannot ensure the purchase; neither can learning, pompous
titles, respect nor dignity. Virtue alone is the moral happiness of the world,
and personal virtue alone secures heaven. Let then priests declaim, this is
sure, that the increase of virtue is the increase of happiness; and whatever
sound may be made in this world, virtue alone will distinguish us in the next.

Having seen how our religious advantages may render us happy, by rendering us
virtuous, let us, in the next place, inquire, what Jesus intended by doing the
will of his Father. And he has so connected his discourse, that whatever sense
may be applied to his words, in themselves considered, they here admit only one
explanation. When he announces his last blessing, it is upon those who keep
these sayings and do them; and these sayings or precepts are the will of God.
As no new ritual is proposed, or doctrine which does not require action,
something to be done, we may safely infer, that when he propounded his
salvation to his countrymen, proposed his own rewards, upon doing the will of
God, he intended his commandments. What the nature and extent of these commands
were, he has determined by the preceding parts of his discourse; so that his
rewards are offered to all who conformed to their conceptions of their moral
obligations, and the foundation of his religion is placed in this disposition.
For whatever consisted in belief, public profession, and zeal, they were
supposed to perform, while the most important end of religion was neglected.

Such as were obedient, were of the kingdom of heaven. This expression very
frequently occurs, and never when it may not in some sense apply to the history
of Christianity. By some it has been thought to denote the commencement of a
future state, but never is so necessarily limited to this sense, as to prevent
its general design to represent the progress of Christian truth in the world.
When they, who do the will of God, are pronounced to be of the kingdom of
heaven, it intends, that as to them, religion has its true and most acceptable
effect: That the proper way to secure divine blessing, was to obey, to act most
agreeably to our obligations, and from the best motives reason or revelation
could furnish. This obedience depends on our habitual inclination, connected
with reasonable pursuits after knowledge. The different capacities of men may
admit degrees of virtue, but all are consistent with religious integrity.

From the sentiment of the text, it is then inferred, that all men are, and
always have been, capable of salvation. For if no external advantages, or
personal knowledge of a revelation, can avail, without an habitual disposition
to obedience, and this obedience is to be judged by its fruits, then this
disposition is preferred to all those advantages, in themselves considered. And
as the will of God implies the obligations of his creatures to all moral
duties; so far as they are sensible of them, and conform, they do, in their
measure, which is all that can be required, perform his will, the end proposed
in the kingdom of God by Jesus Christ. This is an obvious doctrine of Jesus;
and perhaps the reason why any have been taught to overlook it, has been, that
it favors not those comparative, if not exclusive advantages to which some
pretend, as it certainly does not their hopes, who cry, Lord, Lord, with
affected devotion, and for their accomplishments, real or pretended, would be
thought better than others, without any just claims. When men can inform us of
a more noble end in revelation, than to perfect the constitutions which God has
given us, we may suspect our argument; but when all the various opinions may
accord with this end, in the judgments of their several advocates, we cannot be
blamed for accepting the conclusion as free from their intricacies, or
absurdities, as is possible. For while objects and powers are so admirably
connected in the whole system, to make an abstruse religion, in order to
introduce a distinction, which is internal; since the exclusive help attributed
to the Christian religion makes no outward distinction in the moral world, and
the effects of the different motives may account for all we see, is to affront
the simplicity of the Christian faith. But by placing religion in sober action,
we are able to see how all men are accountable for their respective advantages;
and hereby we leave not God as a respecter of persons, and prevent not the
equitable distribution of his favors. God, we all know, has variously bestowed
his gifts upon the human race; in equal variety he may have bestowed his moral
as his other benefits; but as neither are in their relations unequal, and both
may have a worthy end, there is no injustice with him. Without such sentiments,
our most evident conceptions of justice may be violated.

What evidence should we consider as sufficient to prove this to be a doctrine
of the Christian religion? At the critical moment when this truth was to be
declared, should an heathen, possessed of devout respect to heaven, and
exemplary in his life, be declared acceptable to God, and revelation assist
this true light with miraculous testimony, would it be conclusive? Can any
evidence be better adapted? This we can produce, without any forced or critical
construction, in positive terms* Peter was taught to call nothing unclean,
because the Jews thought other nations without the favor of God. Cornelius, a
Roman officer in the province, was, for his devotion and alms, accepted of God.
He was not proselyted to the Jewish religion, because Peter says, it was
unlawful to keep company with him. Yet upon this evidence Peter exclaims, Of a
truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, for in every nation, he
that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of him. Nor was this
truth questioned in the disputes respecting the use of the Hebrew ritual. If
evidence, in such circumstances, produces not conviction, arguments may be
applied in vain. And what a generous idea does this truth give us of God! He
was the friend of Israel, that in the end he might advance a universal
religion; but for a distant good, he never disregarded a present benefit. He
knew the capacity he had given, and the several means by which it might be
improved. He knew the distance of our most pure conceptions from truth, in all
its relations, and could easily pardon the little varieties in those opinions,
which were, at best, imperfect. If he took care for ravens, how much more would
he take care of mankind! How much more acceptable is the honest devotion of an
heathen, than the hypocrisy of a Christian! How much more pure the charity of a
savage, than the pulpit-anathemas of a priest against churches which differ
from his own. Blush, O Christian, that thy illiberal heart can call thy God to
justify thy insolent attacks on other men, and fear lest thy fate, more
miserable than their own, teach thee, with sorrow, to renounce the execrable
idea.

And what may we infer more readily from this truth, than that the natural
advantages of men constitute their only probation? Their gratitude is to arise
from blessing they do really receive, their only devotion from the glory they
behold, and their only obedience from the obligations they perceive. And do not
our minds revolt, at the first reflection, on any other constitution? Let
misery, in any degree, be increased by the guilt of men, that they should not
rise beyond the strength of their powers in such state, is curse enough. But to
superadd a gift which man has no natural power or inclination to accept, even
when connected with his highest happiness, is a policy unworthy the bounty of
heaven. As revelation shows us the motives adapted to strengthen and improve
our virtue, will not God direct the natural powers to the best advantage, if he
intends a bounty? Our most familiar ideas of goodness, especially such as the
gospel recommends, assure us of it, and we dishonor God by any other
supposition. We are all his offspring.

We may also infer the original dignity of natural religion. For what good ends
Christians have shaken the foundations of their own religion, by depreciating
natural religion, may not be easy to determine; but if the text is rightly
explained, natural religion is still the most excellent religion. This consists
in doing the will of God; (...) inquiries may make it known to us, and our
knowledge of its agreement with our nature confirms us in our affection for it.
Neither this law, nor its authority, is weakened by Christianity; for as
Christianity has the same object, it can, at best, but claim to assist us in
the knowledge, and confirm us in the practice of it. For to suppose an original
law so defective in itself as not to be sufficient to direct us, is to admit,
at once, a defect in our constitution, which is as dishonorable to God, as to
charge him with changes in the constitution of any other part of nature,
because his original laws were not sufficient. Revelation cannot then be
admitted but as a part of the original plan, or rather as such a spring as may
act in subserviency to the original law, till a variety of causes, wisely
fitted to act, may render this assistance unnecessary. Christianity is an help
to recover the full force of natural law. The Son himself shall then be put
under, and God, by perfecting human nature, be all in all.

If this be true, there is not an absolute, but only a relative difference in
the condition of men. Natural law is always right, Christianity will assist men
to go right. There is nothing beyond our conceptions in this view of
Christianity. If God was pleased to constitute us for happy, natural action in
the present being, and yet render us capable of future life, but not place the
evidence of this future life so certainly in our natural condition as not to
admit other evidence, we may not doubt of the benefit, and that he is able to
make the evidence appear wise and fit. And when it concurs with natural
religion, by our present good, to promote our final good, it may assist some,
while it offers no injury to others; and as all things may be in a progressive
state, it may, at some future time, be as universal as natural religion itself.
But whatever our opinions of such things may be, we should be careful not so to
frame them as to exclude natural law, and injure one of our first and most
noble ideas of perfection, an impartial regard to the capacities of creatures
which God has created for happiness. However we may magnify our relative
advantages, let us leave all men sufficient for wise action; and if our just
and exalted ideas of our own privileges do produce as just and exalted
improvements, we are more sure not to be found among those boasting professors,
who have said much and done little, and may have our reward in ample glory for
doing the will of God.

The practical use of our text should be, to teach us to place religion in
those things in which it really consists. However numerous our doctrines,
whether simple or mysterious; whether we receive all the dogmas of the Church
or not, let us consider that we should produce good fruits. To have accurate
and well defined sentiments, is not unworthy of our most serious attention. To
be distinguished, may be most laudable ambition. But let us not mistake either
of them for religion, without regard to our actions. All the orthodoxy in the
world will not vindicate a dishonest man. If we believe in supernatural gifts,
and that we possess them, let us doubt our religion, if we allow ourselves to
violate justice, defame or injure other men. However God may produce his
desired regeneration in the mind, let it not have a visionary, but an active
operation, that we may show, out of a good understanding, the works of meekness
and love. But all the exercises of instrumental religion are not worth one good
deed, and a dishonest act is more than a balance for them all. We cannot be too
careful to assist our virtue by the simple institutions of religion; these
ought to have been done, and not the other left undone; but we are guilty of
heinous iniquity, if we make them a cloak to our vices. Let us then reflect on
the various duties of external religion, which we have attended with such
deception. How many solemn sounds without sober thought! how many gracious
words and ill actions! how many attempts to deceive by assumed gravity! how
many tears in vain! and let us learn to despise such hypocrisy. Let the
language of our countenances express the cheerful devotion of our hearts. Let
our gravity arise from a just sense of religious truth, and all our actions
have an undisputed testimony to our sincerity. The cries, and groans, and
complaints of dangerous errors, disturb the weak, the credulous and
superstitious. But the single act of injustice speaks louder to a discerning
man than all this cant and hypocrisy. When a man is found, who does not profess
much, nor despise all, who is pure from guile, peaceable in his life, gentle in
his manners, easily dissuaded from revenge, with an heart to pity and relieve
the miserable, impartial in his judgment, and without dissimulation, this is
the man of religion. This is an apostolic description of a good man; and
whatever opinions he may have, he ought to have some, and he has a right to
choose for himself; this man is after God's own heart.

The candid sentiment of the text demands also a practical effect. The opinions
of men belong to God, and the consciences of men are subject to no human
tribunal. But wherever they have a virtuous effect, we ought in charity to
suppose the favor of God. When the Mahomedan journies to Mecca, as his acts of
self-denial spring from his serious belief, we have no authority to determine
in God's stead. But when we see his devotion, his zeal, and the acts of his
unfeigned obedience, our affection should teach us with what tenderness the
Universal Parent views his creatures innocently erring before him. And we
should dismiss all the partialities, which arise from our own particular
connections. We should be particularly kind to virtue, wherever we may behold
it; and prefer, in this regard, the distant stranger, who practices it, to the
child of our bosom, who neglects it. By considering religion in this amiable
view, we may increase our love for it, and be induced to consider ourselves,
not of small societies only, under the formal obligations of social contracts,
but as belonging to the household of the faithful, who dwell in every nation,
and in every clime, with one God and Father, who hates nothing that he has
made, but loves and cherishes it.

While we consider religion in connection with the unnumbered ceremonies of
superstition, spread in strange confusion over the earth, we may be inclined to
forget the reverence we owe to it, and despise the true excellence and glory of
our nature. When we observe how often the various incidents of life tear
asunder the mask, and expose the dreadful features concealed under it, we may
be induced to curse the religion which assisted the disguise. But when we
familiarise the reflection, that true religion is true virtue, and that it is
only superstition which lends the false appearance, we shall detest the
imposition, not more as an insult to man, than to religion itself. And how
happy should we be, if we could attain that Christian perfection, when we may
love to appear what we are, and yet deserve the character of true Christians.
We cannot be too cautious. A form of prayer will easily pass upon us as
devotion. We may easily mistake our gifts for divine fervor, and pass on with
our neighbors, and be as zealous as they, without the least virtue. Our
caution should increase with our danger, and we should remember, that our great
obligation is to keep the heart with all diligence, since from that alone are
the issues of life.

FINIS.

