Shan' Aullim the present Emperor of Indostan enthroned in State on the day
Inauguration.


A SERIES OF Indostan Letters BY BARW. BURGES. Containing, A striking account
of the manners and customs of the Gentoo Nations and of the Moguls and other,
Mahomedan Tribes in Indostan with other polemical East India (...) both
amusing, interesting, and perfectly original.

N. York Printed and published for the AUTHOR W. ROSS.

INDOSTAN LETTERS, BY BARTHOLOMEW BURGES; A. D. 1790.

DEDICATION. To JOHN LAMB, Esquire, Brigadier-General in the Army of the United
States of America, and Collector of the Port of New York.
SIR,
IF the following pages, rather replete with than destitute of originality and
variety, composed from a number of recent and local observations made on a
country as remarkable for it is opulence as for the singularity of the manners
and customs of its inhabitants, and richness of its manufactures, (conceived in
a style peculiarly adapted to the different subjects which constitute the work)
may serve to characterize a people, by exhibiting them in a more impartial
light than what other writers have hitherto been pleased to do; whose
connection is not only courted by the whole commercial world, but whose
opulence, munificence and traffic, the great egress and regress our American
ships have had to those parts alluded to, viz. Indostan and India infra Ganges,
since the Independence of the United States of America, have become a matter of
general conversation and national attention, may in anywise claim the patronage
of a person whose eminent services to his country in both a military and civil
capacity, have placed him in as exalted as useful a sphere of life, -- permit
me to prefix these few lines to my work, and it will be esteemed an honor done
to the undertaking, and a favor confered on,

Sir, Your obliged and Obedient humble Servant, BARTHOLOMEW BURGES.
City of New York, Nov. 1790.
INTRODUCTION.
SHAH AULLIM's affairs having been for upwards of these thirty years so
inseparably connected with the East India Company, as to render it difficult to
proceed on any intelligible display of their complex system in India, until
what gave rise to this above hinted connection was elucidated, as a scene
seemingly in some measure necessary to open, before any satisfactory
description could be given of a people of different religions and sects, the
fate of war, revolutions in government, and unaccountable vicissitudes of
fortune in an Empire like Indostan, jumbled together, and rendered subservient
to the mercenary views of Regents and different made Emperors, tottering on a
dislocated throne, and a set of upstart Soubahs and Nabobs, set up by the
contrivances of the English East India Company's servants, at the expense of
rapine and bloodshed, I resolved, by way of introduction, on an illustration of
the matter; and thinking Mr. Maire has in as few words, and as expressive terms
as conveniently need be, related how the English East India Company happened to
be originated, I have taken the liberty to quote him on this occasion.

'THE English East India Company,' says this ingenious gentleman, was
incorporated about the 42d year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, A. D. 1600,
and empowered to trade to all these new countries to the eastward of the Cape
of Good-Hope, exclusive of all others; but about A.D. School, application being
made to Parliament by private merchants, for laying this trade open, an act
passed empowering every subject of England, upon raising a sum for the supply
of government, to trade to these new parts; upon which a great many subscribed,
and were called the New East India Company; but the Old Company being masters
of all the forts on the coast of India, the New Company found it their interest
to unite with them, and trade with one joint stock, and have ever since been
styled the United East India Company.

THE most considerable forts and factories and places of trade wherein this
Company are concerned, are as follows, viz. Mocha, or Moco; Aden, Macalla,
Shahara, Dofar and Muscat, in Arabia Felix; Bassora, Isphahan and Gombroon, in
Persia; Cambaya, Amedabad, Borotch, Swalley, Surat, Bombay, Dabul, Cunvar,
Tillichery, Calicut and Anjengo, on the coast of Malabar; Fort St. David's,
Connonore and Fort St. George, on the coast of Coromandel; Massulapatam,
Vizaggapatam, and Ballasore, in the bay of Bengal, to the northward of these
settlements. On the island of Sumutra Achin, Bambat, Calloun, Ippo, Bencoolen,
or Fort Marlbro' and Fort William at Calcutta; Hugely, Cassimbuzar, Dacca,
Malda, Midnapore, Monghere, Rajahmawl, Chunamchoprah, Patna, Burdawan, and
Chittagang, in the province of Bengal; and in China Canton, Amoy and Chysum.

THIS may suffice to inform the reader of the origination of the East India
Company, in which quotation, I have taken the liberty to add some few important
settlements made by the English since Mr. Mair's publication. I shall now
return to the affairs of Shah Aullim.

HISTORIANS pretty unanimously concur in Indostan's being first peopled by
emigrants, or warlike adventurers, from Persia: if so, it is equally probable
they descended from the fraternities of Noah, as now it remains an
uncontroverted point, that Noah and his followers first settled in these parts
after the deluge. This is tracing them as far back as history will admit, and
the oral tradition of the Bramins in India can be relied on. Thus peopled from
Persia, as already mentioned, they remained 'till Alexander the Great
penetrating India with an army and fleet, after meeting with a torrent of
opposition, but principally from Porus, a leading warrior in these parts, whom
he defeated and made prisoner, he ceased his pursuits at the mouth of the
Hydaspes, a branch of the Indus, and made that, seemingly, the limitation of
his conquests; after which, with his armament he sailed down the Indus, and
entering the ocean he returned by the way of the Persian gulf.

AFTER this, Alexander being dead, there is a report in history, that Seleucus
surrendered up this vast country to Sandracottus, for 500 elephants, which
Sandracottus, it is said, conquered all India, both this and the other side the
Ganges. The accounts we have from that time 'till Augustus, Severus and
Aurelian, who received Ambassadors from India, from the then reigning monarchs,
are obscure and not to be relied on any more than is the account of Trajans
conquest of these parts; from whence it appears, India remained inhabited by
these different sets of Persians 'till invaded by the Saracens, who, it is well
known, conquered the major part of it; but without being able to retain long
their hold; for after their first expedition, Mahmud Gazni, and others made
frequent incursions into Indostan, plundered and carried off immense treasures
and riches, and had possession of many principalities there, but obliged to
relinquish them and fly, as well as the Moguls, who though they invaded this
country A. D. 1300, and extended their victorious arms from it is utmost eastern
to it is western boundaries, and apparently made a complete conquest of the
whole, were obliged, after a bloody defeat, to fly before the face of the
Indians and quit the premises. These are the only events, as authenticated can
be relied on, that took place in Indostan since it is first being peopled by the
Persians, (as before observed supposed to be the absolute descendants of Noah)
'till about the 14th century, Tamerlane, a Mogul Tartar, with an army of horse,
conquered these Indostan domains, and put to the sword innumerable of it is
inhabitants, and assuming the title of Emperor, distributed the conquered lands
amongst his countrymen and warriors.

FROM Tamerlane descended the succeeding Emperors in Indostan, which formerly
sat on the throne uninterrupted, without any considerable increase in their
territory, or intestine or foreign annoyance, 'till Aurengzebe, in the year
1667, mounting the throne with unheard of celerity and valor, extended, sword
in hand, his dominions to the southernmost verge of this immense country, back
to the foot of the mountains of Thibet, reduced the Marattas to implicit
obedience, and in short, completed the conquest of this Empire, and lived
'till 1707.

JEHANDAR SHAH, grandson to Aurengzebe, after a bloody contest with his
brothers, on a plain within about ten miles of Agra, gaining his point,
returned in triumph to the capitol, and was proclaimed Emperor by his army.
Jehandar Shah was soon massacred by his Omrahs and Aumeers, they making his
attachment to his Empress an excuse for the perpetration of this horrid act;
and placed in his stead Furrukshir, whom they had employed to strike off his
uncle's head.

FURRUKSHIR was not long reigning Emperor of Indostan; two of his brothers
became so obnoxious to him by their arrogance and assumption, that he ordered
them to be privately assassinated; but they discovering the plot, got him
dethroned, and after imprisoning and strangling him, they raised to the throne
a grandson of Aurengzebe's, a youth about seveenteen years of age, who not
answering the purposes of his brothers, they soon gave him a dose that sent him
to everlasting sleep, and put in his place the elder brother, who took the
title of Shah Jahan. Shah Jahan was succeeded by Mahommed Shah, who giving
umbrage to Nizam Muluck, the sovereign of the Decan, and a branch of the Mogul
family, this vindictive Prince, though a near relation, a soubah, sworn
subject, and Generalissimo to Mahommed Shah, invited secretly Nadir Shah,
(formerly Thamas Kouli Kan) to invade the country; which succeeding in, Nadir
Shah, after beating Mahommed Shah, and possessing himself of the capitol,
entered into amicable treaty with the Mogul; but unhappily during the
negotiation, a disturbance happening amongst the natives on the spot, Nadir
Shah being fired at by a musket from the crowd, (though before no ways inclined
to draw blood) ordered his Cuttlebashes to stand forth and spare no man they
should fall in with, and from about ten in the morning were to cut away 'till
on the top of the Jummah Mosque, (as related to me by people who were then on
the spot, and pointed out to me the very streets the greatest massacre happened
in, which was the concerted signal to sheath their swords,) the Peerzadahs, as
usual, with a loud voice should call out Allah! Allah! Arumdall Allah! etc. one
of the daily invocations they make to God, and a public notice for evening
prayer.

AS this event is as remarkable as important, I will without breaking in much
with the thread of my Introduction, relate it so as painted to me in lively
colors by Shake Haggabdullah, and Shah Nazurbeg, two men of veracity, who had
not only been present to the transaction, but the former in office, then under
Mahommed Shah, and the latter an Hazarce, or commander of a thousand of the
very Cuttlebash horse employed in this destructive business.

AFTER Nimage, said this Cuttlebash, our Patcha hearing a noise, mounted, and
we followed him, and ordering silence in the Chandny Choque, where a riotous
mob had assembled, and making signs for them to be pacific, without being
regarded, and shot at by an Indostan Burghundass, with a large iron ball, he
said they were refractory, and wanted chastisement, and concluded by saying, go
and bomma Shumshere, sofmekund waw tuxeer moph ne mequoned, i. e. go clear the
way and give them no quarter. -- When ordered by Nadir Shah, we dispersed
ourselves amongst the crowd, and, allah hufurst! what blood did we spill;
within the eight hours, kodduh ab na punnah Patcha Nadir Shah Sarrah lack, that
is a lack and a quarter, or 125,000 youths and men of all descriptions, fell a
sacrifice to this conqueror's resentment.

THIS carnage over, the Patcha exacted a contribution; in the completion of
which many cruelties were practiced on the unhappy inhabitants; after which he
marched back to his own dominions, in 1739, with the immense sum in specie of
two hundred and thirty-one millions sterling, including the peacock throne,
etc. seventy millions of which fell to his own share; which loss Indostan
sustained by this invasion, besides the loss of 200,000 lives.

THIS was the first shock the Mogul Empire suffered, and put a final end to the
sway of the race of Tamerlane. Nadir Shah quitting Delhy, he left the Mogul in
quiet possession of all his territories to the southward of the Attock;
reserving the provinces before belonging to that Sovereign to the northward of
it, for himself; and to diminish the sovereign authority, by dividing it is
interests, prevailed on Mahommed Shah, to make the soubah ships throughout his
empire, hereditary: but Nadir Shah had not long left Indostan, before the
country was invaded by a numerous army of Rouhillus and Patans, who were
opposed by the Emperor's son, a youth about eighteen years of age, and totally
defeated. During this contest Mahommed Shah was strangled by his Vizier; when
the young Prince succeeding him by the name of Amet Shah, (the Emperors in
Indostan ever assuming a new name and title on their ascending the throne)
offering as a reward a munsub, and phill nashan to any one who should discover
the conspirators against his father's life, they were detected and put to
death: but a fresh invasion of the Patans and Marattas conjoined, being made,
Amet Shah was dethroned and imprisoned in Selingur, and Allingheer, father to
the present Mogul, put on the throne by Ghazodinkan, the then Grand Vizier: --
But Allimgheer tampering secretly with Amud Shah, sovereign of Candahar and
Pishoar, in order to purchase his friendship, and a quota of troops, to cut off
the thread of the obnoxious connection subsisting between him and Ghazodinkan,
his letters being intercepted by Ghazodinkan, a branch of the Nizam family,
that long owed a grudge to their cousins the descendants of Tamerlane,
inheriting the honors and profits of the Mogul Empire, though then very young,
a daring and enterprising genius, to revenge himself on the Emperor, and answer
his sanguinary and ambitious views, engaged two Molvies who had just returned
from a pilgrimage they had made to Mecca, to assassinate the aged Allimgheer,
which they effected in the following manner:

ALLIMGHEER advanced in years, and though not more remarkable for his attention
to fast or prayer than Mussulmans in general, yet Fakirs and Hagies and these
sort of people found easier access to him than what other Emperors had been
used to give; and hearing that two Molvies, with reverend beards, and of a
respectable aspect, who had arrived from the tomb of Mahomet, and wished to pay
him homage, he ordered them in his presence, who under the color of presenting
him two small Alcorans, as a nazur, at the same time stabbed him to the vitals
with their poignards, and the retinue, by premeditated orders of young
Ghazodinkan, threw him from the top of the terras of the palace he was then
seated on to breath the fresh air in the evening, and dashed him against the
pavement below; when Ghazodinkan assuming the regency, and aiming at the life
of Alligore, the eldest son of the demised Emperor, amidst a tumult that this
occasioned in the capitol, the Shah Zadah, by the assistance of Ilelroy, a
Maratta Chief then at Delhy, made his escape, and crossed the Jumna with his
Princess and the select part of his Zunnanah, what jewels he could muster,
which were to a prodigious amount, and accompanied by a few Mogul Noblemen;
amongst whom were Morahjahdowlah, Akborillykan, Bahahder Dowlah, and others of
note, with his Cojahs, Bahahdarilly Kan, Mecah Almas and Mecah Yawkoote,
incognito, flew across Anterbade, and crossed to the Commong Hills, where he
met with an hospitable reception from the hill Rajahs or Potentates, in these
parts, which he made an asylum for some years; during which time his Princess,
now Empress of Indostan, was brought to bed of Akborshah, Alligore's third son,
who on account of the remarkable beauty of his person, natural and acquired
abilities, as a favorite of his father and the Divan, will, if ever the Mogul
gets perfectly established in his rights, succeed to the throne, it is presumed.

THESE circumstances hitherto, though of moment to the political world and all
European powers to be known, have artfully been kept a secret by the Honorable
East India Company, and more so by their Governors and Counselors, Senior
Merchants and Factors abroad. Why? That by not letting transpire the legitimacy
of Alligore's birthright, (disputed by Ghazodinkin,) though sufficiently
known, they might occasionally have a pretext of assisting any competitor for
the sovereignty of Indostan among the Maratta Chiefs against the right heir,
should Alligore ever estrange his affections from them; and even after Ragouby
(appointed Regent during the minority of Madarow) assassinated this promising
young Prince, the English have kept in to all intents and purposes with
Ragouby, assisted him laterly with troops to fight his battles, and oppose the
Barrow-bye, and finally, after having attempted the reduction of Pounah, and
the whole Decan, in order to pave the way for this Ragouby's accession to the
throne, and throw by their contrivances, the Mogul into the hands of the
Marattas.

ALLIGORE some six or seven years resided in these principalities above
mentioned; in the interim the English growing powerful in Bengal and Madrass,
and having by this time acquired a great military fame, and aiming at an
extension of their territorial revenue, presuming that under the auspices of
the Great Mogul all imaginable sanction would be given to their proceedings,
could they but induce him to fall in with their measures, sent a deputation to
Alligore, with an offer of their services, by Messrs. Cartier and Claude
Russell; which Alligore accepting, he was conducted to Eleabas, a fortified
city on the banks of the Ganges, and by them (the English) with great solemnity
crowned King of Delhy and Indostan, not Emperor: the Company were pleased to
say that title was redundant, and when spoken of by them he is only styled the
King, or Shahzadah, which implies Prince. On ascending the throne he assumed
the name and title of Shah Aullim, that is in English, the King of the world.
Rupees were struck in his name, with the above title thereon. Two battallions
of Seapoys were allotted him for his guards, and one hundred lack of rupees per
annum for his maintenance, that it might not be said the Badshaw wanted doll
rouice, (i. e. a current phrase in Indostan, which idiomatically translated, is
bread to his meat) whilst among the generous brave English Toppe-wallas, i. e.
hat-men; but this Shah Aullim as soon suspected was but an honorary stipend, as
he did that the civilians who on various pretenses frequented his court, were
as much spies over his actions, as the Seapoys he had been honored with to
attend him, were bars to his liberty. Nor were these suspicions ill-founded,
for his agents in their attempt to collect the taxes of the adjacent purgunnas,
(that being the channel through which he was to come at his stipend) with
difficulty obtained a tascel, i. e. gather of land tax for a six months back
balance, due to the Sircar, that made it out in the proportion of no more than
twenty-five lacks per annum. The Company's servants in India anticipated the
complaints of Shah Aullim on these occasions, by waiting on him with rich
European presents, which they distributed amongst those of his sons that
attended Court; and renewing their assurances of friendship induced him to give
them grants for all the lands they had purloined from the natives, with
Jaghires and grants for immense tracts more of lands in the richest provinces
of the kingdoms of Bengal, Behar and Orissa, with a Phirmaund to collect
revenue vi et armis throughout all these three extensive districts, and the
liberty of striking Siccas in his name at Calcutta, and distributing justice in
their own dominions, with some few pretended restrictions, relative to the
Soubah Bullmousin, the Beneras Rajah and other officers and persons of property
and distinction it would be policy not to be too strenous with at first setting
off.

FRESH Surveyors, with detachments of Seapoys, were employed to survey and
penetrate the country, in order to find out new towns, gonges and gunges, and
ascertain, or rather extend the Company's limits.

NO Prince on the throne at Delhy, and the sovereign authority annihilated, the
Princes tributory to the Mogul, viz. Rajahs, Nabobs, Fasdars, etc. and others,
affecting independence, each one grew despotic in his respective district,
exacted and collected revenue and taxes of all kinds; favoring the Zemendars,
Banyans and Bockalls, as their avarice, interest or inclination guided them.

THE northern provinces of Indostan, at this time open on the one hand to the
visits of the Marattas, on the pretext of collecting their Chouty or fifth part
of the revenue granted to them out of certain portions of territory by
Aurengzebe; and on the other by the incursions of the Rouhillas, Sicks, and
Patans; without enumerating the mischief done by various tribes of robbers and
thieves this country abounds with, viz. Gougers, Gowars, Minnees, Mewattees,
Tuggs, and bodies of Fakirs; without these intestine oppressions, would have
been sufficient to account for the anarchy and confusion this country at this
juncture was in.

WHAT was the consequence? The pretended hospitable reception the Toppee-wallas
had afforded Shah Alluim and his family, had taken wind, and the head
Zemindars, Sowdawgurs, and Shroffs, not only alarmed for their property, but
for the safety of their lives, from such an inundation of despoilers that now
overspread the country, converting what of their property they could, into gold
or precious stones, for the easier conveyance of it, through by ways would
travel down to the settlements of the English Toppe-wallas, for protection. The
Mogul had shown them an example, and a report was circulated amongst the
Mussulmans, (that Allah, i.e. God, in the Arabic language) and amongst the
Hindoos, that Bogwan, i. e. the supreme God, had made choice of the tribe of
Hadgerat Eesah, to be an engine to redress their grievances.

THESE families of merchants and others swarming into the English settlements,
amongst whom were many monied men, the Company's servants made a point of
receiving them in the most courteous manner; these invited others, and their
settlements became, seemingly, asylums for the rich or ruined emigrants of
Indostan.

THIS migration was productive of many immediate and future advantages to the
Sircar, for these men, particularly the Banyans, early making the Company
acquainted with the pecuniary abilities of the Riets in the adjacent and
remoter parts of their new acquired territory, pointed out to them Gonges
Gunges, and even towns, in recesses they had never dreamed of, nor their
surveyors as yet had come to the knowledge of.

THE English invested now with full powers from the Mogul to act in a civil,
military, and judicial capacity, without control, saw a necessity for an
augmentation of their Seapoys, and their European brigades, and wrote home
accordingly, as well for a supply of civilians to fill up the vacancies of
Senior Merchants, Factors and Writers, by this time dispatched from the
Presidency at Fort William to new subordinates in the different parts of
Bengal, Behar, and Orissa, and employed in the new important businesses of the
Mint, the Lapidaries office, the survey of the revenue, and the Catchary; they
felt a shortness of Agents for the sorting their cloths, and for the completion
of their annual investments of saltpeter, opium, etc. as usual, and
represented in their general letter, that their establishment abroad called
upon all civil, military and naval auxilaries to support it.

THE military reputation of the Company increased daily. Major Clive (since
Lord Clive) had enhanced the idea of their valor by his conduct. He had gained
the battle of Plassey, A. D. 1757, when the head of Surahjahdowlah was knocked
off, and Meerjaffierallykan, put on the musnud in his stead; from which epoch
we may date the Company's making and unmaking Nabobs: Jaffier Ally Kan was
afterward deposed, after being handsomely fleeced out of his jewelry and
gold mohars, and Cossimally-kan, a Syed of good family and a man of good
natural parts and acquired abilities, made Soubah. Presently fault was found
with the conduct of Cossimally Kan, and another Soubah thought of to fill up
the sede vacant when called upon; which coming to the ears of Cossimally Kan,
it provoked this new Soubah to take up arms against the Company, and an army
employed to conquer him and reduce him to reason, under the command of Major
Carnac. Notwithstanding a menacing letter this officer sent him, when fortified
within the walls of Patma, he sacrificed to his resentment a number of English
gentlemen in their factory there; employing one Sombra, a German officer, to
execute his orders. This was during the government of Mr. Vansittart, who had
been the means of raising Cossimally to the Musnud. -- But all friendship being
now at an end between him and the Company, he was proscribed throughout the
empire by the English, and a reward offered for his head of ten lack of rupees.
A new Soubah was set up at Maxedabads, and many events took place between that
and the famous battle of Baxar, where to end a dispute long subsisting between
the Grand Vizier Sujahdowlah, and the Company, Hector Munro was employed
against him, and beat him fairly in the field, and took him prisoner on his
elephant, with a small party of European horse, after the battle; who, subdued,
and in the hands of the English, was glad to enter into an amicable treaty with
them.

SUJAHDOWLAH, one of the most voluptuous and luxuriant Princes that ever
appeared in Asia, at amity now with the Company, but jealous of their power, by
degrees added to his military force an army of twenty thousand well disciplined
Seapoys, and set afoot a large train of artillery, cast and conducted by one
Monsieur Samson, a French officer, his Douan had invited into his service;
which artillery, was under the direction of this Commandant, and a number of
Europeans, the lowest of them paid at the rate of five rupees per day, and a
number at wages from three hundred to one thousand rupees per month.

THE Company strengthened with the additional alliance of the Grand Vizier, in
the eyes of the inhabitants of Indostan, and having gained a permanent footing
in Bengal, their servants began to acquire amazing and rapid fortunes; as
verified in the instances of Lord Clive, Carnac, Munro, Johnson, Holwell,
Hastings, Vansittart, and others. The Jaghire alone of Lord Clive was near
eighty thousand pounds sterling per annum, an hereditary estate settled on him
by the Mogul; besides upwards of two millions of specie, and one hundred and
fifty thousand pounds worth of jewels and pearls.

THE means by which these rapid and immense fortunes were acquired, though too
well known by this time not to be notorious to all Indostan, if not to America
and the European world, were at first but suggested, until men who had been
treated hard by these despotic Lords of the East, though Europeans of repute
and unexceptionably connected at home, among whom was Mr. Bolts, a free
merchant of Calcutta, who with others, laying open at home the illicit and
unwarrantable means by which the Company's servants in India acquired their
fortunes, and the Company's charter that had been granted them by Parliament
having nigh expired, it put the Government upon making an investigation into
the East India Company's affairs; the result of which was, that they should
surrender up their Charter at the expiration of the limited time; but the Court
of Directors desiring a sufficient time to settle their affairs in, it was
granted them, on condition that they paid to the King four hundred thousand
pounds sterling per annum; which they readily assenting to, they carried on
their business as usual. About this time, Mr. Vansittart was invested with full
powers to go to India, and with a number of new nominated officers, civil and
military, sailed for Bengal, but some disaster befalling the ship, she never
arrived, nor a vestige of her, or a soul belonging to her heard of. This
circumstance, however unfavorable to the interest of the proprietors of stock,
and Company in general, was a stroke of fortune that reverberated with eclat on
the former standards in India, for apprized of the measures Government had
taken to secure to themselves some of the great emoluments the Company shared
before amongst themselves, and apprehensive of this step's being followed by a
speedy dissolution of their Company's exclusive right to the India trade,
(which suggestions were not a little strengthened by a report having been
propagated that the territorial revenue of Bengal would be invested in the
right of the Crown,) prompted them to be the more strenuous in their pecuniary
pursuits, and to have recourse to those many unjustifiable means for the
speedier accomplishment of their ends, which have so stigmatized this body of
men, and disgraced the character of the British nation.

LORD CLIVE, a star of the first magnitude in the East, whose words became
mottos' in India, and maxims established laws, not only at the Durbar of the
Company, but at the Courts of the Mogul Sujahdowlah and the Soubahs, declared
in Council and openly, that all acquisitions made under the commission of any
body politic, were legal, and that it was neither immoral or irreligious to (by
force of arms) exact contribution, and establish subordination; and that it was
the nature of mankind to contend for superiority and dominion; that whether
this bend resulted from the exigency of their situations, real or imaginary
wants, it mattered not; an invincible disposition to acquire wealth, honor and
fame, like the fixed principles in nature that leads rational or animal beings
to the propagation of their species, or the quenching of their thirst, was as
predominant in man, -- no fault in him, but an invincible temper or inherent
quality (like indissolubility in quicksilver) that ought to be cherished, not
quashed; and added, that the innumerable and successive instances related since
the creation, of men arriving to glory, and barbarous nations to civilization,
by adopting belligerent maxims and conducting themselves with craft and policy
toward the people they had to deal with, sufficiently demonstrated the laws of
conquest to be justifiable, as having a general tendency toward the
improvement of mankind; that the sword conquered more passions than starched
philosophic documents, study, or strenuousness; adverting that by that right,
and no other, did our ancestors come to their estates, and that on a strict
scrutiny, we should find, that the will of God and propensity of human nature
were not so incompatible as represented by Sophists and Theologicians.

I HAVE heard these, or sentences to the like purport, repeated in company by
some in a serious, and by others in an irronical manner; gentlemen who had
frequently been present at these and the like his discourses. Cojah Petrus, a
rich Armenian at Calcutta, has told me the same; Jenoniah D' Ameida, a
Portugueze of the same place, who used to write for him, and many others: They
are like his expressions, and were known to be his sentiments; which adopted by
his Council and dependants, it will not be thought surprising that they should
without hesitation execute his plans, however repugnant to the laws of humanity
and society, and irreconcilable with morality and religion; whilst the main
spring of their actions, like his Lordship's, were glittering independence.

INDOSTAN LETTERS.
NO. 1. Calcutta bog-buzar, i. e. the Tyger-Market. LOUISA ******, Lethulier's
boarding-school, Westminster:
YOU desired me to write to you on my arrival in India, and promised in return
to answer my letters. I send you this by the ship I took my passage in, now on
the eve of her departure for Europe.

On our leaving the Downs, having a leading wind down channel, we soon cleared
the land, and running between the Azores, i. e. the Western Islands and the
main continent of Europe, made the island of Madeira in about fourteen days;
where, without coming to an anchor, we took on board 150 pipes of Madeira wine,
(a drink highly acceptable to the Europeans in India) and on our way to the
southward, anchored at St. Jago, one of the Cape de Verd islands; where, after
fitting up our empty water casks, and taking in poultry, goats, and other
refreshments, we weighed and steered to the south, when Teneriffe remaining in
sight 'till it is peek or vertex, which terminates in a conical point and
pervades the clouds; (the whole island being but a base as it were, to this
pyramid) was by a meridian observation of the sun, visible even at the distance
of 150 nautic miles, which argued the great height of that remarkable mountain.
We continued on our way to the Cape of Good-Hope, the southernmost promontory
of Africa; having crossed the equinoxial line in the longitue of about 19
degrees west from the meridian of London.

You have learned the use of the globes, and must recollect that if London is
brought under the graduated edge of the brazen meridian, and then the sphere
moved on it is axis until the Cape of Good-Hope is brought under the same
artificial circle, that the difference of longitude between the two places can
be obtained by counting the degrees contained between the two meridians; and in
like manner for any other two places whatever. In crossing the Equator, we had
thunder squalls, calms, and heavy rains, attended with sharp lightning, which
is frequent in these climes; after which, falling in with the S. E. i. e. south
east trade wind, which blows as constant in that quarter of the compass to the
southward of the equator, as the N. E. i. e. the north east trade wind, blows
to the northward of it between the two Tropics, viz. Cancer and Capricorn. We
made the most of the wind, and doubling the Cape of Good-Hope, after very
tremendous weather, which obliged us at times to lie hull too, with our yards
and topmasts struck, and lower yards at portland, in a mountainous sea; and at
other times to scud before menacing waves for life and death, under a close
reefed main-topsail lashed down to the cap of the mast, thinking this the
safest to scud under, as the loftiest sail that could be carried, and most out
of the reach of our briny stern-chasers, the bellowing foaming billows that
followed our ship, and every successive surge menaced our stern. In this
dangerous and boisterous season of the year (it being the winter of this part
of the globe) hawling up to the northward, to use a sea phrase, we entered the
Mosambique channel; (which cast your eye on a map of the world, you will find
lies between the island of Madagascar, which is 1000 miles in length, and the
main continent of Africa) within the course of a week we anchored at Joanna,
one of the Comora Islands (in sight of the above mentioned island of
Madagascar.) This Comora is a small island, but of a beautiful appearance,
viewed from the sea; it rising all round with an easy ascent from the beach, in
little swelling hills projecting out from the main body of the mountain, of
which the bulk of the island is seemingly composed. This mountain, and it is
hills and intermediate valleys, are covered with trees and verdure, which
produce dates, lemons, limes, and tropical fruits in general; fronting the
little bay where the ships lie at anchor is the watering place, which is a
natural receiver of sine sweet water, precipitated from the top of the island
down a channel formed by the celerity of the stream, which running in a
serpentine direction through the bushes and valleys, has a pleasing effect that
cannot but attract the sight. About one third of a mile from this watering
place, is a compact little village, composed of two small narrow streets that
run parallel to each other about two hundred yards in length; it is houses are
small, and neatly built with stone and cement, and was the work of the noted
Avery, the pirate, and his people, who made this island their principal
rendezvous. This place is remarkable (as are all the Comora islands, likewise
Madagascar) for a breed of bats, or flying squirrels, the color of foxes, as
big as cats in general, and as full of hair and fur as weasels; as well as
mococks and mungooses, animals in make like greyhounds, but no bigger in their
bodies than a large cat, with long bushy tails, which are both held in
estimation in India and Europe, particularly the mococks, which are the color
of dark sables, but covered with a thick fur. These animals the ladies in
Europe affect such fondness for, that they frequently permit them to wrap their
soft bushy tails round their necks, and repose with their heads on their
bosoms. This island also abounds with a race of small bulls and cows, about the
size of yearlings, which are very fleshy and fat; they have a hunch on their
shoulders, and little horns, very sharp, but no longer than a man's thumb.

At this island we watered and refreshed, and then proceeded through the
Maldavia Islands for Bengal, after which making in our way, the Island of
Ceylon, (famous for it is cinnamon, the smell of which was very perceptible in
the neighborhood of the land) we entered the Bay of Bengal, and in about
forty-eight hours discovered the high land of Ballasore, when taking a pilot on
board that had been looking out for the Europe ships, we stood on for the mouth
of the river Hugely, a branch of the Great Ganges, a very critical navigation,
the mouth of this river being frontiered with sands, some of which shift, and
are equally blocked up with swampy islands, infested with tigers of an enormous
size, and aligators, also large serpents. The pilot had not been long on board
before (whether through his obstinacy or the precipitancy of the Captain) the
ship shallowing her water, she struck on the tail of the eastern brace, one of
the most dangerous sands in that vicinity, and had very nigh been lost; but
escaping this danger, she anchored at Ingillee the latter part of July, when,
with the ladies we had on board, some Company's servants, and other passengers,
I proceeded in a budgero to Calcutta.

This first part of my letter is written in a style calculated for the perusal
of a seafaring gentleman apparently, rather than that of a young lady; but as
intended for your amusement and information, as introductory to the letters to
come, I have hazarded it is insertion.

NO. 2. TO THE SAME.
In the Old Fort, Calcutta.
ON our arrival at Calcutta, which was the day following, we passed by
Fort-William, and the budgero gaining the front of the settlement, she hawled
into a landing called Bibby-Watts, i. e. the Woman Watt's landing, where a
number of boats, different in their construction from any I had seen before, --
burrs, dinghees, budgeros, and Moor punkys, added to the exotic appearance of
the inhabitants assembled in innumerable bodies, (Moors, Genloos, Armenians,
Callo-fringhees, or Country-born Christians,) men, women and children, all in
general remarkably well dressed, particularly in the style of the country, who
I was informed were of the Gentoo tribes, attracted my attention, as well that
of the rest of the passengers; and being given to understand that something
extraordinary was to be transacted on or about the spot we had come to at,
being as well situated in the varandos of the budgero as we could wish, we
waited the event of these novel preparations, and in the interim through the
means of the mangy, under whose direction the boat was, who spoke English in
common tollerably well, I informed myself which were the different casts or
tribes amongst this numerous assemblage of people; who pointed them out to me
much to my satisfaction, saying, that is a Mussulman, -- that is a Hindoo, --
this a Callo-fringhee, -- that an Armenian. This man, from his childhood
employed by Europeans, had acquired a considerable share of experience in
polemical matters, and amongst other things could tell us, that though the
Toppe-wallees governed Bengal and all the coast of India, and did as they
pleased with the Badshaws and Nabobs, there were Moor men enough, stanch
Shakes, Syeds, Moguls and Patans, without the Gentoos, to bury them all alive
in a day, with but a handful of sand each, had they but courage; for that there
were, according to the account of the Bramins, who knew the number of the
inhabitants, ten millions of Mussulmans in Indostan, and not half one hundred
thousand Toppe-wallees, including the Callo-fringhees in all; but, added the
Mangy, so immense a number of Hindoos, that were they not as timid as women,
without any other weapons than even bamboos in their hands, they could drive
both Mahometans and Fringhees out of the country; for that there were ten
Hindoos for one Mussulman, which made an hundred million of Gentoos in all, but
the Hindoos are infidels and idolaters, says this man, and Pyrumbur will not
let them rule over true believers, though he permits the Toppe-wallees to be a
scourge to them for a time. This and other discourse he held us while I was
surveying the crowd, and paying attention to their dresses, which I shall in
their proper place describe minutely. The Moors and Gentoos dress alike, with
jammers and turbans of fine white muslin or callico, and sashes of the same,
and cryssis stuck into their sashes, which are bound tight around their waists,
and have edges to them of gold fringe, etc. These jammers are gowns made much
like the women's in America or Europe, but with long sleeves that taper as they
come down to the wrists, and are so long in general, both before and behind,
that when walking the streets they are under the necessity of gathering up a
bunch in one hand, to keep the border from being trampled under foot: these
jammers are bound with silk, mode or ribband, or else with a binding of the
same stuff they are made of. Their turbans are traversed chequerwise, and the
ends of some of them a foot and others a span deep, which they take care to let
come out at the top, by way of ornament. Over this turban frequently is tied
obliquely to the forehead, a handsome shawl, handkerchief, or a small silk or
satin sash, and fringed with gold or silver. The Moors esteeming themselves
Seapoys, wear swords on all occasions, and when in sawawry, or on a visit,
carry in their hands shields made of Rhinoceros or wild Buffalo's hide, thick
enough to send off the blow of a scymitar, but not an arrow or musket ball. The
Gentoos go equally armed, but none but Rajahpoots, whose business it is to
sight, and Bramins of distinction amongst them, wear any other arms than a
Chury or Chryss, except on particular occasions, as, for instance, on
celebration of their nuptials, or the festivals held amongst themselves, when
the addition of the sword and shield take place, though a mere matter of
parade. These two casts of people made up the assembled crowd, excepting a few
Armenians and Callo-fringheees that were intermixed with them, commonly called
Portugueze, of which latter there are a great number in Bengal, and in all the
European settlements in India. The Armenians are a fair complexioned people,
and dress much like the Moors and Gentoos, except their caps, which they wear
instead of turbans, which are mostly made of black velvet, or broad cloth. The
Portugueze or Callo-fringhees dress exactly like the Europeans, and being as
remarkable for their vanity as their superstitious attachment to the papist
religion, endeavor to envy each other in finery and equipage. The Gentoo women
and girls from all the neighboring parts had likewise gathered together on
this occasion, and were mixed with the multitude, but few or no Moor women were
to be seen, except some of inferior stamp; the females amongst the Mahometans
in India, like the women belonging to the Turks in Asia and Europe, not
exposing themselves to public view, nor going out without being completely
covered from head to foot with a veil. These Gentoo women in general are
dressed in a muslin or callico pizwawge, resembling the gown I have described
the men wear, which I shall be more particular in the account of hereafter;
under this pizwawge they wear an upper and under skirt, the upper one some
brilliant color and the under one fine linen: they wear no shoes, but go
barefoot through the streets, except the Ranahs, i. e. wives and daughters of
Rajahs, and Hindoo ladies of the first rank, who keep themselves as hidden as
the Moor women from the sight of men. Over the pizwawge they wear a lungah, and
over that a deputah; the lungah is to cover them when they are bathing and the
deputah is their veil, both which they throw over them in a careless manner,
but will occasionally peep out from under their veils, and discover their faces
as they pass through the streets, or remain standing in a crowd. The palms of
their hands and the soles of their feet are tinged with mindy, as likewise
their finger and toe-nails, which being a beautiful pink color shows to no
disadvantage. They wear rings in their right nostrils and the middle stnip of
their noses; the rings they carry in their nostrils are frequently the diameter
of a dollar, and sometimes not exceeding that of a pistareen, which always have
two precious stones, saphires, rubies or amethysts, with pearls between the two
jewels suspended, and the same to the rings that are reeved through the snip of
their noses, which are less than the nostril rings, being so contrived as only
to admit the jewels suspended thereto to come down to the upper-lip. -- We had
not long amused ourselves with contemplating this crowd, when the sun setting
below the horizon of a beautiful serene sky, I was struck with the splendid and
sudden appearance of some thousand little pagodas, or Indian temples of
different magnitudes and proportions, (all of them painted and gilded, from
three to six feet in height, with their respective porticos, galleries,
ballustrades, turrets, domes and spires,) launched from the strand; and numbers
of pleasure boats in different parts of the river, on flat boards of sufficient
bearings to float them; which illuminated with little gilded tapers within side
and without, reflecting on and shining through casements of transparent
isinglass, exhibited in a very advantageous light the images that were fixed on
pedestals in the center of these edifices: some of Bramin bulls, and peacocks
with their tails expanded, and others of Jagarnaut and Christnou Swamy, and
different idols worshipped by these deluded uninformed people. These glittering
temples had no sooner been launched, than a report as smart and as loud as
musketoons, like a feu-de-joye or street firing, was heard from all quarters.
They were a number of Chinese crackers, discharged from the hands of boys,
dressed, painted and decorated with jewels, on the occasion; the boys in these
parts wearing necklaces and earrings, with rings in their noses like the women;
and even men, when full dressed, will never appear without them. These crackers
are neatly made up and bound tight with small wires, cat-gut and Indian weed,
and filled with strong double fortified elastic powder; thus artfully confined
though the interior tube that contains the powder, will be no bigger than a
large porcupine quill: on being fired they make an incredible loud report.

This scene was novel and pleasing enough to have attended to awhile, but the
turning of the tide against a breeze of wind that began to increase, soon
overset this fragile navigation, extinguished the luminaries of these little
floating temples, and immerged in the stream these various Indostan deities,
amidst the repeated shouts and acclamations of the Gentoo tribes on the river
and adjacent shores, and completed what the Europeans in Bengal call drowning
Jagernaut: this day happening to be the celebration of an annual festival held
in commemoration of that Pagan divinity, who by the Gentoos is looked upon as a
mediator between Bogwau and man.

NO. 3. TO THE SAME.
From Barnagar, a small Dutch Settlement, near Calcutta.
JAGERNAUT drowned, as I wrote you by the last year's shipping, the different
equipages by this time brought down to the landing for conveying we new-comers
to our respective connections, viz. phaetons, chariots and palanquins, in
disembarking we were felecitated on our arrival by some gentlemen on the spot,
the ladies handed into carriages and drove to the government (it being an
invariable rule for every gentlewoman who is sent from Europe to visit the
Governor first) who never parts with her 'till he delivers her into safe hands,
and sees her honorably accommodated. These ladies, daughters to gentlemen of
narrow fortunes, with the consent of their friends, annually, some two or three
in a ship, go to India, where having nobody on the spot to supercede them, they
in a short time make a conquest of some gentleman or other, advanced in the
Company's service; for no one less than a factor dare presume to think of an
European lady, nor will the Governor (without whose consent they cannot be
married) admit of such a match, which restrictions secures to them considerable
settlements, and I believe an instance never was known for a young maiden of
spotless character not making a brilliant fortune by a trip to Bengal. The
women bowled off in their superb carriages; a palanquin that had been sent for
me by Mr. Lambert, a senior merchant in the Company's service, I stepped into
it, and was shown how to fix myself without endangering it is tilting, and
orders given in a language that I did not understand, (as I was afterward
informed) to carry me to the house of a Mr. Middleton, a gentleman then in
Council at Calcutta. As this vehicle is not only a shining but a necessary
equipage in India, I will give you a short description of it, and refer you to
my glossary for further particulars. A palanquin may with great propriety be
called a valant couch; it is oblong in it is make, and bespread with mattrasses,
and a silk or satin covering called an epinjary, that is spread over the arch
of the bamboo, to keep out the dew and sun beams, and is carried by four men at
a time on a thick bamboo, that forms an arch over the main body of the
palanquin, and runs projecting out some six feet before, and about four feet
behind; two of the men keeping forward and the other two in the rear. These
bamboos have their ends neatly covered with leather, and the arches of them
with velvet or broad-cloth. Three handsome tassels hang under the bamboo, the
body of the middle one as big as an ostrich egg, and the tassels in general a
couple of spans deep. These are of use and ornament both, for bobbing this way
and that way with the motion of the palanquin, they serve to keep off the flies
and musquitoes, with which this country abounds. At the but end of the fore
part of the bamboo is fixed in cast metal, gold, silver or brass, the head and
claws of a dragon, a griffin, or crocodile; and at the other end of the bamboo,
the tail and posterior parts of the same animal that is fixed in the front: and
a palanquin being a mark of honor and distinction in Indostan, no subject
presumes to mount one, except authorized by the Mogul himself, a Soubah, Nabob
or Rajah; which right remains hereditay, or only during office or life, at the
will of the Prince who confered it. -- Thus fixed in my palanquin, though in a
very inexpert manner, as it then stood on it is four feet on the ground, the
sides of it were held by two men, whilst the bearers stooped down and
dexterously raised it up by clapping the ends of the bamboo under their
shoulders, when they set off in a dog trot, at a rapid rate, singing out as
they jogged along, in a plaintive tone, a kind of a song I did not understand.
In this way I was conveyed to the house of my friend, where the palanquin was
set down, and I conducted up stairs and received by Mr. Middleton, who
introduced me to his acquaintance, and gave orders for a notch, and as we
passed up and down the varando, amongst other things told me that he would
furnish me with a banyan, when his carrany called me aside to inform me there
were sent into an apartment destined for me, two bags of rupees; upon which I
took the hint, and with this carrany withdrew, who counted out to me two
thousand rupees, -- I deposited them in my escrutoire, which was no sooner
done, than a fat short man of a straw colored complexion, accompanied by his
son, a boy about twelve years of age, accosted me: this man was a Gentoo, of
the bramin cast, and a substantial banyan. They both were richly dressed in the
style of the country, and had all the appearance of people of credit. The
subject they waited on me was that of my employing the father as my banyan; who
producing a line from my friend, I accepted of his offer, with a nazar, he
presented me, consisting of five gold mohars and three sicca rupees, which was
looked upon, I was informed, as an indication of an agreement; when they paid
their compliments by meeting their right hands with their foreheads, and
letting them fall in a graceful manner while they bowed their bodies, (which is
called making a sallam) -- after this they retired, and left me to my private
cogitations. My friend returning after supper, we went into a large saloon,
when a company of women, about fifteen in number, advanced as it were, in the
front of a theater, by typhas, i.e. sets, with their bajana wallas, and paid
their compliments by sallaming us in the manner the banyan and his son sallamed
me; the women varying nothing in this particular from the men, in Indostan.
This done, they seated themselves cross-legged on the carpet, according to the
custom of all Asiatics, when a typha, which always consists of three of these
dancing girls, sang a song (much in vogue then, and accompanied it by the
serindas, to the satisfaction of the audience) that was called the fate of the
Soubah Serajahdowlah, which name introduced in the chorus occasionally, ended
every verse; when beatle was brought in to entertain them.

NO. 4. LADY CAROLINE *********, Westminster.
Dumdum Garden, Calcutta. MADAM,
THE girls to whom I have hitherto addressed myself from India, correspond with
each other, and will be as proud to transmit you my letters as I am to
understand by yours that you wished for a perusal of them: in future, it will
be improbable I should neglect writing to you the first. Your letter I have
made the frontispiece to my Europe miscellanies. The letters antecedent to
this, should ere now, by the steps I am informed you had taken, have fallen
into your hands. The company seated, (as I wrote Louisa ******'s sister in my
last letter) afforded me an opportunity of contemplating their persons and
examining their dress, both which I shall give you a sketch of in my letters to
the ladies I correspond with in general.

The dresses of these females, closely copied from the fashions of the
Seraglios, which are constant standards for the women in those parts to
regulate themselves by in that important article of dress and the decoration of
their persons; it being to be remarked that these Asiatics are as tenacious in
the points of dress, and any significant addition or dimunition might be made
thereunto by a predominant party of belles in the Seraglio of the Mogul, Vizier
or Soubah, as ever a set of the first rank ladies that ever formed a route in
London or Paris. To return from which digression, the Indostan women wear
shifts which differ but little in make from those of the European women, and
under their skirts, which are always made of tissue or a brilliant colored
silk or satin, set off with a deep gold or silver fringe below, and as often
embroidered with sprigs of the same, they wear likewise a white linen
petticoat, and within that striped silk drawers, drawn round the waist with
silk, knit, or wove bandages, and in the same manner drawn tight round the
ancles of their legs; whilst the Gentoo women, who differ from the other
Indostan women in this particlar, dispense with these drawers and wear an
extraordinary skirt in their stead. Over the dress above described goes the
pizwawge, a robe or gown made in the following manner; two pieces of muslin are
laid flat on each other like sheets of writing paper in a quire, then doubled
from the middle, which making them fourfold adds to the strength of them, and
makes the whole better calculated for the lower part of the pizwawge, which
forms a skirt with a handsome gold border to it of about a span deep all round;
these pieces of muslin being finished off in that manner while fabricating on
the bamboo stands, are made of such lengths as to admit occasionally their
being converted into pizwawgee's, in the making of which by doubling the
lengths together, it may easily be conceived how the ends of these pieces by
making them meet, may be contrived to answer the purposes of a border to the
lower part of the pizwawge, which the Zundirjees, i.e. the women tailors, pay
particular attention to, as well as the length of the train of the pizwawgees,
in the making of which, with the Indostan ladies they must never be infringed
on. In order to accomplish this, the Zundirjees employed for that purpose in
measuring the lady the dress is intended for, begin by taking her circumference
from just below her shoulder-blades, and that part of the body that coincides
with them, not from the small of the back above the hips, according to the
custom of the American and European ladies. This done, they cut off the upper
part of the folded muslins and lay them apart for the body or vest of the robe,
whilst the part that forms the skirt is drawn up into a convenient number of
gatherings; then they adjust the body, and fix it to the skirt to their liking,
making the hind part terminate in a train as proposed, while the fore part but
barely meeting the floor has loops to raise it and keep it from incumbering the
feet, by contriving it so as to admit of the border's just reaching the instep;
which contraction of the robe discovering (as the party walks or dances) the
glittering annulets, and large hoop rings incrusted with pearls and gems of
different culours with which her toes, ancles and legs (if a female of the
least pretensions) will be in a manner incased, whilst her train flowing behind
sweeping the rich Persian carpet she treads on, exhibits to great advantage the
gracefulness of the person, and elegance of the dress.

I am addressing myself to ladies, or I should perhaps be less diffusive on a
subject that by the other sex might be thought effeminate; in future I will be
less minute, but beg leave to finish the detail of an Indostan lady's attire in
the manner I have began.

I will now write in the plural number, and not confine myself to the dresses
of the women in question, their disposition and manners in particular, but
treat of them in general.

The sleeves of Indostan ladies robes are fixed to their pizwawgees much in the
same manner the American or European women's gowns are, only these growing
narrower by degrees are made to extend to about half a yard, when pulled out,
beyond their finger ends, that by that contrivance a number of muslin ringlets
may be made to form a pretty cuff when shoved up above the wrist, without
concealing the gold rings and bracelets adorned with precious stones that they
wear night and day on their fingers and wrists. These sleeves being strait, to
render them more convenient for the motion of their arms, are slit at the
elbows; and the edge of that aperture worked round in needle work, like the
edge of a Dresden wristband. They wear neither tippets nor handkerchiefs over
their necks and shoulders, but have a half vest or bodice of muslin, edged with
small rubies, sapphires, emeralds, or pearls, if able to purchase them; if not,
a narrow binding of silk answers the purpose; which demi vest they slip under
their shifts and clap over their breasts: these demi veils are called chatty
bunds, and are made exactly to fit, and being diaphanous, the women solely
depend on the contexture of their veils for the concealment of their charms,
which, as one of the most indispensable parts of an Indostan female's dress,
you must not be surprised should I be rather lengthy in the description of it
in my next.

NO. 5. TO THE SAME.
On board my budgero, off Fort-William.
THESE veils I had promised you a description of are about three else long, and
an ell and one quarter wide, of an azure, purple, pink, green, scarlet, or any
fancy color whatever; and though of an extreme fine manufactured muslin, are
so thick as not to be transparent but from within side: they have all gold or
silver edges to them of about four fingers wide, and the ends terminate like
the ends of the sashes or bottoms of their pizwawgees, in a deep gold or silver
border, and as one of the most essential appendages of an oriental lady's
dress, as I have already intimated, are by them manouver'd and handled with as
inexplicable art and inimitable ease and oconomy: whether when traveling in
their palanquins, doolies or hackerries abroad, or when walking in their
varandoes, saloons or gardens at home, or sitting down in public, or tete a
tete in private with a friend, it matters not, the veil must be introduced.
When in a state of real or seeming despondence, the head reclined on the arm
inwrapt in one end of the veil, a part of the face will be discoverable under
the shining border of the other end or golden edges, with the marks of anxiety
or care depicted thereon. At funerals the veil the disconsolate mother, sister
or relict, throws over her in such a manner as to cover the whole body from
head to foot except her hands, which wringing with a bunch of it retained in
them, she suddenly will convert into a ramol to absorb the tears dropping from
her eyes. When exasperated by the perfidy or frowns of a lover, the veil, by
the irritated dame who wears it, will be distended, then twisted first one way
and then another, and the ends converted into tassels to beat time to the sighs
and sobs intervening her ejaculations. When overjoyed at the unexpected sight
of a long absented friend, parent, husband or lover, (contracted to in marriage
perhaps, and given over for lost) the veil then, like wings, will be expanded
at the full extent of the hands and arms, whilst the enraptured female with
rapidity and obvious solicitude, will fly to the embraces of the welcome and
unexpected guest; and if a parent or husband, fall down at their feet and wipe
them therewith. The veil in short, under all circumstances of the mind or body,
whether fortuitous or premeditated, exigent or voluntary, comes of use in
course; and without it, with satisfaction and decorum, nothing trivial or
important can be effected. I have described in my letter, No. 2, to your
neighbor Louisa ******, the necklaces, bracelets and annulets they wear on
their wrists and ancles; which but differ more or less from each other in mode
or value, in proportion to the circumstances and taste of the women who wear
them; which rings, etc. except the thumb ring wore by women of all degrees in
Indostan, are all the trinkets that at present occur to me, belonging to them.
The thumb ring is about the size of a common signet, of the diameter of a
quarter of a dollar, and worn on the right thumb; the surface of it is a bright
speculum of plain polished steel, or a bit of good looking-glass, set in a
socket of gold, environed with little gems. They are cut out into ovals,
perfect circles, or polygons, at the pleasure of the goldsmith or female it is
intended for. This little mirror serves the women to adjust their hair by,
pencil their eyebrows, accommodate to their fancy their veils, or contemplate
their faces in, and answers the purpose both of portable mirrors and ornaments.
There remains nothing now but the sash and the slippers to complete the
inventory of the decorations and dress of an Indostan female: The sash differs
in nothing from the veil but in color, (which is always by way of contrast
different) and in dimensions, it being in general about one third less than the
veil. These sashes they wear partly round their waists and partly round their
bodies, as fancy or chance at times decides, with frequently one end of them
circumflected round an arm, whilst the other end carelessly playing about will
reach down to the bottom of their pizwawgees, and fall in with the border
before or behind. Their slippers are either silk, velvet or red leather, and
ornamented with spangles, and often with gems. They likewise use ramols, i. e.
handkerchiefs, and are in as perpetual want of them, it may be supposed, in a
climate situate under one of the tropics, but do not convert the one and the
same handkerchief to all the menial purposes Europeans do theirs, for their
stomachs would revolt at the idea of wiping their faces with the same ramol
they had wiped their noses with; which is not the only instance of the delicacy
of these women, for they are the epitome of neatness in body and apparel: in
every other respect, bathing themselves, and having their hair combed out and
cleansed, their bodies and clothes perfumed, their ears picked, and their nails
pared at the same time, daily, not neglecting their teeth every morning; to
preserve which and keep clean they rub with munjun, (a searching powder in use
in those parts) and once a month apply mindy to their fingers, toe-nails, palms
of their hands, and soles of their feet, which keeps them cool, and gives them
a beautiful crimson tinge. [See in glossary further described.]

In this manner do the women in Indostan dress and adorn themselves, with
little if any variation in those particulars, except in the different degrees
of magnificence of their clothing and intrinsic value of the auxiliary
decorations.

No. 6. TO THE SAME.
AFTER having been diffusive in the description of Indostan women's dresses, it
would be remissness in the extreme to neglect their persons; but wishing to
deduce my criterions from particular observation rather than from instances,
when discriminating the manners and habits of a nation, I shall now, as I am
about depicting the scene that was represented to me the evening I arrived in
Calcutta, by confining my animadversions to the characters alluded to, in a
display intended to discriminate only a particular cast or tribe, avoid
including in the portrait the main body of the people or rather the females
belonging to them; reserving for a more favorable opportunity such a general
deliniation.

These women, amongst others, falling into the hands of Abdally, (styled Amud
Shah) by the fate of war, or paid him as an equivalent at different times,
after a considerable devastation he had made with his army in Sarmarcand,
Bochara, Circassia, and the confines of Persia, in different parties were sent
to Shah Aullim, and Sarahjahdowlah, as presents, in expectation, it is supposed,
of adequate returns: after which translation of these females, Sarahjahdowlah's
army being totally defeated at the battle of Buxar, and dispersed, amongst
other fugitives of his camp, these women having lost their lord and master, and
flying to Shah Aullim for protection, and meeting there their former
acquaintance, a connection cemented under remarkable circumstances,
sympathizing with each other's lot, in pathetic terms, in the hearing of Shah
Aullim, the Emperor struck with the vicissitudes of their fortunes, they
expressing a desire to live together, he ordered all those ladies in his
presence by whom he had had no children, who were either related to, or had
been formerly connected with this new arrived party; when, on their making
their appearance, he not only gave the whole of them the choice of continuing
with him in his Seraglio, or seeking their fortunes elsewhere, but on their
prefering the latter, dismissed them with handsome presents, and gave them the
appellation of Shahzadees, at the same time: they have retained that title
eversince, and been respected accordingly, and by such Indostan families of the
first rank, as knew their history, invited to and called upon to improve by
their conversation and manners, their young male children and female
connections, and even looked upon as precedents for behavior in the precincts
of the Zunnannah^ ^f princes, or before whatever company they happened to
perform, or be invited to visit; which should not be thought surprising when
women of this description, or less pretensions, are frequently called upon by
both Mahometans and Gentoos, on similar occasions, to improve their children;
which the experience of ages has demonstrated to be the most successful mode of
weaning children from their puerile habits, for by conquering in them early an
awkward bashfulness natural to some, or a too prompt disposition to be forward
and refractory, as peculiar to others: by their being frequently compelled to
dress, and approach their parents and relations with a cheerful alacrity and
respect, before a company from abroad, introduced for their edification and
amusement, they as insensibly fall into a happy mediocrity of behavior, between
downright effrontery and what the French call la mauvaise honte; for however
inconsistent with our ideas of delicacy and decorum, and incompatible with the
rigidity of European documents, the countenance given to women of this stamp in
Indostan may appear to be, their acting but according to the dictates of their
consciences and the tenets of their respective religions, in a country where
polygamy is lawful, and a plurality of female companions (ladies not conjoined
by matrimonial bands) equally admissible; which gives a sanction to their
proceedings, that amongst Gentoos and Mahometans not only exempts them from any
imputation of immorality or irreligion, but renders them unexceptionable in the
eyes of the main body of the people. It must not be thought surprising, that
from their infancy taught with care by able hands to dance, to walk, to sit
down, and rise up in the easiest and most graceful attitudes the body will
admit; instructed equally in sine needle work, and reading and writing the
Persian language, as well as vocal and instrumental music, by people declared
enemies to all species of inebriety and intemperance or illiberal conversation,
and as remarkable for their rigid observance of holy feasts and fasts, their
punctuality in their daily devotions and aptitude to give alms, from whom they
imbibed these principles; were trained up and taught to know that their
maintenance would depend solely on their personal accomplishments, the elegance
of their dress and delicacy of manners and deportment, should be introduced
occosionally as precedents for behavior, and held in estimation throughout an
empire like Indostan.

The women in question, with respect to their persons, sprang from parents of
one color and sect, though of different nations; an obvious similarity of
physiognomy, manners and make, were discoverable throughout the whole set; and
to be conclusive, had I them to class as the Poets have classed the graces,
(Juno, Pallas and Venus) I should have divided them into three parts, and
styled them Junos, Pallasses, and Venuses; for they equalled these historic
Goddesses in stature, proportion and attitude, and in my eye inheriting the
prevailing characteristics of beauty, viz. an harmony of features and limbs,
black sparkling eyes, long fine hair, and complexions and skins as clear as
amber, and a shade lighter than wheaten straw, they might, except American and
English women, vie with the whole globe in these particulars, and be styled
beauties of the superlative degree. I could have wished this Asiatic belle
assemblee, had been constituted of characters less exceptionable in the opinion
of more refined nations in the European or American world, particularly those
of the ladies; but as a description of such remarkable casts of women, and of
the means by which they maintain themselves in splendour, cannot but tend to
chracterise the voluptuous Bassas, Nabobs and Rajahs, and licentious European
Agents in these parts, on whose favors these females and all of the like stamp
are dependent for a livelihood, and will demonstrate equally to what a degree
the prejudices of education, and religion founded on false principles, and
irreconcilable with theology and morality, will influence the human mind, and
biass a bigoted people, I could not but include the above matters in the
series of my letters.

No. 7. TO THE SAME.
Calcutta.
THE beatle brought in to regale this company with, as I wrote you in No. 4,
was handed round for them to partake of, and then laid before them with the
pondon, when they began to expatiate upon the goodness and quality of the leaf,
and other of it is constituent parts, as the gentlemen around informed me, and
by their looks and actions I judged was the case, which were so significant and
expressive that without speech even were obvious indications of their minds.

These people, fond to excess of this beatle, which from their infancy they had
been taught to chew like tobacco chewers, snuff-takers, or dram-drinkers
amongst the Christians, among whom a long use of the intoxicating weed,
spirituous liquors and cephalic fumes renders habitual, the sudden deprivation
of goes as hard with, as the gratification of their depraved appetites
therewith must be pleasing. These Indostan women seem to expect their pan
sapyary (the expression for beatle in the Indostan language) as much as these
dram-drinkers, tobacco-chewers, and snuff-takers do their inebriating potions,
and could probably as ill dispense with their daily auxilaries as these folks
above hinted at, could pass without theirs, but with this material difference
in favor of the one substitute and against the use of the other, that beatle
sweetens the breath, preserves the teeth, is aromatic in it is smell and
balsamic in it is taste, without having any disagreeable medicinal twang, and by
the addition or the dimunition of the cochineal and chunam can be rendered more
or less astringent or concoctive, as required, the juice in either cases that
involuntarily escapes downwards being known to be an excellent stomatic,
consequently salutary; whilst the auxilaries used by the others are pernicious
to the ultimate degree, debilating mind and body, and carrying with them a
train of consequences destructive to mankind.

I left the women expatiating on the quality of the beatle, which they did with
as much glee as a club of fashionable connoisseurs in wines would over a batch
of Burgundy, when charging the red battalions they engage hob and nob with full
bumpers in hand. This beatle besides it is other good qualities, cheers up the
heart, and gives a zest to conversation, and in short, is held in such
estimation in all parts of Indostan, that the females at visits with as much
assiduity and punctilio as ladies in America or Europe wait on each other at
tea, attend their visitors over their beatle, and pondans in which they keep
their beatle, the little spoons and utensils and the different ingredients that
constitute this beatle all together, and priding themselves on the utility,
intrinsic value and magnificence of their pondans, which are in general made of
the finest gold or silver filligre their appendages; a pondon is held as a very
essential part of an Indostan lady's equipage.

No. 8. PETER SEGUIN, Gent. Dublin.
Calcutta.
YOU was always fond of East India intelligence, and I keep my word in writing
to you from these parts, either Louisa or Anne ******, preserve copies of all
the letters I transmit them or my acquaintance, they will with pleasure submit
them to your perusal, by which you will get initiated into the spirit of these
miscellanies, without which you would be at a loss to form your criterions. A
set of dancing girls having been sent for on my arrival in Bengal, to entertain
me by their performances, I will give you a sketch of the plot and history of
the comic opera that was played, and in my next send an account of the
performance throughout, to some one or other of my correspondence, as usual.

The piece was called the Durrabas Sardar, (this is the deceitful Lord) and the
persons of the drama were as follows: Sardarilly Kan, a sovereign Prince
amongst the Patans, at war with the Sicks; Shah Jahan, Emperor of Indostan; a
peerzadah, i.e. priest, and two eunuchs.

The women were, Mawtab, one of the Emperor's daughters, and Sittarradar, a
Princess residing at Lahor with Zemroude, who had been seduced by Sardarilly
Kan. Mawtab is contracted in marriage to Sardarilly Kan, whom the Emperor
dispatches after this contract, to engage the Sicks, proposing the nuptials to
be consummated on his return from battle, who having set off to meet the enemy,
Mawtab impatiently waiting her lover's return; but he paying his addresses to
another lady at the same time, one Sittarradar, of Lahor (unknown to Mawtab and
the Emperor her father) after having obtained the victory, he sends a rich
dooly with an embroidered ramol as a private token to Sittarradar, in order to
convey her incog. to the palace at Agra, where he proposes meeting her with a
priest that shall join their hands immediately on her arrival; and prior to
that, he having wrote two letters, one to Mawtab at Delhy, and another to
Sittarradar, the Princess at Lahor, which letters, in the hurry of his affairs
he making a mistake in the superscription, by addressing the letter intended
for Sittarradar to Mawtab, and the one intended for Mawtab to Sittarradar;
allowing Sittarradar sufficient time to pay him the proposed visit and return
before Mawtab could, from the nature of his appointment with her, reasonably
expect him at the capitol, which opening an unexpected scene to these two
ladies, (neither of which, as women of the first rank, could brook the idea of
a competitor in their pretensions to the ascendency in matrimonial rights, the
first wife amongst Mahometans, notwithstanding a plurality of wives is
admissible, ever claiming a prerogative over the rest) enraged at Sardarilly
Kan's dissimulation, (though apart) these ladies formed similar plans, at
meeting together at Delhy (being intimate from their childhood) they unbending
their minds to each other, and concerting measures for exposing their deceiver,
and being revenged on him for his perfidy to them, they put them into execution
in the following manner; Zemroude, whom Mawtab had taken for an attendant,
compassionating her misfortune, jointly with Sittarradar opened the secret to
her, and proposing to her to dress herself in Sittarradar's clothes and jewels,
and in the identical Dooly sent for Sittarradar, and to set off for Agra and
meet Sardarilly Kan at midnight (the time appointed) in the Varando of a garden
within the palace, whilst they, disguised as Kistmutdars, would accompany her
with all expedition to Sardarilly Kan, who having been deluded by him, with
eagerness consented to carry on the plot, that a strong similarity of age,
features, voice, size and gesture, which subsisted between her and Sittarradar
could not but considerably contribute to the success of.

These steps taken, the two heroines with the injured Zemroude set off for the
metropolis of Agra, where at the time and place appointed by the Patan General,
Zemroude (personating Sittarradar) meets her seducer, falls into his arms, and
presenting him with a rich ramol embroidered with diamonds, sent as a token,
and the letter that was received by Mawtab, but intended for Sittarradar, not
doubting the identity of the person she represents, the priest makes his
appearance, and at an altar joins them in lawful marriage, Mawtab and
Sittarradar being called upon as witnesses to the deed; all which personages by
favor of their veils, notwithstanding the brilliancy of the lunar orb and the
glare of the tapers, escaped to all intents and purposes discovery.

The nuptial knot tied by the Peerzadah, the the new married Prince with his
Princess withdraws and retires to his Seraglio, leaving two eunuchs to guard
the doors; Mawtab and Sittarradar witness to these transactions, and though
overjoyed at the success of their undertaking on the one hand, but as
exasperated, and with reason, at the chicanery of this Patan on the other,
agreed to force their way into the Zunnannah and open the plot, and directly
strove to burst the doors, in attempting which, two eunuchs opposing them, the
Princesses draw their poignards against these eunuchs breasts, and oblige them
to deliver up to them the keys, which they do with timidity and precipitation,
when the scene changing to the Zunnannah, where Sardarilly Kan and Zemroude
appearing arm in arm, Mawtab and Sittarradar throwing off their veils and
appearing to Sardarilly Kan as Princesses, and Sardarilly Kan discovering his
mistake, the conflict happens, when the two Princesses contemn this common
deceiver, load him with bitter reproaches, spurn him from them and deride him,
'till at last Sardarilly Kan, provoked by their behavior, by the trick that
had been played him, and by his being made an object of ridicule by these
Princesses, in the heat of his passion he orders Zemroude to be strangled, but
the Badshaw all this while apprized of what was going forward, and determined
to see justice done, timely interfering, a stop is put to these rash
proceedings, silence imposed all round, and immediate restitution to all
parties ordered by Shahjahan from Sardarilly Kan, who is compelled to make good
the settlements he had proposed when he promised the Princesses marriage, by
paying down the stipulated value of them, and ordered to make over his Jaghier
to Zemroude, or swear to be loving and faithful to her during life, when
choosing the latter, and begging pardon for his indiscretion, the piece ends
more happily then it began.

No. 9. General letter to my CORRESPONDENTS.
Calcutta.
YOU form one circle of correspondence, and communicate your letters I know to
each other, I shall therefore in future not point out to any of you any more
the methods you may take to get at this or that particular number, but leave it
to yourselves to do as you please therein, as I shall confine my addresses
entirely to this circle of my acquaintance; and thinking myself highly honored
by the attention paid to my scralls, my study shall be to render them as worthy
your acceptance as possible.

The persons among the dancing girls who were fixed upon to represent the
characters in the drama, we may suppose a long while prepared before hand, and
exercised in the like performances by such frequent representations, must have
got their particular parts well off by heart, and be sufficiently adequate to
the task. The parts of Mawtab and Sittarradar were to be acted by two young
beautiful girls, whose real names taken from history happened to be the same as
those of the personages they were going to represent: these girls moreover
happening to be maidens, and as females in Indostan during the state of
virginity are particularly distinguished and more than ordinary attended to
during that state, before I proceed any further I will give you an account of
them. -- A girl that is a maiden never wears a pink or scarlet pizwage or
skirt, except it is on the day of her wedding, when her friends if they think
proper may invest her with this mark of distinction; and as an important
indication of virginity the pearl that is wore in common and suspended by a
little ring reeved through the middle snip of the nose and admits the pearl
down to the top of the upper lip, has during her virginity no collateral jems
on each side like the middle pearls wore by the rest of her sex who have been
joined in hymeneal bands, as an undeniable mark of innocence and purity,
nothing but the bare pearl drop on her lip appearing till after consummation in
marriage; and being in general the youngest of the females in a family, a
greater attention is paid to her by her connections, and more means used to
improve as well as amuse her, particularly amongst the dancing girls, when a
cheerabund, as the flower of the flock and favorite of the company or set she
belongs to, being on account of her youth the best calculated to please, no
pains are spared to render her equally attractive in other respects by an
extraordinary attention paid to the decorations of her person, that her
superficial ornaments added to her natural charms and acquired accomplishments,
she may by being exhibited in the most advantageous point of view the more
readily attract the eye of a Shazahdah; a Soubah, or opulent Rajah, or a rich
young libertine amongst the English or French Toppe-wallas in their settlements
at a notch, and by making a signal conquest of a man of fortune secure to
herself and her friends a capital sum of rupees, with rich presents from the
fascinated Syab, whom she has allured with her charms on taking leave; bestowed
as an equivalent for the favors conserved and the sacrifice she has made of her
charms to the lofty borrah Syab or pompous asiatic lord. The two persons
pointed out to represent the two princesses, I have noticed; which with a
spirited young female who was pitched upon to act the part of Zemroode, and two
personable grown women larger than the rest, to do that of Shajahan, the
Emperor and the Priest with two tall palled looking girls who were at hand to
act the parts of the eunuchs, constituted the whole of the persons of the drama.

These leading characters dressed in a more conspicuous manner than the rest of
their comrades, to suit the occasion, advanced in front forming three Typhas,
with Mawtab in the center of the first, Sattarradar in the center of the
second, and Zemroode in the like position with respect to the third, when the
opera opened, and was conducted in the following manner, -- the Typhas thus in
readiness, on the entrance of about ten Mossolljees with their lighted mossalls
blazing in their hands, (which are flambeaux used all over India) fixed in
brass handles, they altered their Typhas, and Mawtab between Settarradar and
Zemroode, in trio, sang a song, the tune of which resembled in some measure the
tune of 'Water parted from the sea,' etc. -- This was accompanied by the
Serindas, Tomtoms, and Beringealls; in the course of which scene the abused
Princesses would interchange frowns and smiles in different cadence, rise and
fall their voices, and modulate them to the different keys or pitch of the
instruments of the band then playing, and to the measure of the tune in hand;
which artfully adapted to the sense of the words, being alto and fortissimo,
where complaints should be expressed in rage, and moderato adagio or piano, in
less irritable altercations when the dialogue was cheerful, etc. etc. All this
while the bodies and limbs of every musician belonging to the band was in
motion, from the Serindawallas down to the Tomtoms and Beringealls; the
Serindawallas notwithstanding the softness with which they drawed their bows
across the strings of their viols, and the delicacy with which they stopped
their fingers, would give at times such sudden exertions of their crests and
shoulders, and violent retrogradations of their elbows, that a spectator who
had never seen them perform before, would imagine they had thrown themselves
into convulsive fits; and the same with the others in the different departments
of their business. The Tomtoms and Beringealls being on opposite sides of the
place, emulated in endeavoring to outdo each other in a variety of odd
positions they put their bodies in, and as uncommon gesticulations they made
with their limbs, and grimaces with their faces, by various aggravations of the
features, and confronting each other like combattants who had entered the lists
to decide some warlike dispute, would begin the contest by mutual nodding,
winking and beckoning across the saloon; after which the Tomtoms perhaps
leading the van for the then present, would with fingers and thumbs (for those
are all the implements they have to extort sounds out of the instruments with)
in order to succeed without failing in the part they were playing at that
particular juncture, shrink their heads to such a degree into the hollow
formed, by shrugging up of the shoulders at the same time, in order to
facilitate and humor the rattling the revillee they were beating with their
fingers on their hollow instruments or Tomtoms, while the Beringealls not idle
on their part, and equally ambitious to demonstrate their abilities, would draw
up their mouths, grin and bite their lips, stare the opposite Tomtoms full in
the face, then grasping their Berringealls, menace with them, seemingly, the
Tomtoms; and continue this sport for some time in the following manner: the
Serindawallas now conjoin both timbrels together, clap them in that position to
one ear, and with incredible rapidity and violence ding for half a minute or
so, then rattle them over their heads, or with less violence when any soft
tender air was playing, gently sound them within a respectful distance of the
Princesses ears; and on a transition of the tune from piano to fortissimo, from
that position that was partly erect, suddenly bending their bodies downwards
with their fists employed as before, as suddenly sweep the surface of the
carpet on which they were standing, and looking eagerly at the performers in
the face, however uneasy the posture they might be in by the unnatural
curvature of their necks; whilst the actresses on their part observing
carefully their quee throughout the different scenes of action, accompanied
this vocal and instrumental music with as great a variety of agreeable
alterations in the disposition of their robes and the inclination of their
heads and elegant positions of their feet and hands and arms; while the veils
all this time, like different colored ensigns and pendants waving about ships
sterns and mast-heads in light intermitting breezes, circumvolving round these
brilliant asiatic actresses in innumerable gyrations, heightened the complexion
of the entertainment, and obliged the company to concur that it transcended any
theatrical performance they ever saw exhibited in Europe. Thus did they
proceed, enveloping and developing themselves with their veils; sometimes
exhibiting to full view their whole persons from top to toe, at others
affording but as transient a glimpse thereof, whilst in a perpetual motion of
their bodies and limbs, without jumping up or down or beating time with their
heels, or crossing over and figuring in, as is done in hornpipes, jiggs, etc.
amongst us, which they would esteem rude in a female to pretend to attempt;
they went through the innumerable evolutions of the dance, to the end of the
piece. This may convey to you a tolerable good idea of what is called in
Indostan a notch; there remains now but to determine what name, with propriety,
might be given to this asiatic entertainment, in English. In treating of it all
along, I have occasionally called it an opera, a dance, or a dramatic
performance, which latter includes all productions of the drama whatever, and a
name general to all theatrical productions, I thought with great propriety
might be applied to a notch: they have all the properties of a dramatic piece,
viz. an history, with an episode, a plot, and a counter-plot, which are well
wound up and concealed, and the characters as well supported and contrived,
replete with variety and incidndence; and the laws of time, place and action,
as minutely observed, inasmuch that were these pieces to be acted in one of the
Theaters in London, by his Majesty's comedians, they would meet with as general
applause as any opera that ever was acted; which latter species of writing I
think they should be classed amongst; but this disadvantage these operas labor
under in Indostan, where no man cannot even as much as ride out in the same
carriage with a female, or sit near her in public, without becoming an object
of ridicule, it would be absurdity then to the last degree, and a subject of
admiration and contempt, to see men and women indiscriminately mixed together
on an occasion like the one I am alluding to; but for a man to offer to kiss a
lady's lips before a company, or take her in his arms, would be an offense that
could not be pardoned, and consequently inadmissable in Indostan; which will
sufficiently account for the women acting the part of men on these occasions,
and the reason they have not public Theaters on purpose for exhibitions of this
nature is as plain. The natives of Indostan fond of permanent things, and
holding all scenery and picturesque representations of palaces and groves as
puerile and tawdry, prefer carrying on their country dissipations in actual
Saloons covered with rich Persian carpets; and superb Varandos, and natural
august groves formed by nature, with some elegant edifice therein to retire to;
and flattering myself that you will side with me in opinion of the rectitude of
the Indostan gentry, in these last particulars, and in that of their notches
being dramatic pieces that may come within the description of comic operas, I
will conclude and bid you adieu.

No. 10. GEORGE C*******, esquire Athy, in Ireland.
Plassay Garden-House.
I Have now been in the country a considerable time, and a long intercourse
with the natives, added to the knowledge I have acquired of the language,
enables me to judge for myself in matters I was before obliged to be guided by
others in: I can maintain a conversation with any people I have business with,
dictate a letter, or listen to a history while reading to me, without being at
a loss to understand its meaning; and it being a fine evening, I have been
solacing myself in the varando of Plassey garden-house, and satisfying my
curiosity in visiting the particular spots on these plains that Plassey gives
name to, that have became the most remarkable and in a manner eminent for some
important incident at the battle that was fought on them by major Clive, when
he engaged the Soubah Serujahdowlah, where, after completely defeating him,
this unhappy Prince in his flight fell a victim to the private resentment of a
fellow of low stamp, who for theft some time before, had his ears cropped by
order of his highness. A number of particulars were related to me concerning
this battle, by some people who attended this garden-house, I have mentioned
that perhaps I might transmit to you as matters that have escaped the
observation of other writers, but shall decline it, I think, and prefer filling
my letters with my own observations, and proceed in giving you an account of my
voyage to this place from Calcutta. On the eve of my departure from
Fort-William, being employed to assist in a branch of a survey that was to be
made in the province of Dacca and Chittagan, which latter place is at the
bottom of the bay of Bengal, I was furnished with a Budgero, or rather allowed
the hire of one I had bought a little before, a large Dinghy, with two
cook-boats to carry and to dress the victuals in, and cook in besides when we
should not make fast at some Got, or run up some creek in the evenings, as is
customary, with a little boat to pass and repass from the shore to the larger
boats. In this Budgero I had embarked my Palanquin and equipage in general, my
naval and military department and household, if I may be allowed to use such
lofty distinctions in so humble a sphere as I revolve in. My military consisted
of an Huvledar and fifteen Seapoys, with their arms and ammunition, and two
field pieces, four Gollandashes; which with two Classees, my Mangy and sixteen
Dandees to govern and row the Budgero, and a Mangy and sixteen Dandees to the
Dinghies, with five men to each cook-boat besides, completed my naval force;
my own private equipage and attendants were as follow, a new and handsome
Palanquin, with silver dolphin's head and tail in their proper place, a
sprightly sizeable tarsy horse, that cost me about fifteen hundred rupees, with
European bridle and saddle and furniture, constituted my equipage; and my
attendance were in the order and rank I have below placed them, leaving them to
you to enumerate, -- Ramramboss my Banyan, a Bramin and of course a Gentoo,
Syedillykan my Munsee or Persian schoolmaster to teach me to write and read
the Persian language; Mamadkan my Consommah or butler, and under him a Bobbojan
or cook, and a Couragebadar or market man, a Kittysawl boy to carry my
umbrello, a Pankahbadar or fan-man, a Chowzeebadar, a little Callofringhy boy,
two Mossowljees or flambeaux-men, a Mattarrany or woman room sweeper, a
Sardar-bearer, and under him eight others, making nine bearers in all to carry
my Pallanquin. The above were Ballasore bearers, which are the best of bearers,
being remarkable for their activity, strength and cleanliness; add to these an
Hookerbadar and his assistant or man, and boy to take care of and trim my
Indostan pipe; an Hadgeam or barber, a Doben or washer-man, a Durrahwan or
porter to watch the door, a Fruss to brush my clothes and furniture, a
Sitrigebadar or carpet-man, and a Hallacors, completed the whole of my
domestics. -- The residue of my train being of quite a different stamp, as
likewise the offices they filled, I shall place them apart: -- imprimis, a
Chubdar; secondly, two Peuns, and thirdly, two Harcarars. The business of the
Chubdar was to announce the arrival of any person, and to usher him in, if
permitted, who, as an emblem of his authority carries a Bamboo-mace in hand,
covered with silver. The Peuns are a specious of military men, and are armed
with daggers, swords and shields, and act the part of body guards. The
Harcarars, who are Hendoos, are employed in no other service than that of
delivering letters and messages, though it is part of the duty of either of the
former to do either, or to arrest men they have controversial business with,
collateral to this equipage and to these attendants. My Banyan, Munsy, and
Consommah, Chubdar and Peuns, had theirs; the Banyan had his Hackerries,
Palanquin and Tanyon, or mountain horse, with double the number of servants;
for being a Bramin, his daily bathings, libations and different calls of
religion exacted a greater number of attendants than had he been of any other
tribe or cast. The Munsy had his Tanyon, his Hookerbadar and Syss, and one half
of the servants at least each another servant to attend him. My traveling
utensils and furniture, were as follow, -- a tea equipage, in camp baskets
covered with red leather, and carried by Bearers on Bamboo poles, when
traveling by land; my wines in ditto, a silver Hooker, a Gallab perch,
Chowrees, Punkahs, Chillam and Chillamchee, two Pig Dannies See Glossary for
explanation of the above articles.
and cooking utensils.

With this luggage, navigation and attendants, having every thing in readiness
to depart early in the morning, I proceeded up the river, and in ranging the
shore along passed by Bogbuzar, Barnagore, Chitpore, and several other
intermediate little hamlets and buzars. Bog Buzar is about two coss from
Calcutta, and is where the company manufacture their gunpowder. Barnagore is
two coss farther up the river and belongs to the Dutch, who have a
counting house there and a large flag-staff to hoist their colors on. Above
Barnagore is Chitpore, an Hindoo hamlet, remarkable for having been the spot
where Serajahdowlk's army encamped when he marched against Calcutta and sacked
it, which as an event that proved fatal to a number of Englishmen, and by which
the company sustained a considerable loss, though related by Mr. Holwell in very
striking and pathetic terms, who was then upon the spot, and narrowly escaped
with his life, as a matter strictly connected with the subjects I am treating
of; in my own words, and from accounts collected by myself I will relate.

Serajahdowlah, the Soubah of Bengal, a young voluptuous prince, too apt to be
influenced by the advice of sycophants, in consequence of repeated complaints
made to him of the English merchants encroachments on the lands, stands in
buzars, wharves, rotts, and harboring places of the Moors and Gen^^^s, his
subjects, in the neighborhood of Calcutta, and at other of their settlements:
likewise of the increase of cannon on the walls of their factories added to
their repeated peremptory refusals of payments of certain customs, that
independent of their exempts of duties from the Sircar, the Soubah thought
himself entitled to, and their having confined and punished a Patan for some
slight offense he had given one of the companies factors, and was then in
actual service of the Nabob, a fellow who likewise had served him in his
pleasures on repeated occasions. Serajahdowlah resenting this behavior, and
wishing to pay his eastern territories a visit, having the expulsion of the
English in view, with a large army of Indostan cavalry marched from Muxadabads
to Chitpore, where he encamped; when the chief of the English settlement,
apprised of his approach, dispatched one of his factors to know the reason of
such an oftensible appearance, but the messenger being treated cheap, and
receiving no satisfactory answer, returned to Calcutta; and the Soubah's army
approaching, some of the English inhabitants saved themselves with what effects
they could muster on board the ships in the river, while the chief, with Mr.
Holwell, and a few of their acquaintance, planted at the most eligible passes
of the town, four or five pieces of cannon, and stood ready to oppose their
entrance, and on their striving to force their way sword in hand, the English
killed a considerable number of their horse, and made such a devastation
amongst them, that had there been but people sufficient to supply their
artillery and ammunition in proportion, they would have, as it was thought,
frustrated their designs so far as to have withdrawn the most valuable of their
effects, and secured them on board the shipping; but fatigued with the working
and loading of their guns, without necessary reliefs, etc. they were obliged to
fly and retreat into the old fort and other recesses of the town for safety,
when the Soubah entering with his troops, they plundered the houses and stores,
and ended the evening in the ruin of Calcutta and the death of one hundred and
forty-five Englishmen, who were suffocated during the night, in a place called
the black-hole, fronting the interior gate of the old fort. This melancholy
affair was ascribed to the rash and premeditated orders of the Nabob: It Is as
customary in writing or speaking of a Soubah, to style him Nabob as Soubah.
but without palliating the matter or exculpating him from blame, this was the
case as represented to me, by people of undoubted veracity, who were witnesses
to the whole transaction. Some of the stores taking fire in the old fort after
the enemy had possessed themselves of the place, the English who were then
under a guard, alarmed for their safety and not knowing but the incineration
was done designedly, in order to get rid of them by burning them in their
barracks, forced their way out, and being seized on by the Seapoys, they were
clapped into the black hole, a dark subterranean dungeon belonging to the fort,
about 20 feet square, which had but one small window to let the air in, below
the level of the ground, and secured with iron bars; where the closeness of the
place and the want of water, and fresh air for respiration, one hundred and
forty-five of them perished as above mentioned. The dimensions of the place
were unknown to the officer of Seapoys who commanded the party that had
imprisoned these Europeans, and when application was to have been made to the
Soubah, for to exchange their place of confinement, he had unfortunately
retired within the precincts of his Zunnannah, where it was impracticable to
have access to him, or the untimely death of these unhappy men might, it is
probable, have been prevented; but neither that step nor several others that
Mr. Holwell, who escaped the fate of his comrades, had taken for their
preservation, answered any essential purpose. The Soubah immerged in his
pleasures, and his troops employed, some in resting themselves and others in
dividing their spoils, the repeated cries of the prisoners, panting and gasping
for air and water, unattended to, they died in a heap, in the happening of
which catastrophe, if the Soubah was reprehensible in any thing, it was the
little attention, it is said, he paid to the news that was brought him the
morning following of the death of these people, when it was suggested he would
have punished the commandant of Seapoys for his remissness in not examining
into the size of the prison before he ordered such a number of men into
confinement; but calling for his Hooker, whilst smoking it, instead of
attending to the matter in question, though serious enough in its nature to have
exacted a greater share of his attention, he satisfied himself with saying,
Allap kuhhookum, i. e. The will of God. Waw toppee walla kuh nasseeb, and the
hat men's lot; some weeks after which he returned toward his capitol, thinking
he had effectually routed the English out of his dominions, but disappointed in
that, and the immense quantity of riches he thought to have possessed himself
of, by surprising and plundering Calcutta, which was, if not a primary, a
secondary motive for his making this descent: provoked at his disappointment
and the fallacious representations which had been made to him of the wealth of
this settlement, he determined on making an example of the person who had
infused those notions into his head, and sending a messenger for the identical
man, a fellow who under the color of religion had acquired the character of a
pious and sincere Mohammedan, though in fact an hypocrite and deceiver, taxing him
with his imposture, ordered him to be strangled and thrown into an old tomb on
the road side, as he was on his march within about four or five coss of his
capital, with an alcoran that he had clasped to his breast, and a bunch of
beads in his hands that he had used to carry continually about him. This
unfortunate Mussulman having been informed by Fakirs and other emigrants of as
little credibility, that the Toppee Wallas at Calcutta possessed immense riches
in their stores, though but merely chimeras, infused into his brain by these
itinerant enthusiastics, he to flatter the ideas of the prince and to induce
him to plunder a place, in the despoiling of which he guessed he might have
become a gainer (in a private audience he had demanded of him) imparted those
matters to him as facts, induced him to precipitate a step he might otherwise
probably have declined.

These anecdotes I thought proper to introduce, as they contribute to show the
temper of this man, and to point out by what an unexpected chain of events the
credit of the English factors in Bengal was re-established, and the overthrow
of this restless young Prince brought about; who not many months after fell a
victim to the resentment of the English, by their contrivance, and lost his
life in a disgraceful manner in the fray, for major Clive arriving with
commodore Watson, from Europe, he engaged one Mere Jaffier Alli Kan, a Syed of
some repute, who was then a general under the Soubah, to head an army against
his master, in consort with the Company's forces, then consisting of about 600
Europeans and a small train of artillery, headed by major Clive, who having
previously agreed to give this Mere Jaffier the Soubahship of Bengal for his
services, with this Indostan army and European detachment they gained the
plains of Plassey, situate on the banks of a branch of the river Hughly, about
thirty coss from Calcutta, and twenty coss from Muxadabad's, where the Nabob
was encamped with an army of a thousand cavalry and infantry, besides a large
train of artillery posted to advantage in the topes of Plassey; which Clive's
army approaching, and beginning to annoy with their field pieces, the Soubah's
forces sallying out, headed by himself, and the confederate troops advancing at
the same time, a general engagement took place; when the Soubah's troops unable
to withstand the brisk fire of the English platoons and artillery, giving way,
they were soon put to flight, and quit the field with a considerable loss
sustained on their side; when Jaffier Ally Kan, in whose name the battle was
fought, having gained a complete victory through the craftiness of Clive, in
front of the two armies, was proclaimed Soubah, and conducted to Muxadabads to
take the place on the musnud of the vanquished Prince, who had exalted him to
great honors, and entrusted him with the second in command of his troops; when
Serajahdowlah, averse to falling into the hands of the enemy, not trusting to
his elephant or a horse that was offered him to retreat on, he dismounted and
concealed himself in a valley of thickets, where being discovered and known by
a man he had not many months before punished by cropping his ears, this
vindictive Moorman recollecting the injury, taking him by surprise, split his
scull with a battle-ax, and afterward cut his head off and carried it to
Jaffier Ally Kan. -- From Chitpore, in my Budgero, to Sirampore, a danish
settlement about four coss to the northward of Chitpore, during this interval,
my time was employed in viewing the different scenes that successively
presented themselves as the Budgero was tracted by Coolies up the river; a
method adopted by all the navigators of the great Ganges, and its largest or
inferior branches; the rapidity of all which streams are so great that no boat
with wind alone, except in the months of November, December and January and
February, when southerly winds set in, whose influence extends more or less to
some distance up the country during about four months of the year, one half of
which it will, as observed, at times blow fresh enough to send even heavy laden
burs up the Ganges, against a very strong current, without tracting, but the
only certain dependence of getting up the Ganges, the river Hughly and the
Gogra, and in short up all the rivers that are frequented by boats of trade and
passage in this country, being by tracting, a method from time immemorial used
in these parts, the Dandies and Mangies, and people who have the conduct of
these boats, having a very successful knack in tracting them, as matters that
might tend to the information of future European or American adventurers
disposed to direct their pursuits toward these parts, I will describe their
method: they have small but well made cotton lines, about three times the
thickness of whip-cord; these lines they fasten to the vessel's mainmast-head,
after reeving them through smooth thimbles or rings that are spliced into lines
that can occasionally be cast off or hauled down to the vessel's bow, as may be
required to keep her from (what in the sea phrase is called) shearing broad off
from the shore, which without this prevention they would be very apt to do.
These lines are always made of a sufficient strength to sustain any jerk they
may receive from a sudden zigzag motion of the vessel, when repelled on the bow
or the quarter by the violent retrograde direction of the stream, and long
enough to afford a sufficient scope for the vessel to keep always at a safe and
convenient distance from the strand, and equally to admit of six, ten, fifteen
or twenty coolies, more or less as may be required, to haul the vessel along
shore by this tracting line, which coolies, the conductors of boats belonging
to the Company in Bengal, are never at a loss to obtain; a Harcarar being
sufficient at any time, or on any occasion, to supply that defecct by only
showing himself in the out-skirts of a town, or village, and calling out
Begary! Begary! When whether Zemindars busied in making or repairing their
granaries, in grinding grain or sugar canes, howing, harrowing or ploughing, or
mechanics of any denomination whatever, weavers, masons, carpenters, smiths,
tailors, and in short, men of all the above descriptions, at the signal given
for Begaries, must quit their respective occupations, however deeply engaged in
them, and away with the Harcarars to draw the Toppee Wallas boats along, or if
traveling by land, to carry their luggage, in as much that the loom,
agriculture, mechanics with all its branches, must be thrown aside till the
Company is served; and as a discovery of the least repugnancy to obeying these
unreasonable orders of the folks belonging to these Top Wallas, be attended
with smart Chaw Bucking (i. e. whipping) these subordinated people knowing the
consequences of hesitation or being refractory, on the appearance of the
abovementioned emissaries, will flock round them with submission till they
shall have assembled perhaps double the number wanted, when one half of those
there should be no need of: on their bribing the Harcaras or Seapoys with two
or three rupees, or more or less, in proportion to their number and
circumstances, will be dismissed, and those that are detained frequently
stripped of their turbans, which will be lodged on board as forfeitures, in
case they should give them the slip. These Coolies will tract the boats from
the place they were taken from to the next habited spot, let the distance be
long or short, when the same steps will be taken to obtain fresh hands, and the
last catched Coolies after sallaming released, it being an established custom
amongst the inhabitants of this country, never to leave a person he has been
treating with or been employed by, without Sallaming him first, and these
Coolies, according to custom of the country; on parting will be very strenuous
in obtruding their Sallams to the Peuns, Harcarars and Seapoys, or any of the
attendants belonging to the boats they had been tracting, though in return to
their compliments they will be sure to meet with abuse. These Indostan
hirelings under the Company valuing themselves on the important offices they
fill, imagine they show their consequence by treating the inhabitants cheap, as
verified, not only in this instance, but in others, will generally return their
compliments with kicks and cuffs. -- I shall now return to the thread of my
narrative and continuing my account of my voyage up the river Hughly to Plassey.

Our proximity to the shore in sailing along, afforded me all the opportunity I
could wish to survey the country, its buildings, animal and vegetable produce;
the images of which are lively in my mind, I think I see them now in the
Budgero I then was in. Figure to yourself a large river, bounded by a flat
sandy beach, with a bank of tough earth and clay cut through with gutters
running in an oblique direction to the front, made by the descent of the waters
during the rains, at a distance sufficient to admit two or three carriages
driving abreast between it and the stream, and you will have a tolerable good
idea of the side of the river. The country, which is in general level from
Calcutta to Muxadabads, runs back in plains to a considerable distance till it
meets the Burampore hills, and others that divide it from the southern
provinces and the Decan, which interspersed with little groves and lone trees
here and there in the midst of fields and verdant plains, gives it a rural and
pleasing prospect. These lands are of a rich soil, and favorable to the
production of grain or vegetables, and the trees in general are as friendly in
bearing variety of fruits.

The groves I mentioned are of the utmost utility to the country and its
inhabitants; -- in them the Mahometans and Gentoos have their places of
worship, Mosques and Pagodas, public Bagnios and wells, or reservoirs of water.
If a Mosque, and situate in one of these groves, a Fakir or a Peerzadah will
have his abode there, and sometimes six or seven others of the same
denomination with him, constant residents, and perhaps proprietors by
inheritance or by purchase; Mahometans and Gentoos both frequently buying of
the Sircar districts for an abode during life or pleasure, in one of these
shady, solitary or frequented spots. If the grove is occupied by a Gentoo
Fakir, a Bramin or Byrahghy, it is as likely he may be accompanied by some of
his sect as not, but seldom or ever a Fakir, whether Gentoo or Mohammedan, is
without a man or a boy to keep his company and attend him. In these groves, let
the proprietor be what sect he will, an alter will be erected of mud, brick or
stone, with a turret over the platform, and a pedestal for an alcoran to lie
on, if a Mussulman; and if a Hendou, there will be in the place of an alcoran
the figures of a Branim, Braminbull, Jaggernaut, or Krisnou Swamey, hewed in
stone or cut in wood. These Fakers making these places their constant home,
have likewise at least a little shade made of thatch, to keep of the dew whilst
sleeping, and a kind of a cook-room to put their utensils in, with a fireplace
adjacent to dress their victuals at; which fireplace being nothing but three
lumps of baked clay stuck on the surface of a little terras of the same
material, rose about two inches from the ground, that they smooth at the top by
wetting their hands and then rubbing them over it 'till it is even, are made
with little trouble; so that a traveller can be provided with victuals, be
accommodated with a fireplace, with wood for fuel; which article can also be
obtained as readily, it being scattered all over the country amongst the bushes
and trees; fire is likewise to be had at these Fakir's stands, as they never
are without tinder, flints and matches. -- These groves serve likewise for the
cattle to retreat to in the middle of the day, as well as all kinds of
repositories for travelers: in the neighborhood of large towns or villages,
or in the vicinity of thick settled parts of the country, these groves, with
which all Indostan is shaded, are the spots fixed upon for their most superb
Pagodas and Mosques, particularly the latter, in Bengal, where the Gentoo
religion has from immemorial and centuries back, had such innumerable
adherents, and where Brumma being perhaps born, and his doctrine first
originated, the discipline of it has since been so tenaciously observed; which
together with the number of rich, superstitious Hindoos, who at the instances
of the Bramins, and as munificent and liberal Rajahs, that during their lives
and at their deaths bequeathed as many more for the same purpose; together with
the innumerable donations from the various resort of the Hindoo tribes, who
from all parts of Indostan annually flock down to the Pagodas to pay their
devotions and complete the different vows they have made to their respective
divinities, by way of expiation for their sins, may account principally for
these temples being in greater number in Bengal than in any other part of
Indostan. -- The superb appearance of which buildings, situated amidst these
verdant groves, excited my curiosity to take a closer view of them,
(particularly a remarkable large one about half way between Syram Pore and
Chandernegore). I quit my Budgero, and with my Banyan and Munsy, made a little
incursion from the place we landed at, ordering the boats to proceed up to
Hugly, and directed our steps toward this Indian temple, It stood in the
middle of a large grove of mangoe trees, the fruit of which being ripe, and
some of them presented us by a Bramin, attendant on this building, we ate of
them and I thought it delicious fruit. An avenue cut through this grove lead up
to the front of the Pagoda, a very lofty pile, and of some considerable
magnitude. It stood on an oblong platform of bricks, with a revetement of fine
white Chunnan about six feet rose from the surface of a large esplanade
pavement, composed of the same materials, that extended every way about forty
yards from this platform. On the platform, which I take to have been thirty
yards by sixty, was erected the temple, consisting of one complete square, and
a lofty hall in the midst, included within four larger exterior apartments that
had all arched entrances at right angles, with little columns at their
gate-ways or entrances, whose pedestals were demi-urns cut through the
conjugate diameter of their out-lines, and inverted, which met pine apples
rector on the top, from the bases of which ran diminishing regularly upwards,
fluted columns that met capitals corresponding with whole pines above, with a
cornish that in the larger columns went round the building both within and
without side these apartments, were niches in the walls, with seats large
enough for to sit down cross-legged; and another story above this were
correspondent apartments, much in the same style, but with the addition of a
gallery that went all round and was ornamented with balconies that projected
considerably without the main body of the building. The second story was flat,
and above it ran the upper part of the Pagoda, in form of a pyramid, with a
number of narrow niches and arched slips and peep holes in it; in which was
hung, according to the custom of all the large Pagoda's, a set of bells about
the size of ting-tangs, that the Gentoos ring on festivals. On the sides and
angles of this upper terras, were other less spires and turrets, with a
bullastrade all round, and little balconies at convenient intervals, without
which, supported by a double colonade of large pillars, whose pedestals met the
out-line of the main oblong platform below, was carried round on a flat roof
parade, covered with cement, about thirty feet in breadth and two hundred and
forty feet in length, the two longest sides which was screened with a wall of
six feet in height, divided into niches and arched windows, filled up with
chequers, or brick work, like pidgeon holes, that let in the light, and
answered the purposes of windows. Upon this wall, at equal distances, stood
urns and pine apples, and both within and without, in every other nich, in has
relief, were the figuers of men, some mounted on bulls, others on rams, and
others on fishes, peacocks and Braminy kites, with a variety of other
extravagant representations of men with enormous heads and large eyes, and a
number of hands and arms projecting out from their bodies, with figures
representing demons, with horns to their heads and claws to their hands and
feet, and wings to their bodies, with the ugliest aspects can be conceived, all
which were characters taken out of the Hindoo's holy writ. The Vidam and
Shastra which matters were learnedly expatiated on by my Banyan and a Bramin
belonging to the Pagoda, that accompanied me as a virtuoso and antiquarian, to
explain the inscriptions that were written under many pieces of statuary, and
tell me in brief, the names and histories of the various idols with which the
walls of this Indian temple were invested; that he did indeed extremely to my
satisfaction. From this gallery I had a nearer view of the upper part of the
Pagoda, that diminished by degrees into a point, in about the proportion of the
pictures of the pyramids of Egypt. On the top of which pyramid was a large gilt
copper flat-rim forming a circle of about four feet diameter, traversed cross
wise with two other flat pieces of gilt copper, the same dimensions of the
outward rim, which was fixed with its plain perpendicular to that of the
horizon (facing the east) on an iron rod, measuring ten feet from a gilded ball
it passed through. On the upper part of this circle was a figure, resembling a
trident, with this difference, that it had five prongs on which were inscribed
five black letters, in the character of the Shastrah, which were the initials
of five mysterious cabalistical names, viz. Shey Ou Dee Ou Dee, the sense of
which is only known to the Bramins; and every cupola, dome or spire, belonging
to the building, had these prongs on their tops, or the holy leaf of the Peepal
tree -- a tree held in such veneration amongst the Hindoos that they never
wound its body or presume to pluck a leaf from its boughs; only daring to take
them up when they fall, or are blown down by the wind: and as a greater
argument of the important lights it is considered in by these people, a Gentoo
to swear by this leaf, whether the oath he takes be administered to him by a
Bramin in a court of judicature, or on a less public occasion, it is held as
sacred as though he had sworn by the holy water of the Ganges.

The large pillars that went round the building were much in the same style as
those small ones I have already described, forming lofty and spacious Varandos
on all sides of the Pagoda. In the four sides of the building were four
porticoes, supported by eight pillars on each side, projecting out from the
range of their respective calonades, square with the flights of steps that lead
up to the platform on which the main body of the building stood with balconies
and cupaloes over them.

In the center of the middle chapel there was erected an altar, on which stood
the figure of a bull sitting, with four small bull calves at the corners, in
butting positions: the Gentoos worshipping these idols, it is customary for them
to accompany their adorations with offerings of Ghee, milk, honey, cream,
sugar, sweetmeats and money, which offerings being brought from all parts
adjacent to the Pagodas, by the inhabitants, a considerable quantity of
donations daily are accumulated, which moneys and vegetable food these
inanimate bulls and calves having no need of, fall to the lot of more rational
creatures, viz. Bramins, who frequent, and in a manner reside in these places
of worship, a part of which will be bestowed by them on the Byraghees that
occasionly visit these temples, and make them places of temporary abode.
Fronting the entrance of the middle chapel was a gygantic figure of Jagernaut,
to whom the Pagoda is dedicated, and in niches in the other sides of it, were,
in a less proportion, the representation of the various births, lives, and
transmigrations of Chrisnou Swamey, from his first being born of a woman, and
then transmigrated into a hog, and from that into a fish, until his translation
to heaven according to the Shastrah.

Without the whole pile of building on the angles of the esplanade were four
elegant little Pagodas, in the form of Pentagons, with gilded spires and prongs
on their tops, resembling those on the larger pyramid. Having sufficiently
satisfied my curiosity in the examination of this temple, accompanied by my
Banyan and a few attendants, I proceeded in my Palanquin to Chandernagore, the
head settlement belonging to the French, in Bengal, where I was received with
politeness by mons. Jean Babtist Chevalier, the then governor, and some
gentlemen of his factory; and passed from thence to Chinchura, the first Dutch
presidency in Bengal, and met my Budgero and people at Hughly, a large town
belonging to the Nabob, about four coss to the northward of Chandernagore,
where resides a Fazdar. -- This city is situated on the banks of the river it
gives name to; it is very populous, but the streets irregular, and the houses
in general in decay; but commanding a pass, the Nabob, and Company, have their
Choques there to examine the Dustocks, and take duties, -- the latter having
erected a battery there to command respect, as it is one of the greatest
thorough-fares by land and water between Calcutta and Patna. All the Burrs
laden with salt, transient Budgeroes, Dinghees and fleets of boats laden with
goods, going up or coming down the river Hughly, being obliged to send off a
Nabob's or Company's Dustock, or hawl along side the got, and be examined by
the Choques, fixed there to collect the customs. It being about sun set when I
arrived there, I quit my Palanquin and went on board my Budgero, where I had
not been long before a Chubdar from the Fazdar brought in his master's Sallam
with a customary present, called in India Meersmahny; consisting of goats,
fowls, eggs, ghee, butter, sugar, milk, fruit, sweetmeats, and twenty rupees
in cash. This custom of sending presents to travelers of any credit, from the
chief man of the town, on the first of their arrival, in proportion to the rank
they discover they bear, is as ancient as laudable, as invariably observed
throughout Indostan by both Mahometans and Gentoos, who daily send eatables to
their respective places of worship in the towns or villages they belong to, for
the supply of the various tribes of itinerant Fakirs, or pilgrims and fanatics,
who traverse the boundaries of this extensive empire, viz. Hadgees, Hafusts,
Taveegewallas, Hackeems, amongst the Mussulmen, and amongst the Hindoos,
Bramins, Byraghees, Bambollahnautmen; either of which sects, without infringing
on the rigid precepts of their respective religions, by which means, from the
mouth of the great Ganges to the westernmost limits of Indostan, a distance of
fifteen hundred miles, and from Cape Comorin, the southern promontory of this
empire, to the foot of the mountains of Thibet, in length two thousand miles,
can the wearied traveller find a place to repose in, and sustenance as well as
the wealthy merchant, or Sardar, in this country, who though pagans and
infidels, their predominant characteristics notwithstanding, are unparalleled
urbanity and hospitality.

After returning my compliments to the Fasdar, it being new moon, which had
just made its appearance, my Munsy, Banyan and attendants, with their hands
spread out and Rupees in them, looking up to the lunar orb, began to mutter
(the Mussulmans in Arabic, and the Gentoos in the language of the Shastrah)
prayers, seemingly of congratulations for the return of this brilliant
concomitant; when the Mussulmans, as usual, beginning their prayers with the
words bissimallah! nirrouhah, alloim! and ending aloud with the words an
sharlot allah! whilst the Gentoos called out as loud in the language of the
Shastrah, krisnou govendro ram ram! hurreekus houry houry! -- This done they
sallamed me, and my Banyan, on the part of the Gentoos, presented me with a
stem of Indian corn, and the Mussulmans with a saucer full of grated cheese and
sugar candy; which carries this emblem with it, that salt and sweets go
together; whilst the Gentoo gifts implies a wish for the increase and
multiplying the human species. After this the Mossalljees lighted their
mossalls, and my Banyan, Munsy and attendants, sallamed me anew and retired.
The new moon as one of the most adjacent and conspicuous orbs in the creation,
the Asiatics, both Mahometans and Gentoos, celebrate its appearance with
remarkable solemnity, making it as a general rule when night comes on to light
their lamps, tapers and flambeauxs, and at the same time to pay their
compliments to their masters. I was at last left alone but soon interrupted by
the appearance of a well dressed, handsome fellow, perhaps twenty years of age,
who brushing by the Chubdar and a Seapoy that attended, and presented me with a
Rupee as a Nazur, which I accepted, and asking his business, he was interrupted
in his answer by the harsh language and frowns of my Chubdar and a Seapoy; who
displeased perhaps more at his having got access to me without a silver pass,
than at his audacity in approaching without their leave, began to reprimand
him, and were for turning him out, but I detained him and bid them desist, when
my servants interfering again, notwithstanding the countenance I had already
shown this fellow, and provoked with the business they knew he had come upon,
told me he was a Burawwaw, i. e. a pimp, and that I must permit them to drive
him away, when without any further ceremony they dismissed him, by which visit
I discovered the large cities in Indostan were no more than those in Europe
destitute of Mercuries for the negotiation of business carried on incognito.

No. 11. OLIVER *********, esquire in the Temple, London.
Plassey Garden-House.
I WAS happy to understand by your letter from Blackheath that my Hooker got
safe as I directed, and that you received the little alcoran, the piece of the
Shastrah, and Mallabar letter, written with an iron skewer on a couple of palm
leaves, that I sent you; they will serve you as specimens of their writing and
the different characters they use, until an opportunity offers to transmit you
some account of their language. I repent I did not address my letters to but
one person alone, instead of distributing them amongst a number of my
acquaintance; but that would have prevented my keeping my promise with them
all. Should they swell out big enough to form a little volume -- should I live
to return to the Western Hemisphere, perhaps I may publish them. In the interim
they must remain in different hands as directed. I was relating the account of
my passage from Calcutta to Hugly, by land and water, where I had arrived, and
remained all night with a few Seapoys and attendants, in boats on a branch of a
survey I had set off to assist in. In the morning by day light, the boats cast
loose and tracted up the river, and next morning arrived at the place I date my
letter from.

On my arrival at the Got I saw a greater number of people than ordinary in a
cluster, a little above the landing, when I took a walk to the spot to see on
what occasion they had gathered together; it was a Gentoo, a man of the Bramin
cast, who had died about an hour before, whose corpse they had conveyed to the
water side, to perform his obsequies rites over a pile, which was made of dry
sticks and pieces of Bamboo that was about five feet above the ground, in the
construction of which a kind of order seemed to have been aimed at, by their
having laid the sticks as nigh as they could in squares, and crossed them with
others in the diagonals; the lower part of which pile was limited by two long
Bamboos and two short ones, forming a long square, and between this bottom and
the top were parallel to those at equal intervals, two sets more of such
Bamboos placed in the like manner, and another correspondent set of Bamboos
above all, which were fastened with lines leading across the main body of the
pile. On this was laid the corpse extended, and an earthen pot, filled with
water that having been mixed with the water of the holy Ganges, became by
confluence and adoption both related to the sacred stream. The widow and her
children, with all the female relations, stood apart on the left side of the
hill, and the male relations opposite to them on the right side: a Bramin then
pulled off his Lungah, as did the eldest son of the deceased, (a boy about 11
years of age) when both he and the Bramin, after pouring the water out of their
Loutahs over their heads and bodies, and making libations by pouring water
likewise into the river, and some into the palms of their hands, muttering in a
low key, with great precipitation at the same time, a number of words, and at
intervals holding their hands toward the sun, and locking the backs of their
hands together by interlinking their fingers and thumbs in the manner baskets
are begun at the making of their handles, and forming therewith a variety of
circumplications, which part of the ceremony over, the Bramin, with an air of
true solemnity, addressing himself to Bogwan, i. e. the supreme God, with his
eyes and hands directed toward heaven, expatiated in truly philosophic terms,
on the shortness of life -- the certainty of death -- the expediency of making
the most of our time, and improving the gifts of nature, by the contemplation
of sublime things and the conquering our passions, that when transmigrated into
another body; whether the body of a reptile, a bird, or a beast, which ever it
should please Bogwan, the ruler of all things, to send the fugitive soul into,
by having been habituated to restriction it might undergo the next change with
less pain or uneasiness, which in comparison to the changes that have already
happened, in created existencies since the creation, and future ones that would
take place before the ultimate and general translation of souls into celestial
bodies and classes; and conjunction of spirits was no more than a grain of sand
compared to the mountains of sand that line the seas and dreary deserts. It
behoved man, as he had observed, to be prepared for such vicissitudes, that by
a speedy gradation of purifications, obtained by the observance of the above
precepts, they might the sooner attain to perfect felicity, as the soul was
immortal and incapable of annihilation, and would in the end join with Bogwan,
the creator of all things. The similarity of which doctrine to that contained
in the metempsychosis of Pythagoras, render it highly probable to have
originated therefrom; which oration over, the Bramin whispered the son of the
deceased in the ear, who immediately took from one of the company, with his
left hand that he put behind his back, a whisp of straw, whilst in the other
hand he held a fire brand, both which he kept apart by extending his arms at
the full length; when the Bramin taking a new Gennony, or Bandelier, that he
took from off his own neck and shoulders, and putting it over the departed
Bramin's, he took the earthen pot of holy water, springled him with it, and
dashing it afterward into the river, made a signal to light the pile, which
the youth did in an instant, on which the relations and friends approaching,
each throwing an handful of rosin mixed with frankincense, on it, while the
Bramin called out aloud, Hourrykas, Hourrykas, Krisnou Govendro, Ram Ram, --
which words, the spectators all joining in and repeating, amidst these
invocations, the pile rapidly taking fire, the corpse presently burnt up to
cinders, and the company went singing a plaintive song to the house of the
deceased.

No. 12. GEORGE CHAPMAN, esquire Athy, in Ireland.
Muxedabads, the capital of Bengal.
YOUR curiosity has been excited at my relating to you the manner the Spaniards
fight the bulls at Barcelona, Valentia, Malaga, and other parts in Spain; I
will now give you an account of a fight I was witness to last week, of
elephants, rhinoceroses, tigers, and wild buffaloes. The Nabob was visited by a
brother of the Nizam, and some other men of distinction from the Decan, at the
same time, and meaning to compliment them with an elephant fight, amongst other
diversions he gave orders to that effect, and preparations were made
accordingly. At the foot of the city of Muxadabads runs a little river that
divides it from Moradbaugh, a village on the opposite shore, remarkable for the
number of beautiful gardens and pleasure houses of former Nabobs and great men,
viz. Jaggertfeet, reputed to be the richest banker in the world, and other
opulent men, living and deceased. In the kingdom of Bengal, on the eastern side
of this rivulet, stands the killah or palace of the Soubah, a large pile of
buildings, or rather concatenation of buildings, constituted of a number of
large courts or squares that contains the Zunnannahs, Seapoys barracks, parks
of artillery, arsenals, stables, and elephant stands, and all the different
offices belonging to the Sircar of the Soubah; fronting which rivulet, over a
gateway, were a number of galleries and a large balcony that had communication
with one of the Soubah's presence-chambers; opposite to which, on the other
side of the river, was a sandy plain about half a mile in length and one eighth
in breadth, bounded by a stout high garden-wall that ran partly parallel to the
edge of the river, perpendicular to which a line of houses run down to the
waterside, which with several horsemen, and men on camels, and footmen
together, that were assembled on the southernmost part of the plain, formed an
oblong square in the front of the opposite palace; the inside of which being
reserved for the combatants, it was kept clear by the horsemen, who kept
galloping up and down for that purpose; which crowd with the populace on the
top of the garden walls, and those that filled the windows and apartments of
the houses to the northward, and the balcony and galleries of the palace,
comprehended the whole number of spectators, and composed an amazing concourse
of people. The combat was to begin at eight o'clock in the morning, at which
time the Soubah, magnificiently dressed, appeared with his company, and Aumeers
attending him, in the balcony described; when the nobut that had been playing
ceased, and a discharge of artillery was made, it being the concerted signal
for the fighting elephants to begin the combat; a female elephant, by her
driver, was then pushed on to the middle of the plain, when two large elephants
from opposite sides of the square, made their appearance: these elephants had,
previous to this recountre, been painted, after first being well washed and
scrubbed with pumice stone in the river, whilst lying on their sides; which
operation these creatures (fond of wallowing in water) conform to with alacrity
and pleasure; after which being exposed to the sun, their skins drying and
growing hot, they rubbed them with linseed-oil, which the heat of their bodies
soon absorbing, they painted them from head to foot with a shining jet black,
that as soon as laid on dried up, and was so fixed a color that though rubbed
hard with clothes afterward left scarcely a stain thereon. I was witness to
this scrubbing and painting match, and took notice of the process. This ground
work laid on the whole superficies of the creatures, two painters with their
pencils, beginning just below the upper part of their heads, completed
conspicuous ornamental circumferences about those parts, resembling laurel,
muric, or civic crowns. Circles of different colors were likewise drawn round
their eyes, with well defined edges, and large broad streaks of vermillion
drawn from thence down to the extremeties of their trunks, and the insides of
their ears painted with the same color, which added considerably to the
fierceness of their aspects. Their heads and bodies thus painted, scarlet cloth
or crimson velvet coverings, fringed and embroidered with gold, were thrown
over their bodies and secured from falling off by girths fastened under their
bellies. Each elephant had a bell about the size of a half gallon pot,
suspended to a broad leather collar, right under his neck, with round bells of
different sizes fixed at convenient distances from the large bell, toward the
upper part of his head, on the same collar: these bells are both of ornament
and use, for chiming when the elephants enter a buzar or a town, they give
warning of their approach, and give people time to take their children out of
their way, and to avoid them themselves if they think proper, as
notwithstanding their remarkable sagacity and docility, amidst multitudes of
people tricks being played them, the creatures at times resent the affronts, and
kill or maim the unwary inhabitants.

The elephants thus painted and decorated, the drivers presented themselves to
them, in order to mount, when the beasts knowing their duty, gently extending
their trunks downwards in a curve, with a striking dexterity clapping them
under the hams of these their drivers, gave them each a successful cant on to
the back of their heads; when they fixing themselves to their conveniences, by
striding over the necks of the elephants, when their legs and thighs were
screen'd by the elephants ears, as large at least as small round tea-tables.
These drivers were both stout personable men, well dressed and armed in the
style of the country, with additional weapons in their hands called punjahs,
about the length of ships boat-hooks, and pointed sharp enough to wound their
elephants on the top of their heads, which purposes alone they apply them to
when they prove disobedient or refactory, and to menace them with occasionally
on the march.

The drivers thus mounted, with their punjahs uplifted, and their right hands
to their left sides, forming bows, in an ostentatious manner as they passed
their elephants on and urged them to the charge, who prepared for the fight, in
an instant faced each other, and irritated with the spirits they had given them
before they had left their stands, and jealous of each others approaches to the
female shown to them on the ground, the riders with both hands seizing the iron
punjahs and driving them into the flesh on the top of the creatures heads, and
renewing their blows, while at every stroke the blood spouted out and trickled
down their cheeks, which added to their fury, they rushed on toward each other
with the most violent impetus, their drivers in approaching, before the attack,
reciprocally saluting, by lifting their right hands up to their heads and
calling out in Arabic assallam allycam! allycum sallam!

Matters in this position, the people on foot who formed great part of the
southernmost side of the square to secure themselves against any sudden attack
of the engaging elephants, began to draw off and gain the tops of the garden
walls, the adjacent mosques and dwelling houses, and horsemen, and men with
wheel rockets, which they kept playing, who were employed for that purpose,
kept a continual driving up and down in the front of that line of people that
formed the southernmost barrier to the field already noticed, in order to
prevent the crowd from approaching too near whilst the animals should be
engaging.

No. 13. TO THE SAME.
Mordabaugh.
THE spectators more used to these sights than myself, formed, I discovered
earnest and different ideas of the determination of the battle, and laid wagers
accordingly: two parties subsisted, one in favor of the Aurangabad elephant,
and one in favor of the Gorackpore elephant; two places whose vicinities are
famous for good elephants. The Gorackpore elephant was a size smaller than the
other, but seemed possessed with more activity though less craft, and the
expectations of the crowd were raised to a considerable pitch when the attack
began, in the manner following:

The larger elephant being on the level of the plain, while the smaller one was
on the declevity of an hillock, the big elephant ran one of his fangs into his
mouth, that in the push passed through the fleshy part of his cheek under the
ear, and hooking him at the same time with the other tusk under one of his
hams, got himself so entangled that notwithstanding his repeated endeavors to
overset him, he failed in his attempt; when the other elephant taking the
advantage of a stumble his opponent made with one of his fore feet (that buried
itself up to the middle of the leg in a sand hole) expeditiously ran him
through the gullet with one of his tusks, and set him in a gore of blood. All
this while their trunks, like two ropes, were twisted in one, and thus
entangled together they seesawed backwards and forward for the space of about
five minutes, beweltered in blood, and their eyes swelled with the distention
of their trunks, and the agony it put them in, to such a degree they appeared
as though they would burst in their heads; while their strength and spirits
wasted with fatigue, the pain of their wounds and the great loss of blood they
had sustained, they stood stock still for perhaps another five minutes, panting
and puffing, and blowing so loud that the sound of their respiration was
distinguishable amidst even the din and clamor of the surrounding populace;
notwithstanding which enfeebled state, they vigorously maintained their hold,
in order, apparently, to recruit their wind and spirits, that they might be the
better enabled to begin the combat anew; while at intervals the drivers calling
out to their elephants aloud by their respective names, to hold out to the
last, and never yield while there was breath in their body, for the honor of
their illustrious master the Souhah, and his subjects the spectators, both
drivers, laterly with their punjahs pricking the heads of their respective
elephants (already like honeycomb with the holes that had been made in them in
the course of the action by these weapons) both unable to bear the repeated
stabs of the punjahs, and the excrutiating pain they endured by this rude
circumplication of each others trunks, after making two-most hedious roars,
with obvious repugnance let go each others trunks, and afterward with as great
a reluctance withdrew their formidable fangs from the bloody incissions they
had made in each others bodies (hitching back at the same time, and watching
each others motions with unremitted attention) when the rider of the smaller
elephant urging his beast to the charge again, they both by this time being
reinforced with wind and spirits, he advanced with tolerable celerity toward
his antagonist, who instead of facing him, turned from him and ran as hard as
he could drive toward that part of the plain that was barrier'd by the
concourse of the people above mentioned, and getting amongst the thick of them
before they could get out of his way, both men and horses he scooped up with
his tusks and tossed over his head with the same facility a cat would as many
mice, until the elephant in pursuit of him having come up with him, he turned
round to face him, and a fresh combat ensued, when (as these animals are very
apt to do on confronting) they receded back some few fathoms, in order to join
with the greater force on renewing the attack, then pushing on toward each
other with seeming greater violence than ever, the smaller elephant with his
trunk circumflected round a tooth, the better to secure it perhaps from danger,
which gave him an arch look and made him appear the more formidable, with
remarkable activity on meeting his antagonist, after giving a loud roar, run
his other tooth down the throat of his enemy with such success that its point
came out below the shoulder blade, brought him to the ground, and killed him
dead on the spot; when the other elephant was surrounded by horsemen, who
felicitating his driver on the conquest, conducted him to the front of the
balcony where the Soubah and his nobles were seated, when both the victorious
elephant and his driver, saluted the Nabob in form, attended by this escort and
a Chubdar on horseback in the front, announcing his sallam and the creatures,
they both paying their compliments at the same time, the Fazdar A title given
to the conquering elephant's driver.
, as usual, by lifting up his hand to his head, and the elephant by inverting
his proboscis and bending it backwards over his own head and the drivers, three
times, and giving loud roars at each incurvation of his trunk.

Any injuries done to individuals by the elephant on the day of the fight, the
Soubah ordered ample restitution to be made, and saw it done himself, by having
called into his presence the relations of those people who had been killed or
maimed in the conflict; when the evening was appointed for a main of cocks to
be fought, and little lolls, and a battle of antelopes and fighting rams, --
while which orders were going forward several other diversions were carried on,
on the plain; boys, Gentoos and Moors, all richly armed and dressed, mounted on
Arabian and Persian steeds, with bows and arrows slung over their shoulders,
without any thing on their horses but cloths and silk nets fringed with gold or
silver, circling round the plain in different parties, made sham attacks on
each other, sometimes with javelins, at others with scymitars, and at others
with their battle-axes; whilst some extending themselves on their backs, with
their heads on their horses rumps, would draw their bows charged with arrows,
and bring down with them hawks, kites, and vultures hovering above them in the
air: when two elephants making their appearance, and shutterwans, viz. armed
cameliers, and dividing themselves into two distinct parties, rushed on toward
each other with their drawn swords, which flourishing and clashing together,
after discharging a shower of arrows over each other's heads, dispersed; when
followed by the horses, the elephants with their drivers on their necks,
menacing them at times with their punjahs, and at others encouraging them with
fair words, plunged into the river with the whole of the cavalry; when the
elephants disporting themselves in the stream, encompassed with the squadrons
of horse and shutterwans, showed their remarkable craftiness by filling their
trunks with water they had sucked up with them as they swam along, and spouting
it out again at times, like grampuses, up in the air, and wetting the adjacent
horsemen with the showers of it as it fell again; and at others, when nigh
enough to do execution, blowing a quantity smartly in the faces of any two or
three horses and their riders, who happened to be within the limits of their
humorous cascases. The coast clear, the flying army had no sooner gained the
river than a number of paper kites suddenly were seen flying in the air,
different in their construction from such as are made in Europe, which had been
mounted by boys who were dispersed in different parts of the plain, handsomely
dressed with scymiters by their sides and poignards in their wastebands or
sashes: and others in that of dragons or land or sea monsters, made of the
finest transparent paper, painted, varnished and gilt, with glittering tails of
the same materials, that mounted to considerable heights, and hovering over the
river, palaces and plains, to me was a sight as pleasing as novel.

No. 14. The Miss CHAPMAN's in general, at Castle-Michel and Castle-Raben, near
Athy.
LADIES, I have been describing to Mr. Chapman, the diversions I was witness to
yesterday forenoon, which letters there is no doubt but you have seen and will
impart to those of your acquaintance, with whom I correspond.

The heat of the day coming on the Soubah retired within the walls of his
palace, and the spectators withdrew to their respective homes, whose example I
followed by going to my friend's at Moradbaugh, an English captain, commanding
two battalions of Seapoys in this department. This gentleman had been some
years in the country, spoke the Indostan language perfectly well, and was even
a critic in it; and initiated along while into the ways of the natives, whether
Gentoos or Mahometans; likewise of a satirical turn, and a young fellow of
excellent wit and finished education, proved an agreeable companion, and was,
during my stay at Muxadabads of great service to me, in his informations
respecting the country.

In the cool of the evening we returned to the place of action, in a few
minutes after which the Nabob, with his visiters and aumeers, appeared again in
the same balcony they did in the morning, on which a rhinoceros, and an
elephant prepared for battle, were brought forth, who on the sight of each
other, instantly approaching, begun with the utmost fury to engage. The
elephant, at the first onset, oversetting the rhinoceros in scringing back to
get sufficient play for his teeth, which were at least between eight and nine
feet long, he being a very large elephant, and upwards of ten feet in height,
and proportionably strong and robust, and in appearance double the magnitude of
his foe, but failing in his attempt by only helping the unweildly animal up by
lifting him bodily with his teeth, that he ran completely under him, instead of
through his vitals as he intended; the recovered brute, with all his might,
rushing his head under the elephant's belly, in order to rip it open with the
horn that projected out from his forehead (which is always the rhinoceros's
play when engaging his common enemy the elephant) he continued poking at his
antogonist's guts, having got at last both his head and shoulders between the
elephant's hind legs, which being out of the reach of the elephant's teeth,
giving him pain without his being able to disengage himself.

Provoked with his situation, he gave three sudden successive roars, followed
by a violent jerk of his whole body backwards, which bringing the rhinoceros in
front, with an incredible rapid push of one of his teeth, he maimed him to such
a degree, that unable to continue longer the fight, he turned tail and marched
off, and left him master of the field, amidst the shouts and acclamations of
the crowd; when he was conducted by an escort in the same manner the conquering
elephant had been in the forenoon to salute the Soubah his sovereign lord and
master. The rhinoceros I have been treating of, though described in the
encyclopedia, and by writers of natural history, as an animal not so generally
known as many others of a less note, I will, before I proceed in my account of
the diversions I have promised in my letters, say something about this
creature. The head of a rhinoceros has resemblance to both a camel's and a
boar's, and so thick the bone of his scull that it will repel a musket ball, or
the blow of an ax; but disproportionate to his body, which with his legs and
thighs resemble much an elephant's: upon his forehead grows a horn, turning
inwards toward his ears, to which his forehead is a base, this horn being
about six inches in diameter below that part of it that coheres to his face,
and seven inches in length, terminating gradually from the base to a point;
which horn though not very large is very solid and stubborn and is the only
weapon he has to trust to for offense or defense, except his hide, which is a
complete coat of mail, nature having provided this animal with, above all
others known in the creation, the most redoubtable barriers against the missive
weapons of men, or the formidable talons and voracious jaws of other beasts, an
hard knobby crust of ramifications and thick impenetrable scales covering the
superfices of his hide, excepting his belly and lower parts, that, though
retained within a skin of an inch thick, and of a more glutinous and elastic
nature than that of even a buffaloe's, lies exposed to the wound of shot and
pointed weapons. His food is vegetable, and when kept up a while, he will grow
docile and pacific; and his horn is said to be so certain an antidote, that
liquor even drank out of it, though mixed with poison, will have no fatal
effects.

After this engagement, I observed the multitude suddenly broke the line they
had formed on the south side of the plain, and were contending who should gain
the banks of the river first, till by degrees thousands of spectators assembled
on both sides. The ladies of the seraglio had been taking a party of pleasure
on the water, and were then returning in their Budgeroes. A fleet of these
Budgeroes, or Indian barges with about three hundred boats of different sizes
and construction, appeared on the river winding into that branch of it that ran
between Muxadabads and the opposite shore, that I amongst the rest of these
spectators stood on. These boats formed a three distinct divisions, viz. --
front, center and rear. In the center of each division was a large Budgero,
commanding the rest, and in the center of the middle division, seven of greater
magnitude, the middle of which was at least as big again as the Budgeroes in
general amongst the whole. The lesser boats were painted Dinghees and Moor
Punkies with little Kisties attending them, and rowing ahead at times, and
then dropping a-stern, according to the signals given from the rest of the
fleet, which signals were made by the firing of small brass cannon from the
large Budgeroes, and waving particular flags, and from the Dinghees and Moor
Punkies by discharging several guns or large Burghundasses. In this order
divided, they advanced down the river, but the current running against them,
which was pretty strong, the progress they made was but slow, whilst the wind,
being contrary, likewise which prevented their carrying sails; it gave good
opportunity for examining the form of the boats, the dress of the people that
managed them, and their mode of conducting them. The Budgeroes were all painted
and gilded, and decorated with carved work heads and sterns, with elegant
varandos to them, screened by silk and satin, venetian blinds, and windows of
flowered glass to the apartments of the Budgeroes, that the ladies within side
might see without being seen. The tops of the Budgeroes were all covered with
scarlet broad cloth, and fringed with gold, and waist cloths and quarter cloths
of the same. The oars were painted red, and the Manjies and Dandies were all
dressed in scarlet cloth coats with narrow sleeves, and long trowsers of the
same, but different colored, sashes and turbans, with gold borders and fringes
to them, which variety and contrast in these parts of their dress had the more
pleasing effect. In this manner were the crews of the Budgeroes, Dinghies and
Kisties dressed, throughout every squadron, but the Manjies and Dandies of the
Moor Punkies, wore a different garb, and additional ornaments, having all
scarlet Jammers of stout linen, and turbans and sashes of the same, whose
extraordinary businesses were to beat time to bands of music these boats were
all furnished with. -- They had appendages to their dress to answer that
purpose, having bells fastened by bandages round their arms and wrists,
likewise across their bodies and round their waists, hanging bells in the form
of those that are in steeples, and others cast like those that are hung round
the necks of slay horses in America, or carriers horses in Europe. The bandages
these bells were tacked to were from two to three inches wide, and had tufts of
black silk sewed to them, with thick bunches of black horse hair fixed in
silver sockets to their wrists and elbows, and each Manjy and Dandy, an
ornament of the same kind hanging to the back part of his turban.

The largest of the Budgeroes that was in the center of the fleet was called
the Sultana, on board of which was the Beagum or queen, and the others were
named in general after ladies in the seraglio; -- she had twenty-four Dandies
on a side to row her along, making forty-eight in all, with a fore-castle that
was about twelve feet in length, and a cabin or accommodations abaft, that
reached from the after oar to the stem, at least thirty feet, making the
Budgero in all about ninety feet long; on her poop or top of the cabin were
seated guards of Seapoys, Peuns, and Harkarars, all handsomely dressed, and
officers of trust, with a number of female Arabs, (women in the capacity of
menial servants) were seen going in and out of the Varando of the Budgero;
likewise eunuchs, young and old, superbly dressed and armed, a large band of
music was on the fore-castle, and a quantity of musicians, more or less in
every boat, and Moor Punky in the fleet. The colors that were flying on board
the Sultana, were a large scarlet silk ensign fastened to the toping-lift of
the main-boom, (as she was rigged sloop fashion) and in form of the section of
a cone, snipt at the vertical point, that formed two ends, with a pair of black
sheers in the center: with a large long pendant, that extended by the breeze of
wind that was stiff, ran beyond the taffel of the Budgero that was in a right
line with the Sultana a stern, with smaller pendants fastened to the same
flag-staff, in the shape of swallows tails, and a large flag on a staff, fixed
on the bowsprit, besides several ensigns of different colors. Men and boys
carried others, fastened to painted and gilded staffs. The other Budgeroes of
the fleet were all in the same style that the Sultana's was. The Dinghies were
open boats painted, and their heads, sterns and waists, covered with cloths of
different colors, and filled with people differently dressed; these boats
belonging to individuals amongst the inhabitants who had accompanied this fleet
in order to take their pleasure had joined in with this fleet, but each boat
had at least a musician on board, and some two or three, and some a whole band;
the boats being near two hundred in all, formed at least two-thirds of the
fleet. The Moor Punkies, of which there might be fifty of different sizes, were
some five or six of them 70 feet in length, made like petiauguas, but with high
poops and little top-gallant decks or fore-castles and prows, some of them
carrying thirty or forty Dandies. These petiauguas or Punkies were rowed with
paddles (not oars) which were neatly made, about five feet six inches long,
with blades to them about eight inches wide, and made upon the whole exactly
like a spatula. The Kisties were a number of small skiffs in the form of whale
boats, that passed to and fro the fleet, and did the business of tenders for
them, and were painted and ornamented like the rest, on the occasion.

The fleet thus in three divisions having gained the front of the palace, all
hauled into the shore, where a large elephant with a silver turret on his back,
with columns of solid gold and incrustations of diamonds, made his appearance,
with Pelanquins, Doolies, and Hackerries, on the water side, to convey the
ladies of the seraglio, to their respective apartments, when, the sun going
down, orders being given for a salute, a discharge of artillery was made from
the walls of the Killah; platoons were fired by the Seapoys drawn up along
shore, and a general discharge of all the guns of the Burgundosses and
Musketoons of the Shutterwans; which being answered by the guns on the opposite
side at Moradbaugh, made what might with great propriety be called, a feu de
joye, which ceasing when the sunset, the ladies, covered with scarlet cloths,
were huddled into their equipages, and conveyed through different avenues into
the palace, when the multitude quitting this scene of dissipation on hearing
the sound of Allah, which is God, echoing from the battlements of the mosques,
and from the pagodas of the Gentoos, that of Bogwan, they withdrew to their
respective places of worship, or falling prostrate on the spot they were then
standing on, joined in with the common invocations made to heaven, and
concluded the day in prayer; for no business whatever is carried on by those
people without calling on the name of God both at the beginning and ending of
it, throughout the empire.

No. 15. TO THE SAME.
Moradbaugh, facing Muxedabads.
THE day thus ended, I returned with my friend to his place of residence, as
usual, and after refreshing ourselves (which indeed we were in want of) a
Chubdar coming in with the compliments of the Soubah to this captain, inviting
him to the entertainments of the evening; and understanding by him that there
were to be illuminations and fireworks, (besides a grand Notch) that were to
be exhibited before the public, my friend declining the visit, and returning
his compliments to the Nabob, accompanied by my Banyan and Munsey, and a few
necessary attendants, I returned with this Chubdar, and crossing the river,
with my servants close to me, through the means of the Nabob's Chubdar, got a
very convenient seat in the front of a balcony that commanded a prospect of the
square the principal diversions were to be exhibited in, and faced exactly a
spacious Varando the Nabob and his company were to be seated in, with a Musnud
erected for the Soubah; a difference being paid me on account of the character
I appeared in, of an English gentleman, which put me upon a footing with a
Soubah or Rajah, and above any other Mohammedan or Gentoo in the realm. The
whole palace was illuminated within side and without with gilded and painted
candles and lamps, that were placed so thick that the windows, niches, and
arches of the building, were in a manner covered with them; besides a number of
glass and isinglass lanthorns, of various colors and sizes, and of as many
different forms; some representing Pagodas, and others barges, suspending in
the air, with candles and lamps burning; both without side and within a number
of trophies, ensigns and pendants, and embroidered cloths and velvets were
spread at intervals over the ballustrades; and in the front of the balconies of
all the different galleries, up to the battlements of the building, which was
lined with spectators. On one side of this square were six or seven elephants,
richly adorned, with magnificent turrets on their backs, and the sons of
Omrah's and Aumeer's sitting on them: a guard of Seapoys were on each side of
the gate-way, with brass cannon pointed across the passage, and the intervals
of the colonnade that supported the lower gallery, crowded with spectators of
all ages and descriptions; whilst below in the middle of the court, which to me
appeared to be one hundred yards square every way, was an amphitheatre, whose
top ran up to the summit of the palace, by means of scaffolding that was
erected for that purpose; the walls of which were embossed with various
circular, asteric and gibbons figures of sulphur, camphire, and other
pyrotechanic compositions, being intended for an exhibition of fire works, had
a stage or platform within side, level with the middle story of the palace
court; and was stout enough to bear a number of people on, with a gallery run
round it within side and without. This platform which might be twenty yards
square, was plained smooth and fixed on for the spot on which the game cocks
and Lolls were to fight their battles, while the intervals between this
amphitheatre, below on each side on the pavement, were destined for the battles
to be fought between the fighting rams and fighting antelopes.

These princely matters all in readiness, the Soubah's arrival was announced
aloud by the Chubdars and eunuchs, who advancing in the front of the Varando,
accompanied by his Omrahs and Aumeers, seated himself on the Musnud, and
received the compliments of the spectators in general, and returned the same by
putting his hand to his head, when the Peerzadas calling out, Dowlat Zadah
Bahadar Geeteeo! that is, Long live and prosper! The words were repeated by the
throng in such loud peals the palace trembled with the sound, which compliments
passed the amphitheatre, which was illuminated, and a number of cocks brought
in, by men in short jackets, to fight a general battle as proposed; they all
belonged to different owners on the spot, and being, if not different breeds,
were of different coops and stands, and as strangers to each other, wherever
they should meet would fight; which cocks being let loose on the platform, at a
signal given, began with great fury to engage.

These creatures varying in their shape considerably from European or American
fowls of the same species, being of a smaller breed and resembling falcons in
their heads and formation of their bodies and limbs, displayed as obvious a
difference in their strength and spirits, both of which they possess to such a
superior degree, that without gaffs or steel weapons (the game cocks are armed
with amongst Europeans) they will strike such decisive blows, that in but a
short contest, a combatant will be struck dead by a blow through his head, the
back bone or rump, or some vital part, or knocked down and laid struggling at
his adversary's feet, when the vindictive conqueror, not satisfied with his
conquest, or the mere death of his enemy, will seize with his talons, the dead
or wounded fowl, and by digging them into the flesh, with the most pointed
exertions of his whole body and limbs, with his bill and claws together, peck
the eyes out of his head, tear a hole in the carcass, and pluck out the
entrails and heart, and finally, lay it open to the back bone; and exulting in
his conquest, besprinkled over with blood, and though wounded himself and
pricked to the quick, in a majestic posture treading on the mangled carcass
with his feet, will clap his wings and crow, and proclaim his victory aloud,
then walk with as menacing and imperious an air over others in the same
condition, toward cocks of an opposite party, until he meets with one to take
up his challenge, and begins a new fight. From this intimation you form some
idea of the battle that was fought by the cocks brought upon the stage of the
amphitheatre before the Nabob, when I add that amongst twelve sets let loose
upon each other, making about sixty game cocks in all, who peremptorily engaged
and singling each other out by pairs, fought amidst a cloud of feathers and
streams of blood, 'till only eleven were left standing erect on the place of
action, pecking at the mutilated carcases of the fowls they had vanquished;
some of them during the conflict, at times springing up by pairs, to the height
of, some four, others five, and others six feet, before they met each other's
heels, or exchanged with their talons their formidable blows; whilst others in
pairs would fall down dead with their talons in each other's skulls, or some as
sensitive apart amongst expiring cocks gasping for life, and defending
themselves to the last, on their sides or backs: which scene was not a little
heightened in its sanguinary appearance, by the contrast of some milk white
cocks amongst them painted crimson with the blood of their own wounds, and the
gore of other bleeding warriors they were fluttering among and trampling over,
which, added to the repeated clapping of wings, and reciprocal crowings of the
inveterate incorrigable creatures, made it upon the whole as interesting and
striking a contest of animals as I think I ever beheld. These combatants all
killed or wounded, excepting the eleven remaining upon their legs in the field,
were taken up by their keepers, chucked under the gills, and commended both by
them and the spectators, for their behavior; and on their being carried off the
stage, proclaimed unanimously Borrah Bahadars, by the spectators.

This scene of action over, the killed and wounded were carried off and thrown
to leopards to devour, and the stage cleared and covered with Setringees Stout
striped cotton carpets, manufactured like canvas, but as thick as sackcloth,
, and about twenty cages of lolls brought on it by Chirrouahwallas Men employed
to attend game birds, and to fight them.
, each cage containing in number a dozen lolls. These lolls are little birds, a
size less than wrens or indigo birds, but exactly the shape of bullfinches,
with dark brown feathers, but so covered with innumerable red specks that they
predominating over the brown ground work of their plumage, has given rise
probably to their being called lolls, which signifies red, in the Indostan
language; which birds being as remarkable for fighting as for their beauty and
longevity, (some of them being known to live, though in cages, twenty years)
they are held in estimation in India, and amongst the grandees often brought
out to fight, as verified on this occasion. These lolls brought on the
setringees, were no sooner let loose than like a cloud they rose from the
surface of the stage, and meeting each other indiscriminately, friends or foes,
cocks or hens, aloof began a battle pell mell, that soon demonstrated to the
spectators that though with respect to birds they were but pigwidgions, they
could fight like harpies when put to the test, and began to knock each other
down by scores; whilst others engaging on the plain, would do a proportionable
part of the execution, though so smothered in their feathers and gore that it
appeared surprising to lookers on they could fall on each other but by chance;
be that as it will, these little annimals had not quit their cages one quarter
of an hour before the one half had killed or wounded the other half, and laid
them sprawling on the stage.

No. 16. TO THE SAME.
Moradbaugh.
THIS battle over, the antelopes, about twenty in number, and as many rams,
were brought in upon the pavement below, tied by the horns with silk cords, and
held in hand by their keepers until the proposed signal was given for engaging,
when they were let loose at the four angles of the square, and the rams
disposed of in the same manner at the sides; the keepers of the latter having
plentifully rubbed their noses with garlic preparatory to the sight, which they
pretend sharpens the sensations and has a cephalic effect, and likewise making
them snort and sneeze, irritates them the more, and fits them the better for
action; and thus both parties at liberty, they rushed on toward each other
with great celerity, the antelopes approaching erecting themselves on their
hind legs that their heads might meet with greater force, while the rams,
possessed of more strength but less activity, rencontred in a more
quadruped-like manner, receiving the blows of each other's heads in a more
horizontal direction, that stunning them in general at the instant of the point
of contact, they remained twisting each other's heads about with their horns
interlocked until the dizziness wearing off, the keepers forced them asunder,
and hauling them back to their former distances, after a fresh application of
garlic, let them return to the charge, when meeting as before with the shock of
the formidable blows they repeatedly exchanged, made the colonnades and
galleries of the whole building rebound, in which manner the engagement was
continued (the antelopes with the antelopes, and rams with the rams) for about
half an hour, during which time the rams and antelopes both were so bruised
about their heads and faces that their eyes were closed up in general, and
their mouths and noses battered and swollen to such a degree, that but one
mutilated gibbous lump remaining, the original out-lines of their faces were
totally destroyed, and not the least degree of excentricity discernable on
them; in which condition the conquering rams and antelopes, with their keepers,
had their Sallam announced by the Chubdar to the Soubah, who, returning their
compliments, they retired with their parties.

The rams and antelopes taken away, the fire workers called Attash Bagywallas,
in the Indostan language, or men who make fireworks, came in with ladders,
hammars and nails, and several mantles of various colors and dimensions, which
they tacked up to different parts of the amphitheatre, with other pyrotechnic
figures composed of saltpeter, sulphur, gunpowder, charcoal, file dust,
camphire, etc. of different forms and sizes; this done, the stage within side
this pile was taken away, and a distinct view obtained through the arches of
the whole building, from the pavement to the upper part of it all round; and
now nothing remaining but to play off the works with which this edifice were
embellished, four men from the battlements of the palace at a signal given,
with fire brands neatly fixed into the ends of long Bamboos, touched the heads
and tails of four fiery dragons that were fixed on iron spindles opposite to
each other on the upper part of the amphitheatre, they instantly began to turn
round upon their respective axis, and continued in motion during the exhibition
from the extremities of their wings, claws and tails, and all the extravasated
points of their bodies, emitting fires of different colors, and voiding out of
their mouths and nostrils and posterior parts; likewise burning compositions,
that bursting would scatter in clusters resembling festoons, which with globes
of a larger size, projected from the mouths of four figures of monsters below
that in their flight like shells sent from mortars, bursting with great
explosion, and dispersing globular fire around, lighted the fuzes of all the
works belonging to the pile, and exhibited to the view of the spectators a
scene of novelty, beauty, variety and contrast, I had never seen before. A
large blazing orb made to represent the sun, the diameter of a butt, in the
center of the amphitheatre, that filled up the arched intervals of this pile
intended for tapestry: to the sides of this pyrotechnic pile displayed to great
advantage, the variety of exotic and grotesque figures of beasts, fishes and
fowl, and of men, some gygantic, and some pigmantic, with grottos, groves and
cascades, that cut through the body of the mantles, like flowers or figures on
open work in lace, with but little assistance of the imagination, formed much
the appearance of real existances, that the vibration of the mantles occasioned
by the circulation of the air, rarefied by the circumambient heat, and the
evaporation of the different compositions on the surfaces of the mantles, did
not a little contribute to. This sun by degrees losing its brilliancy, and
setting below an artificial horizon, was extinguished, and the figures on the
mantles by this time grown dim and indistinct, had vinegar thrown over them and
their vestiges taken down, when a new moon appeared, rising by degrees above
the artificial horizon, and increasing in measure as it was elevated by a pole,
till it got to the proposed height where it rested, when it appeared like a
large full moon with spots on it is disk, amidst numberless constellations and
asterisms, burning as though in a firmament around, which with the sky-rockets
flying aloft, and the wheel revolving below, and a number of fireballs of
different magnitudes rolling about this central luminary, helped to show in a
conspicuous light, a number of extramundanian figures vibrating on spindles in
the different arches and porticoes of the amphitheatre, together with those of
copracapellas, or hooded snakes and serpents, hovering seemingly in the air,
the wires that suspended them being invisible to the naked eye, whilst others
were spitting fire and brimstone in all the entrances of the edifice; when the
lunar orb dissipating by degrees, and the circumvolving fires evaporating in
smoke, these nocturnal lights suddenly were extinguished by the spouting of a
cascade from the body of the obscured moon, and from water projected from the
top of every pillar and little spire or turret belonging to the amphitheatre,
as well as from the heads, tails, and wings of the dragons and serpents, who
but a few minutes before, had been vomiting fire and brimstone: the inside of
all these columns being hollow, and having a communication with the artificial
dragons and other monsters, which waterworks playing, as taken notice of from
all quarters, and projected up to above the top of the palace, cooling the air
and interior part of the square; -- these diversions had been carried on while
all the serandas and music on the spot were playing in concert; at the same
time the company embraced this occasion to refresh themselves with different
meats their servants had prepared for them, and to quench their thirsts with
sherbetts, and various beverages this country is remarkable for. These
waterworks had played half an hour, when they suddenly ceased, and in less
than five minutes the whole amphitheatre was taken to pieces and carried off,
and the pavement dried up and covered with carpets; when sets of dancing girls
from all quarters appeared with their musicians and slambeaux, and began a
comic opera, which they went through with much in the same manner as the
dancing girls I described in my letters to Louisa ******, and other
correspondents, and finished by twilight; when the Nabob withdrawing, the
company broke up, and I crossed over to Moradbaugh and reposed myself.

No. 17. TO THE SAME.
Morodbaugh Gardens.
BOTH here and at Muxadabads, the streets are crowded with fakirs, musicians,
players, singers, and sportsmen of all casts and descriptions; men, women and
children, viz. bucties, rope-dancers, tumblers, posture-masters, mimicks,
gladiators, cudgellers, pilewans, puppet-show men, antic goat-men,
snake-dancers, falconers, etc. one half of which characters, though I might have
had a cursory view of before, ere now I never was witness to their
performances, which, though matters in themselves but of mere dissipation and
amusement, and less interesting perhaps than others of similar purport already
transmitted to you, as they contribute to diversify the subject, and display
more amply the manners and customs of the people I am about to describe; at all
events, I shall venture to fill a page or two in the delination of the above
characters. The Bucties are sets of dancing boys, who, from various fortuitous
means, having fallen into the hands of these casts of people who conduct
notches, and the like amusements, and by them adopted as their children, and
taught music, singing and dancing, during their childhood, from the age of
about seven years, till they arrive to that of about fifteen or sixteen; they,
on being called upon to act the same parts in public, or before particular
companies as the dancing girls, no boys answering the purpose of bucties, but
such as have delicate features, are well limbed, and are of the lightest
complexions the country affords: -- they are in general exceeding handsome, and
when they appear in character, being elegantly dressed, and decorated with
jewels, they wearing them in their noses, ears, etc. and ornaments of gold or
silver round their wrists and ancles, were it not for the obvious distinctions
of turbans, and the sashes they wear round their waists, they would be scarce
distinguished from women. The Rope-dancers are composed of men, women and
children, and by the natives are called Nutnys, and are, as well as the
tumblers, posture-masters, puppet-show-men, and cudgellers, of a dark mulatto
complexion; which former and latter performers, both in their exhibitions,
differ but little from those of the like denomination in Europe: but the
Pilewans, a cast of people whose gifts must be those of nature, and improved by
art, merit more attention. These men in their infancy, are selected out of
numbers of children, here and there one, on account of the apparent strength of
their bodies, contexture of their limbs, and goodness of constitution; and with
the consent of their parents, in the towns or cities they dwell in, taken as
apprentices to Pilewans to learn their art, and by degrees become expert in the
line of their profession, as eminent wrestlers or Pilewans. To effect which,
during the time of their apprenticeships, they are kept up and exercised as
regularly mornings and evenings, as bred horses are amongst sportsmen in
England; all access to the fair sex is denied them during their minority, and
as well as intoxicating liquors or fumes, and equally taught to avoid too great
a repletion of food, or indulgence in sleep, they esteeming the one as
productive of indigestions and head-achs, and the other of as lethargic
effects; by observing the regimens proscribed with respect to their diet, they
improve their constitutions, and acquire additional health and strength to that
which nature supplied them with at their birth; and being the strongest men in
the country they live in, are consequently best calculated for the feats of
strength and activity, which it is their business to exhibit, in the which they
are unparalleled as yet by any other people on the face of the globe; inasmuch
that a boy of sixteen, that has been under the tuition of Pilewans, and
habituated to their mode of living and exercises, will stand in opposition to a
man in full growth, face him in the field, on the sod, or on a solid pavement,
where the falls are more redoubtable and less avoidable than on soft ground to
an unexperienced competitor, and by sending off his passes, and repeated
efforts to grasp him, and close in with him, by a sudden and masterly catch,
made at a sensitive and muscular part of the arm with one hand, and by a
dexterous application of an elbow in the pit of the stomach with another, and
of a finger and thumb each in as delicate a part, viz. the one under the
gullet, compressing the jugular vein, and the other in as close a point of
contact with an auricular passage, and as seasonable a circumplication of an
opposite leg and thigh about that of his adversary, with such incredible
impetus, cant him slap against a slab, or the terra-firma they stand on, as to
lay him senseless on the spot, and sometimes to kill him by the fall, by
dashing his brains out against the pavement; from which specimen of one of
these probationary Pilewan's abilities in manual and bodily exercises, you may
form some idea of what must be the contest when two experienced adepts enter
the lists, in order to try their strength, before their princely masters and
fellow countrymen!

The antic Goatmen, who are the next it appears to me on the list, are people
who make a trade by carrying goats up and down the country to divert the
populace; and however insignificant these capricornicular animal's performances
may appear to be, one of them alone will bring in money enough in his travels
to maintain his master and a man, besides a tatto Little hobby horses, in
abundance in India; they running up and down the streets and suburbs of towns
and villages, unowned and unmolested.
to carry the luggage and the aparatus belonging to his profession; which
latter article, from the observations I made lately on one of these itinerant
goat's equipages, consisted of the following articles, viz. a long bamboo to
reach the goat when on the top of his pile while playing his antics, with a
flag to it; a tripod, with a triangular frame fixed to it, to clap on the
goat's head and to suspend cages of birds to, when he mounts with ten cones
turned in wood, with ridges round their lower parts, of about two inches broad,
and of different diameters, with holes perforated in their bottoms for the
reception of screws.

The points of these cones terminated in order to connect the whole number of
cones together occasionally, that when so connected by means of these screws
the whole of them might form an obelisk or pyramidical figure of about thirty
feet in height, for the goat to ascend on when exhibiting before a crowd; they
having been turned in proportion to the different diameters of the proposed
fabric; with which apparatus fixed, the pyramid being secured to the ground,
on it is base, by means of long pegs to keep it from tilting when mounted by the
goat, and a sufficient number of spectators having assembled on the appearance
of one of these antic goats, sufficient to encourage the proprietor to begin
(which in a country like Indostan, remarkable for the addiction of its natives
to scenes of dissipation, would it may be supposed, require no great time to
obtain) the tripod is fixed on the goat's head, and three or four cages of
little birds hung to it; when with a fringed mantle thrown over his body, which
is hung round with bells, he begins. On being ordered to mount the building,
and clapping his feet on these circumferential ridges that run round the
fabric and form an escalade to the whole. Naturaully addicted to climb, though
but indifferently calculated, from the formation of his body and limbs, for
mounting very critical precipices, he pretty expeditiously ascends to the
summit, which not exceeding the space of the top of an half hourglass,
obliging the goat to converge into one cluster his four feet, in order to get a
footing solid enough to stand on, in that uneasy posture and critical situation
he will remain for some time, balancing himself one way or the other, by means
of the triangles on his head, and the cages of birds suspended to them, and by
which he acquires applause amongst the crowd, when he descends backwards, on
being ordered, and comes down.

The snake dancers are men who catch snakes while they are young, extract the
various poisons they contain in their jaws, and cherishing and habituating them
to run out daily to feed, while they played on tubular instruments, resembling
hautboys in their sound, after the snakes, replenish themselves with their
food, which is generally eggs, milk, and dough made of rye or indian corn, and
the carcases of small birds or larger fowl: the animals exhilirating in the
beams of the sun, and animated by the impressions the different sounds of the
instruments have on their nerves, they will circulate in a variety of
directions, perambulations, and circumpositions, on a grass plat, or in short
any surface, and accelerate their steps in measure to the vivacity of the tune,
with a little interlocutory sencurisagement of their patrons. Some of these
animals in their dancings adhering to the surface of the ground, without so
much as rearing their heads above it an inch, of which are the black snakes and
meadow snakes, whose bites are not venomous, whilst others are, for instance
the Covra-capel, or hooded snake, and the Covra-manil or ringed snake, which
former of these two are remarkable for carrying his head erect, with one fourth
of his body perpendicular to the other part of it, in which possession making
zig-zags and oscillatory vibrations of his whole frame, as though it moved upon
an axis, passing through the angular point of his crest, at times and at
others, advancing progressively; in both which evolutions he spreads an
umbrella, This umbrella is a common transparent film, interwoved with
membraneous rays, about the thickness of goose quills below, and of a yellow
color throughout, that diverging like fan sticks when expanded, and from an
incurvation at their extremities above, form a scolloped alcove over the head
of the Covra Capel, resembling much a scallop shell, that growing out from
about a span below the back of his head, and originating at his gills, or the
angles of his mouth, and when extended reaching upwards, forms this coverving,
that the natives gives the name of the hood to; and the Portuguese likewise,
who first gave them the name of Covra Capel; the bite of which animals,
independent of their voraciousness, is mortal withuot instantaneous remedies
are applied.
which nature has supplied him with, that participating of a similitude to fins
and to wings, as well as answering the purposes of a shade to keep off the
intensity of the solar rays, gives him an unparalleled air of vigilance and
intrepidity and ascendency in beauty to any other of the serpentine race as yet
known; but as fierce as fallacious in his nature: he will attack either man or
beast openly or by surprise, and by darting at the throat, seize that part
above with his jaws, of a capacity sufficient to take in a lambkin's head, if
in proportion to a body of three yards in length, which in general are their
dimensions, while entangling their legs, by winding his body and tail round
them below, he oversets his game and feasts on the crimson stream; which
serpent, notwithstanding his natural ferocity, their owners find means to tame
and domesticate, as well as the Covra Manil or ringed snakes, which snakes is
about one fifth less in proportion than the Covra Capel, differing little, if
any, from other serpents, than in it is jaws, which are of less eccentricity,
but a more dangerous enemy to animals and mankind than any, perhaps, of the
reptile species; the progress of it is poison being so rapid, that without the
limit that is wounded by it is bite is directly cut off, or an antidote
instantaneously applied, with external remedies, the whole mass of blood,
within less than an hour, will be corroded, and the patient expire in agony
with the pain.

This snake during the dance, contrary to the motions of the rest, would form
itself into a complete spiral, with her head upwards at one time, and downwards
at another, resting on the earth, while with the circumgyrations of its body
and tail, it would catch an accessable adjacent bough of a tree or twig, and
snatching himself up retain himself by it 'till a bird above or fowl below
coming within length of his grasp, dart at it and retire to devour it. Besides
which above animals carried about in this country by people of the above cast,
there is a race of large snakes which infest the swamps in the province of
Dacca and Chittagan, of an enormous size, some of them measuring one and twenty
feet in length and three feet in circumferance, with heads as large as horses,
and fins and combs to them of a black membraneous substance resembling
whalebone, but grown like hog's bristles, and in somewise resembling a mane;
which with the redness of their lips, and the irritated glare of their eyes
when their jaws are open and their tongues are lolling out, with the slime and
the saliva running therefrom, (in which situation I have seen them basking in
the sun) gives them as terrific as obnoxious an appearance; notwithstanding
which enormous size and capacity to depredate on either man or beast, a set of
people who frequent the jungley parts of these provinces, reduce them to such a
degree of subordination that at a call they will rouse from their places of
confinement or abode, and return to them as soon, after being fed, at the word
of command; (an argument of their superior sagacity to other reptiles) which
monsters are carried in large baskets on bamboos through Indostan, and let out
to satisfy the curiosity of the inhabitants.

I have described these different sets of people as I set them down in the
order they occured to my mind when I began my letter, without paying any regard
to precedence, a thing of which the Indostans above all are tenacious, or I
should have placed the faulconers, if not the first at least, the second on my
list, as these men are always in the service of omrahs or princes, who mostly
bestow the office of faulconer on a decayed Mahomedan of former good repute, or
the son, of a like character. Their business is to train the young faulcon up
to his business, to feed him and air him daily, according to custom, and to
always attend his master in sawary Procession, whether on an elephant, horse,
or in palanquin.
; on which occasion, if the omrah he belongs to proposes going any distance,
the faulconer is furnished with a horse from the stables to ride on, when he
joins in with the sawawry, with his royal bird perched on his left hand; on
which, to secure him from the gripe of his talons, he wears a stout learher
glove; in which manner he conducts him 'till a pidgeon or partridge is seen
aloft, when the hood being taken off his eyes he takes an aerial excursion, and
seizing on his winged prey, at a call returns in variegated directions,
exulting in his success to the wrists of his keeper, who seizing on the wounded
fowl, before the breath is out of his body, that nothing may be eat by this
royal bird, that may contaminate him, takes a knife from out of it is scabbard,
from his side, and pronouncing the words, Bissim Allah Nirouah Alloim, draws
the blade across it is throat and sacrifices it, when it is lawful for him to
eat it, which he gives him to devour.

No. 18. LADY CAROLINE *********, Westminster.
IN my letter, No. 6, in treating of the dancing girls, I declined, including
in a description of them, the women in general of the country, from a deference
I wished to show women of other stamp, on the one hand, and from my want of a
sufficient knowledge of the Indostan females in general on the other, since the
writing of which letter my experience in the country has enabled me to form a
tolerable good idea of the temper, character and manners of it is inhabitants,
and particularly of the females, opportunities that have been afforded me and
very lately of becoming acquainted with the domestic economy of women of the
first stamp, having supplied me with materials enough, not only to fill up a
letter, but a little volume on the occasion, I shall venture upon a general
description, however concise, of their persons, morals and manners. The
Indostan women, whether Gentoos or Mahomedans, are allowed by all travelers,
to be remarkable for animated and beautiful countenances, proportionable bodies
and limbs, and a delicacy of behavior, which characteristic may be said to be
general, for though descended from parents of different tribes and complexions,
which a long intercourse with foreign nations and between the Mahomedans and
Gentoos that did not subsist in any considerable degree until the total
subversion of the Hindoo authority and their subordination to the Mogul's took
place, may account for, that has notwithstanding produced an obvious difference
in their complexions, in proportion to the color of their progenitors, a
similarity of looks, gait and actions, and even formation of body and limbs;
subsists to the ultimate degree.

With respect to their persons, the unwearied attention they pay to them, and
indefatigable pains that are taken by them to keep them clean (particularly
among women of rank) is so unparalleled that, in the eyes of any other nation
than themselves, or people who had resided amongst them, however expedient the
mode, and indispensably necessary, it would appear as ridiculous as useless, an
appropriation of time, and as undeniable a contamination of it, notwithstanding
not only the precepts of their religion, independent of the invariable custom
of the country; their invincible desire to render themselves agreeable to their
connections, whether feminine or masculine, and if married, to please their
partners to whom they are inviolably attached, and owe implicit obedience;
their situation with respect to latitude, and a combination of other mental and
local considerations, as evident to themselves as indistinguishable to others,
in a climate like the one alluded to, where the intense heat of the sun that
keeps both the rational and animal part of the creation in a state of
fumigation and perspiration, which calls upon all the precautions prudence can
dictate for the preservation of health; as for instance, the frequency of
baths, and repeated lavations of the body; for the restoration of it is wonted
elasticity reduced to a state of relaxation, and for the prevention of scum and
soil accumulating and adhering to the skin, exacts, if not all, a considerable
part of that attention they pay to their persons, and argues a propriety that
is commendable, and worthy of imitation.

I propose confining my remarks for the present, to the description of the
manners of women of distinction, who, enemies to indolence, and brilliant in
their nature, rise with the sun, make a short prayer to heaven, and invoking
Mahomet, call for their attendance, consisting of eunuchs, servant maids and
women, with their shawls and veils thrown carelessly over their bodies, and a
few coriander seeds mixed, with their beatle in their mouths, in an elevation
of spirits that is always attendant on health and an unclouded mind, in a
cluster huddled up in this undress retire, to a bath in a garden, situate under
an arborage or bower, within the walls of the Zunnannah; where, with their
lungahs round their waists, and their veils over their shoulders, they repeat a
second prayer prostrate on the ground, then rise and plunge into the bagnio,
taking care to stop their ears up with little plugs of cotton perfumed, and
corns of pimento within side as preventatives against colds and the obstruction
of water, and use similar precautions with their nostrils, by pinching them
close between their fingers and thumbs before they dive, and keeping them
confined in that manner while immerged in the water, where, as a part of their
education, taught from their infancy to swim, disporting in the limpid plain,
they will emulate with each other in feats of activity, washing and rubbing
themselves at the same time with Romals, that their attendants continually
supply them with through their watery excursions, that snatching out of their
hands and passing over their heads, in their circumprogressive lavations and
immersions, in the lucid stream, added to the various circumfusions of their
beautiful colored Lungahs and veils, with their shining borders glittering
through the transparent waves, constitutes a scene easier to conceive than
express. These diversions they will continue for the space of a quarter of an
hour: upon quitting the bath a screen will be made of their Lungahs and veils,
by hanging them on silk lines that always environ the sides of their baths, and
large callico cloths thrown over their bodies that cover them from head to
foot; this done they seat themselves on wove mats, and with multan mittee and
water, prime their whole bodies, and clot their hair likewise, (when they
expose themselves to the sun, which dries it up instantaneously) after which
their maids take balls of Indian meal and sand and rub well their whole bodies
with it, while others are employed in pouring water over them and washing away
the dregs, 'till they have sufficiently cleared them of the multan mittee, when
the ladies investing themselves anew in the order they had done at rising,
plunge themselves again into the baths, and after a second lavation return to
their apartments, when another process is begun. -- The ladies then throw
themselves on their settees, and their servants pare their nails and file them,
prick their ears and clean them, then comb out their hair, braid it and perfume
it, and after that, hand them Munjun to rub and cleanse their teeth and gums
with, and two or three waters to wash them withal, when almond powder is used
as a substitute for soap, which to those ladies would be as obnoxious as the
application of odor, after which they perfume them with Ottah, by slightly
rubbing their skins with it when they invest them with their jewels and dress
them in fresh attire; when after reading part of a chapter in the alcoran, they
join in a short prayer, and withdraw into a saloon to breakfast, within an
epinjary or cage, being a light portable fabric constituted of frames, like
those of a screen, the top covered with tissue the inside with colored gauze,
in order to prevent the intrusion of flies and musquetoes, at meals, -- so
offensive to Indostans, particularly to the women, that a large fly to enter
one of their apartments alone, or in company, would occasion such an hue and
cry that a troop of domestics would assemble, and with forceps made on purpose
for the entrapping these voltigent intruders (constructed after the manner of
drum battle-doors, but of a larger circumference, and covered with gauze) chase
and catch the buzzing maroder, and confined in that manner, have him conveyed
beyond the confines of their Zunnannahs before they will venture to sit down
and enjoy themselves.

Thus incased in their epinjary, secure from the innovation of flies, the
eldest in company saying grace, they seat themselves down according to the
custom of the country, to partake of the meats prepared for their breakfast.
The manner in which these repasts are conducted are in every respect like the
Turks, and other Asiatics, that in the course of your reading you must have
become sufficiently acquainted with. After breakfast they wash their mouths and
hands, pass round the beatle, and make a short excursion in the gardens; which
done they enter their apartments, and their servants sprinkle them with
rose water out of the golab perches, they then pay their compliments to them,
and ask their commands, when the business of the day will be pointed out,
whether at home or abroad; if the latter, and there is a married lady in
question, she will perhaps retire to a private part of the mansion with her
daughters, and ordering her sons into her presence, after reciprocal
salutations, accompany her enquiries after their health with some mark of her
esteem, a trinket, a toy, or some appendage of dress; for instance, if a boy,
perhaps a handsome arrow made at Labor Eminent for it is fine bows and arrows.
, a new ink-stand, or tassels for his poignard; while to the girls some piece
of fine muslin will be distributed, to make up into robes, and mantua-makers
called in to measure them and cut out the garments; -- when if an apple or a
pear is given to them, it will be divided with deliberation equally, by their
being cut into slices; then one of the ladies to whom the ascendency is given
in point of declamation, will be requested to recite some select passage of
some ancient or modern author; after which another will repeat a copy of as
chosen verses, probably composed by herself; an acquaintance, or one of the
party or family, or a matron remarkable for her retentive faculty and aptitude
to relate stories, fabulous or fact, will undertake the recital of an extract
from the Persian or Arabian night tales, a concise history of one of the
emperors, or anecdote of the times; in the course of which relations, which
they make a point of cutting short, they admiring precision and brevity in
their discourses, (which they are as remarkable for as their laconic replies
and speeches in altercations in general) animadversions will be made by
different persons in the company, on the style, diction, variety, contrast, and
propriety of the narrative, while parties are amusing themselves at plays, though
listening attentively to different narrations at the same time; one party
perhaps at cards, and another at fox and geese; the cards they play with being
round, about the size of crown pieces, and painted, gilt and glazed, and the
tables for the other games made of satin lined with canvass, and with the
diagonals and squares worked with gold and silver threads, while little ivory
standards represent the fox and geese, which, and the like amusements, will
continue till the heat of the day coming on, they will retire to their lords in
the interior parts of the Seraglio, (the ladies connected in marriage) and
those in a state of celibacy, to other as secluded apartments.

I did propose having finished an account of the domestic economy of the
ladies and females in general in this letter, to have subjoined a sketch of the
singular and refined mode of education of both sexes in these parts; but an
order I have received from the chief at Eleabas, that obliges me to proceed
directly up the Ganges for Patna, prevents my treating any farther on these
subjects at present: I therefore request you will let the following lines,
directed to the care of my friend at Athy, who has taken upon him the charge of
transcribing and distributing my letters as addressed; as they are all
submitted to his perusal; if not supply that defect answer the purpose of an
East India packet, which in your last was all you exacted.

No. 19. GEORGE CHAPMAN, esquire Athy, in Ireland.
FROM the completion of my letters you might conclude that my time was solely
taken up in one continued round of pleasures, and in remarking the manners and
customs of Indostan, it is animal and vegetable produce, manufactures and
buildings; but it is not the case, as a small proportion of it is spent that
way; the business I am upon exacts a rigid attention: I have angles to take
from the sides of rivers and creeks, and tracts of land to measure across
Jungles I am surveying, and other places as difficult to penetrate; when on
board of my Budgero, or in my marquee, maps and charts of different data and
different proportions and projections to methodise; some gnominic, some
stereographic, some arthographic, and some mercators; differing both in their
longitude and latitude of places; some being obsolete and some modern: in
general, all rude and indigested materials, which I have to reduce to one scale
and species of projection, and from them and other materials of Gentoos, men
but little experienced in the business, and Europeans as inexpert, or just
initiated into the art of Geodosia; besides, a journal of my proceedings I have
to keep to throw before the committee at the precedence appointed to examine
into the business of the survey. These may be said to be my public concerns;
besides which, I have a private trade to carry on, whether licit or contraband,
and matters of litigation to settle, whether belonging to me the prorogative or
not, no adventurer in India hoping to obtain a competency ever, without
transcending the narrow precincts of the Company's civil, military, and
commercial ordinances and restrictions, much less to come at ten or a dozen
lacks of rupees before he arrives to the rank of a counselor, (a mere
Bagattelle) in comparison to what some Companies servants in Bengal have
acquired, between their being writers and getting into council, an
apprenticeship of about 9 or 10 years they generally serve before they arrive
to that honor, when they may be said to set up for themselves: how they
acquire such rapid and immense fortunes I shall make it my business in future
to inform you.

At present I am engaged in making preparations to leave Muxadabads; it is
reported that Hyder Ally Khan has laid all the country waste to the southward,
and that the Company's affairs are in a very precarious situation in the
department of Madrass. Last season troops were sent to them from Bengal, and
now we are informed they are in want of more supplies. How the governor and
council at Calcutta will order matters I cannot tell; but it is said here by
the old standards in the country, that they are apprehensive the folks at
Madrass have got themselves in a predicament they will not so readily extricate
themselves from. Hyder Ally has more than once hemmed in the Company's
brigades. He storms their camps (as their letters report) sword in hand, and
obliges them to form whenever he thinks proper, and gallops up with his horse
to the mouth of their cannon, cuts down their artillerymen, and turns their
pieces against them; in short, by his stratagems, and a run of successes he has
had, he has so hampered the military, and disconcerted the measures of the
governor and council there, that, unable to act any longer on the offensive,
and of extending Mamadilly, the Nabob of Arcot's pretended territorial rights,
they find themselves reduced to the alternative of paying Hyder his own demands
for the expense they have put him to by a war, and surrendering him up
Sandysyab's family, now prisoners in the fort of St. George, with other weighty
requisitions Hyder, it is rumored, expects them to make him before he sheaths
his sword, or let the re-establishment of their credit (not a little hurt by
their conduct toward this man) rest on the risk of a battle with him, on the
success of which would solely depend the completion of their annual investments
of cloths, diamonds, and other articles, the produce of the Carnatic, in which,
if they fail, the Company's affairs will receive a shock in these parts that
must materially effect their whole credit in India and at home; be it as it
will, there are nothing but rumors of wars with us here; a militia is raised
at Calcutta, and all it is subordinates to be prepared for the Marattas, now
encamped near Eleabas, in case their confederates on the frontiers of our
settlements to the southward should have planned an invasion from two quarters,
and in consequence of some dispatches arrived this instant from the Decan, the
three European brigades are ordered with a large army of Seapoys and artillery,
to march to Monghere.

In my next, it is likely I shall be able to let you know the event of all this
bustle. I expect to be in the thick of it before next season; in the interim,
do not expect to hear from me till my arrival at Bangermau, a place a little
inland from the Ganges, where the business I am upon will oblige me to make
some stay, when I propose embracing an opportunity of writing a general letter
to my friends.

No. 20. TO THE SAME.
Bangermau, near the Great Ganges.
I ARRIVED here yesterday morning with a tent and equipage, having left my
Budgero at Frakabadgott, when a Chubdar directly from the Killah, brought me
the compliments of Allybegkan, the Fasdar, with meersmanny, who I accompanied
with my attendants to the Killah, (a few steps off) where I was met by two
handsome young Cojahs, whose physiognomies and dresses were more like women
than men, and conducted by them to Allybeghan.

This man was short and robust, about 70 years of age, had a venerable black
beard, they having an art to tinge the hair black to a great degree of
perfection. He was copper-coloured, had a black sparkling eye, and was a native
of Ispahan, and from his infancy, intimate with Thomas Koulikan, afterward
styled-Nadir Shaw, following the fortunes of this eminent warrior, became one
of his principal confidents and leading officers: but on Nadir Shaw's being
killed, retreating with his family and a body of horse to Indostan; to
strengthen his interest, he married one of his daughters to the Vizier, who
retained him in his service, and advanced him and his followers. He was seated
on a carpet leaning against a large cushion, in a circle of Mogul officers who
lined the apartment.

These Moguls had a fierce look methought, which their ruddy complexions, bushy
beards, sharp white teeth, fiery eyes, and big turbans, did not a little
contribute to any more than their arms and dress; they wearing all high
cylindrical caps within their turbans, exactly in the proportion and form of an
high crowned hat of different colored velvets, sattins, broad-cloths and
kincobs, and traversed round with shawls, or some beautiful manufacture, and
tied over all with a ramol to keep them snug, and from falling off when on
horseback. Their coats were like Hussar's vests, both in the body and sleeves,
but longer and fuller in the skirts, they coming down to their ancles, and are
bound all round their waists with large shawls or silk, or chequered linen
sashes, in which they stuck their poignards and their scymitars, which are
eccentrical, and hung by their sides by handsome belts passed under the sash.
Instead of breehches they wear drawers, and over them velvet or broad cloth
long full trowsers; all which clothes were neatly made, and under all their
shirts, which differ in no wise from women's shifts, having neither collars nor
wrist-bands to them. Their boots vary in nothing from European boots but in the
heels, which are made exactly like our women's high heeled shoes, and their
slippers are made in the same manner but stouter, and are mostly of velvet or
cloth, or of red, blue or green leather. The clasps of their belts, and the
hilts of their swords, and in short, all the metal about their arms and missive
weapons, were in general gold, and studded with jewels; and upon the whole,
they cut as warlike as respectable an appearance, and being the flower of Nadir
Shaw's soldiers, though most of them advanced to 40 or 50 years of age, and
numbers of them upwards of 60 or 70; they neither wanted vigor of body or
mind, which were both evident in their looks and actions, having in general a
warlike aspect, and had upon the whole, the appearance of men of credit and
wealth; they having, most of them, more or less gold in specie and jewels they
had accumulated at different times in battle, and favorites of the Grand Vizer
were perpetually employed on lucrative jobbs that added to their wealth; these
men being cuttlebashes, not common horsemen, but even part of the identical
body of men who had been employed by Nadir Shah, to exact the contribution of
the inhabitants of Delhy and Indostan, when he invaded the empire.

On my making my appearance the old man arose and met me half way, took me in
his arms, according to the custom of the country, and sat me down at his right
hand, placing a cushin between us both to lean on; when I signified to him that
I wished for a private conference, on which the company and attendants were
told to withdraw, and no one but eunuchs, who are admitted to all privacy
whatever, remained in the saloon; when after some few questions, of course
independent of the business I was upon of a survey, I opened to him my mind on
another subject quite remote; it was on that of my quitting the connection of
the English and trying my fortune by joining Sujah Dowlah. The exalted idea I
had formed of that Vizier from the various accounts I had had of his
magnificence and the specimens I had seen of his opulence amoust the English,
who had made their fortunes by the plunder they gained at the battle of Buxar;
added to the great wages he gave to Europeans of even the lowest stamp, and the
superior encouragement he had given to some French gentlemen, and other
foreigners who had sought employment under him, with a number of other powerful
incentives, strongly biassed me toward the step. He was an enterprizing
prince, with no bounds to his generosity, and it appeared to me in a strong
light, that could I but get introduced into his service, I could not fail of
answering his purpose and making my fortune; but such impediments laid in my
way against accomplishing such a design, that it was evident to me, without
uncommon luck and some extraordinary effort of interest, out of the usual
channel, exerted in my favor, I should never gain my point.

The Company, to their sorrow, had experienced already the disagreeable effects
of Europeans having straggled up the country, and joined the country powers;
but particularly in the body of them this prince had got together, by whose
means he had not only raised an army of thirty thousand seapoys, equal, if not
superior, in discipline, to the Company's troops; set a foot a large train of
artillery, as well mounted and served as any at Fort-William; and initiated his
artificers and mechanics in all the collateral branches of artillery and
warlike apparatus; circumstances so diametrically opposite to the Company's
politics, that it getting to the ears of the court of directors at home, they
reprimanded the governor and council in their letters to them from Europe, for
tacitly permitting the Vizier to tail such a military force; who made it an
object of such consequence to them in the main, that they sent a messenger to
him by one of their factors, to dismount his artillery and disband his seapoys;
which Sujah Dowlah considered in such an approbrious light that he dismissed
their ambassador without giving him an answer; and provoked with this measure,
and not knowing what sinister designs they might have, he assembled his whole
army, and marched through Gorackpore toward Patna, when a second message from
the Company, to know the reason of such a warlike appearance on the frontiers
of their lands, that gave his highness an opportunity of coming to an
explication of his motives for assembling his troops. After they came to an
eclaircissement he ended his expedition in a drill campain, and his army,
artillery, and European detachments have been increasing ever since; from which
time, while the Company to prevent any future migrations of Europeans up into
the interior parts of the country, have given orders tolet no white men,
without their permit, pass the Choques forts or settlements, and enacted in
council, that any servant of the Company's who should presume to visit the
Patcha, Vizier, Soubah, or any of the country powers, without their leave, he
should be dismissed their service; and if a free merchant, free mariner, or any
other adventurer in the country (though not in their service) for such on
offense be sent a prisoner to the Presidency, and as such conveyed to Europe.
These restrictions subsisting, were the stumbling blocks in my way, which
apparently had hitherto prevented my attempting affecting any business with
Sujah Dowlah; in order to remove which obstacles, on my arrival at Bangermau,
it occurred to me that the Fasdar, who saw with an envious eye the growing
power of the Company, and had talked loudly of their late impertinent behavior
to the Vizier, might possibly listen to a preposition that had a tendency to
the aggrandisement of his son in law; as my vanity made me presume, that the
offer of an English Toppee Wallas's services (of my consequence) might not be
considered as an object of no importance, and flattered with that idea, I
determined on explaining myself to this Mogul of eminence on the occasion,
which, in the interview I had required of him, I did in earnest and sufficient
terms, that he listened to with the greatest attention; and though prepared
with an answer, as he afterward informed me, then told me it was a matter of
the utmost moment, that required some mature and deliberate consideration, to
which he would attend, and give his opinion of in the evening: in the interim,
informing me breakfast was ready, that had, he added, been retarded upon my
account, which he would be glad I would partake of; I accordingly went with him
into the apartment adjoining.

This was the first time I ever ate with a Mogul, and as the entertainment was
to me new, I will give you an account of it: a large covering was spread in the
middle of the apartment, made of camel's leather, neatly sewed together and
fringed with the same, with diaper cloths and beautiful mats above all, to
place the dishes on; Madeira and claret wines were then, by order of the
Fasdar, brought in from my own cases, for my use, when after they had seated
themselves cross-legg'd, as usual, with the Fasdar at the head of his company,
consisting of about forty Moguls and others, bread of two different kinds was
handed round, -- the one sort was nonpor bread, the other chappaty bread; the
nonpoy bread was leavened, and about the size of thick pancakes or slapjacks,
and the chappaty or unleavened bread, (the dimensions of a common china plate)
made of fiber and water, converted into dough, fastened out with hands, and
afterward baked on (...) or hollow iron utensils. Their meats were of various
kinds, and too tedious to enumerate; however some of them I will introduce by
way of variety; which were their Pilloes, saline Sourrouadars and meat
Curryadar. Their pilloes are their favorite and standing dishes, and are made
of rice and the meat of kid, mutton, antelope, deer or fowls, and cooked much
after the manner as in Europe, with this difference, that the flavor of them
is not heightened by the addition of ham, which to christians, though so
agreeable to Mahomedans, is so obnoxious that what quantity of it would satisfy
the appetite of a child amongst us, would not only contaminate the meats of a
single repast, but pollute a whole tribe of Mussulmans that should partake of
it. The smaller dishes were kid, mutton and fowl; fried, boiled and roasted,
and some of each made into forc'd-meat-balls; with fish, flesh and fowls
dressed with Currystuff and Salline Sourrouadar (of which two last articles,
See Glossary for explication). The pilloes were served up in dishes of about
three feet in diameter; the one of gold, the other two of silver: the other
meats were served up, some in thin wooden trenchers, and some on plates and
dishes of china, silver and gold, of different sorts and sizes; they prefering
this variety, in those articles, throughout the country, to that uniformity
therein we so much admire. Thus seated, and grace being said by the Fasdar, as
head of the family, he began to officiate at table in distributing the
different meats that were before us, which he did with great alacrity and
cheerfulness; and showing me a deference as a stranger, had the dishes of
Pilloe handed to him, when taking two of these large flat Nonpoys, above
described, with a proportion of the Chappaty bread, clapping both hands first
into one dish and then into another, filled them with Pilloe, and sent me at
difrent times, double handfuls of these articles, with a pickled mango in each,
on the surface of these broad cakes pinched up like a hat to confine the meat
as it was handed from the Fasdar to me; when rejecting the knife and fork that
was laid on purpose for me, that I might conform to the manners of the company
I was in, I ate with my right hand, though without being able to acquit myself
with that facility and fashion the Fasdar and his company did.

These Asiatics in general, averse to useless and trivial altercation, are more
remarkable for their taciturnity than loquacity, which I discovered at this
interview, notwithstanding which they are still sociable and communicative,
decisive, and laconic in their speech, and without using strained compliments
like the Christians, are naturally hospitable and generous, rather than polite
and ceremonial; esteeming any thing that will excite laughter as ridiculous,
whether an act, word or deed: a person by his writings or expressions, to
acquire the name of a wit amongst them, would be esteemed, if not a fool, a
buffoon, without being pitied or despised.

The Moguls, by profession warriors, are used from their infancy to face danger
and the extremities incident to their calling; their character and dependence
resting on their supporting the dignity of a Seapoy, contemning every thing
that has the color of effeminancy or frivole; their constant study being never
let their words and actions contradict their pretensions to equanimity and
honor; and equally manly and tenacious of their behavior among themselves in
public or private companies, no sudden start or flirts of body or mind, will
with the strictest scrutiny, be discovered in an intercourse of seven years
with these people, to hear them break out into a loud vociferation or horse
laugh, notwithstanding the natural brightness and cheerfulness of their temper:
though used to depredation in war, and decisive when they strike a blow, as
they never draw their swords in vain, they still know when to show mercy or
when to give no quarter: as for instance, an aged or defenseless man, woman or
child, would be sure of an asylum, from all quarters, amongst Moguls or
Indostans, under any circumstances whatever, whether in war or peace; and with
respect to women, so sacred is held the person of a female in those parts, that
a Dooly, Palanquin, or Hackerrey, with women therein, covered with scarlet
cloth and announced to be a Zunnannah, between even contending armies, would
not only pass unmolested, but escorts from both parties would be detached to
convey them out of harms way; for to violate this law is death without
reprieve; inasmuch that even to lift up, through curiosity or any other motive,
the mantle of the carriage, if apprehended, the party's right hand will be cut
off, and the other branded with an hot iron, for infamy, let the woman or women
in question be of whatever stamp or quality may be; it matters not be they rich
or poor, their honor and persons are held sacred in these parts and amongst
these people.

They are not less rigid in the observance of the payment of their debts, and
equally as charitably disposed, having a natural propensity to give alms
without being urged to it from the commandments of their alcoran, which makes
charitable acts as essential a duty in men as prayer, but actuated by inherent
principles of humanity when asked for relief by a distressed person, without
framing idle pretexts to evade helping the needy, or aggravating the
suppliant's misfortune by ascribing them to idleness, drunkenness, gaming, or
other extravagance, as is too frequently the case amongst many very apparent
good christians, but immediately order him victuals, and if any company, a
small collection will be made amongst them for the poor mendicant, and when
dismissed, give them their farewell in earnest terms, by saying allah hafust,
which signifies God be with you.

They are not less commendable in points of religion and morality, never taking
God's name in vain; that is, have not recourse to oaths, but when called upon
by courts of judicature, or exacted of them on emergent occasions, when the
formalities of laws, and justice require it. When a Seapoy swears by his
scymitar or the alcoran, putting his hand on the one or the other, both being
equally held sacred in this case, and no provocation can induce them to use
execrations, or illiberal language to each other, or neglect their duty to
their parents, whom they love to excess, though the same affection does not
subsist between brothers and sisters, which arises entirely from the liberty of
their alcoran, (i. e. their bible) that permits them to have plurality of
wives, from which different branches of sons and daughters may spring, and all
claim equal right to parental affection and inheritance. Hence the various
paricides, fratricides, and massacres, throughout all the Mohammedan dominions,
that the wisdom of the christian laws happily precludes. With respect to
religion without being great bigots, excepting their priests, who are not
without their craft, any more than many others of other sects; they neglect not
the worship of God, for they pray twice a day, and freqently peruse the
alcoran, or hear a Molvee read a chapter.

I shall now return to our repast, which having finished, a desert of fruit was
brought in, and an apple and a pear presented me as a rarity, in which light
indeed they might be considered; they having been produced on the frontiers of
Arabia, and brought from thence in little screw boxes, and separately packed
and stowed in cotton, and sold afterward at the rate of two rupees a-piece
when not plentiful, and at a rupee a-piece on an average. After the desert, the
Fazdar smoaked his hooker, and the rest af the company their sulphos, and
formed parties, some at chess, (a favorite game amongst them) others at fox and
geese, some at chequers, and others at cards; during which dissipations,
sherbetts occasionally were called for to taste of, (not quench their thirsts
with, as that is only admissible with water) and to moisten their mouths and
give a zest to their smoking, which they do without spitting; a circumstance
peculiar to no other people but Asiatics, as well as their rejection of all
spirits or intoxicationg liquors on these occasions, or on any other, but such
as I shall point out, wherein the use of either taken under certain
circumstances, as an auxilliary contributory to health renders it salutary;
whereas from the frequent use of which, not only a train of fatal consequences
arises injurious to both body and mind, and equally detrimental to society, but
is productive of a degeneracy in the human system, that by debilitating it,
becomes a bar to the increase of mankind, and held in such detestation in
Indostan, that notwithstanding there are stills for the distillation of
spirits, the sale of them are under the most rigid restrictions, in any part of
the country where Europeans have not had influence, and used in common by no
people but Hallalcores, Sewarwollas, and Chummars, who all go under the
denomination of Harricajl; who, being held as unfit to associate with others,
are not permitted to dwell within the walls of their cities or towns, but have
little huts or houses in the suburbs allotted them to reside in, who drink at
seasonable times spirits, but never to excess; as for instance, when overcome
with fatigue by carrying burdens, it falling to the lot of these people to
serve as begaries throughout the country, more than any others, as well as to
do the most laborious parts of work without doors, or when after the labors of
the day, or at a wedding festival, or an entertainment, when in imitation of
the Christians, they will regale themselves with a few potions of the
inebriating juice, while Aumeers and Rajahs, like the generality of other great
men, whether Pagans or Christians, who, building upon their rank and
independence, together with their superior talents and education, claim
luxuriant pharasanalia, and prerogatives amongst themselves (that with the
vulgar would never be admissible, or by them be thought of) in their hours of
dissipation, whether with lords of their acquaintance, or when solacing
themselves during the rainy seasons, in their bungaloes or budgnroes; or at
other times in their serraglios, be so conscientious, as to refuse from the
fair hands of their mistresses rich wine or cordial, of which their consorts on
these occasions will partake, but in such stipulated potions, that what would
serve a lady of quality in England, would be sufficient to satiate a large
company in Indostan.

The above innovation on the laws of the alcoran and Shastrato, which makes it
Haram Damnation.
, to drink wine or spirits, is entirely confined to the sets of people I have
been discriminating, and the dancing girls and players of all denominations,
who notwithstanding the freedom they violate them with at times, conscious of
their having broken through moral and religious restrictions, thinking
themselves unfit for prayer, or further legal prosecution of their affairs,
until they have expiated their sins by lavations of the body, and acts of
contrition, never appear in public after a breach of this kind, or begin any
other negotiation public or private, till they have plunged in a bath, and
asked forgiveness of Osman Heaven.
and Mahomet (if mussulmans) and washed away their sins with the holy waters of
the Ganges, (if Gentoos) and prayed to Bogwan, the Sun, and four elements; made
libations and prostrations to them at the same time, and invoked Jagernaut and
Chrimou Swamy, for remission of their crime: which restitution for sin, in
breaking this weighty commandment, however reconcilable to the secular part of
these people, is repugnant in every shape to the sentiments of their
priesthood, as in their eyes incompatible with the principles of religion and
morality. Bramins amongst the Hindoos, or any other set of men amongst the
Mahometans, particularly with priests, would as soon dispense with poison, as
with spirits or wine.

Something less than an hour was passed away in those amusements after dinner,
when the company taking leave of the Fasdar, they dispersed; which time I
employed in sounding Allybegkan, on the subject I had introduced to him in the
forenoon, concerning the eligibility of my joining the Vizer, not having
patience to wait his answer as proposed, till evening; or should not that be
made out at all pacticable, circumstanced as things were then between him and
the Company, and of diverting my pursuits into another channel, and courting
the friendship of the Patcha In speaking or writing of the Emperor, it is
customary to style him Patcha or Badshaw, which titles are synonymous.
, and following his fortunes as soon as he should quit the connections of the
English, which it was commonly reported, he had ultimately determined on doing
before the setting in of the next rains, which the preparations he had made,
and his behavior to the Company, left no manner of room to doubt but he would
accomplish if he could.

The impossibility of removing the variety of obstacles that would apparently
intervene with any attempt I should make, of connecting myself at that juncture
with Sujah Dawlah, being demonstrated to me by this man in a clear and
perspicuous light, I adopted the latter, relinquished all idea of the former,
and substituted in it is place that of accompanying Shaw Aullim, in his intended
expedition to Delhy, as already thought of, for, not satisfied with my
situation, however eligible, and present pursuits, and fond of exchanging a way
of life for any one that carried with it the face of enterprise, I was
determined to improve the reasons that presented itself of consulting with this
Mogul, how to bring about a matter so consonant to my wishes, and urging him
pretty strennously on that head, as he had already remarked; for given me all
manner of assurances of his advice and assistances, he concluded by telling me,
that a Vacquil had arrived with dispatches from Alligore The name of the
Emperor or before his inaugeration, by which name he is frequently spoken of in
India.
, that were to be forwarded by him to Sujah Dowlah, with whom, as soon as he
should have some conversation, which would be in the evening, he would heartily
give me his opinion of the matter, and a definitive answer, observed that the
heat of the day was come on, and he was going to repose, which, if I was
disposed to do, his attendants would wait on me, when I was shown to an
apartment, where was a long couch with camel's skins nicely cured, and
pallanpoes spread thereon, over which hung a swing punkah on an hinge, about
the size and form of half the leaf of a large oval table; it being made of a
stout bow retained in a circular form, by a cross piece of round wood or cane
that formed the cord of the arch, and both served for an axis, and a member of
the implement, which was covered with silk in the manner the heads of drums are
covered with parchment, having fringe about a foot deep round the edge of it;
at the vertex or middle part of which bow, was fastened a silk cord, that
leading up to the ceiling through a little pulley or sheeve, and passing down
again obliquely through a small hole made in one side of the wall for the
passage of this cord through, was moved backward and forward by a servant or
slave without, to fan away the musquetoes, and maintain a breeze within the
apartment, while through a lettice on the other side, that was made on purpose to
admit the fresh air, was discoverable the arborage and verdure of a garden,
from which the sound of a band of Indostan music that was playing at intervals,
gently reverberating with the circulation of the zephyrs that fanned the trees
of this rural department conducing to repose. -- I soon was lost in sleep; and
continued on the couch dreaming of Patchas and Viziers, till a young eunuch,
about eighteen years of age, dressed like a prince, with scymiter and poignard,
incrusted with diamonds, coming in, awoke me by dashing rose water in my face
from a Golab Perch, which he told me smiling, was by order of the Nabob, the
rank and title Ally Begkan had borne from the day of his alliance with Sujah
Dowlah by affinity, on which arising, I was met by his excellency, who without
preparing me for the visit he had in his eye to make, proposed my accompanying
him in an excursion without doors, attended by a single eunuch, and an old
matron (who was a Cashmirian birth) through a number of avenues of the Killah,
which, though far from being magnificent, it being but a mud fort with a brick
house erected within side of it, for the residence of a Killadar, was furnished
well enough to answer all the purposes of a temporary abode for the Nabob,
during the business he was then on of collecting the revenue, and reducing to
reason a disaffected set of subjects, who had of late been remiss in the
payment of their duties and taxes, viz. Rajah-poots and Zemindars. To return
from which digression, conducted by Ally Begkan through some number of passages
to the interior part of the Killah, we stopped at a door, where an Abyssinian
eunuch, who had been seated, arose, and snipping off with a pair of sheers, by
order of his master, a label that was fastened by silk threads, and on which
was an impression upon virgin wax, of the Nabob's private signet; according to
an ancient and invariable custom of these Asiatic lords, who not confiding
altogether in their ladies integrity, and the barriers alone of iron and steel
of the apartments of their seraglios where they are sequestered, have the
additional security of locks and keys, and the impression of their signatures;
which label the Abyssinian eunuch having cut, he opened a red leather case, (in
which the padlock that fastened the door we had come to was contained) that he
pulled off, and with a key he had about him, unlocked the door, and letting us
in, we passed through an antichamber this door was entrance to, covered with
Persian carpents, that lead into an interior apartment more elegantly set off;
a canopy of crimson satin fringed with gold, covereing the whole ceiling, and
silver nets, decorated with pearls, lining its walls; where about thirty women
were seated, with treble the number that were to be seen in a Varando that lead
out of this place into a long gallery back adjacent to it, standing on their
legs, or passing to and fro attending them; some fanning them with Puncahs,
some with Chouries, others dashing rose water over them through Golab Perches,
and others helping them to Sherbetts, almonds, raisins, walnuts, pears, apples,
and Beatle. We had taken these ladies at a nonplus; they were surprised, and
no wonder; so unexpected and unprecedented an intrusion of a man, young or old,
a stranger and an European too, and in company with the Fasdar, struck them
with amazement, and left them at a loss what to do or say, until the Nabob
telling them to be easy, that I was a friend, and more than that, I was his
son, and that they must receive me as such, -- his princess (which rank I
afterward discovered she had by birth, a woman of about forty years of age, a
native of Candahar, and sister to Amud Shaw, the Durany, commonly called
Abdallah, or Abdally, the then reigning prince of Candahar) rising, sallamed
me, when all the seragli^ followed her example; which compliments being
returned by me in the style of the country, Ally Begkan seating himself
opposite to his wife, and placing me at his right hand, after conversation of
about half an hour, we retired.

During this visit I was complimented with beatle, and when the surprise of the
women was over, was asked questions by six or seven of the leading characters
amongst them, such as whether I understood the Persian or Indostan language? --
how long I had been in the country? -- and whether the women in mi^^ dressed in
the manner they did? etc. etc. All which females, excepting his excellency's
wife (who was on the decline, and about a dozen years past her grand
climacteric) were, I observed, the greatest beauties amongst them; that
prevalent article beauty, (a staple commodity) purchasing favor and
pre-eminence at the court of Badshaws and Viziers, all over Asia, and
independent of their pretensions to rank from descent, or parentage, owed their
present exaltation and ascendency to the superiority of their charms, in which
they excelled any women I ever saw in India before or since, to an
inexpressible degree; for these were, if I may be allowed the comparison, like
concomitants to a Sun, shining in an exalted sphere. -- The select pieces of
Sujah Dowlah's seraglio eminent for an assemblage of the greatest beauties in
the world, one of Alligore's eldest daughters had been paying a visit to the
Vizier's queen, at Phazabad A retiro of the Vizier's, built by himself, on the
banks of the Gogra.
, and this Zunnanah A party of women.
of his highness, to do her honor, accompanied her on her way back to Eleabus,
as for as Allybekan's, when they were detained by the civilities of his wife
and family; for this good old Mogul advanced in years, though formerly
remarkable for the number of women he had in his seraglio, confined his
affections laterly to his first wife, by whom he had had five children, one of
which was married to the Grand Vizier, as already observed.

I met this Zunnannah and its escort, on the banks of the Ganges, and assisted
in embarking the Badshazadee Similar to a field officer.
: it was the most magnificent fight I ever beheld, -- a Rasalladar An Emperor
or King's daughter.
, commanding a thousand Mogul horse, each cavalier rightly armed and dressed,
mounted on Persian barbs, led on the advanced guard, while two lines of
Indostan cavalry, composed of Shakes, Syeds and Patans, marched on each side
the Zunnannah, which I call the center, and a body of Maratta Pullagars,
mounted on horses and mares which Rumchundersunnes had accommodated the
Princess with, brought up the rear; the flanks of the Zunnannah being guarded
by two hundred Shutturwans, equally divided, dressed in scarlet, and their
camels covered with cloths of the same, fringed with yellow silk, and top knots
as big as pine apples, of black silk and silver threads, with tassels of the
same kind hanging to their sides; while within, eunuchs on superb horses, with
gold and silver stirrups and bita, silk bridles and saddles, and furniture
composed of the same materials, kept prancing and parading within the different
corpse of cavalry and Shutturwans; between whom and the front, on three
elephants in a row, without turrets, were seated behind the drivers, the
Bajannawallas to sound the nobut, a martial serenade of drums (equal in
diameter to the bulge of butts and pipes) and trumpets of different sizes and
tones. -- Chubdars, with silver maces in their hands, were scattered about the
Zunnannah, all mounted on horseback; and men, singing the praises of the
Princess they were conducting, at intervals, and in concert with the Nobut,
that kept a constant beating. The ladies were all conducted on Palanquins
covered with crimson velvet mantles, embroidered with gold, and deep fringes of
the same, with peep holes in them to look through; and their attendants traveled
in Hackerries covered with scarlet cloth and silk blinds, drawn by large milk
white guzerat bullocks, with mantles on their backs of silk, satin or velvet,
except the Badshazadee, who was mounted on an elephant, in the center of six
others, in a turret covered with a mantle of satin sprigged with diamonds and
rubies, and fringed with emeralds and pearls; the elephant having round his
neck bells of solid silver, and trappings of gold. On the foremost elephant was
Meerzamany, the Vizier's eldest son, a very corpulent young fellow, about
twenty four years of age; on the second was Jungly Mungly, the second son, and
a handsome youth; and on the third Morajah Dowlah, the Emperor's uncle; while
Mawboob, Bussunt, and Leetaffat, (three young eunuchs of great trust, belonging
to the Vizier) filled the turrets of the three other elephants behind; with
several Sardars Gentlemen.
mounted on horseback and on elephants, who had joined the party to take their
pleasure, scowered the plains. Which escort having conducted the Princess to
the side of the Ganges, where a bridge of boats was thrown across, she was
received by another party, when the ladies attending her, and those belonging
to the Vizier, took leave of each other by interchanging their compliments
through means of the Chubdars; when the Shutterwans discharged their muskettoons,
and the Vizier's party returned, and marched to Bangermau.

Having finished our visit to the Zunnannah as related, the Fasdar and I
withdrew, -- when he give audience to the Vacquil arrived from Eleabas; when
returning, I asked him what news from the Sultan? On which he shook his head
and cried worse and worse! you must not think of disjointing yourself from your
countrymen, nor joining the unfortunate itinerant Alligore. Some fatality, says
this Fasdar, attends the steps of this prince, defeats all his attempts; his
evil stars will not let him arrive to the pinnacle of his wishes. He is of a
restless disposition, and equally suspicious; he has been so unfortunate in his
undertakings, no one wishes to be concerned with him; will never succeed in his
present scheme of getting himself established on the throne of Delhy. The
moment he leaves your brother, the Toppee Wallas, he is ruined, and will become
a vagabond, and in the end, will be thrown by the contrivances of his enemies,
into the hands of the Marattas; the legitimacy of his birth is disputed, or be
that as it will, the English, your countrymen, have made friends with Ragouby,
who massacred Madarow; and countenance under the rose, the steps he is taking
for gaining the sovereignty of Pounah, and affect to not dispute the Maratta's
right to the inheritance of the empire; you cannot, must not think of the step
at any rate; at present it would be equally as impracticable as that of your
joining my son in law. -- The ensuing season, should he in earnest take the
desperate step of joining the Marattas, and you should happen to be upon the
spot, he might perhaps not not refuse your assistance, and the impediments that
are in your way now, would no longer subsist. The truth of Allybegkan's remarks
were too evident to admit of dispute, and consoling myself with the Emperor's
quitting the next year the Company's connection, and paying my court to him, I
made myself easy on the subjects of Shaw Aulim and Sujahdowlah, and got all in
readiness to go on with my survey.

No. 21. On board the Peggy, Capt. Markbridge, at an anchor in Ballasore road^,
bound to Madrass.
To my Correspondents in general.
IT is upwards of a year since I have set down to write to my friends, a
multiplicity of affairs has totally prevented my continuing as usual my
correspondents. I promised lady Caroline -- a further account of the women of
this country, and other matters, and Mr. Chapman a description of the buffaloe
and tiger fights, and shall begin now with an account of my proceedings, and
what offered to me worth notice, or committing to black and white, from the
time I left Muxadabads, till my arrival at Bangarmau, and return here again by
the way of Dacca and Sundry-Bunder, at Chittagang; by the way of Dacca, after
leaving Bangermau, and return through the Sundry Bunder to Calcutta. On my
leaving Muxadabads, I proceeded in my budgero, by the way of Bogwangollah, (the
greatest gunge and repository of grain in Bengal) to Rajahmaul, on the banks of
the Ganges, once the seat of empire during the power of the Hindoos, where the
Company have a factory, and a fortress. -- In that neighborhood I remained a
week, and had an opportunity of seeing a number of Decoits; at which place is a
palace of black marble, of as ancient as curious construction.

From Rajahmaul I proceeded to Monghere, where the Company have fortifications,
it being their second military department, their first being at Fort William,
and the other at Kassim Buzar; this being one of the principal passes of the
country, and to narrow (being cut through a solid rock) that a file of
musqueters, or a single field piece can defend it against the invasion of an
army. From Monghere I proceeded to Patna, the largest and most populous city in
the three kingdoms of Bengal, Bahar, and Orixar or Orissa, there being a
greater concourse of people in the markets and streets, and about it is suburbs,
than I ever beheld in any other city in any part of the globe, which is one of
the principal settlements of the Company in India, where the French, Dutch and
Danes, have likewise factories, and the Portuguese and Italian missionaries of
different orders; Jesuits, Augustines, and Franciscan and Dominican friars, who
have churches or chapels there, and in short in all the European settlements in
India. At Patna and about it, the saltpeter and opium is produced, and Kincobs
A rich thick manufacture of silk, and gold or silver threads interwoven as a
ground work, on which are bird's eyes or small flowers resembling bird's eye
handkerchiefs.
, Gulabuttons Striped silks, the thickness of lutestring.
, Mushrooes Striped or checked silk and cotton, manufactured together.
, Chandarees Fine linens, resembling cambrick.
, and a variety of other beautiful articles manufactured here, that the Company
export to different parts of India, and to Europe. At Patna I had an
opportunity of seeing Bulmonsin, the Beneras Rajah, who is the first Hindoo
prince in riches and rank in these three kingdoms. He was then about 40 years
of age, of a copper colored complexion, and rather a pacific than predominant
character in his face. -- From Patna, I proceeded up the Ganges to Eleabas,
where, for the first time I saw the Nabob, Sujah Dowlah. It was early in the
morning, and he was mounted on a small elephant, without a Houdah A turret.
, striding his neck himself, with his punjah in his hand, and a broad scymiter
by his side His Highness was exactly five feet ten inches high, as I have been
credibly informed, but appeared to be a taller man on his elephant; he was
corpulant, without being fat, of a dark copper color, wearing both beard and
whiskers, and in any garb, or under any circumstances, would by a remarkable
authority, and majesty in his countenance, be known to be a person of repute.
The circumstance of his being mounted in this manner, attracted a greater crowd
to see him than otherwise probably it would have assembled. He had been to pay
the Patcha a visit, and was on his retain to Phyzabad, when, remarkable for his
courage, strength, and feats of activity on elephants and horseback, the boats
not being in readiness that were to have conveyed him and his retinue over the
river; notwithstanding it is breadth opposite the place, he changed the elephant
he had passed through the city on, for the one I have already described, and
mounting him in the manner above mentioned, he proceeded for the river side,
when plunging in thus mounted, he crossed this great stream in despite of a
rapid current, and within a pistol shot of the opposite shore, cut asunder an
alligator that attacked his elephant, and landed safe in about 20 minutes, in
sight of above a thousand Europeans then at Patna, including their military.

From Patna I proceeded to Eleabas, which city stands on an angle of land that
terminates where the confluence of the streams of the Great Ganges and the
river Jumnah meet, and is one of the grand passes of the empire.

At Eleabas, the other parties engaged in the survey agreeable to appointment,
met, when we compared our works; a few days after which, we took different
routs, and I proceeded to Frackabad, and from thence to Bangermau; whence,
after a week's stay, I passed by land through Lucknoar, and other towns in my
way to Phyzabad, where I proposed meeting my Budgero and other boats, with all
dispatch to avoid the approaching rains, which would interfere with the
business I was upon, and had ordered the boats round by the way of the Gogra
accordingly. During my stay at Bangermau, my leisure hours were agreeably
enough disposed of, some of them in conversation with the Fasdar, wherein the
accounts I gave him of Europe, the coast of Africa, its inhabitants, and the
West Indies, etc. were not less agreeable to him, than were those he gave of
the interior parts of Asia he was acquainted with, and of his enterprises
amongst the Mogul Tartars, Cossacks, Russians, and others, with his former
General Nadir Shah, interspersing them with anecdotes of that warrior's life,
equally singular and interesting, which creating an intimacy with Allybegkan,
that amounted to a degree of friendship, that on his part he had remarkably
demonstrated, by the compliment he had paid me of carrying me into his
Zunnannah, and considering me as one of his family; I had opportunities
afforded me thereby, of observing the manners and ways of the boys and females
belonging to him, and the behavior toward the children in the bringing of
them up, sufficient to enable me to form a general idea of the mode of
education of both sexes I have alluded to, that the Asiatics in these parts are
so remarkable for, as well as of the domestic economy of the ladies and
females in these parts, that otherwise I might not have had in a continuation
in the country of seven years, and agreeable to the promise I made you, I will
give you a summary of my observations, if not in elaborate terms that will be
represented without exaggeration.

The girls, when they have learned to walk, the use of speech coming to them
generally about the same time, have their baby cloths thrown aside, and in
their stead other dresses prepared for them, viz. long drawers, pizwagees,
veils, sashes, slippers, annulets, bracelets on their hands and arms, with
necklaces, pendants for their noses and ears, and round the neck, and taveeges
Lockets containing words out of the alcoran or Shustrah, intended as charms to
send off mishaps.
in lockets to fasten round their arms, and mindy to tinge their finger and toe
nails with, and as much care and exactitude observed by the mantua-makers in
the measuring them and making up these clothes, under the direction of their
mothers and female connections, as though they were preparing wedding suits;
the same care is likewise taken by the lapidaries, jewellers and goldsmiths, in
the accommodating the ornamental et-ceteras that they may fashioned in exact
proportion to their limbs, and the parts they are intended for, particularly
with respect to the diameter of the rings that are to be suspended by a pendant
over the young misses lips in question, who, always prior to this first
investiture of their sex, have their noses and ears bored, while lulled into a
profound sleep, to palliate or prevent the sensation of pain.

Thus dressed will these infants, in the arms of maids, be carried up and down
the houses and gardens they belong to, and out in Hackeries or Budgeroes daily,
not omitting plunging them every morning in cold water, to brace up their
nerves and increase their bodily strength, and handed from one relation to
another to receive their carcases; from that period until they arrive at the
age of between three or four years, (at which time children in these parts are
one third more mature and advanced in their bodily and mental faculties, and
adults in proportion, than cotemporaries of either sex of the same age amongst
the nations in Europe) when they begin to qualify them for the future necessary
purposes of life, by having them instructed in all the different branches
requisite for a female to be acquainted with; as for instance, embroidery,
plain needle work, reading and writing the Persian language, the composition of
the same by setting them tasks, and pointing out to them subject to expatiate
on verbatim, and by giving them dialogues to get off by heart, and repeat
before companies occasionally at home or abroad; and subjects to write letters
upon to each other, by way of miscellaneous correspondence, together with
dancing, vocal and instrumental music; and accompanying their mothers and
females belonging to their families by sun rise in the mornings to bathe, and
taught to copy them in the prostrations they make at prayer, and the remarkable
reserve and economy with which they divest themselves of their morning robes
and conduct themselves in their baths until they return to their apartments and
dress themselves in fresh attire. By this association a similitude of manners
and improvement in their intellectual parts, and exterior deportment, are
acquired, that growing up with them, subjoined to their other collateral
instructions, by the time they arrive at eleven or twelve years of age,
complete their education, and qualify them for the society of male or female;
while the boys are invested at the same time with dresses and ornaments suited
to their sex; and from that time until they arrive at seven years of age, when
they are circumcised, and some military additions are made to their dresses,
their hair shaved off their heads, excepting a single lock which is left on the
top of them, as a distinction to indicate their being Mahometans, both till
then and afterward, accompanying their fathers and male connections in their
daily adorations and bathings, as well as excursions abroad on elephants or
horses, which they are taught early to ride and manage, while they acquire
health and strength by these exercises and others, as for instance, the drawing
the bow, and discharging arrows, swimming for wagers against currents, and
diving, from great heights, into deep waters, together with the literary
instructions they receive from their preceptors within doors, by adhering to
the precepts of all these different masters, and following the examples of
their lofty connexions, in point of decorum and manly behavior, fit themselves
in their sphere, to fill such offices as their merits, fortunes, or different
interests may obtain them.

Having finished my business in the neighborhood of Bangermau, I took leave of
the Fasdar, and by the way of Lucknoar, as I mentioned, proceeded to Phyzabad
to join my Budgero and department there, where I visited the Vizier, and
presented him with a Nazur Park of Artillery.
in Golabbaug, Garden of roses.
by Morajah Dowlah and a son of Allybegkan, and invited to the Top Connor by
monsieur Sanson the commandant, saw the Vizier review his ten battalions of
Seapoys and train of artillery, conducted by the Europeans mentioned in former
letters. From Phyzabad I crossed the Gogra, a large river that discharges
itself into the Ganges, dispatched my boat to Chunnan Chopprach, facing Patna,
and proceeded to Gorackpore, where the Fasdar, a Mogul, entertained me with a
Notch and a fight with a wild buffaloe, and tigers; when a tiger being brought
forth in a cage, was let loose by his keepers, who, the buffaloe at the first
onset meeting, (though larger and more corpulent than any ox I ever saw, and
longer in the body by two ^et) overset him and dashed his brains out with his
horns, which were in a manner shapeless, resembling billets of wood as long as
a tall man's thigh, and 8 inches thick at the lower parts, when a second
tygress being let loose on him, he rushed at her head-foremost, but missing of
his aim, by a start she took sideways, she leaped on his back, and with the
talons of her hind feet in his neck and shoulders, and fore feet in his hind
haunches, with her teeth fixed in his loins, tore out his back bone, and killed
him dead upon the spot; and not having been fed for two days before, in order
to make her more voracious, tore out his entrails, buried her head in his body,
satiated herself on the flesh, and glotted herself with the blood, till, with
the heat of the day and fatigue of the combat, intoxicated with the buffaloe's
gore, she fell a sleep and laid in that situation in the beams of the sun.

From Gorrackpore I proceeded through the jungl^^ Wilderness.
, where frequently at a distance, I saw herds of elephants feeding in the
wilderness with their young, some of which, by the assistance of my refractor,
I could discover to be no larger than young bullocks, and others as small as
grown hogs. This wilderness is equally habited by tigers, leopards, baboons,
and apes of all sorts and sizes, elks, deer, antelopes, innumerable jackalls,
serpents, alligators and crocodiles; of the bird kind, eagles, vultures,
pilicans, hawks, kites, peacocks, all preying (beasts and birds) the one
preying on the other. In crossing which wilderness, penetrating the country to
the northward, I discovered the Napal hills, where I was obliged to precipitate
my march, in order to avoid the Rajah poots of those mountains, then out upon
the scout to intercept the Company's surveyors and detachments sent to explore
their country, and discover the passage up those hills, in order to come at the
knowledge of the rich gold mines their country is replete with; and one and
twenty days from the time I left Brangermau, I arrived at Chunnam Choppah, when
I embarked in my budgero, and proceeded with the rest of my boats by the way of
Jillinghee to Dacca, one of the largest cities in Bengal, and capital of a
province, and famous for its muslin manufactures, that are fabricated by men
who work under groves of trees, in walks resembling rope-walks, where they have
the threads of the muslins extended on bamboo stands, with cross pieces on
them, and traversed through and through with shuttles in this manner, without
being manufactured, as some have imagined, in a loom, which cloths being first
taken off these bamboo implements, though of book muslin, which is of the first
sort, are as thick as callicoes, till they have undergone a variety of washings
by the Dobens Washermen, employed by the Company to wash out and dress their
cloths, which they do by soaking them in water, and folding them up into
convenient lengths, and then beating them against notched boards that are
placed against the edges of ponds for that purpose, in which it is supposed one
fifth of the cotton employed in the fabrication of these cloths is expended.
. From Dacca, I proceeded down the Great Ganges to Chittagan. Chittagon is at
the bottom of the bay of Bengal, and is the easternmost of the Company's
settlements on the continent infra Ganges; is a very mountainous country, and
so subject to earthquakes, that half a year never passes away without some two
or three shocks. This province joins to Aracan, on the confines of the empire
of China, eminent for it is riches, and the idols of solid gold which are in the
temples of it is capitol. -- The inhabitants of Aracan are remarkable for their
dexterity in the use of bows and arrows, as well as for their depredations by
sea and land; -- they having frequently in the bay of Bengal, by keeping the
shore along, and screening themselves and their boats amongst the islands in
the mouths of the Great Ganges, seized upon large burs, Company's sloops, and
once or twice, some twenty years past, a brig or two, and carried them up the
rivers in the country, where they have kept the people prisoners with stout
wires run through their noses, and chains to their hands and feet, till the
Company have sent ransomes composed of European goods, to release them, which,
with the Dacca decoits Boors out of the inexplored parts of the country, to the
N. E. of Ducca, who come down to the edge of the Ganges, seize boats, and with
them rob and plunder, then retire back to their recesses.
, who infest these parts, and make it a practice of scuttling the vessels they
seize on, and after despoiling them, frequently massacre the crews, renders it
necessary to use some precautions to prevent being surprised by either in the
night; as in the day time, a single four pounder, with six or seven men armed
with musketry, would be sufficient to keep at a distance a fleet of such craft.
My business called upon my ranging these shores along, and gave me an
opportunity of informing myself of their haunts and force, which, with respect
to the Muggs, the name which the inhabitants of Aaracan go by amongst the
Europeans in India; their excursions are confined to the precincts of their own
shores, and the mouths of the Ganges, a fight of which they never choose to
lose, or venture out of the reach of, so far but what they may regain by the
turn of the sea breeze; and the Dacca dec^^ts, whose excursions are of less
eccentricity, never exceeding the bounds of the tides, with which they pass up
and down the embouchures of the rivers that enter themselves into this part of
the bay of Bengal. Any vessels to the southward of these parts, in a
defenseless situation, need not apprehend any attack from these quarters,
whatever they may from pirates of other parts in the bay of Bengal, which, as a
subject interesting to navigation in general, that I have promised to
comprehend in the series of my letters to my correspondents, and comply equally
with the promise I made them, of giving them an account likewise of the monsoon
and trade winds in these parts; I will embrace this opportunity of dedicating a
few lines to that effect, which, as capable of being comprehended in a narrow
compass, will answer all the purposes of a larger display, therefore will quit
the subject of pirates at present, and enter upon that of the winds called
monsoons. The monsoons are winds that blow and shift their direction
periodically with the seasons all over India, and are distinguished by the
names of the easterly and westerly monsoons. In the bay of Bengal, the westerly
monsoons begins to set in between the beginning of September and the latter end
of October, which shifting of the monsoons is generally attended with such
violent and sudden alteration of the weather, that the Company, to prevent the
loss of their shipping, and the underwriters that of a greater risk of their
insurance, have made it a principal article in their police, and the former
made it an established order for the ships to leave the bay of Bengal, on or
before the 24th of October, on which day the flag staff at Fort St. George is
struck, that the ships at anchor in the roads may regulate themselves
accordingly, a precaution necessary, not to be considered in a trivial light;
as a proof of which, I was standing on the beach at Madrass, in a tremendous
hurricane, that attended the shifting of the monsoon alluded to, that the surf
(which is the biggest surf in the known world) running mountain high, made an
innovation on the ramparts of the fort, that filled some of the narrow avenues
of the town up to the eves of the houses with water; in which inundation, some
few people were drowned; which wave, in its recession, carried away a Huvledar,
and a Seapoy that was sentinel on the saliant angle of the bastion, back into
the sea, where they were drowned; notwithstanding which dangerous surf, a
Kattamaran, with a Malabar on top of it, landed safe from an Indiaman, then
riding with three whole cables veered away to their better ends, and three
anchors a head, her yards and top-masts struck, and lower yards a-portland;
which foundered the same evening, and bulged, it was supposed, by striking with
a lift of the sea, notwithstanding she was then in six fathom water.

This monsoon blows constantly between the north and west, in a direction of
about West N. West, from about that time above mentioned, for six months
successively, when it changes and blows on the opposite point of compass, and
so on alternately; which change of the season is called shifting of the
monsoon, which is equally attended with as hazardous weather as the former;
which latter monsoon is called the easterly monsoon, it blowing between the
south and the east; while the other, for contradistinction sake, is called the
westerly monsoon; -- which winds blow in diametrically opposite directions in
the same seasons of the year, on the westerly side of the peninsula, the south
easterly monsoon blowing from that part of the coast of Africa which is
intersected by the equator, to the verge of the coast of Malabar, from April
till October; and the north westerly monsoon blowing the other six months via
versa. From which information, any captain of a ship could not fail to regulate
himself by; and with respect to any other pirates than those I spoke of
already, excepting the Coolies, who infest the coast of India from the mouth of
the river Indus, and all along shore to Diu, (a Portuguese settlement) to the
gulf of Guzerat and coast of Malabar; and extend their cruises from the
northward of Surat, down to Cape Comorin, the southernmost peninsula of
Indostan, and off the island of Ceylon, and sometimes to the southward of the
Laccadavies; and a small square rigged vessel or so that Hyder Ally at times
when at variance with the English, under Maratta colors or his own, may equip
at Mangolore A fortified seaport town belonging to Hyder, on the coast of
Malabar.
, capable of seizing on a vessel unarmed or unprepared, are all the vessels
that can come under the denomination of pirates this side the Chinese seas,
from which any danger might be apprehended, -- the Mallays in the straits of
Malacca, and on the island of Sumatra, never extending any of their pursuits
seaward from the eastern coast of the Bay of Bengal. What may or may not be
apprehended from these Coolies, Maratta or Mangalore cruisers, you will be able
to form a judgment of when I describe to you the magnitude of their vessels,
and their warlike equipments. I shall begin with the Coolies, as having from
ages back made a practice of ranging the shores along, and the coast of
Malabar, etc. as above described, and making prizes of what vessels they could
master, and carrying them into their ports. These Coolies are a race of Hindoos
that inhabit the coast of India from the borders or the river Indus to the
south-westernmost part of the gulf of Guzerrat, the major part of which coast
being frontiered with dangerous rocks and shoals, as well as the rivers and
creeks that lead up to the places where the principal haunts are, on account of
the intricacy of their navigation inaccessible to any craft but their own,
equip boats of different dimensions, of a size from fifteen to thirty or forty
tons burden; some with two and others with three masts, with light cotton
sails and rigging, and coir cables Made of the fibrous coats of cocoa nuts, of
the size of a small hawser, and some large and strong enough to ride a 70 gun
ship.
; -- in which boats, furnished with long bow chasers from a bore of three to
six pounders, and men armed with muskets, swords and pistols, with always a
black Toppee-wallas or two on board of each boat, they will find their way
through the intermediate passages of these shoals, and extend their pursuits
down the coasts I have described, attack and take any vessels belonging to the
Marattas, with whom they are generally at peace, and send or carry them into
their ports; but having latterly met with such warm reception from vessels
belonging to gentlemen in the Company's service, and private adventurers in the
country, as to have convinced them of the folly of attempting any vessels of a
respectable appearance, they now keep themselves aloof, and seldom or never
make a larger prize than a cotton boat or other coaster, or sometimes a fleet
of them in their way backwards and forwards to Bombay, and the mouth of the
river Indus, and others thereabouts; for though they will run within the Grand
Carranjar, and the islands that barrier the bay of Bombay, so close as to be
seen from the windows of the houses of the settlement, in hopes of cutting off
some small craft they espy coasting along the shore, they will on a small armed
sloop of the Company's appearing, make off like a flock of geese; -- though
upon the whole, a number of them might in a calm hamper a vessel so, by firing
at her with their bow chasers, and resolutely rowing up to her from all
quarters, and boarding her, make a prize of her; which they have succeeded in
some three or four times, and no more, since the reign of the celebrated
Angria, whom the Company took prisoner and entirely ruined, together with his
naval force. -- With respect to Hyder Ally's ships, under Maratta colors or
his own, they are generally old crazy vessels, patched up in his port of
Mangalore, armed with old rusty uneven guns of different lengths and calibres,
manned by Lascars, and commanded by Europeans of a low stamp, and
Callofringhees or black Christians, who at the sight of a vessel with but a
cannonade on their quarter deck, that stands her way without avoiding them,
will keep their distance.

I have now given you an account of the monsoons that blow in these seas, and
of the different pirates that infest them; -- I shall now return to Chittagon,
where having finished my business, I took my leave of the chief, and of the
gentlemen of the factory, and by the way of Dacca, I returned to Calcutta,
where having orders to proceed to Madrass, in the vessel I date my letter from,
we dropped down Ingillee, and from thence to Ballasore roads, and are now
getting under sail in order to proceed to the southward.

No. 22. To my friends and Correspondents in general, in Europe.
I Have been now four months at Madrass, during which time I have been witness
to transactions that to relate at large would fill a volume: I must cut them
short, and contract them into a narrow compass. -- I shall begin with my
arrival at Madrass, which was eight and forty hours after leaving Bengal, when
we dropped anchor in the roads, within half a league of the sort, bearing west
and by south, -- when two Mussoullah boats from the shore, and a Kattamaran Is
made of three junks of a very light wood tree, and lashed together in the rough
with cords; the piece retained in the middle being in general about nine feet
in length, and the other two pieces on each side two feet shorter, and are all
of (...) thickness, seldom exceeding eight inches in diameter; to the one end
of which they have a rope to hawl their Kattamaran by, or fasten her to a
ship's side with. With which Kattamaran these Mallabars will face the surf,
hawl her thus by the cords into it, and mounting it, set crossed with a slit
bamboo of about nine feet in length, digging in the sea, first on one side and
then on the other, make their way good through a dangerous surf, and even in
dark nights, for the lucre of a pagoda, (i. e. equal in value to nine shillings
sterling) extraordinary, on one of them embark, cut through the mountainous
waves, and gain the ships in the roads, deliver a chitty, i. e. letter, on
board of an Indiamen, and return with an answer to the town within a few hours;
and what is more extraordinary, three of these Kattamarans double manned, will,
by converting one of their Kattamarans into what the seamen call a Spanish
windlash, and the other into a heaver, purchase with a buoy-rope an Indiaman's
sheet anchor.
came along side; the Kattamaran with a letter from the governors messieurs
Bouchier and Dupree, and the Massoula boats to convey the captain, and any
passengers who might be on board, on shore; in one of which I embarked with
capt. McBride, and landed amidst a very great surf, -- when I waited on the
governors with letters of business, and recommendation; who were so emerged in
the concerns and negotiations with Hyder, that they were obliged to take turn
about night and day to receive and return answers to dispatches from their own
army, and from that quarter. They have invaded Hyder's country, possessed
themselves of several of his subjects not taken in arms, and among the rest
some principal women, and some of the males belonging to the family of
Sandysyab, and fixed their colors in several towns and hamlets, in the name of
Mamhudilly, the nabob of Arcot; to whom they pretended these places, with a
considerable more territory beyond them, belonged. In return to which he came
down to Madrass with his army, laid the whole country waste, and was obliged
them in short to pay him his own demands for the expense they had put him at by
the war: made them return these families of consequence they had taken
prisoners, and sign the most shameful concessions ever made by British subjects
to a foreign power; which put a blot in the Company's escutcheon it is thought
they never will be able to obliterate; which concessions being signed April
1769, and securities given for the mutual performance of the contracts, Hyder's
troops, who but a few days before had been the terror of the whole settlement,
entered the black town and the gates of Madrass, and were seen bartering the
plunder they had taken from the Company's connections, with the merchants and
shopkeepers of these two places; -- during which time I visited Hyder Ally,
within a few miles of Poulay-Malay, where he received me with his son, in his
tent, then a handsome tall youth, of an olive colored complexion, his father
being considerably darker, about five feet ten inches high, corpulent and
lusty. It was midnight when I entered his camp and was shown to his tent, when
asking my business, on my informing him that it was nothing but the desire I
had of seeing so great a man, he smiled, and ordering me a pair of super fine
shawls, as a mark of his esteem, I took leave of him, and with an escort he
ordered me, of a dozen Pullagar Horsemen armed with lances of twenty feet long,
which they handle very dexterously.
horse, they cond^^^d me to the gates of the line of circumvallation that had
been formed round Madrass, from sea to sea, to keep off his horse, -- when
knowing the countersign, I was admitted by the captain of the guard, and
returned to a tavern in the black town, -- I taking the opportunity of visiting
the Nabob in the night, that it might not be known to the council. A few days
after this, he marched toward his capitol, and general Smith had orders, which
were with the consent of Hyder, to watch his motions, by marching within a few
miles of his rear, till he had entirely quit the boundaries of Mamhudilly's
territory. I continued three months after this in and about Madrass, where I
had an opportunity of seeing their chintz pallampores stamped and printed,
which process differing but little from that performed in Europe, I think it
needless to relate; when a vessel being ready to sail, in which I proposed
returning to Bengal, I prepared for my departure accordingly, -- about which
identical time the attention of the Europeans on the spot, and the inhabitants,
was taken up with the appearance of a comet with a remarkable large
atmospherical tail that from the head to the extremity of the said tail
occupied the space of near thirty degrees in the heavens: its motion was
direct, and from an observation some of us took of its path, its orbit was very
elliptical, and moved with such velocity that it was not visible in those parts
fifteen days after its appearance, when it was in the zenith of Madrass. --
From which comet's appearance, the Bramins foreboded famines, wars, etc.

I prosecuted my voyage to Bengal, and in a hundred hours after my leaving
Madrass, arrived at Calcutta, where I was employed anew in the business of the
survey; but these (...) being countermanded, I was sent under the pretense of a
survey to assist in finding out such of the inhabitants about Burdawan and
Midnopore, and interior to those places as might, under the color of their not
having paid the back taxes due to the Sircar of the Soubah, be (if monied men)
sent prisoners to the Presidency, in order to be squeezed, for that is the
technical term used in India by Europeans, for extortion, which afforded me an
opportunity of being witness to the many unwarrantable means by which the
English East India Company's servants, exclusive of their commercial
emoluments, acquire their rapid and immense fortunes; amongst a number of
which, that I was witness to, while on this underhand business in the back part
of the country, were the following: on a senior, merchant, factor, writer, or
any other of the Company's servants being informed by their Harcaras of a rich
Bramin's daughter being on her way to be married, to seize on the company and
retinue, on pretense of mistaking the Bramin for an offender they were in quest
of; convey these people to a convenient retired place, there threaten to
sacrifice a bull, cow, or calf, and drench him with the broth of the creature
out of a horn; whilst the young bride and females attending her, would, on the
other hand, be threatened with being dishonored, if a lack of rupees or such a
quantity of money as these gentlemen should think proper to exact, was not
produced and securities given till the stipulated sum was paid.

Amonst the Gentoos, the bull, cow, or calf, is venerated and occasionally
deified, and excepting the Rajahpoots, none of these people will taste animal
food of any kind; and so tenacious in the observation of this rigid precept of
their religion, that even several vegetables there are they will not eat; as
for instance, onions, carrots, radishes, etc. Onions, why? b^^^use if they
excite not your pity when prepared to be ate, they extract, they will tell you,
tears, and should induce you to refrain from devouring them: reasons, which in
the eyes of European nations, however absurd to them, are irresistible; and
carrots and radishes are equally compassionated in their state of vegetation,
on account of the sanguine tincture of their roots, and the fibrous nature of
their texture -- so analogous, as they will tell you, to blood, sinews and
bones: and a drop of blood from a bull, cow, or calf, to fall on a Gentoo,
contaminates him; directly he loses his native purity, and can no longer
associate with his tribe; his nearest and dearest relations even cannot, or
dare not receive him; and equally scrupulous, or rather circumspect in their
conduct toward the fair sex; a man to lay his bare hands on the hands and arms
of a female, defiles her, and she is exterminated for ever her cast or tribe.

It is not surprising then that people so tenacious of their religious rites
and customs, and delicate with respect to their ideas of women, should rather
than have their deities sacrificed, themselves polluted, and their ladies
dishonored, surrender up a lack of rupees, or more in measure, to their
pecuniary abilities, to avoid incurring the formidable penalties of these
avaricious Top Wallas.

The business that I was employed upon took me up about six months, during
which time I became tolerably initiated into the various mysteries of
squeezing; when, returning to Calcutta, I was dismissed the service, for
refusing to give an account of a quantity of rupees I received, that I thought
myself entitled to as much as the Inquisitors. -- about which time a famine
happened that swept off within the space of four months, according to the
computation of the people or the country, half a million of inhabitants;
entirely arising from the measures adopted for the emol^^ent of the Company and
its substitutes, which took place as follows:

A monoply of grain of all species was thought of, and it was decreed in
council at Calcutta, that all the ghee, wheat, rice, Indian corn, bodgero, gram
and grain in general, within the three provinces of Bengal, Behar and Orixa (on
the pretext of measuring and sharing it for the respective proprietors) should
be delivered up to the Company's agents on pain of death, confiscation, or
imprisonment, at such a stipulated price; and officers appointed to see it
done. The mandates were obeyed, all the granaries ransacked, and seapoys put
over them till godowns were built for the depositing these articles; and within
three months from this decree's having passed, no quantity exceeding a (...)
(of ghee, or grain) could be procured without the Company's chop, and that at
an exorbitant rate, from the mouth of the Great Ganges, to the utmost confines
of the above mentioned extensive provinces. Money could not at last purchase
it: it was a reserve made, the Company said, for a time of need. What were the
effects of the monoply? It produced a famine throughout the country. Gentoos
and Mahometans would be seen begging aloud for routtee; and however contrary to
the tenets of their respective religions, the latter abhorring swine's flesh,
and the former, to them all animal food as obnoxious, particularly beef. The
calls of nature breaking through all religious ties, glad were these famished
people, the Gentoos, to devour the flesh of the cow; and the Mahometan's
swine's flesh, which pollutes, according to the alcoran, both body and soul,
and excludes them for ever the mansions of the blessed.

The famine increased; the natives began to die for hunger in abundance,
inasmuch that the streets of Calcutta were so bestrewed with dead bodies, that
it made it necessary for people to have their palanquins hung round with sprigs
of rue, and chaffindishes with burning charcoal and frankincense evaporating in
them, to keep off the noxious fumes of the dead bodies; for so thick were the
human carcases, that the bearers, in narrow streets, and at the turnings of
corners, were obliged to walk over them; the dead bodies increasing daily it
was more than the Hallalcores and Sewerwallas could do to keep the streets
clear of them, though they were well paid for throwing them into the adjacent
rivers.

Men, women and children, staggering after passengers, craving for alms, unable
to hold out any longer, world be seen to fall amongst other expiring Gentoos
and Mahometans, to shun the common fate of their famished countrymen; while the
name of Allah by the Mahometans, and Bogwan by the Gentoos, which signifies
God, in their respective languages, alternately rung by peals in one's ears,
would add considerably to the horror and awfulness of the scene.

The banks and sides of the river Hughly, which runs by Calcutta, lined with
the bodies of these unhappy people, attracting in prodigious numbers the
jackalls, piadogs, pillicans, Braming kites, vultures, and carrion crows, with
which this country abounds; the dead bodies and some of them but expiring (men,
women and children) screened from the eye by these contending parties of
voracious animals, and the amazing volumes of flies that the stench had drawn
together, formed a scene as horrid as obnoxious to behold.

The quadrupedes, some of them satiated with their repast, would be seen
sleeping, some watching, and others basking in the sun; whilst some finishing
and beginning their meal, interrupted by the intrusion of new comers (four
footed animals and winged fowl) skirmishes would ensue, and frequently
terminate in a general battle, in which all parties would be indiscriminately
engaged, -- the crow, kite, vulture, dog and jackcall, pell mell; at which
juncture, should caprice or curiosity lead a spectator to fire a gun toward
them, flocks of fowl would rise in bodies, thick and extensive enough to cast
an obvious shadow to considerable distances on the banks of the river, that
would seem to darken the adjacent shore.

After the height of this famine was over, the news being confirmed at Calcutta
of the Badshaw having broke with the English, in a small Budgero, with a fixed
determination of joining him I set off, with a few attendants and a Banyan, one
whom I could confide in, for Eleabas, and proceeded up the Ganges to above
Frakabad, where in a creek, a few miles from that city, I harbored my Budgero
not choosing to be seen by the English then at Canpore with Sir Robert Barker,
the then commander in chief of their troops; and made Frakabad my residence,
where I was accommodated with an eligible house for me and my attendants, by
order of the Nabob Mussoffre Jung, a Patan, about eighteen years of age, where
I waited until the English took leave of the Patcha and returned to Bengal,
which as a very interesting event, before I proceed on a detail of any other
matters, I will give you an account of the Badshaw's motive for this step, and
of the situation of his affairs when I arrived at this place.

The Badshaw having early discovered the sinister views of the English
East India Company, had a long while determined on striking up a confederacy
with the Marattas, who, glad to listen to any proposition that might favor a
plan they had in view, of laying all the country without Bulmonsin, the Beneras
Rajah, Sujahdowlah's, and the Company's territory, under contribution, affected
to make it a business on purpose to march for, in order to join Alligore, who
receiving assurances from Rumchundergunnis, Tucojah-hulkah and Sindia, to that
effect he regulated himself accordingly, and Nannaby, an important Maratta, and
a Bramin, likewise with Sindia, otherwise Petellzibe, and Tucojah-hulkah,
(three powerful chiefs) moved their armies from the Decan, and crossing the
Jumnah, encamped in Anterbade, while Nagebekan, an enterprising Mogul, of
repute in the Badshaw's household, augmented his body guard to the number of
6000 Mogul horse, and engaged about double the number of Indostan cavalry, with
a proportion of Indostan Burgondosses, perhaps a thousandmen, viz. mercenaries,
the Badshaw resolved to take the field, and riding through the gates of Eleabas
mounted on an elephant, followed by his Zunnannah and confidents, attended by
his court, and the two battalions of Seapoys the Company had all along allotted
him for his safeguard, he crossed the Great Ganges in a boat without
dismounting, and in a few hours afterward joined the Maratta army on the banks
of the Ganges, and encamped; having, prior to this, signified his intentions to
the British commander in chief, Sir Robert Barker, then on the spot, who
remonstrated to the Emperor with all his eloquence and artifice in vain, to
decline all thoughts of prosecuting such a plan, pointing out to him the
inexpediency of taking the field, and exposing himself to the mercy of a
rapacious set of troops; but the Pacha, tired out with the reiterated
impertinances of the English and their barefaced impositions, resolutely set
forward as described, and joined this new formed connection as intended, who
received him with all the marks of friendship in their power, and Eleabas
evacuated in a manner by this step of the Mogul, it taking wind through the
country, his fortunes were followed by such a number of opulent men, bankers
and merchants from all parts, who, having experienced the cruel oppressions of
Clive, Cartier, Verelst and Sikes, while at Cassambuzer and Bouehier, and Dupee
at Madrass, with Hornby at Bombay, and their agent in general, eagerly embraced
this opportunity to save their lives and fortunes, and traveling back up into
the country again in disguise, by the same unfrequented by ways, etc. they
first passed to join the English, gained the Patcha's army, and offering him
their pecuniary assistance, he found himself unexpectedly in a condition to
augment his forces, and add strength to his credit, while the provinces of
Bengal, Behar and Orixa, the vicinities of Madrass, Bombay and Surat, felt a
sudden want of monied men to furnish them as usual, with loans upon their
bonds. A few days after this the Badshaw moving within four miles of Frakabad,
and the Maratta army having changed their front to the rear, in order to
proceed on toward the north, I embraced this opportunity to visit him, when I
was instantly introduced by Akborillykan, an Aumeer, and on my presenting him
with a nazur, consisting of a dagger studded with diamonds, (Allybegkan in
return, to a brace of handsome pistols had made me a present of) he ordered me
a horse and sword, which is considered as a great mark of honor; when I was
conducted to the entrance of the court to pay my devoirs, which I did by
sallaming, during which my name was pronounced aloud, as likewise the
Badshaw's, by the Chubdar's attendants, when returning to the throne I was
welcomed by Shaw Aullim to his court. -- This happened to be his birth day, and
the Maratta army and his own embraced the opportunity of celebrating his
inauguration, on which occasion all the Omrahs of his household, and generals of
his army were assembled; a varando, supported with eight pillars was erected
for that purpose, that had a canopy underneath it of purple velvet, embroidered
with brilliant diamonds, and fringed with rows of pearls, emeralds, rubies,
sapphires, and other jems, under which was a throne with seven steps on, the
upper one of which was a chair without a back to it, upon which he sat with his
seven eldest legitimate sons, viz. Murzahjumakbux the eldest, about 26 years of
age, on his right hand, and Sukundarshaw, a tall young fellow, of a light cane
colored complexion, about 20 years of age, on his left hand, (both standing)
with Akborshaw his third son, a beautiful youth, about 15 years of age, seated
on the second step downwards, and Solomonshaw, a little boy, about 7 years of
age, and three younger boys below those three, all magnificently dressed with
diamond crescents in their turbans, scymitars by their sides, and poignards by
their wastes. I attended the Durbar Court of an Emperor or Prince.
five hours, during which time the Badshaw was employed in receiving nazurs,
returning presents, and conferring honors upon his grandees and officers of the
two armies, when he arose, and encircled by the eunuchs and Aumeers of his
household, who on that occasion linking their hands together, conducted him to
the tents where he kept his seraglio; when I was shown to a tent by order of
the acting Vizer, who informed me that I should not be able to do any business
with the Patcha till after the expiration of nine days, which interim I
employed in observing the Maratta army and the Patcha's, a sight easier to
conceive at once than to relate in few words, but confined in time, I must cut
this and other matters short.

The then army of the Marattas consisted of one hundred and twenty-five
thousand horse, interspersed with perhaps 200 elephants, commanded by three of
the most important chiefs of the Decan, viz. Sindiah, Nannahby, a Bramin, and
Tucojahhalkah, with about fifty thousand Pindarrahs, plunderers, mounted on big
and little, old and young horses and mares, with as many buffaloes, oxen and
camels, to carry their tents and baggage, and about ten thousand camels to
carry the tents and equipage of the regular horse; and about as many more
camels to carry the goods and equipages of the various merchants, artificers
and tradesmen, who follow these armies, with perhaps upon an average, about
fifteen thousand buffaloes, laden with grain and ghee; which with flocks of
sheep and goats, destined for the slaughter for those tribes in the army, whose
laws permit them to eat flesh, added to the thousands of piadogs and jackalls
that allured by the offals and carrion that falls to their lot among these
itinerant troops, with the innumerable quantities of vultures, and birds of
prey, attracted by the same incentives, and the immense volumes of flies of
different kinds, this immense body of men and animals are so formidable and
numerous, that on encamping on the frontiers of a territory, without drawing
their swords, they can exact contribution. The wood they require for fuel and
the grass they require for forage for their horses and cattle being so great
that wherever they encamp, the spot thereon and circumjacent country is laid
waste, the trees are cut down, the grass pulled up by the roots, and the wells
and ponds in general dried of their waters, and dreary barren plains left
behind; which, with above army of the Patcha, constituted the force prepared to
reduce to obedience the revolted power of the country. The nine days elapsed,
when I was informed he had received a message from Eleabas, to prevent his
employing me, in which they menaced him with maintaining some person as an
equivalent, if he gave me any encouragement, upon which I took my leave and
wished him success, and never saw him again until three years after that, in
his palace at Delhy, where he was seated on the throne of his ancestors, and
received me with unexpected marks of attention; about which time Sir Alexander
Champion, on St. George's day, in conjunction with Sujah Dowlah, engaged the
Ruhillah army, commanded by Hafuft Ramut, an eminent Patan, and totally
defeated it at the beginning of the action; the Ruhillah general being knocked
off his elephant by a cannon ball, and killed on the spot, when the English,
after enriching themselves with the plunder, marched with Sujah Dowlah to his
dominions, where soon after this eminent Asiatic warrior finished days in the
following manner, -- A beautiful young princess about 15 years of age, a grand
daughter of the Ruhillah general, who had the Ruhillah's been victorious, would
have been married to a prince, the second in command to her grandfather's army;
but he being killed and she taken prisoner by the Vizier's troops, and carried
before Sujah Dowlah, struck with her beauty he paid his addresses to her, but
disappointed in his expectations of her yielding to his desires, and attempting
illicit means, this princess determined not tamely to yield to his unlawful
embraces, in a contest between them that happened on the occasion, by a blow
from a poisoned poignard that she aimed at his heart, that in fending off with
his right hand entered deep into his thigh; notwithstanding all the advice of
many eminent physicians, and the joint efforts of doctor Fullerton, (then
surgeon to the English army, and to whom the Vizier's mother promised ten lacks
of rupees, should he save the life of her son) the wound mortifying, and the
baneful taint of the poignard contaminating his vitals, he expired in great
agony fourteen days from that on which he received the blow; -- and to prevent
the circumstances of his death transpiring but as little as possible, he was
buried incognito, in Mawtabbaugh, at Phyzabad, in the forty eight year of his
age.

Thus after having rendered himself conspicuous, and even formidable in the
eyes of Asiatic nations, by a long series of warlike enterprises, (by the hands
of a female, a girl, and a captive! -- in the center of armed troops) fell this
blazing star of the eastern hemisphere; he having in point of retinue, grandeur
of his army, and brilliancy of his Seraglio, obliterated all his cotemporary
princes in the East, -- a just sacrifice to his folly and dishonorable aim.
Adieu.

THE author of the preceding pages, having by a long residence in India,
acquired a local knowledge of those parts that few Europeans can pretend to,
and presuming a list of a few articles that he imagines could not fail of
selling well in some particular parts of India, might be acceptable subjoins
the following list.

Plaster of Paris, packed in barrels, to send up the Indus and Ganges.
Daddybyseet, a rich Persian at Surat, or his folks at Bombay, would contract
for large quantities.

French or Dutch cordials, in small bottles, to retail on the coast of Mallabar.

Spermaceti candles and globe lamps, any where above Calcutta up the country.

English tin, iron hollow ware for the country armies, and iron boilers for
their sugar bakers; with light cannon for field pieces, -- and brass or other
muskettoons; with musket balls, and cartridge-boxes, and moulds to cast them
in, would be bought up at a great rate by the Marattas in the gulf of Guzerat.
-- Any Guzerat, Debash, or Banyan, at the settlements in India, would treat
privately for such articles. Pistols and muskets, would be sure sale at the
above places.

In return, staple articles for the China market, could be had, viz. --
Putchac, sandal wood, ivory and ebony, with cotton at 6 d sterling per pound,
the best sort; -- likewise cornelians, mocco stones, agates, etc. Putchac is a
root thick as carrots, but the color of snake root, used by the Chinese in
their dies, and bears a great price at Japan, Canton, and Manilla.

A GLOSSARY, Containing an explanation of the Asiatic names and terms not
explained in the letters.
A
ALLIGORE, one of the names of the present Mogul. Anterbade, a tract of land
lying between the great Ganges and the river Jumnah. Aumeers, synonimous to
Omrahs, Grandees. Assallam allycum, in the name of God I hail you.

B
BOCKALLS, shopkeepers -- Buzar, a market place. -- Burs, boats of great
burden, used for the transporting of salt and saltpeter up and down the
Ganges. Beringoalls, hollow brass timbrels. Byragees, Hendoo pilgrims. Bramin
kite, kites with beautiful plumage. Bissim allah nircuah alloim, in the name of
God, Amen. Badshazadee, the daughter of a sovereign prince. Bungaloes, places
like summer houses. Banyans, brokers. Budgeroes, barges er galleys.

C
CHOQUEES, watchmen over goods by sea or land. Cuttlebashes, Mogul horsemen,
whose business it is to depredate principally with the sword. Cejohs, children
who have been emasculate. Coolies, a general name for laboring men. Chunam,
cement. Cheerabund, virgins. Classes, seafaring men. Chowrees, whisks made of
the hair of cow's tails. Chummars, tanners. Chillam and Chillamchee, washhand
bottle and basin. Catchary, seat of justice. Chop, signet and seal.

D
DINGHY, a sail-boat for fishing or ferriage. Dandees, rowers.

F
FAKIRS, itinerant fanatics or pilgrims.

G
GHEE, butter melted and boiled down 'till it is turned to oil, in which state
it will keep pure two or three years. Gungees, markets or places for fairs.
Godowns, magazines or stores. Gots, wharves or landing places. Gollandashes,
artillerymen.

H
HAFUSTS, aged men who affect to know the alcoran off by heart. Hadgees, Arabs
or others who have visited the tomb of Mahomed. Hackeems, quack doctors.
Hallacores, cleansers of common sewers. Hooker, an Indostan pipe, with a bowl
in form of a churn, fixed to a flexible tube that curves round the arm, from
nine to fifteen feet in length. Hadgerat Eesah, Christians.

J
JAGHIRES, sinecures of government, territorial or otherwise.

K
KILLADAR, captain of a fort.

M
MUNJUN, an astringent powder for cleansing the teeth, Munsub, a degree or rank
in the realm. Molvies, theologicians and expounders of the alcoran. Mohars,
gold rupees, equal in weight and six to silver rupees. Mangees, padrons or
cockswains of boats. Mittee, alluding to multan mittee, like fullers earth, but
of aromatic smell.

N
NADGUMES, astrologers and fortune tellers. Nizam, sovereign of the Decan.

O
OMRAHS, grandees.

P
PATCHA, a king. Phillnashan, elephant and suit of colors, a princely mark of
distinction Patans, a tribe of mahometans. Punkahs, large or small sans.
Pyrumbur, prophet. Peerzadah, priest. Pig-dannies, spit-pots. Punky, or Moor
punkies, long petiaugua rowed with paddles. Pagoda, an Indian temple, likewise
a piece of gold coin. Piadogs, wandering dogs.

R
RASSALADAR, not an emperor's daughter, as represented in the letters, but a
field officer. Rajah, a Gentoo prince. Rupees, silver coin in value from half a
dollar to half a crown. Ramol, handkerchief. Reuttee, bread. Riets, subjects.

S
SHAW AULLIM, present emperor of Indostan. Shazadah, similar to the prince of
wales in England, the dauphin in France, or infanta in Spain, Soubah, viceroy.
Sapary, belonging to beatle. Sircar, the government. Shastra, the Gentoos holy
writ. Seer, about a pound weight. Sewarwallas, hog drivers. Serindahs, violins.
Sulphas, pipes, but less than hookers, their tubes being like cyphons, and
their bowls like cream-pots.

T
TAVEEGE, explained in the letters. Toppee-wallas, men who wear European hats,
meaning Christians. Tomtoms, tabor and pipe men or drummers. Tarsys, a race of
Indostan horses.

Z
ZEMINDARS, freeholders and farmers.

SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
GEORGE WASHINGTON, President of the United States, etc. JOHN ADAMS, L. L. D.
Vice President. NEW YORK:
A
HENRY Aborn, John Abrams, Arthur Adams, Jecamiah Akerley, Wm. Alexander,
Anthony L. Anderson, Alner and Bogart, Pascal de Angelis, Nicholas V. Antwerp,
Nicholas N. Anthony, John Armery, Gilbert Aspinwall, John Atkinson, Wm. Ash,
Aulay M'Aulay, Richard M. Ayscough.

B
Christian Baehr, Gardener Baker, Joshua Barker, Robert Barker, Punderson
Bartow, N. G. Barbarin, Margaret Batton, William Bayard, John Beckly, Alexander
Berry, Peter Bertin, Simeon A. Bailey, Joseph Bindoon, John Blagge, Daniel
Bloodgood, Samuel Boyd, John Botton, George Bond, Robert Bowne, George Bowne,
jun. Peter Brinckerhoff, John Brinckerhoff, Theophilus Brower, Thomas Brown,
Wm. Bryar, James J. Bull, Richard Bullock, Andrew Bunlay, John Burger, John
Burrall, Josias Byles, Bartholomew Burges, jun. C. Burges, Sally Burges
Juvenex, J. Boulton.

C
John Campbell, Samuel Campbell, Nicholas Carmer, Edward Carroll, Charles
Carroll, David Cation, Thomas Cavenaugh, James Chalmers, J. A. Chevallie,
Michael Chenevan, Francis Child's, Thomas Clark, Isaac Clason, Lewis Clephan, De
Wit Clinton, Doctor Coan, Elijah Cock, Andrew Cock, Walter Cochran, Robert
Cocks, jun. Daniel Coe, Peter Cole, Wright Coals, John Collins, Noah Comroy,
Daniel Colton, jun. Jacob Conkline, William Constable, Job Cook, David Cook,
capt. Cornelius Cooper, Those. Coxe, jun. Tench Coxe, William Corwin, P. Cruger,
H. Cruger, George Cummings.

D
Harry Davis, Fred. Davoue, J. Dayton, Wm. Davy, Corn. Decker, jun. Wm.
Deforest, Gerardus Deforest, 8am. Delaplane, Peter Demilt, S. Denton, Geo.
Dickinson, A. Dodd, Eze Dodge, F. Dominick, Geo. Douglass, jun. Wm. Douglass,
R. Drake, Jas. Drake, T. Drake, Alfred Dresser, Wm. Duer, S. Dutch, Duychinck,
James Duane, Isaac Devenport, George Douglass.

E
Wm. Edgar, Essing, Embree, Charles M'Evers, James M'Evers, jun.

F
James Farquhar, Joseph Field, Samuel Finlay, Cornelius Fish, J. Fish, Sampson
Fleming, Royal Flint, Stephen Ford, Wm. Fosbrook, Jacob Foster, Joseph Foulkes,
John Franklin, Abraham Franklin, William Fraser, Caleb Frost, Michael Fullam.

G
Daniel Gantley, Andrew Garr, Samuel Gautier, E. Gerry, Wm. B. Gifford, Wm. W.
Gilbert, Thomas Gilbert, John G. Glover, Isaac M. Gomez, Edward Goold, Thomas
Gorewick, R. Gilchrist, Sheldon Graham, Mrs. Graham, Robert Graham, Roswell
Graves, David Gray, Thomas Greenleaf, Joseph Governeur, Isaac Griffin, John D.
Gross, D. D. Able Gruchard, James Griffiths, Oliver Glean, John Gould, John
Greenwood, John Graham.

H
George Hacket, Jeremiah Hallett, James Hallett, J. Halsey, Alexander Hamilton,
S. T. William Hamilton, sen. A. Hammond, Lemuel Hand, Henry Hanton, Theodosius
Hanwick, Barnard Harris, John Harrington, Hallett and Bowne, Harrison and
Purdy, Richard Harrison, Lewis Hartman, Christopher B. Hazard, Ephraim Heart,
Genesis John Hathorn, Nathaniel Hawxhurst, Thomas Hertell, John Henry, Cornelius
Hertell, William Heron, Thomas Hicks, Jacob Hicks, Elias Hicks, Josiah Ogden
Hoffman, M. Hoffman, Christopher Hoffman, James Y. Holly, Noah Holly, John
Hopkins, Leake Hunt, Richard Hunt, Robert Hunton, John Huttell, Jan. Thomas
Hamors, Robert Hodge, W. Hill, William Howell.

I
Isaac H. Jackson, John Jay, chief justice, Benjamin Jayer, William Samuel
Johnston, president of Columbia College, John Johnston, Henry Johnston, William
Johnston, Benjamin Jones, James Jones, Mordica Jones, Geo. Joy, Benjamin Judah.

K
William Keating, John Keese, Samuel Kelly, John Kemp, John Kempton, Rufus
King, Abraham King, Daniel Kingsland, William Kinman, Thomas Kipp, Isaac
Knevels, John Knevels, Henry Knox, sec'ry at war, Mrs. Knox, Charles Knowles.

L
John La Bagh, Miss Hannah Laboyteaux, Edward W. Laight, John Lamb, collector
of customs, Thomas Lane, John Lasher, Solomon Lattus, Augustine H. Lawrence,
Samuel Lawrence, Richard Lawrence, Thomas Lawrence, Morris Lawrence, William
Leaycraft, George Leaycraft, Jacob Leonard, Eleazer Levy, Hermon Le Roy, George
Lindsay, William Linn, D. D. Anthony Lespenard, William Livingston, J. H.
Livingston, S. T. P. Edward Livingston, George Lorillard, Arnot Love, Samuel
Low, Nicholas Low, John Low, Henry W. Ludlow, George Ludlow, George Lion,
William Lypton, Dominic Lynch, Samuel Luydam.

M
Solomon Macks, Alex. Macomb, Isaac Manning, A. Marshall, John Mason, D. D.
Leff^rt Martense, Abijah Masterton, Peter R. Maverick, William Maxwell, Daniel
M'Cawley, James M'Cready, Will. M'Clatchie, James M'Cawl, Hugh M'Dougall, Jas.
M'Evers, John M'Donald, John M'Farlane, Alexander M'Gillivray, chief of the
Creek nation; John M'Mennomy, Robert M'Mennomy, John M'Kiernan, Lot Merkel,
Joshua Mersereau, Mitchel and Brewster, Wm. Mooney, John Moore, J. Morgan, Wm.
W. Morris, Jacob Morton, G. Mouwood, John W. Mulligan, Peter Jay Maro.

N
Peter Newman, James W. Nicholson, John L. Norton.

O
Joshua Oakden, J. Ludlow Ogden, Jos Olney, Michael Ortley, William Osborne, L.
W. Otto.

P
John Palmer, jun. Daniel Parcut, James B. Patterson, Josiah Pearsall, John
Peter's, Caleb Pell, Benjamin Pell, Nevers Perry, Arent Peuyn, John Pintard,
John M. Pintard, Richard Platt, Elizabeth Pook, Wright Post, Abraham Polhemus
Samuel Post, John Powel, John Preston, Peter Pride, Alexander Proudfit, Samuel
Provoost, bishop of the episcopal church; William Provoost, J. B. Purdon,
Robert Pearce.

R
John Ramage, Thomas Randall, John Rankin, Abraham Rapley, Jacob Reed, colonel,
D. Reedy, John Ramsey, Terence Reilly, Abra. Beach, D. D. James Renwick. John
D. Revere, Richard Rhilander, James Ricker, junior, George Richards, William
Richardson, jun. Nicholas Roberts, Ezekiel Robins, James Robinson, William J.
Robinson, John Rodman, John Robertson, Moses Rogers, John Rogers, D. D.
Cornelius Rogers, William A. Rollinson, Joseph Rose, Nicholas I. Roosevelt,
Robert Ross, Henry Rutledge, Albert Ryckman, Elbert Roosevelt.

S
Comfort Sands, Joshua Sands, Thomas Sattere, Seaman and Franklin, Teunis
Schenk, jun. Peter A. Schenk, Matthew Scott, Jacob Seaman, Richard Seaman,
Isaac Sebring, Joseph Sebring, Cornelius B. Sebring, Peter Schemerhorn, Abraham
A. Setoover, William Seton, Rev. Gershom Seixas, John M. Shabzel, Jacob Sharp,
jun. Charles Shaw, George Shipby, Jacob Sherred, William Shotwell, Isaac
Shotwell, John Siddle, Edward Shepherd, teacher of mathematics; John Shepherd,
Isaac Stymets, Anthony Simmons, William Sharp, Jas. Sculthorpe, George Sim,
John Shaw, Benjamin Smith, John Smith, Richard Smith, David Smith, P. N. Smith,
James Smith, Jacob Smith, William Smith, William Smith, jun. Thomas Smith,
Joseph Smith, Nathaniel Smith, James Smith, Roger Smith, George Snowden, jun.
Henry Snyder, John John Soane, Francis Summers, Daniel Stanbury, Rev. I.
Stamford, M. A. John I. Staples, jun, Ebenezer Stevens, John Stewart, John
Story, William Strong, Joseph Stretch, Nathan Strong, Samuel Stockwell, James
Stuart, Peter G. Stuyvesant, B. Swartwout, jun. Zachariah Sukely, Caleb Sutton,
James Saidler, Those. and James Swords, Samuel Henderson, Jacob Seaman.

T
Sam. Talman, Sir John Temple, Robert Thorn, Henry Thomas, William Thomas, Tho.
Thompson, John Thompson, Cornelius Tiebout, Francis Tillon, Silvester Tiley,
James Todd, Daniel Tooker, John Townsend, John Trost, Andrew Trumbull, John
Trumbull, Those. B. Buttler, John Turner.

V
Thomas Vail, Matthias Valentine, Adam Van Alen, William Van Beuren, Coertlandt
Van Beuren, Jacob Vandervort, John Vanderbilt, Jeremiah Vanderbilt, Jacob
Vanderheyden, Peter Van Devon, David Van Nauser, John Van Nostrand, Daniel Van
Voorhis, Richard Varick, mayor, Joseph Vear, Daniel Verplanck, Simon Vous.

W
William Wade, William V. Wagenen, Thomas Wainwright, George Walker, Daniel
Walker, J. Walker, Charles Walton, William Walton, jun. Henry Waning, Richard
Ward, Samuel Watkins, Asa Waugh, C. R. Webster, Jas. Weeks, Charles Wilkes,
John Wells, Azarias Williams, David Williamson, Thomas Winslow, capt. John
Wilson, P. Wilson, Timothy Wood, James Woods, Nathaniel Woodward, Jeremiah
Wool, Hon. J. Wyckoff, William Wright, John Wyliery, Henry Walton, William
Lowerre.

Y
Joseph C. Yates, Dr. Joseph Young, J. Young.

ELIZABETH TOWN:
Jeremiah Ballard -- John Clarke, John Chandler, major William Crane. --
Jonathan J. Dayton, Elias Dayton, Luther Dean, John Donington. -- Richard Gray.
-- Job Naines. -- Jonathan H. Lawrence, Samuel Lee. -- William Ogden. -- R.
Quigley, Thomas Quigley. -- George Robertson. -- Samuel Stackhouse, Samuel
Smith, Wm. Shute. -- Matthias Williamson, Lewis Woodruff, Isaac H. Williamson.

RAHWAY:
Charles Howel Hughes. -- William Lawrence. -- Jonas Stanbury.

NEW-BRUNSWICK:
John Bayard, Jacob Bogart, Joseph Bonney, Cornelius T. Broeck. -- Samuel
Carlisle. -- John Dennis, jun. Staats V. Deurson, Wm. Dunham. -- Luke Edgerton.
-- Peter Gerretsen. -- Thomas Hance, Jacob R. Hardenburg, Jacob R. Hardenburg,
jun. Aaron Hassert. -- Walter Kercole. -- William Lawson, James H. Low, Wm.
Lupp. -- M. Marchett, W. Monteath, John Tailor, Mayor. -- John Neilson. --
William Paterson. -- W. Richmond. -- Edward Stevens, James Stevenson, Those.
Schureman. -- H. Trappagen. -- Isaac Vanorden. -- Anthony W. White, Gershom
Williams, John Wyckoff, Henry Wyckoff, Corn. P. Wyckoff.

PRINCETON:
John N. Abeele, Daniel Agnew, I. Anderson. -- Jacob G. Bergen, John R.
Bleccker, Jacob Burnet. -- Joseph Caldwell, R. Calleway, James Campbell. --
Robert B. Deas, Allen R. Buckett. -- M. Gelston. -- John Harrison, Henry
Hollyday, Andrew Hunter. -- Edmund J. Lee, Wm. S. Lee, John Little. -- Francis
Marcoe, Wm. Matthews, Walter Minto, L. L. D. James Moore, Captain, Stephen
Morford. -- John Otto. -- Ebe. H. Pierson. -- Joseph Reed, James C. Roosevelt,
James D. Ross, William Ross, Perez Rowley. -- Adam Shaw, Abraham Skinner,
Edward Simpson, Samuel S. Smith, D. D. Fred. Stone, Samuel Stout, jun. -- Jesse
Tailor. -- John Wetherspoon, Peter Wickoff, Thomas Wiggins, Silas Wood, A. B.

TRENTON:
Isaac Bardes, Thomas Barnett, J. Benjamin, jun. Joseph Broadhurst. -- John
Chambers, Alex. Chambers, jun. John Cox, Gershom Craft, John Curtis. -- Lewis
Evans, James Ewing, Mrs. Maskell Ewing. -- Nancy Fisher -- John Green, Captain
of the Empress of China Indiaman. -- B. Hanlon, George Holland, Isaac Horner,
jun. Aaron Howell, Elihu Howell, William, K. Hugg, B. S. Hunt. -- Isaac Lecaa.
-- James B. Matehett, John M'Collum. -- Ephraim Olden. -- John Potts. -- James
Ruan. -- Charles Tomkins, Jacob Tomkins, jun. W. A. Turner. -- Benjamin
Williams. -- Archibald W. Yard.

MAIDENHEAD:
Jonathan Phillips, Capt. Joseph Phillips, Col. John Phillips. -- Sam Titus. --
Aaron Van Cleve, Philips Van Cleve, Miss Betsey Van Cleve.

BURLINGTON:
Bows Reed. -- James Craft, -- J. Henley. -- Josiah B. Loomfield. -- Samuel
Sterling. -- Doctor Samuel Treat. -- R. Jones. -- Frances Buller.

PHILADELPHIA:
A
Andrew Adgate, Robert Aitken, Joseph Aitken, Joseph Allen, jun. Wm. Allibone.
Those. Allibone, John Andrews, George Anoby, Joseph Anthony, Thomas Anthony,
Abraham Armstrong, Jas. Ash, George G. Ashbridge, Isaac Auld, Step. Austin.

B
Richard Babe, Richard Bache, Francis Failey, Henry Baker, Hilary Baker, Jacob
Baker, John Barclay, John Barker, William Barton, Benjamin S. Barton, Simeon
Belden, Peter Benson, Robert Bernard, Robert Bethel, S. Bethel, Charles Biddle,
William Bingham. Daniel Beechin, William Bood, Joshua B. Bond, Elias Boys,
Those. Bower, Ebenezer Breod, Thomas Britton, H. Brown, T. Bryan, Isaac
Buckbee, Robert S. Buckley, Robert Budges.

C
Andrew Caldwell, James Campbell, Thomas Canby, George Carlisle, Matthew Carry,
Thomas Cash, Samuel Ceutly, Samuel Ghew; Benjamin Chewir, J. C. (7) Thomas
Clamfer, Wm. Clark, David Clark, John Clead, Meredith Clymer, W. Clark, William
Coats, Nicholas Cochran, John Cochran, John Cole, George Cooper, James Cooper,
Samuel Cooper, Thomas P. Cope, Frederick Coningham, Henry Cooper, Josiah S.
Cotes, Seth Craige, Jacob Chingman, Edward Compten, W. Council, James Crammand,
William Cumming.

D
William Dalzell, John David, Wm. Davidson; Abner Davis, John Davison, William
Davis, Elias Dawson, Robert Dawson, Wm. Delany, Joseph Deler Croix, Peter
Dobet, Daniel Delaney, Benj. Duffield, John Dickins, Abraham Dubois, Isaac
Duncan, Joseph D. Dunker, William Duvees.

E
Jacob Eckfeldf, Adam Eckfeldf, Worsley Emes, Samuel Emlin, Philip Erick.

F
Adam Faulk, Joseph Fearon, Hugh Ferguson, John Fisher, Jamuel Fisher, John
Fisher, Elisha Fisher, John G. Fenthan, Wm. Forest, Alexander Foster, George
Fox, Samuel Foudray, Jacob Frank, William Frombisgu.

G
John Gammon, Benj. F. Garriguis, James Gaudette, Josiah W. Globs, W. B.
Goldthwait, Wm. Goldthwait, John Goodman, jun. Isaac Gray.

H
Andrew Hall, Fred. Hamberger, Gavin Hamilton, Charles Harris, John Heart, James
Hawthorne, Samuel Harlchurit, Sampson Harvey, Christopher Hemple, John Hervi,
Joseph Hewes, David Hickman, Robert E. Hobert, John Hofnel, jun. John Holland,
Caleb Hoskins, Thomas Howard, Asheton Humphrys D. Humphrys, James Hunter,
Thomas B. Hursh, Mahlon Hutchinson.

K
John Keble, William Kenley, David Kennedy, Caleb Kember, George K^^pe, William
King, Wm. Kinnear, (...), Samuel Krugsley, Frederick Kuhe, John Kanckoff.

L
Mary Landell, John L^^, John L. Leib, Robert Latimer, Joseph Lawnes, Dr. M.
Leib, Robert Lestie, Jerem. Lewden, Josiah Lewis, Josiah Lewis, John Lupton,
Josiah L^r^ey.

M
William Mackenzie, Anthony V. Mauncerick, William Martin, James Martin,
Charles Massey, John Matthews, John Matin, Arch. M'Call, John Mayben, George
Mead, Samuel Mead, George Meminger, John Mickeljohn, Thomas Mifflin, President
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; Joseph Miller, Wm. Miller, jun. Thomas
Miller, William Millward, Thomas P. Morgan, Joseph Morehane, John Morrison,
John Morton.

N
Randolph Neff, Conyngham Nesbitt, John Nicholson, Isaac Norris, Thomas Norton.

O
Hugh Ogden, Wm. O'Hara, Joseph Ollivier.

P
Samuel Parrish, Pearson Parvin, Edward Pinnington, Fred. Philo, Samuel
Pleasants, William Pollard, John Poor, John Porter, Edward Price, Procopis T.
Pollock, Joseph Price Pragers, R. Puttelgones.

R
Thomas Randall, James Read, James Rees, Philip Reilly, George Riepie, Jacob
Ridgeway, Samuel Roberts, Thomas Rogers, J. Ross, Geo. Row, Richard Rundle.

S
Wm. Sansom, Benjamin Say, Fred. Schweickard, George Sclosser, jun. Benjamin
Scull, Jacob Screiner, John Shaw, Those. Shaw, Jacob Sharles, Thomas Shields,
Shurp Delany, David Skerret, Isaiah Skinn, Geo. Simpson, John Smith, Snowden
and North, John Sowder, Philip C. Sommervanch, Wm. Standley, Walter Stewart,
Robert Stevenson, Henry Speel, Edw. Stanley, J. Stony.

T
Thackara and Vallance, Evant P. Thomas, Christ. Tobiger, John Tplift, Peter
Thompson, Jamas Todit, James Trueman.

V
Henry Voight, John Van Reed.

W
John G. Wacksmush, Philip Wager, Lewis Walker, John Walker, Robert Walton,
John Wallington, Frederick Watts, Matthew Watton, Jacob Weaver, Jesse Waterman,
Bernard Webb, John Webb, John C. Wells, Samuel Wetherill, John Westcot, Hannah
Wharton, Moore Whaiton, Henry Wharton, Samuel Wetherill, John Wilcock, Samuel
Wilcox, Joseph Williams, Isaac Willis, James Wilson, Fred. Wolbert, jun. Isaac
Wonell, Enoch Wright.

Y
Charles Young, Samuel Young, jun.

ERRATA:
INTRODUCTION, -- page xxii, l. 1, read army was. P. 51, l. 22. r. were
screened. P. 54, l. 20, r. pass where. P. 54, l. 24, r. choquect, etc. P. 55,
r. and as invariably. P. 59, l. 13, r. should I live. P. 84, l. 22, r. wheel
rockets, etc. P. 90, l. 16, r. by this. P. 90, l. 34, r. encouragement. P. 91,
l. 7, r. position. P. 107, l. 9, r. opprobious. P. 107, l. 14, r. when a
second, etc. P. 109, l. 16 and 17, r. (which to Christians though so agreeable)
to Mahomedans, etc. P. 116, l. 21, r. occasion. P. 118, l. 4, r. in. P. 120, l.
31, r. richly.


