

MINISTER preaching his own FUNERAL SERMON, etc.
IN ^e town of Cov^et, thirteen miles south-west of Gloucester, lately li^ed
the P^v. Mr. THOMAS CHAMBERLAIN who was a worthy and able Divine, and had been
a faithful Minister of that church twenty years; all which time he behaved
himself as a good Shepherd to his flock* pressing them on by the rules of the
Gospel, to the practice of a christian life. But o^ the sixth of September,
17^8, at night, as he was praying at his chamber-window facing his garden, that
joined the churchyard, he saw round the same a bright shining light and
several persons in glorious app^ walking therein, and heard a ravishing sound
of music, with melodious voices singing praise to the Most High GOD: A^ length
one, like a Husbandman, warned him of his Death, and told him still to do the
will of the LORD, for in seven days shall thou be with him in the blessed
mansions of the kingdom of Heaven, and fully possess those joys, whereof thou
have now but a taste; but before that time comes the LORD will declare unto
thee what (...) about to do to the inhabitants of the (...) this will come to
pass.

On the tenth, at night, walking in the same garden, praying and singing
Psalms, he was seized with a great drowsiness, and cried out, I will lay myself
down and take my rest, for the LORD is my shield and defense; he was taken in a
Trance, where he lay several hours, until his wife came to him at his customary
hours of praying in the garden. She endeavored to awake him, but all in vain.
After she had waited about three or four hours, with (...) sudden start be
awaked, and sighing, ^ried out with tears, O my good LORD! ^ave me not, I
beseech thee. Then turning to his Wife, cried out, My Dear, had you seen where
I was, you would ever admire the infinite goodness of God. She asked him what
he had seen? He answered glory inexpressible, which I am not to discover until
the next LORD'S Day in the Pulpit.

After this he bought a very plain shroud and coffin, and ordered his grave to
be made, and then invited his Parishoners to ^ome and hear his last Sermon,
which (...) preached the Sunday following, having his ^roud on and coffin
before him, and ^n declared his vision: How he saw Death riding in triumph upon
a pale horse, (...) of the message he had given him to warn the inhabitants of
the earth, and of his dying in his Pulpit.



When he had delivered the same, he got up into the Pulpit and exhorted them to
give good heed to his words, and ponder them in their heart: After which he
proceeded as follows:

JOHN XVI. 16. A little while and ye shall not see me, and again a little while
an^ ye shall see me.


WHEN my senses were lulled (...) and my soul, as it were, had taken its flight
into another world, I was kindly saluted by the same Person that had warned me
of my Death; with him were two others clothed all in white, having crowns of
gold upon their heads, who welcomed me with, "Thou blessed of the LORD," and
bid me drink freely of the cup of salvation; then was I led by him to a gentle
ascent, where I beheld the heavenly Jerusalem, and the glory of GOD, the walls
thereof were of crystal, and the City of pure gold; it was apiece, and
each square had three gates, and the foundation of the walls of the City were
garnished with all manner of precious stones, and the streets of the City were
of pure gold: One of my Guides said, this is the City of God; it has no need of
the sun nor moon to shine on it, for the glory of God does enlighten it, and
none can enter it but such as are his, whose names are written in the Book of
life. O Lord, I beseech thee, said I, permit thy servant to enter in. That thou
shall do, (...) the Angel, but thou must first die in (...) heart, and then
shall thou enjoy a (...) how (...) of the Saints, and take pos^ wit^ of the
glories laid up for th^se (...) ^ly love him. No tongue can ex^ss, nor can it
enter into the heart of in ^o conceive of the glories that I (...) held there:
There I saw Angels and ^ch-angels, the Seraphims, with all the ^eavenly host of
such blessed souls, who while on earth, truly served the Lord, and who were
then enjoying the just reward of their labor, walking in the presence of their
Lamb in great glory, with crowns on their heads, singing halelujahs to the most
High: Now, said the holy Angel, you shall see the state of the damned, and all
who do not make their peace with God. Then taking me down the hill o^ he bid me
look on my left hand, whe^o^ I had a most dreadful prospect of the bottomless
pit, burning with fire and brimstone, which put me into a great trembling,
because I saw a great many Devils on the first brink thereof, some of which
offered to catch me: But the Angel bid me take courage, for they could not hurt
me: and looking a little more earnestly on them, I per^eiv'd the^ were chained,
which gave me (...) assurance. Behold! had you, (...) cries of the damned, and
see^ (...) ^ments, you would never dare (...) nor offend God any more. There
(...) the Atheist cry out, he found the ^er^ vengeance of a just and incensed
God There did the Li^r cry out against the deceitfulness of his heart,; the
^u^to^^ against his lust; the Drunkard against his excess; the Swearer, Curser,
and Blasphemer against the unknown wickedness of their polluted tongues and
deceitful hearts; the Gallants against their pride; and every miserable sinner
^ay exclaiming against the transgressions that had brought his soul into that
miserable state. Alas! alas (...) there was no pity to be had, nor ease to
their torments. Consider this, my beloved, even while I am with you, and lay it
to heart whilst you have time to repent, and God is now ready to receive and
pardon every penitent sinner: Let the consideration of Hells torments stir you
up to make your peace with God, before you go hence and be no more seen; if not
your portion will be with those miserable souls who partake of the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, never to be quenched. Many of you are hearty and
lusty now, but none know how soon the God of Heaven may visit you with a
deathbed sickness, or strike you with sudden death; therefore receive this as
a warning from a tender and most merciful Father, who desires not the death of
a sinner, but rather that he would turn from his wickedness and live. That what
I have now said is true you need not doubt, for you see my shroud on and my
coffin before me, the grave ready open to receive me, and in some few minutes I
shall be no more in this world: and what torments can be severe enough for me,
should I depart with a lie in my mouth.

Now, said my Holy Guide, thou have seen the inexpressible joys of the blessed,
and intolerable torments of the damned, I Will lead thee to one place more and
then dispatch thee with the Lord's message to the inhabitants of the earth: So
taking me by my hand be led me to a deep valley called the valley of the shadow
of death, lying between the Holy City and the place of the damned; there did I
see death in all its triumph; there was the Prince and the Beggar, the Rich and
the Poor^ lving equal; the haughty Lawyer, huffing Courtier and the griping
Usurer made no greater figure there than the meanest Peasant or poorest Beggar.
There did those faces and bodies that had been decked and enriched with the
most costly jewels and ornaments for beauty, lie unregarded, with no other
pomp, and attendance to wait on them than the dust, and the worms had equally
made the same prey upon them: Those faces that have often admired themselves in
the glass, there lay putrified with the smallpox, or other nauseous
distempers. The poorest body, who on earth appeared ever so despicable in the
eyes of the rich, here looked as lovely as the greatest Potentate. Death then
mounted o^ his pale horse, appeared in all his trophies, arrayed in all points
with most mortal weapons: His attendants were the smallpox, fevers, plagues,
sores and other contagious distempers, and ten thousand other instruments, with
which he triumphed over all nations, sexes and ages: While I beheld this sight,
I saw Death approach toward us, and though he was clothed in so many
frightful shapes, I was not afraid of him. I also saw my Holy Guide give him
new commissions, which as soon as he had received he flew as quick as lightning
to dispatch one of them; and he that held me by the hand seeing me take notice
of this, Thou Holy Man, will thou understand what the Lord is about to do? The
commissions thou see me diliver Death are commissions at large; he has now
power to wound the sons and daughters of men, for the Lord is angry with the
inhabitants of the earth for their abominable and crying sins, and he will
avenge himself. They murmer against me, says the Lord, when any calamity does
befall them, or when any plagues, sickness or war oppresses them; or when they
have scarcity of grain, or want the fruits of ^he earth, not considering their
sin is the cause why the Lord punishes the land for them. Blasphemies,
idolatries, drunkenness, adulteries, cursing, swearing, lying, cheating, pride,
gluttony, covetousness, wantonness and many other heinous crimes; for all which
GOD will surely punish them. He will begin to lay his hand upon them, by
causing wars to break out amongst them, and let them know, that if they do not
seek the Lord and repent of their wickedness, that the Lord will further
afflict and punish them; for tell them what an angry God can do: He can visit
all the corners of the earth, he can send the plague, pestilence, famine and
more bloody wars, as so many scourges for their crying sins. Return, therefore,
with this message to the children of disobedience, and say, that I, says the
Lord, have seen the oppression of the land, the enmity and hatred between the
people, devouring each other with malice; the cries of the poor have reached
mine ears, and I will be avenged of them who grind the face of the poor: I will
have the poor redressed, the fatherless relieved, and they that are afflicted
comforted; the abominations of the earth are great, Sodom and Gommorrah, Tire
and Si^on sinned not more than they.

For thus the Lord said, they have abused his mercies and slighted his love,
disregarded his calls, contemned his reproofs, refused his offers, tired his
patience, insulted his Messengers, despised his counsels, neglected his
warnings, disobeyed his commandments, broken their repeated promises of
amendment of life, and highly affronted his divine Majesty, who will surely
visit for such their iniquities; what calls, what invitations, what offers of
love and mercy have they slighted and contemned. How has he fed and clothed
them, preserving them in all times of adversity, fought their battles, humbled
their enemies, filled their vineyards, plentifully stored their fields with
corn, blessed and replenished the earth with all things by his divine
Providence, and yet they forget God, by not returning thanks for such benefits;
and now let them turn to God, by repentance before it is too late; remember how
God spared Ninevah, because they sincerely turned from their evil ways, and
repented in sackcloth and ashes, so God will likewise show mercy to them if
they repent. Depart now thou Holy Man; be thou the Messenger of this, and make
known what thou have seen and heard to the inhabitants of the earth. The Lord
has found thee righteous in his sight; be faithful until death, and thou shall
have a crown of life: For on the thirteenth day of the month, and ninth hour of
the day, thou shall be with the Lord, and receive the reward of come ye
blessed, and enter into the joy of thy Lord.

Then leading me to the place they found me in, I heard most ravishing music
from the holy City, with which I began to sing praises to the Lord, and then
awaked. Thus, beloved, I have made known to you the will of the Lord: I beseech
you, when I am in the grave, to spread this abroa^, that all the earth may
repent of their sins.

Serve the Lord, and in time avert these impending judgments from falling upon
you: You see daily how the Lord visits you, and how many go to their graves in
their prime; you see how death triumphs and visits you, and the smallpox,
fevers, falling sickness, blotches, bloody swellings and bloody wars, are the
harbingers to bring you to your graves; delay no time to seek God's mercy and
loving kindness while it is called today, least it be too late tomorrow. Live
in brotherly love and charity one to another; let no difference in opinion
cause hatred among you; do good to your poor Brethen, especially those that are
of the household of faith, not Cristians only in name but in deed; relieve the
poor, for in so doing you lend to the Lord. Grudge not, though your neighbor
be richer than you, and to get to Heaven, learn to do good for evil, and strive
in what station God has allotted you, to be therein contented. My spirits begin
to faint; let my Death be a witness to you all what I say is true, and then the
good God be with you, comfort and preserve you in this world, and at the last
bring you to his everlasting Kingdom. O my dear Savior, now I come, I come,
open thy arms to receive my poor soul. Uttering of which words, he immediately
dropped down in his Pulpit, which caused almost all the people to give a great
outcry; they brought him down and laid him in his coffin. He was aged
fifty-five years. -- Now let us join with one heart and one mind, and say, from
sword, pestilence and famine, from battle, murder, and from sudden death good
Lord deliver us. AMEN.

Country Shopkeepers, Travelling-Traders and others are desired to call at E.
RUSSELL's Office, in Essex-Steet, next Liberty-Stump; where is just published,
and sold cheap by Wholesale,

THE Bloody Register, No. IV. containing, a true account of the Lives of WALL,
SMITH and DU^^GAN, executed in Boston for Burglary. -- The ORACLE: A Pack of
Car^, turned into a complete and accurate (...)-Tell^ -- The PRODIGAL DAUGHTER;
or Disobedient Lady reclaimed, and several other Pieces suitable for Traders,
which will be sold ch^.




