Dr. Dana's Sermon, AT THE EXECUTION OF JOSEPH MOUNTAIN.

THE INTENT OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT. A DISCOURSE Delivered in the City of
New Haven, OCTOBER 20, 1790. BEING THE DAY OF THE EXECUTION OF JOSEPH MOUNTAIN,
FOR A RAPE.

BY JAMES DANA, D. D. Pastor of the first church in said city.

NEW HAVEN; PRINTED BY T. AND S. GREEN.

The intent of capital punishment.
DEUTERONOMY XIX. 19, 20. So shall thou put the evil away from among you. And
those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more
any such evil among you.


MY BRETHREN,
AN occasion so melancholy as the present, viewed in all circumstances, has
rarely, if ever, fallen under our notice. This numerous assembly, of all orders
and characters, will attend with reverence to the counsel that may be brought
from the word of God. Especially is it to be hoped, that he, whose tragical
death is to succeed this solemnity, may be all attention to the last sermon he
will ever hear. I have ever considered that I preached to mortal men; but was
never called to preach to one doomed to death by public justice, and but a few
hours before his launching into eternity.

AN important end of capital punishment, as it relates to society and this
world, is pointed out in the words read. This comprehends sundry particulars:
It is to rid the state of a present nuisance -- to prevent the extension of the
evil -- to reclaim or preserve those who have been, or might be in danger of
being, seduced by examples of profligate wickedness. So shall thou put the evil
away from among you. And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall
henceforth commit no more any such evil among you. A further end of capital
punishment will be attended to, as it is a natural consequence from the words.
This respects the offender, and a future world. Let us first attend to the
former.

WHAT is here said with immediate respect to perjury is applicable to other
crimes equally pernicious in their tendency. The direction is to civil
magistrates and judges, to make diligent enquiry respecting the evil; and upon
proof of it, to put it away by the excision of the criminal. It is a duty which
the civil guardians of a community owe to God and their people. They are the
ministers of God, by him appointed "revengers to execute wrath upon such as do
evil." They may "not bear the sword in vain." In being "a terror to evil
works," they are ministers of God for good to the community and its virtuous
citizens.

THE excision of a member of society can be justified only for crimes of
magnitude. It is putting a period, a reproachful and excruciating period, to
the probation of a fellow creature. A just and humane government will recur to
it only in cases where the sovereign of life has declared his will, or the
public safety clearly requires it. "Among the variety of actions which men are
daily liable to commit, it is a melancholy truth," says judge Blackstone, "that
no less than an hundred and sixty have been declared by act of parliament to be
felonies without benefit of clergy; or, in other words, to be worthy of instant
death. So dreadful a list, instead of diminishing, increases the number of
offenses. The injured, through compassion, will often forbear to prosecute:
Juries, through compassion, will sometimes forget their oaths, and either
acquit the guilty, or mitigate the nature of the offense: And judges, through
compassion, will respite one half of the convicts, and recommend them to the
royal mercy. Among so many chances of escaping, the needy or hardened offender
overlooks the multitude that suffer; he boldly engages in some desperate
attempt to relieve his wants, or supply his vices; and, if unexpectedly the
hand of justice over-takes him, he deems himself peculiarly unfortunate, in
falling at last a sacrifice to those laws, which long impunity had taught him
to contemn." Vol. 4. p. 18, 19.


SHALL crimes so different in their natures as murder and a trifling theft be
subjected to the same penalty? Policy, justice and humanity alike remonstrate
against it. "Death is of dreadful things the most dreadful. This terror should
be the last resort of authority, the strongest and most operative of
prohibitory sanctions, and placed before the treasure of life, to guard from
invasion what cannot be restored." It does honor to the wisdom as well as
lenity of our legislators, that not more than six crimes are capital by our
law. The lenity of government should rather be expressed in framing of penal
laws, than in suspending or stopping the execution. Government is weakened by
annexing to crimes such penalties as are too severe to be executed. It is a
presumptive evidence of the wisdom and lenity of our penal laws, of the just
sense our legislators have of the rights of the subject, and the importance of
life, that capital punishments are very rare with us. Institutions, providing
for the preservation and employment of public criminals of various description,
have been found salutary in many states.


THE execution of a capital sentence should ever be accompanied with
circumstances of solemnity expressive of public grief, and adapted to make a
lasting impression on all ages, ranks and characters -- particularly on
children and youth: Such solemnity will greatly subserve the security of the
state, and the cause of morality.

VARIOUS crimes were made capital by the jewish constitution, for peculiar
reasons which do not apply to other people. Nations are far from being agreed
in the number of crimes which should be punished with death. The circumstances
of different nations may require them to have recourse to this punishment for
different crimes. Nations in general have agreed to make murder, treason, and
rape, capital. The divine legislator has expressly interposed his authority
with respect to the first. And the reason assigned for the excision of a
murderer equally applies to all times and people: It is this: For in the image
of God made he man. The second, or high treason, is murder increased, and
extended to an whole community. The last is the crime for which this malefactor
is to suffer death. It is beside the intent of this solemnity to specify all
the crimes which the legislature and magistracy of a state may be bound to put
away by cutting off the perpetrators. Such we suppose this malefactor's offense
to have been. Seldom is such an offense so amply proved. For seldom is a
delinquent of this description so bold and shameless.

IT is on all hands agreed that a private citizen may defend himself against a
violent assault. The consequence is plain, that a state may defend her citizens
against such assault. When lenity to a criminal would be cruelty to good
subjects, on what ground does he expect lenity? The God of order has vested
civil government with authority to preserve itself -- to provide for the
personal safety and rights of every subject. He has commanded the civil
magistrate to put away any flagrant evil from the state. If this can be done
only at the expense of life, then life has been forfeited to the state.
Ravishment is such an outrage on humanity, an injury so great and irreparable,
a crime so baneful and dangerous to society, that civilized nations have agreed
to protect female honor from violence by making death the penalty for this
crime.

THERE is a distinction between the forfeiture of liberty, and the forfeiture
of life. But the criminal whose atrocious conduct has merited imprisonment for
life, does not differ materially in his moral character from one whom all will
allow to have merited death. And whether one who has wholly forfeited liberty
can have a claim to life will admit a question. In the instance before us, we
proceed on the supposition that it is unsafe and dangerous, and therefore
unfit, that such an offender should live. Those who are so depraved in their
moral character that they can neither be cured nor endured, are in the civil
state what a mortified member is in the natural body. As such member must be
amputated for the preservation of the body, so persons of such depravity must
be cut off for the preservation of the state. The master of a family expells
from his house the member whose residence in it is no longer consistent with
its order and welfare. Should his conduct as a citizen be equally vicious and
dangerous, the like power in civil government must be exercised in sentencing
him to death -- not to banishment. If unworthy to live in his own country, he
is equally unworthy to live in another. If he has no rights in his own
country, where has he any rights? And what indignity to another nation, to
transport into it such convict?

ONE design of capital punishments then is to rid the state of a present
nuisance, and protect good subjects. A further design is to warn and restrain
others of evil dispositions. That those which remain may hear and fear.

WITH this view the supreme ruler, in his moral government of the world,
sometimes evidently sets forth individuals, and sometimes communities, as an
example -- an example of his righteous severity; and an admonition to the
ungodly. You will readily call to mind various examples in scripture of the
judgments of God, final as to this world -- inflicted with the parental design
of giving a sensible demonstration of the malignity of vice, preventing the
extension of it, and awakening a just awe in the minds of many, who, were it
not for such admonitions, would proceed to commit all iniquity with greediness.
Divine threatenings as well as judgments recorded in scripture are all parental
warnings. The divine government is a pattern to earthly rulers.

SOME may imagine that punishment, especially capital punishment, must be
dictated by revenge. If only the case of the suffering individual came into
consideration, this might appear specious. But government, from the nature of
it, regards a public interest: It provides for particular parts or members in
subordination and subserviency to the good of the whole. Surely no individual
can complain that his interest is not consulted to the injury of any citizen --
much less at the peril of the public. He cannot complain, that he, being of an
abandoned character, is not spared to spread the contagion of iniquity. If
righteousness exalts a nation, and iniquity is its ruin, goodness requires that
such as would bring on this ruin be cut off. That must be a very bad
administration under which any subject is permitted with impunity to assault
his fellow subjects, or to seduce them from their allegiance. That head of a
family does not consider what he owes to his household, who suffers any member
of it to subvert all order, decorum and duty. Nor could we prove the moral
rectitude and goodness of God, were he not known in the course of his
providence by the judgments he execuseth. Punishment is his strange work. He
delights in mercy. But if this does not reclaim, he will whet his glittering
sword, and his hand will lay hold on judgment. Benevolence itself calls for
punishment in this or an after state, or there is no such thing as moral
government. In civil society, the wicked would walk on every side, and the cry
of the oppressed be in vain, the foundations would be destroyed, confusion and
misery would prevail, were punishment, capital punishment, never executed.

INGENUOUS motives are the best. But with how many have such motives little or
no influence? It would be well, could we, in inculcating morality, prevail with
all by representing the reasonableness, excellence and advantages of virtue,
the turpitude and misery of vice. But we are compelled to persuade men by the
terror of future judgment, and future wrath. With this view the scriptures
reveal future indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish. Yet even the
revelation of the wrath of God from heaven does not restrain many. They do not
believe, or do not fear, him who can destroy soul and body in hell. So in
regard to civil government, the love of it is the most worthy and sure
principle of obedience and submission. But what course must be taken with those
who neither fear God, nor regard man? who are impatient of control, and break
through the restraints of all laws human and divine? who would dissolve
society, and introduce universal anarchy? If such would be the consequence of
suffering them to live, they manifestly ought to die, that so great an evil may
be prevented. Such examples of public vengeance naturally strike terror into
others, whose lusts and passions might impel them to the same, or as great
evil, were it not for this warning.

THERE are but few who are made without fear. So awful and strange a punishment
especially, as in a few hours awaits this poor prisoner, is calculated and
designed to put the lawless in fear. On this occasion persons of all characters
have come together. Possibly there may be some in this great concourse, who
have been kept back from the same, or the like excess of riot, by no other
consideration than the fear of human laws. To such especially he is now set
forth for an example, and will be in a yet more affecting manner in the
afternoon. Very few have ever been more hardened and audacious offenders. Yet
even he informs us, that when in the midst of his career, one of his associates
was tried and condemned, he, with those that remained, heard and feared. Well
had it been, if they had taken warning, and committed no more any such evil.
But when they found that their companion, who met the just reward of his deeds,
made no discovery of his accomplices, their fears vanished, and they returned
to their former course. Now another, perhaps the most bold and subtle of all,
after having escaped the vigilance of the civil magistrate in several kingdoms
of Europe, is this day to be offered a victim to public justice. From the past
tenor of divine providence toward such offenders, the probability is, that
none of them will die a common death, but that all will share a similar fate
with this criminal. If even his heart failed him for fear, lest his iniquity
should be brought to light, how does it now tremble? If this spectacle of human
depravity and misery should prove a restraint to others from committing any
such evil, it will not be exhibited in vain. They themselves will have reason
to acknowledge the divine goodness in giving them this warning -- a check will
be put to such evil in the state. This example of wrath will praise God. It may
be heard of in the kingdoms where the prisoner long perpetrated the most
flagitious crimes. It may be a means of bringing his confederates in vice to
deserved punishment, of detecting a band of villains, combined for the vilest
of purposes, and as dangerous to a community as the pestilence that walks in
darkness. It may be a restraint to an horrible practice which has long
prevailed in Europe, and has begun to prevail in this country.

BUT whether it may be presumed or not, that this day's example may be thus
extensively known, and be followed with such salutary consequences; it is at
least adapted to restrain any of a like character who may be witnesses, or hear
of it. In this view its design is important to them, and to the community. If
such a warning should not be hearkened to, it must argue stupidity and madness
in vice, which forebode speedy destruction from God and man. Seldom is there
such an example, such a warning, as the present. God grant it may not be an
admonition unregarded by such whose degeneracy makes it a needful one to them.
What fruit of his past life has this condemned malefactor? The end is a
premature, shameful and violent death. In full health and strength, in early
life, in a moment, on a gibbet, he is to be dispatched into eternity.
Compassion itself calls for it -- public compassion. I add, compassion also to
such as have entered on a vicious course, or may be in danger of being seduced.
The prisoner preaches a better sermon to such than I am able. Look on him, ye
who make a mock of sin; hear, and fear. Behold, ye despisers and wonder. See an
early wanderer from the path of good education, an early despiser of God and
things sacred, one who has had no awe of sin and wrath, one who has sported
himself in the spoils of his fellow men, one who has speedily filled up his
measure of iniquity, one of whose untimely end you are to be witnesses this
day. Beware how you harden yourselves after his example -- stifle the checks of
conscience -- hate instruction, and despise reproof -- how you join yourselves
to company who are in the broad road to destruction. Such was the case with him
who is now set before you as a warning. He has been almost in all evil, and is
going to appear before the judge of all, to give account of himself. Should he,
in this situation, have a feared conscience, what thought more affecting!

THIS reminds us of another end of capital punishment mentioned at the
beginning of my discourse. It respects the offender and a future world, as the
former respected society and the present world. This is a consequence from our
subject. For crimes which call for such severity of punishment, which render it
dangerous to society that the criminal should any longer live on earth, must
needs be as scarlet and crimson, and call for a repentance deep in proportion.
When nothing short of death can expiate his crimes against his fellow subjects
or the state, his punishment is indeed final as to this world. But in this last
extremity his soul is commended to the divine mercy. What has been ever usual
under our happy government, ought to be the usage in all, to allow the convict
a space of repentance. To hurry him immediately from an earthly bar to the bar
of God, (extraordinary cases excepted) seems to argue want of sensibility and
compassion. To give him opportunity to consider, and give glory to God before
he dies, is the united dictate of humanity, morality, and christianity.

THE situation of a condemned malefactor, confined and chained in a dark
prison, an emblem of the shadow of death, the day of his execution fixed, must
awaken reflection in one who is not totally abandoned. The providence of God
intends it as a moral means of opening the ears to discipline. By this means
has he sealed the instruction of some. The natural horror of death, the
additional horror from the expectation of such a peculiar kind of death,
conduce to arrest the mind with apprehensions of eternal consequences. Where
some weeks are allowed between the sentence of death and the execution of it,
there is time for most serious consideration and penitential sorrow. The mind
is not thrown into such agitation as precludes sober reflection. In the
situation above supposed, the malefactor, whose mind is not exercised with
other thoughts than those of temporal death, must indeed be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. The second death, the wrath of an incensed Deity
abiding on him, the day of the lamb's wrath, the greater damnation for having
neglected a great salvation, raise other apprehensions than temporal
destruction. If the near view of the latter may be improved as a means of
quickening him in flying from the wrath to come, in this case he that dies on a
gibbet will have reason to be thankful that his wickedness was discovered, and
met a merited punishment from public justice. The expectation of the
destruction of the flesh, through the operation of sovereign grace is a means
of saving the soul from death, and of hiding a multitude of sins. Such as "sit
in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron;
because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of
the most HIGH;" have had their heart brought down -- have cried unto the Lord
in their trouble, and been brought out of worse darkness than the dungeon of
any prison on earth -- worse chains than any outward ones have been broken.

THE scriptures mention a thief who found mercy on the cross. But he was a
penitent, not a reviler. There were two malefactors on the cross at the same
time. One of them railed on the suffering Redeemer, saying, "Save thyself and
us." The other rebuked his fellow, saying, "Do thou not fear God, seeing thou
art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due
reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss." He proceeded, and
"said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. And
Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto you, To day shall thou be with me in
paradise." You see to whom these reviving words were spoken -- to one who had
indeed been a notorious sinner in his life, was capitally condemned, and
brought forth to execution. But he was fully convinced of the enormities of his
life, the justice of the punishment to which he was doomed, and feared the
wrath of God more than that of man. His trial and prison awakened his
conscience: He was resigned to his destiny as what he had merited: He
administered a most pertinent reproof to his companion in sin, who with an air
of levity, and with ridicule on his tongue, was suffering a capital punishment
-- ridicule pointed at the holy and just ONE, who was then enduring the cross
to save mankind, and while he hung on the cross prayed for revilers and
murderers, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." In these
circumstances of ignominy, the other malefactor condemned himself, justified
God, rebuked the reviler, bore testimony to the innocence of Jesus, confessed
him as the Christ of God, and was an earnest, a successful suitor for mercy.
Whoever with like penitence and faith applies for mercy, shall find it, though
at the last hour of life.

BUT what encouragement does this instance afford to the unbelieving,
unconcerned sinner? what encouragement to one who laughs at destruction, and
dies deriding Christ, instead of expressing humble faith in him? All manner of
sin is forgiven for his sake to the penitent. The grossest sinners have been
washed* sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. They who have much forgiven them, are sensible of the
obligation, and love much. They are found weeping at the feet of Jesus. Or with
the prodigal, not while wasting his substance in riot; but when he came to
himself, and resolved, "I will arise, and go to my father, and say, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee." Or with the publican, who "would
not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven, but smote on his breast, saying, God
be merciful to me a sinner." When great sinners are thus overwhelmed with grief
and shame; thus see the purity of God, and abhor themselves; thus look to him
whom they have pierced, and are in bitterness of soul, then may they have hope.
For Jesus was sent to heal the broken hearted. The sacrifices of God are a
contrite spirit.

BUT shall we talk wickedly and deceitfully for God? Shall we speak
comfortably, while the workers of iniquity boast themselves? while they set
themselves against the Lord, and against his anointed? while they think to
out-brazen HIS wrath, at whose "presence the mountains quake, and the hills
melt, and the world and all therein are burnt? Who can stand before his
indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? Kiss the Son,
lest he be angry, and ye perish."

THERE is danger, great danger, of misapplying and perverting the grace of the
gospel. On the very favorable supposition of true repentance at the close of a
profligate life, there will not be the best evidence of the reality of such
repentance. Opportunity is not left to manifest the sincerity and bring forth
the fruits of it. There cannot then be the comfort and hope which is greatly to
be desired. There is not space to efface, by the example of his repentance, the
reproach which the delaying and presumptuous sinner has brought on the cause
of Christianity and of virtue. There is not time to undo what he has done
against God and his fellow-men.

THESE things we observe on the favorable supposition of true evangelical
repentance, after a life spent in vicious indulgence. But such repentance is
rare. More generally those who have despised the riches of God's goodness,
forbearance and long-suffering till the close of their days, go on still
indulging an hard and impenitent heart, treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath: Some remarkable providence may, in a few instances, have roused open and
flagitious sinners from their security, so that a bad life may have ended well.
But though this may be a reason why none should despair, who have thus wasted
life, is it not as forcible a reason why none should presume thus to waste it?
Would you thrust forward the main business of life into the last day and hour
of it? Yea, would you refer to your dying hour, not only the whole business of
life, but also the much more difficult business of reforming and renouncing
habits of sin and excess? Is not the natural bitterness of death enough,
without the greater bitterness of sin unrepented of, and uncancelled? Laden
with an heavy load of guilt, which, without any additional load of infirmity,
would he heavy enough, how will the sinner, on the verge of eternity, support
his own reflections!

WHATEVER aspect any of the preceding reflections may have on such as have
lived without God in the world, and at the end of their days mourn thus, "How
have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof," -- whatever aspect
they may have on the state of the unhappy man here before us; they are, I am
persuaded, the words of truth and soberness. However distressed we may feel for
him, we may not, in this last instruction to him, hold up fallacious hopes; nor
give countenance to others, who are warned by this example to hear and fear.

YET once more am I called to adddress you, Joseph Mountain. No more will you
hear the counsel of God from any of his ministers. The bounds are set which you
cannot pass. The judge, your eternal judge, now stands before the door. This
day, in about three hours, you must die -- must be hanged as a spectacle to the
world, a warning to the vicious. Had I not been very sensibly affected -- were
I not now especially affected, with your situation, I should be ashamed of
myself as a man, more as a Christian, and yet more as a Christian minister. It
is a weighty argument with us to warn the wicked, that we watch for souls as
those that must give account. If warning is not given them, and they die in
their iniquity, their blood will be required at the watchman's hand. He is
sometimes sent with this most melancholy message, "Hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not." But this desperate
message no spiritual watchmen may directly apply to any, unless divinely
inspired, and commissioned in an extraordinary manner. Our general
encouragement to warn and reprove is this: "If any do err from the truth, and
one convert him; let him know that he who converteth the sinner from the error
of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins."
Great sinners may be reclaimed. With God all things are possible.

SOME sinners, if saved at all, are plucked as a brand out of the fire. And
this, I am compelled to tell you, is the utmost we can hope concerning you. Had
not the levity of your mind, during the first part of your imprisonment,
prevented, I should have chosen another text for the present melancholy
occasion. Since your confinement you have by no means given the best evidence
of true contrition. Your circumstances have called upon you, and Christ's
ministers have called upon you, to repent in dust and ashes -- to escape for
your life, to flee for refuge to Jesus Christ, who saves from sin, and from
the wrath to come. How many and fervent prayers have been offered for you in
public and private? We have tried to persuade ourselves that you were a
prisoner of hope, and have most affectionately warned and entreated you to turn
to the strong hold. And did I not think it at least possible, that there may
yet be mercy in store for you, I should hardly have complied with your request
to preach to you this day. Unto you, therefore, I once more call. You are ready
to be offered a victim to public justice. Wherefore, in the language of the
holy Ghost, "TO DAY, if you will hear his voice, harden not not your heart."

IF the history of your life, taken from your own mouth, and this day
published, may be credited, you have been almost in all evil for sixteen years
past; that is, ever since you were seventeen years old, and left your master's
family. You have personally, and in company with others, been guilty of
highway robbery in about twenty instances; of burglary once at least; of theft
repeatedly; and for rape you are now to be executed. From robbery you have
proceeded to gaming, riot and debauch, and from these to robbery. How many have
you seduced? How many have you ruined in their character and estate? From early
youth to thirty three years you have lived in sloth, dissipation, lewdness and
violence. You have gone to and fro in the earth, as Satan your master, seeking
whom you might devour. You have spent your days in contempt of every duty to
God and your fellow-men, and gloried in your shame. You have merited the
punishment you are now to suffer more than twenty times. I say this on the
supposition that you are such a person as you have now told the world. If your
history is false, your depravity is equally manifest. For then, as you go out
of the world, you mock at the most presumptuous sins. You boast of pretended
valor as a villain, in the moment of death. Yea, you die with an act of the
deepest injustice to numbers of your fellow-men, whom you now accuse of a
confederacy with you, for a number of years, in capital crimes. You still
persist to affirm, that the history you have given of your life is true in
every particular. You can reap no advantage from deceiving the world in which
you are no longer to live. I shall therefore suppose that you have said the
truth. Your past unprincipled and shameless character, and this only, can
explain that apparent indifference to your state, during a great part of your
imprisonment, which has astonished us. Should you wish to leave behind you a
character for skill and bravery as a thief or robber, a rioter in the spoils of
your fellow-men -- Should you now think of thus outbraving the wrath of the
most HIGH, the last act of your life would be yet more presumptuous than any or
all your great transgressions. God forbid that you should harbor a thought of
thus filling up the sum of your wickedness -- that you should thus with madness
in your heart go down to the dead. Your name, crimes and punishment will be
remembered, we hope, that others may hear and fear, and commit no such evil.
Though young in years, you are old in sin.

WERE a pardon from man this day offered, how would it affect you, while your
heart is trembling for fear of the tragical death before you? But it is unsafe
for the world that you should live. You have lived a nuisance on earth. You
must therefore be executed. There is no reprieve for you. Yet a pardon from God
is even now offered you, if you repent; otherwise you must perish in a more
deplorable sense than is implied in the strange punishment which awaits you. If
destruction from man be a terror, destruction from God is much more. There is a
world to come. There is an omniscient, holy and righteous judge. The great
Redeemer will be revealed from heaven in flaming fire. Then such as have
trampled him under foot, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
his presence. In that day such will be the lively horror of hardened, but then
too late awakened sinners, that they will cry to the rocks and mountains to
fall on them, and cover them from the face of the Lamb, whose wrath they have
inflamed. Is it not now high time for you to "consider this, lest he tear you
in pieces, and there be none to deliver? The ungodly shall not stand in
judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous." Of what vast
moment then is it, that you "acquaint yourself NOW with him, and be at peace?"
How have you improved the space since you were tried and condemned at man's
bar, in preparing to stand before the bar of the great judge of the world? I
fear you cannot give a good answer to this question. A few moments are yet left
you. Who can tell but God may have mercy? There is plenteous redemption with
him. Fall down before him in the deepest contrition of soul. Own the justice of
your sentence. In the depths of distress cry to him, "Lord, save me; I perish."
Let free and sovereign grace in the Mediator be your plea. I beseech you, be
reconciled to God. I beseech you as an ambassador of Christ, and in his stead,
who made peace by the blood of his cross; in whom all fullness dwells; who has
the words of eternal life; who has the keys of hell and of death; who will
come in glory, and call you and all mankind to account; who will pronounce the
final sentence, "Come ye blessed," or, "Depart ye cursed." -- In his stead I
beseech you, for the last time, BE RECONCILED TO GOD.

My hearers, we have before us one, whose boast it has been, that he was
pre-eminent in the skill and valor of an highway-man; who seems to have
accounted this an honorable acquisition, and has blended with it, as the
natural consequence, various other, and equally atrocious crimes. The last, for
which he is to suffer death, besides its enormity in its own nature, was
attended with circumstances which showed that he had cast off all shame, and
even all fear of detection; that he feared not the eye of the world any more
than that of God.

HE began his career of wickedness at or before seventeen. This is the most
critical and dangerous stage of life. From this circumstance, and this example,
I may therefore very pertinently take occasion to caution our young people
against the follies and temptations to which their inexperience and impetuosity
expose them. See in this instance of what moment it is to form early habits of
virtue -- to hear counsel, and turn at reproof -- to shun the paths of vice.
Happy the youth who "walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in
the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful." Small sins lead
to great ones. The beginning of a vicious course, as that of strife, is like
the letting out water. Wherefore "abstain from all appearance of evil." Resist
the first solicitation, as he, "How can I do this great evil, and sin against
God?" Whenever tempted, allow time for this reflection, "Thou, Lord, see me."
"Can the ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may those
who have been accustomed to do evil, learn to do well." How melancholy a
comment on these words does the present occasion afford? When sinners have
assumed the boldness to leap over the boundaries of laws human and divine, they
gradually lose all tenderness of conscience, and proceed from evil to evil.
What is particularly said of the issue of unlawful pleasure, may be applied to
any other vicious course: It is "the way to hell, going down to the chambers of
death." We therefore beseech those who are yet young, by the sorrowful example
they here behold, that they forsake not "the guide of their youth; that they be
not wise in their own eyes: Fear the Lord, and depart from evil." The choice
they make, the course they enter upon in early youth, is of unspeakable
importance, both with respect to this world and another. Would to God that the
present warning may not be an unprofitable one! that they may see the necessity
and advantage of submitting to salutary restraint, and trust the wisdom of
their superiors, instead of doing what seems right in their own eyes. When
the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise.

FURTHER, have any by false accusation, or secret fraud, or extortion, or
otherwise, deeply injured their fellow-men? They will do well to ask, whether,
in the view of the heart-searching God, they may not be as verily guilty
concerning their brother, as those who have injured him more grossly, and are
subjected to ignominious punishment from civil government? Do the checks of
conscience, or force of human laws, or a sense of public shame, restrain men
from such enormities as the prisoner has been addicted to? And should not the
all-seeing eye of God restrain from all injustice to men? yea, from all sin
either against God, or man, or ourselves? Should it not influence to keep the
heart with all diligence? Do men take pains to save appearances? How much
greater reason have they to approve themselves to him who searches the reins
and hearts; and will give to every man according to his works?

MAY all who indulge vicious passions be warned by the event of this day. May
the consequences of idleness, gaming and dissipation, of lust and an ungoverned
spirit, falsehood and greediness of gain, the temporal and eternal consequences,
be well considered. These things impel men into courses destructive of their
peace, and of their souls. From small beginnings they increase to more
ungodliness. Though timid at first, they soon become capable of bold exploits,
and prove veterans in vice. But few who enter these paths, return again. The
few who do, find it extremely difficult to tread back the wrong steps they have
taken. The gains of vice are hard, perilous and momentary. The triumph of its
votaries is short. They travel with pain all their days. They know not the way
of peace, because they fear not God. Their own counsel casts them down. "The
heaven shall reveal their iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against them.
They shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world. The
Lord's throne is in heaven. His eyes behold the children of men. He tries the
righteous; but the wicked and him that loves violence his soul hates. Upon
the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest:
This shall be the portion of their cup." But the fear of the Lord is a fountain
of life, to depart from the snares of death.


