INFORMATION TO EUROPEANS WHO ARE DISPOSED TO MIGRATE TO THE UNITED STATES. In
a letter from a citizen of Pennsylvania, to his friend in Great Britain.

PHILADELPHIA: CAREY, STEWART, and CO.

[ Price one eighth of a dollar.]

DEAR SIR,
AGREEABLY to your request contained in your letter of the 29th of August,
1789, I have at last set down to communicate such facts to you, upon the
subject of migration to this country, as have been the result of numerous
enquiries and faithful observation. I am aware that this subject has been
handled in a masterly manner by doctor Franklin, in his excellent little
pamphlet, entitled "Advice to those who would wish to remove to America," but
as that valuable little work is very general, and as many important changes
have occurred in the affairs of the united states since its publication, I
shall endeavor to comply with your wishes, by adding such things as have been
omitted by the doctor, and shall accommodate them to the present state of our
country.

I shall begin this letter by mentioning the descriptions of people, who ought
not to come to America.

I. Men of independent fortunes who can exist only in company, and who can
converse only upon public amusements, should not think of settling in the
united states. I have known several men of that character in this country, who
have rambled from state to state, complaining of the dullness of each of them,
and who have finally returned and renewed their former connexions and pleasures
in Europe.

II. Literary men, who have no professional pursuits, will often languish in
America, from the want of society. Our authors and scholars are generally men
of business, and make their literary pursuits subservient to their interests. A
lounger in book stores, breakfasting parties for the purpose of literary
conversation, and long attic evenings, are as yet but little known in this
country. Our companies are generally mixed, and conversation in them is a
medley of ideas upon all subjects. They begin as in England with the weather --
soon run into politics -- now and then diverge into literature -- and commonly
conclude with facts relative to commerce, manufactures and agriculture, and the
best means of acquiring and improving an estate, Men, who are philosophers or
poets, without other pursuits, had better end their days in an old country.

III. The united states as yet afford but little encouragement to the
professors of most of the fine arts. Painting and sculpture flourish chiefly in
wealthy and luxurious countries. Our native American portrait painters who have
not sought protection and encouragement in Great Britain, have been obliged to
travel occasionally from one state to another in order to support themselves.
The teachers of music have been more fortunate in America. A taste for this
accomplishment prevails very generally in our large cities: and eminent masters
in that art, who have arrived here since the peace, have received considerable
sums of money by exercising their profession among us.

I shall now mention those descriptions of people, who may better their
condition by coming to America.

I. To the cultivators of the earth the united states open the first asylum in
the world. To insure the success and happiness of an European farmer in our
country, it is necessary to advise him either to purchase, or to rent a farm
which has undergone some improvement.

The business of settling a new tract of land, and that of improving a farm,
are of a very different nature. The former must be effected by the native
American, who is accustomed to the use of the axe and the grubbing hoe, and who
possesses almost exclusively a knowledge of all the peculiar and nameless arts
of self-preservation in the woods. I have known many instances of Europeans who
have spent all their cash in unsuccessful attempts to force a settlement in the
wilderness, and who have afterward been exposed to poverty and distress at a
great distance from friends and even neighbors. I would therefore advise all
farmers with moderate capitals, to purchase or rent improved farms in the old
settlements of our states. The price and rent of these farms are different in
the different parts of the union. In Pennsylvania, the price of farms is
regulated by the quality of the land -- by the value of the improvements which
are erected upon it -- by their vicinity to sea ports and navigable water --
and by the good or bad state of the roads which lead to them. There is a great
variety, of course, in the price of farms: while some of them have been sold
for five guineas -- others have been sold at lower prices, down to one guinea,
and even half a guinea per acre, according as they were varied by the above
circumstances.

It is not expected that the whole price of a farm should be paid at the time
of purchasing it. An half, a third, or a fourth, is all that is generally
required. Bonds and mortgages are given for the remainder, (and sometimes
without interest) payable in two, three, five, or even ten years.

The value of these farms has often been doubled and even trebled, in a few
years, where the new mode of agriculture has been employed in cultivating them:
so that a man with a moderate capital, may, in the course of fifteen years,
become an opulent and independent freeholder.

If, notwithstanding what has been said of the difficulties of effecting an
establishment in the woods, the low price of the new lands should tempt the
European farmer to settle in them, then let me add, that it can only be done by
associating himself in a large company, under the direction of an active and
intelligent American farmer. To secure even ^ company of European settlers from
disappointment and want in the woods, it will be necessary to clear a few acres
of land the year before, and to sow them with grain, in order to provide
subsistence for the company, till they can provide for themselves, by clearing
their own farms. The difficulties of establishing this new settlement, will be
further lessened, if a few cabins, a grist and a saw mill be erected, at the
same time the preparations are made for the temporary subsistence of the
company. In this manner, most of the first settlements of the New England men
have been made in this country. One great advantage, attending this mode of
settling, is, a company may always carry with them a clergyman and a
schoolmaster, of the same religion and language with themselves. If a settler
in the woods should possess a taste for rural elegance, he may gratify it
without any expense, by the manner of laying out his farm. He may shade his
house by means of ancient and venerable forest-trees. He may leave rows of them
standing, to adorn his lanes and walks -- or clusters of them on the high
grounds of his fields, to shade his cattle. If he should fix upon any of those
parts of our western country, which are covered with the sugar-tree, he may
enclose a sufficient number of them to supply his family with sugar; and may
confer upon them at the same time the order and beauty of a fine orchard. In
this manner, a highly-improved seat may be cut out of the woods in a few years,
which will surpass both in elegance and value a farm in an old settlement,
which has been for twenty years the subject of improvements in taste and
agriculture. To contemplate a dwelling house -- a barn -- stables -- fields --
meadows -- an orchard -- a garden, etc. which have been produced from original
creation by the labor of a single life, is, I am told, to the proprietor of
them, one of the highest pleasures the mind of man is capable of enjoying. But
how much must this pleasure be increased, when the regularity of art is blended
in the prospect, with the wildness and antiquity of nature?

It has been remarked in this country, that clearing the land of its woods,
sometimes makes a new settlement unhealthy, by exposing its damp grounds to the
action of the sun. To obviate this evil, it will be necessary for the settler
either to drain and cultivate his low grounds, as soon as they are cleared, or
to leave a body of trees between his dwelling house, and the spots from whence
the morbid effluvia are derived. The last of these methods has, in no instance
that I have heard of, failed of preserving whole families from such diseases as
arise from damp or putrid exhalations.

To country gentlemen, who have been accustomed to live upon the income of a
landed estate in Europe, it will be necessary to communicate the following
information, viz. that farms, in consequence of the unproductive woodland,
which is generally connected with them, seldom yield more than three or four
per cent. a year in cash, except in the neighborhood of large cities. Besides,
from the facility with which money eno may be saved in a few years, to purchase
land in this country, tenants will not accept of long leases: and hence they
are not sufficiently interested in the farms they rent, to keep them in repair.
If country gentlemen wish to derive the greatest advantage from laying out
their money in lands, they must reside in their vicinity. A capital of five
thousand guineas, invested in a number of contiguous farms, in an improved part
of our country, and cultivated by tenants under the eye and direction of a
landlord, would soon yield a greater income than double that sum would in most
parts of Europe. The landlord in this case must frequently visit and inspect
the state of each of his farms: and now and then he must stop to repair a
bridge or a fence in his excursions through them. He must receive all his rents
in the produce of the farms. If the tenant find his own stock, he will pay a
half of all the grain he raises, and sometimes a certain proportion of
vegetables and live stock, to his landlord. The division of the grain is
generally made in the field, in sheaves or stacks, which are carried home to be
thrashed in the barn of the landlord. An estated gentleman, who can reconcile
himself to this kind of life, may be both happy and useful. He may instruct his
tenants by his example, as well as precepts in the new modes of husbandry: he
may teach them the art and advantages of gardening: he may inspire them with
habits of sobriety, industry, and economy; and thereby become the father and
protector of a dependant and affectionate neighborhood. After a busy summer
and autumn, he may pass his winters in the bosom of society, in any of our
cities, and in many of our country villages.

But should he be disinclined to such extensive scenes of business, he may
confine his purchases and labors to a single farm, and secure his superfluous
cash in bonds and mortgages, which will yield him six per cent.

Under this head, it is proper to mention, that the agricultural life begins to
maintain in the united states, the same rank that it has long maintained in
Great Britain. Many gentlemen of education among us have quitted liberal
professions, and have proved, by their success in farming, that philosophy is
in no business more useful or profitable, than in agriculture.

II. MECHANICS and MANUFACTURERS, of every description, will find certain
encouragement in the united states. During the connection of this country with
Great Britain, we were taught to believe that agriculture and commerce should
be the only pursuits of the Americans: but experiments and reflection have
taught us that our country abounds with resources for manufactures of all
kinds; and that most of them may be conducted with great advantage in all the
states. We are already nearly independent of the whole world for iron-work,
paper, and malt liquors: and great progress has been made in the manufactories
of glass, pot-ash, and cloths of all kinds. The commercial habits of our
citizens have as yet prevented their employing large capitals in those
manufactories: but I am persuaded that if a few European adventurers would
embark in them with capitals equal to the demand for those manufactures, they
would soon find an immense profit in their speculations. A single farmer in the
state of New York, with a capital of five thousand pounds, has cleared one
thousand a year by the manufacture of pot-ash alone.

Those mechanical arts, which are accommodated to the infant and simple state
of a country, will bid fairest to succeed among us. Every art, connected with
cultivating the earth -- building houses and ships, and feeding and clothing
the body, will meet with encouragement in this country. The price of provisions
are so different in the different states, and even in the different parts of
the same state, and very so much with the plenty and security of money, that it
would be difficult to give you such an account of them, as would be useful. I
need only remark that the disproportion between the price of labor and of
provisions, is much greater in every part of the united states, than in any
part of Europe: and hence our tradesmen every where eat meat and butter every
day: and most of them realize the wish of Henry IV. of France, for the peasants
of his kingdom, by dining not only once, but two or three times, upon poultry,
in every week of the year.

It is a singular fact in the history of the mechanical arts in this country,
that the same arts seldom descend from father to son. Such are the profits of
even the humblest of them, that the sons of mechanics generally rise from the
lower to the more respectable occupations: and thus their families gradually
ascend to the first ranks in society among us. The influence, which the
prospects of wealth and consequence have in invigorating industry in every line
of mechanical business, is very great. Many of the first men in America, are
the sons of reputable mechanics or farmers. But I may go farther, and add, that
many men, who distinguished themselves both in the cabinet and field, in the
late war, had been mechanics. I know the British officers treated the American
cause with contempt, from this circumstance: but the event of the war showed,
that the confidence of America was not misplaced in that body of citizens.

III. LABORERS may depend upon constant employment in the united states, both
in our towns and in the country. When they work by the day, they receive high
wages: but these are seldom continued through the whole year. A labourer
receives annually, with his boarding, washing, and lodging, from fifteen to
eighteen guineas, in the middle states. It is agreeable to observe this class
of men frequently raised by their industry from their humble stations into the
upper ranks of life, in the course of twenty or thirty years.

IV. PERSONS who are willing to indent themselves as servants for a few years,
will find that humble station no obstacle to a future establishment in our
country. Many men, who came to America in that capacity, are now in affluent
circumstances. Their former situation, where they have behaved well, does not
preclude them from forming respectable connexions in marriage, nor from
sharing, if otherwise qualified, in the offices of our country.

V. The united states continue to afford encouragement to gentlemen of the
LEARNED PROFESSIONS, provided they be prudent in their deportment, and of
sufficient knowledge: for since the establishment of colleges and schools of
learning in all our states, the same degrees of learning will not succeed among
us, which succeeded fifty years ago.

Several lawyers and physicians, who have arrived here since the peace, are now
in good business: and many clergymen, natives of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, are comfortably settled in good parishes. A minister of the gospel in
a country place must not expect to have all his salary paid in cash: but he
will notwithstanding seldom fail of obtaining a good subsistence from his
congregation. They will furnish his table with a portion of all the live stock
they raise for their own use: they will shoe his horses -- repair his
implements of husbandry -- and assist him in gathering-in his harvests, and in
many other parts of the business of his farm. From these aids, with now and
then a little cash, a clergyman may not only live well, but, in the course of
his life, may accumulate an handsome estate for his children. This will more
certainly happen, if he can redeem time enough from his parochial duties, and
the care of his farm, to teach a school. The people of America are of all
sects: but the greatest part of them are of independent, presbyterian,
episcopal, baptist, and methodist denominations. The principles held by each of
these societies in America, are the same as those which are held by the
protestant churches in Europe, from which they derive their origin.

VI. SCHOOLMASTERS of good capacities and fair characters, may expect to meet
with encouragement in the middle and southern states. They will succeed better,
if they confine their instructions to reading, writing, English grammar, and
the sciences of number and quantity. These branches of literature are of
general necessity and utility: and of course every township will furnish
scholars enough for the maintenance of a schoolmaster. Many young men have
risen by means of the connexions they have formed in this useful employment, to
rank and consequence in the learned professions in every part of this country.

From this account of the united states, you will easily perceive, that they
are a hot-bed for industry and genius in almost every human pursuit. It is
inconceivable how many useful discoveries necessity has produced within these
few years, in agriculture and manufactures, in our country. The same necessity
has produced a versatility of genius among our citizens: hence we frequently
meet with men who have exercised two or three different occupations or
professions in the course of their lives, according to the influence which
interest, accident, or local circumstances have had upon them. I know that the
peculiarities, which have been mentioned in the American character, strike a
European, who has been accustomed to consider man as a creature of habit,
formed by long established governments, and hereditary customs, as so many
deviatons from propriety and order. But a wise man, who knows that national
characters arise from circumstances, will view these peculiarities without
surprise, and attribute them wholly to the present state of manners, society,
and government in America.

From the numerous competitions in every branch of business in Europe, success
in any pursuit, may be looked upon in the same light as a prize in a lottery.
But the case is widely different in America. Here there is room enough for
every human talent and virtue to expand and flourish. This is so invariably
true, that I believe there is not an instance to be found, of an industrious,
frugal, prudent European, with sober manners, who has not been successful in
business, in this country.

As a further inducement to Europeans to transport themselves across the Ocean,
I am obliged to mention a fact that does little honor to the native American;
and that is, in all competitions for business, where success depends upon
industry, the European is generally preferred. Indeed, such is the facility
with which property is acquired, that where it does not operate as a stimulus
to promote ambition, it is sometimes accompanied by a relaxation of industry in
proportion to the number of years or generations which interpose between the
founder of an American family and his posterity. This preference of European
mechanics arises likewise from the improvements in the different arts, which
are from time to time imported by them into our country. To these facts I am
happy in being able to add, that the years of anarchy, which proved so
disgusting to the Europeans who arrived among us immediately after the peace,
are now at an end, and that the united states have at last adopted a national
government which unites with the vigor of monarchy and the stability of
aristocracy, all the freedom of a simple republic. Its influence already in
invigorating industry, and reviving credit, is universal. There are several
peculiarities in this government, which cannot fail of being agreeable to
Europeans, who are disposed to settle in America.

1. The equal share of power it holds forth to men of every religious sect. As
the first fruits of this perfection in our government, we already see three
gentlemen of the Roman catholic church, members of the legislature of the
united states.

2. Birth in America is not required for holding either power or office in the
federal government, except that of president of the united states. In
consequence of this principle of justice, not only in the national government,
but in all our state constitutions, we daily see the natives of Britain,
Ireland, and Germany, advanced to the most respectable employments in our
country.

3. By a late act of congress, only two years residence in the united states
are necessary to entitle foreigners of good character to all the privileges of
citizenship. Even that short period of time has been found sufficient to give
strangers a visible interest in the stability and freedom of our governments.

It is agreeable to observe the influence which our republican governments have
already had upon the tempers and manners of our citizens. Amusement is every
where giving way to business: and local politeness is yielding to universal
civility. We differ about forms and modes in politics: but this difference
begins to submit to the restraints of moral and social obligation. Order and
tranquillity appear to be the natural consequence of a well-balanced republic:
for where men can remove the evils of their governments by frequent elections,
they will seldom appeal to the less certain remedies of mobs or arms. It is
with singular pleasure that I can add further, that notwithstanding the
virulence of our dissensions about independence and the federal government,
there is now scarcely a citizen of the united states, who is not satisfied with
both, and who does not believe this country to be in a happier and safer
situation, than it was, in the most flourishing years of its dependence upon
Great Britain.

The encouragement held out to European emigrants, is not the same in all the
states. New England, New York, and New Jersey, being nearly filled with
cultivators of the earth, afford encouragement chiefly to mechanics and
laborers. The inhabitants of New England have far surpassed the inhabitants of
the other states, in the establishment of numerous and profitable
manufacturies. These wonderful people discover the same degrees of industry in
cultivating the arts of peace, that they did of enterprise and perseverance, in
the late war. They already export large quantities of wrought iron, hats,
women's shoes, cheese, and linen and woolen cloth. The state of New York has
likewise discovered a laudable spirit for manufactures and domestic
improvements. European artists, therefore, cannot fail of meeting with
encouragement in each of the above states.

Pennsylvania affords an equal asylum to all the descriptions of people that
have been mentioned, under the second head of this letter. Agriculture,
manufactures, and many of the liberal arts seem to vie with each other for
preeminence in this state. Each of them is under the patronage of numerous and
respectable societies. No state in the union affords greater resources for
shipbuilding, malt liquors, maple sugar, sail cloth, iron work, woolen and
linen cloths, pot-ash, and glass. Coal, likewise, abounds on the shores of the
Susquehanna, a large river which runs through half the state. The variety of
sects and nations, which compose the inhabitants of this state, has hitherto
prevented our having any steady traits in our character. We possess the virtues
and weaknesses of most of the sects and nations of Europe. But this variety has
produced such a collision in opinions and interests, as has greatly favored
the progress of genius in every art and science. We have been accused of being
factious by our sister states. This must be ascribed chiefly to our state
constitution, which was established by violence in the beginning of the late
war, and which was never assented to by a majority of the people. But that
majority have at length asserted their power. A convention, composed of an
equal representation of the people, has met and formed a new constitution,
which comprehends in it every principle of liberty and just government. From
the excellency of this constitution -- from the harmony it has restored to our
citizens -- from the central situation of our state -- from the number and
courses of our rivers -- from the facility with which we are able to draw the
resources of the lakes to the Delaware -- from the wealth of our capital -- and
above all, from the industry and sober habits of our citizens -- there can be
no doubt that Pennsylvania will always maintain the first rank, for national
prosperity and happiness, in the united states.

There is one circumstance, peculiar in a great degree to Pennsylvania, which
cannot fail of directing the eyes of the inhabitants of several of the European
nations to this state -- and that is, the natives of Britain, Ireland, Germany,
France, Switzerland, and Holland, may here meet with their former fellow
subjects, and receive from them that welcome and assistance, which are the
natural consequences of the tie of country. So strongly does this principle
operate in America, that the natives of Germany and Ireland have formed
themselves into societies in the city of Philadelphia, for the express purpose
of protecting, advising, and assisting their countrymen, as soon as they set
their feet upon the shores of Pennsylvania.

It has been said, that the lands in Pennsylvania are dearer than in some of
our sister states. They sell, it is true, for a greater nominal sum, than the
lands of the neighboring states* but in the end, they are much cheaper. The
soil is deep, rich, and durable, and from the superior industry and skill of
our farmers, our lands are more productive than those of our neighbors; hence
their higher price: for the price of lands is always in a ratio to their
quality, produce and situation: hence likewise, we are able to tell the value
of a farm in any part of the state, by first finding out the quantity of grain
an acre will produce, and the price of this grain at the nearest mill or store,
making some little allowance for the improvements which are connected with the
farm. This remark is so universally true, that a farmer never mistakes the
application of it in purchasing land. There is a certain instinct, which
governs in all purchases and sales of farms, and which arises out of the
principle I have mentioned: it is in general as accurate, as if it arose out of
the nicest calculation. It is from an ignorance or neglect of this principle,
that so many of our citizens have migrated to Kentucke, under a delusive
expectation of purchasing lands cheaper than in the old states. They are, in
fact often much dearer, when you estimate their price by the profit of the
grain which is cultivated upon them. For instance: an acre of land in Kentucke,
which sells for a quarter of a guinea, and yields 30 bushels of corn, at four
pence sterling per bushel, is dearer than land of the same quality in
Pennsylvania, at a guinea per acre, that yields the same quantity of corn,
which can be sold at the nearest mill or store for two shillings sterling. per
bushel. To cure this passion for migrating to the waters of the Ohio, there is
but one remedy, and that is, to open the navigation of the Mississippi. This,
by raising the price of produce, will raise the value of land so high, as to
destroy the balance of attraction to that country. This truth is at present a
speculative one; nor do I suppose it will be reduced to practice, if nations
continue to be what they have been, until the waters of the Ohio and
Mississippi have been dyed with the blood of two or three hundred thousand men.

The states to the southward of Pennsylvania possess immense resources for
political happiness: but while they tolerate negro slavery, they can never be
an agreeable retreat for an European. This objection applies chiefly to the sea
coasts of those states; for in the western parts of them, the land is
cultivated chiefly by freemen. The soil and climate of the extensive western
country of those states is kind and mild to a very great degree. There
Europeans may prosper and be happy.

Thus, sir, have I complied in a few words with your request. In communicating
many of the facts contained in this letter, I have not considered you simply as
a citizen of London, or a subject of the crown of Britain. The whole family of
mankind, I know are your brethren: and if men be happy, I am sure it is a
matter of indifference to you whether they enjoy their happiness on this side
or on the other side of the Atlantic ocean.

From a review of the facts that have been mentioned, you will perceive that
the present is the age of reason and action in America. To our posterity we
must bequeath the cultivation of the fine arts and the pleasures of taste and
sentiment. The foreigners who have visited and described our country, without
making allowances for those peculiarities which arise from our present state of
society, have done as little honor to their understandings, as they have done
to human nature. Nor have those Europeans discovered more wisdom, who have
blended with the American character, the accidental disorders, which were the
offspring of our late public commotions. They resembled the swelling of the
sea, which succeeds a storm. At present, they have as perfectly subsided as the
disorders produced by the civil wars in England, in the last century.

It is somewhat remarkable that in every age, great inventions and great
revolutions in human affairs have taken place in a quick succession to each
other. The many curious machines for lessening labor, which have lately been
discovered in Europe, will necessarily throw many thousand artificers out of
employment. Perhaps the late successful application of the powers of fire and
water to mechanical purposes in your country, was delayed until the present
time, only that the sanctuary of our national government might be perfectly
prepared to receive and protect those industrious bodies of people, who
formerly lived by the labor of their hands, and who might otherwise become a
burden to the countries in which they had been deprived of the means of
supporting themselves. Perhaps, too, the revolutions, which are now going
forward in several of the governments on the continent of Europe, have occurred
at the present juncture for a purpose equally wise and benevolent. The first
effect of the establishment of freedom in those countries, will be to promote
population, by reducing taxes, disbanding standing armies, and abolishing the
vows and practices of celibacy: for I take it for granted that military
institutions in the time of peace, and monastaries of all kinds, must yield to
the present force and cultivated state of human reason, in those countries,
which are now the theaters of revolutions in favor of liberty. This increase
of population will require an increase of territory, which must be sought for
in the united states: for it is not probable that men who have once tasted of
the sweets of liberty, will ever think of transporting themselves to any other
country. This outlet for supernumerary inhabitants from the nations of Europe,
will eventually promote their interests and prosperity: for when a country is
so much crowded with people, that the price of the means of subsistence is
beyond the ratio of their industry, marriages are restrained: but when
emigration to a certain degree takes place, the balance between the means of
subsistence and industry is restored, and population thereby revived. Of the
truth of this principle there are many proofs in the old counties of all the
American states. Population has constantly been advanced in them by the
migration of their inhabitants to new or distant settlements.

In spite of all the little systems of narrow politicians, it is an eternal
truth, that universal happiness is universal interest. The divine government of
our world would admit of a controversy, if men, by acquiring moral or political
happiness, in one (...) added to the misery of the inhabitants of another part,
of (...) globe.

I shall conclude this long letter by the two following remarks:

I. If freedom, joined with the facility of acquiring the means of subsistence,
have such an influence upon population -- and if existence be a title to
happiness -- then think, sir, what an ocean of additional happiness will be
created, by the influence which migration to the free and extensive territories
of the united states will have, upon the numbers of mankind.

II. If wars have been promoted in all ages and countries, by an over
proportion of inhabitants to the means of easy subsistence, then think, sir,
what an influence upon the means of supporting human life, migration to
America, and the immense increase of the productions of the earth, by the late
improvements in agriculture, will probably have, in lessening the temptations
and resources of nations to carry on war. The promises of heaven are often
accomplished by means in which there is no departure from the common operations
of nature. If the events, which have been alluded to, should contribute in any
degree to put an end o^ wars, it will furnish a noble triumph to your society
NOTE.

The gentleman to whom this letter is addressed, is of the society of the
people called quakers.


, by showing how much enlightened policy and national happiness are connected
with the dictates of christianity.

I am, Dear sir, With great respect, And sincere regard, Yours very
affectionately
Philadelphia, April 16, 1790.

