A DISSERTATION ON MIRACLES: CONTAINING AN EXAMINATION OF THE PRINCIPLES
ADVANCED BY DAVID HUME, ESQUIRE IN AN ESSAY ON MIRACLES. BY GEORGE CAMPBELL, D. D.
Principal of the Marischal College, and one of the Ministers, of ABERDEEN.

The works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me. JOHN X. 25.
The THIRD EDITION, with Additions and Corrections.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE HOUSE, IN SECOND STREET.
M DCC XC.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN EARL OF BUTE, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY's PRINCIPAL
SECRETARIES OF STATE, CHANCELLOR OF THE MARISCHAL COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY OF
ABERDEEN, THE FOLLOWING DISSERTATION, IN DEFENSE OF A RELIGION, OF WHICH HE IS
AN EMINENT PATRON AND EXAMPLE, IS, WITH THE UTMOST RESPECT AND GRATITUDE,
INSCRIBED BY HIS LORDSHIP'S MOST DUTIFUL, MOST DEVOTED, AND MOST HUMBLE SERVANT,

GEORGE CAMPBELL.
March 2. 1762.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT IS not the only, nor even the chief, desing of these sheets, to refute the
reasoning and objections of Mr Hume, with regard to miracles: the chief design
of them is, to set the principal argument for christianity in its proper light.
On a subject that has been so often treated, it is impossible to avoid saying
many things which have been said before. It may, however, with reason be
affirmed, that there still remains, on this subject, great scope for new
observations. Besides, it ought to be remembered, that the evidence of any
complex argument depends very much on the order into which the material
circumstances are digested, and the manner in which they are displayed.

The Essay on Miracles deserves to be considered, as one of the most dangerous
attacks that have been made on our religion. The danger results not solely from
the merit of THE PIECE; it results much more from that of THE AUTHOR. The piece
itself, like every other work of Mr Hume, is ingenious; genious; but its merit
is more of the oratorial kind than of the philosophical. The merit of the
author, I acknowledge is great. The many useful volumes he has published of
history, as well as on criticism, politics, and trade, have justly procured
him, with all persons of taste and discernment, the highest reputation as a
writer. What pity is it, that this reputation should have been sullied by
attempts to undermine the foundations both of natural religion and of revealed!

For my own part, I think it a piece of justice in me, to acknowledge the
obligations I owe the author, before I enter on the proposed examination. I
have not only been much entertained and instructed by his works; but, if I am
possessed of any talent in abstract reasoning, I am not a little indebted to
what he has written on human nature, for the improvement of that talent. If
therefore, in this tract, I have refuted Mr Hume's Essay, the greater share of
the merit is perhaps to be ascribed to Mr Hume himself. The compliment which
the Russian monarch, after the famous battle of Poltowa, paid the Swedish
generals, when he gave them the honorable appellation of his masters in the
art of war, I may, with great sincerity, pay my acute and ingenious adversary.

I shall add a few things concerning the occasion and form of the following
dissertation.

Some of the principal topics here discussed, were more briefly treated in a
sermon preached before the Synod of ABERDEEN, and are now made public at their
desire. To the end that an argument of so great importance might be more fully
and freely canvased than it could have been, with propriety, in a sermon, it
was judged necessary to newmodel the discourse, and to give it that form in
which it now appears.

The edition of Mr Hume's essays to which I always refer in this work, is that
printed at LONDON, in duodecimo, 1750, entitled, Philosophical essays
concerning human understanding. I have, since finishing this tract, seen a
later edition, in which there are a few variations. None of them appeared to me
so material, as to give ground for altering the quotations and references here
used. There is indeed one alteration, which candor required that I should
mention: I have accordingly mentioned it in a note page 126,


The arguments of the essayist I have endeavored to refute by argument. Mere
declamation I know no way of refuting, but by analyzing it; nor do I conceive
how inconsistencies can be answered otherwise than by exposing them. In such
analysis and exposition, which, I own, I have attempted without ceremony or
reserve, an air of ridicule is unavoidable: but this ridicule, I am well aware,
if founded in misrepresentation, will at last rebound upon myself. It is
possible, that, in some things I have mistaken the author's meaning; I am
conscious, that I have not, in any thing, designedly misrepresented it.

CONTENTS.
Introduction, 1
PART I. Miracles are capable of proof from testimony, and religious miracles
are not less capable of this evidence than others.
SECT. I. Mr Hume's favorite argument is founded on a false hypothesis, page 5
SECT. II. Mr Hume charged with some fallacies in his way of managing the
argument, page 24 SECT. III. Mr Hume himself gives up his favorite arugment,
page 38 SECT. IV. There is no peculiar presumption against such miracles as are
said to have been wrought in support of religion, page 43 SECT. V. There is a
peculiar presumption in favor of such miracles as are said to have been
wrought in support of religion, page 53 SECT. VI. Inquiry into the meaning and
propriety of one of Mr Hume's favorite maxims, page 55
PART II. The miracles on which the belief of Christianity is founded, are
sufficiently attested.
SECT. I. There is no presumption arising from human nature, against the
miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity, page 62 SECT. II.
There is no presumption arising from the history of mankind, against the
miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity, page 72 SECT. III.
Nomiracles recorded by historians of other religions are subversive of the
evidence arising from the miracles wrought in proof of Christianity or can be
considered as contrary testimony, page 97 SECT. IV. Examination of the PAGAN
miracles mentioned by Mr Hume, page 108 SECT. V. Examination of the POPISH
miracles mentioned by Mr Hume, page 124 SECT. VI. Abstracting from the evidence
for particular facts we have irrefragable evidence, that there have been
miracles in former times; or such events as, when compared with the present
constitution of the world, would by Mr Hume be denominated miraculous, page 149
SECT. VII. Revisal of Mr Hume's examination of the Pentateuch, page 157
Conclusion, page 169
INTRODUCTION.
"CHRISTIANITY," it has been said, "is not founded in argument." If it were
only meant by these words, that the religion of Jesus could not, by the single
aid of reasoning, produce its full effect upon the heart; every true Christian
would cheerfully subscribe to them. No arguments unaccompanied by the
influences of the Holy Spirit; can convert the soul from sin to God; though
even to such conversion, arguments are, by the agency of the Spirit, rendered
subservient. Again, if we were to understand by this aphorism, that the
principles of our religion could never have been discovered, by the natural and
unassisted faculties of man; this position, I presume, would be as little
disputed as the former. But if, on the contrary, under the cover of an
ambiguous expression, it is intended to insinuate, that those principles, from
their very nature, can admit no rational evidence of their truth, (and this, by
the way, is the only meaning which can avail our antagonists) the gospel, as
well as common sense, loudly reclaims against it.

The Lord JESUS CHRIST, the author of our religion, often argued, both with his
disciples and with his adversaries, as with reasonable men, on the principles
of reason, without this faculty, he well know, they could not be susceptible
either of religion or of law. He argued from prophecy, and the conformity of
the event to the prediction Luke xxiv. 25. etc. John v. 39, and 46.
. He argued from the testimony of John the Baptist, who was generally
acknowledged to be a prophet John v. 32, and 33.
. He argued from the miracles which he himself performed John v. 36. x. 25, 37,
38. xiv. 10, 11.
, as uncontrovertible evidences, that GOD Almighty operated by him, and had
sent him. He expostulates with his enemies, that they did not use their reason
on this subject. Why, says he, even of yourselves, judge ye not what is right
Luke xii. 57.
? In like manner we are called upon by the apostles of our Lord, to act the
part of wise men and judge impartially of what they say 1 Cor. x. 15.
. Those who do so, are highly commended, for the candor and prudence they
discover, in an affair of so great consequence Acts xvii. 11.
. We are even commanded, to be always ready to give an answer to every man that
asks us a reason of our hope 1 Peter iii. 15.
; in meekness to instruct them that oppose themselves 2 Timothy ii. 25.
; and earnestly to contend for the faith which was once delivered to the saints
Jude 3.
. God has neither in natural nor revealed religion, left himself without a
witness; but has in both given moral and external evidence, sufficient to
convince the impartial, to silence the gainsayer, and to render inexcusable the
atheist and the unbeliever. This evidence it is our duty to attend to, and
heartily to examine. We must prove all things, as we are expressly enjoined in
holy writ, if we would ever hope to hold fast that which is good These. v. 21.
.

THUS much I thought proper to premise, not to serve as an apology for the
design of this tract, (the design surely needs no apology, whatever the world
may judge of the execution) but to expose the shallowness of that pretext,
under which the advocates for infidelity in this age commonly take shelter.
Whilst therefore we enforce an argument, which, in support of our religion, was
so frequently insisted on by its divine founder, we will not dread the
reproachful titles of dangerous friends, or disguised eneries of revelation.
Such are the titles, which the writer, whose sentiments we propose in these
papers to canvass, has bestowed on his antagonists p. 204.
; not, I believe, through malice against them, but as a sort of excuse for
himself, or at least a handle for introducing a very strange and unmeaning
compliment to the religion of his country, after a very bold attempt to
undermine it. We will however do him the justice to own, that he has put it
out of our power to retort the charge. No intelligent person, who has
carefully perused the Essay on Miracles, will impute to the author either of
those ignominious characters.

My primary intention in undertaking an answer to the aforesaid e^ has
invariably been, to contribute all in my power to the defense of a religion,
which I esteem the greatest blessing conferred by Heaven on the sons of men. It
is at the same time a secondary motive of considerable weight, to vindicate
philosophy, at least that most important branch of it which ascertains the
rules of reasoning, from those absurd consequences, which this author's theory
naturally leads us to. The theme is arduous. The adversary is both subtle and
powerful. With such an adversary, I should on very unequal terms enter the
lists, had I not the advantage of being on the side of truth. And an eminent
advantage this doubtless is. It requires but moderate abilities to speak in
defense of a good cause. A good cause demands but a distinct exposition and a
fair hearing; and we may say with great propriety, it will speak for itself.
But to adorn error with the semblance of truth, and make the worse appear the
better reason, requires all the arts of in genuity and invention; arts in which
few or none have been more expert than Mr Hume. It is much to be regretted,
that on some occasions he has so ill applied them.

A DISSERTATION ON MIRACLES. PART I. Miracles are capable of proof from
testimony, and religious miracles are not less capable of this evidence than
others.
SECTION I. Mr Hume's favorite argument is founded on a false hypothesis.
IT is not the aim of this author to evince, that miracles, if admitted to be
true, would not be a sufficient evidence of a divine mission. His design is
solely to prove, that miracles which have not been the objects of our own
senses, at least such as are said to have been performed in attestation of any
religious system, cannot reasonably be admitted by us, or believed on the
testimony of others. "A miracle," says he, supported by any human testimony, is
more properly a subject of derision than of argument Page 194.
."Again, in the conclusion of his essay, Upon the whole, it appears, that no
testimony, for any kind of miracle, can ever possibly amount to a probability,
much less to a proof p. 20^
. Here he concludes against all miracles. " Any kind of miracle" are his
express words. He seems however immediately sensible, that in asserting this,
he has gone too far; and therefore, in the end of the same paragraph, retracts
part of what he had advanced in the beginning. We may establish it as a maxim
that no human testimony can have such force, as to prove a miracle, and make it
a just foundation for any system of religion. In the note on this passage, he
has these words. I beg the limitation here made, may be remarked, when I say,
that a miracle can never be proved, so as to be the foundation of a system of
religion. For I own that otherwise there may possibly be miracles, or
violations of the usual course of nature, of such a kind, of to admit of proof
from human testimony.

So much for that cardinal point, which the essayist labors so strenuously to
evince; and which, if true, will not only be subversive of revelation, as
received by us, on the testimony of the apostles, and prophets, and martyrs;
but will directly lead to this general conclusion: That it is impossible for
God Almighty to give a revelation, attended with such evidence that it can be
reasonably believed in after-ages, or even in the same age, by any person who
has not been an eyewitness of the miracles, by which it is supported.

Now, by what wonderful process of reasoning is this strange conclusion made
out? Several topics have been employed for the purpose by this subtle
disputant. Among these there is one principal argument which he is at great
pains to set off to the best advantage. Here indeed he claims a particular
concern, having discovered it himself. His title to the honor of the
discovery, it is not my business to controvert; I confine myself entirely to the
consideration of its importance. To this end I shall now lay before the reader,
the unanswerable argument, as he flatters himself it will be found; taking the
freedom for brevity's sake, to compendize the reasoning, and to omit whatever
is said merely for illustration. To do otherwise would lay me under the
necessity of transcribing the greater part of the essay.

'Experience,' says he, is our only guide in reasoning concerning matters of
fact p. 174.
. Experience is in some things variable, in some things uniform. A variable
experience gives rise only to probability; an uniform experience amounts to a
proof p. 175, 176.
. Probability always supposes an opposition of experiments and observations,
where the one side is found to overbalance the other, and to produce a degree
of evidence proportioned to the superiority. In such cases we must balance the
opposite experiments, and deduct the l^sser number from the greater, in order
to know^ he exact force of the superior evidence ibid.
. Our belief or assurance of any fact from the report of eyewitnesses, is
derived from no other principle than experience; that is, our observation of
the veracity of human testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to the
reports of witnesses P. 176.
. Now, if the fact attested partakes of the mavelous, if it is such as has
seldom fallen under our observation, here is a contest of two opposite
experiences, of which the one destroys the other, as far as its force goes, and
the superior can only operate on the mind by the force which remains. The very
same principle of experience, which gives us a certain degree of assurance in
the testimony of witnesses, gives us also, in this case, another degree of
assurance, against the fact which they endeavor to establish; from which
contradiction, there necessarily arises a counterpoise, and mutual destruction
of belief and authority p. 179.
. Further, if the fact affirmed by the witnesses, instead of being only
mavelous, is really miraculous; if besides the testimony considered apart and
in itself, amounts to an entire proof; in that case there is proof against
proof, of which the strongest must prevail, but still with a diminution of its
force, in proportion to that of its antagonist. A miracle is a violation of the
laws of nature; and as a firm and unalterable experience has established these
laws, the proof against a miracle from the very nature of the fact, is as
entire, as any argument from experience can possibly be imagined p. 180.
. And if so, it is an undeniable consequence, that it cannot be surmounted by
any proof whatever from testimony. A miracle, therefore, however attested, can
never be rendered credible, even in the lowest degree. This, in my
apprehension, is the sum of the argument on which my ingenious opponent rests
the strength of his cause.

IN answer to this I propose first to prove, that the whole is built upon a
false hypothesis. That the evidence of testimony is derived solely from
experience, which seems to be an axiom of this writer, is at least not so
incontestable a truth as he supposes it; that, on the contrary, testimony has
a natural and original influence on belief, antecedent to experience, will, I
imagine, easily be evinced. For this purpose let it be remarked, that the
earliest assent, whch is given to testimony by children, and which is previous
to all experience, is in fact the most unlimited, that by a gradual experience
of manknd, it is gradually contracted, and reduced to narrower bounds. To say,
therefore, that our diffidence in testimony is the result of experience, is
more philosophical, because more consonant to truth, than to say that our faith
in testimony has this foundation. Accordingly youth, which is unexperienced, is
credulous; age, on the contrary, is distrustful. Exactly the reverse would be
the case were this author's doctrine just.

Perhaps it will be said. If experience is allowed to be the only measure of a
logical or reasonable faith in testimony, the question, Whether the influence
of testimony on belief, be original or deriv^d? if it is not merely verbal, is
at least of no importance in the present controversy. But I maintain it is of
the greatest importance. The difference between us is by no means so
inconsiderable, as to a careless view it may appear. According to his
philosophy, the presumption is against the testimony or (which amounts to the
same thing) there is not the smallest presumption in its favor, till properly
supported by experience. According to the explication given, there is the
strongest presumption in favor of the testimony, till properly refuted by
experience.

If it be objected by the author, that such a faith in testimony as is prior to
experience, must be unreasonable and unphilosophical, because unaccountable; I
should reply, that there are, and must be, in human nature, some original
grounds of belief, beyond which our researches cannot proceed, and of which
therefore it is vain to attempt a rational account. I should desire the objector
to give a reasonable account of his faith in this principle, that similar
causes always produce similar effects; or in this, that the course of nature
will be the same tomorrow, that it was yesterday, and is to day: principles,
which he himself acknowledges, are neither intuitively evident, nor deduced
from premises; and which nevertheless we are under a necessity of presupposing,
in all our reasonings from experience Skeptical doubts. Part 2.
. I should desire him to give a reasonable account of his faith in the clearest
informations of his memory, which he will find it alike impossible either to
doubt, or to explain. Indeed memory bears nearly the same relation to
experience, that testimony does. Certain it is that the defects and
misrepresentations of memory are often corrected by experience. Yet should any
person hence infer, that memory derives all its evidence from experience, he
would fall into a manifest absurdity. For, on the contrary, experience derives
its origin solely from memory, and is nothing else but the general maxims or
conclusions, we have formed, from the comparison of particular facts
remembered. If we had not previously given an implicit faith to memory, we had
never been able to acquire experience. When therefore we say that memory, which
gives birth to experience, may nevertheless in some instances be corrected by
experience, no more is implied, but that the inferences formed from the most
lively and perspicuous reports of memory, sometimes serve to rectify the
mistakes which arise from such reports of this faculty, as are most languid and
confused. Thus memory, in these instances, may be said to correct itself. The
case is often much the same with experience and testimony, as will appear more
clearly in the second section, where I shall consider the ambiguity of the word
experience, as used by this author.

BUT how, says Mr Hume, is testimony then to be refuted? Principally in one or
other of these two ways: first, and most directly, by contradictory testimony;
that is, when an equal or greater number of witnesses, equally or more
credible, attest the contrary: secondly, by such evidence either of the
incapacity or baseness of the witnesses, as is sufficient to discredit them.
What, rejoins my antagonist, cannot then testimony be confuted by the
extraordinary nature of the fact attested? Has this consideration no weight at
all? That this consideration has no weight at all, 'twas never my intention to
maintain; that by itself it can very rarely, if ever, amount to a refutation
against ample and unexceptionable testimony, I hope to make extremely plain.
Who has ever denied, that the uncommonness of an event related, is a
presumption against its reality; and that chiefly on account of the tendency,
which, experience teaches us, and this author has observed, some people have
to sacrifice truth to the love of wonder p. 184.
? The question only is, How far does this presumption extend? In the extent
which Mr Hume has assigned it, he has greatly exceeded the limits of nature,
and consequently of all just reasoning.

In his opinion, When the fact attested is such as has seldom fallen under our
observation, there is a contest of two opposite experiences, of which the one
destroys the other, as far as its force goes, and the superior can only operate
on the mind, by the force which remains p. 179.
. There is a metaphysical, I had almost said, a magical balance and arithmetic,
for the weighing and subtracting of evidence, to which he frequently recurs,
and with which he seems to fancy he can perform wonders. I wish he had been a
little more explicit in teaching us how these rare inventions must be used.
When a writer of genius and elocution expresses himself in general terms, he
will find it an easy matter, to give a plausible appearance to things the most
unintelligible in nature. Such sometimes is this author's way of writing. In
the instance before us he is particularly happy in his choice of metaphors.
They are such as are naturally adapted to prepossess a reader in his favor.
What candid person can think of suspecting the impartiality of an inquirer, who
is for weighing in the scales of reason, all the arguments on either side? Who
can suspect his exactness who determines every thing by a numerical
computation? Hence it is, that to a superficial view his reasoning appears
scarce inferior to demonstration; but, when narrowly canvassed, it is
impracticable to find an application, of which, in a consistency with good
sense, it is capable.

In confirmation of the remark just now made, let us try how his manner of
arguing on this point can be applied to a particular instance. For this purpose
I make the following suppsition. I have lived for some years near a ferry. It
consists with my knowledge that the passage-boat has a thousand times crossed
the river, and as many times returned safe. An unknown man, whom I have just
now met, tells me in a serious manner, that it is lost; and affirms, that he
himself standing on the bank, was a spectator of the scene; that he saw the
passengers carried down the stream, and the boat overwhelmed. No person, who is
influenced in his judgment of things, not by philosophical subtilties, but by
common sense, a much surer guide, will hesitate to declare, that in such a
testimony I have probable evidence of the fact asserted. But if leaving common
sense, I shall recur to metaphysics, and submit to be tutored in my way of
judging by the essayist, he will remind me, that there is here a contest of two
opposite experiences, of which the one destroys the other, as far as its force
goes, and the superior can only operate on the mind by the force which remains.
I am warned, that the very same principle of experience, which gives me a
certain degree of assurance in the testimony of the witness gives me also, in
this case, another degree of assurance, against the fact, which he endeavors
to establish, from which contradiction there arises a counterpoise and mutual
destruction of belief and authority p. 179.
. -- Well, I would know the truth, if possible; and that I may conclude fairly
and philosophically, how must I balance these opposite experiences, as you are
pleased to term them? Must I set the thousand, or rather the two thousand
instances of the one side, against the single instance of the other? In that
case, it is easy to see, I have nineteen hundred and ninety-nine degrees of
evidence that my information is false. Or, is it necessary, in order to make it
credible, that the single instance have two thousand times as much evidence, as
any of the opposite instances, supposing them equal among themselves; or
supposing them unequal, as much as all the two thousand put together, that
there may be at least an equilibrium? This is impossible. I had for some of
those instances, the evidence of sense, which hardly any testimony can equal,
much less exceed. Once more, must the evidence I have of the veracity of the
witness, be a full equivalent to the two thousand instances, which oppose the
fact attested? By the supposition, I have no positive evidence for or against
his veracity, he being a person whom I never saw before. Yet if none of these
be the balancing, which the essay-writer means, I despair of being able to
discover his meaning.

Is then so weak a proof from testimony incapable of being refuted? I am far
from thinking so; though even so weak a proof could not be overturned by such a
contrary experience. How then may it be overturned? First, by contradictory
testimony. Going homewards I meet another person, whom I know as little as I
did the former; finding that he comes from the ferry, I ask him cencerning the
truth of the report. He affirms that the whole is a fiction; that he saw the
boat, and all in it, come safe to land. This would do more to turn the scale,
than fifty thousand such contrary instances, as were supposed. Yet this would
not remove suspicion. Indeed, if we were to consider the matter abstractly, one
would think, that all suspicion would be removed, that the two opposite
testimonies would destroy each other, and leave the mind entirely under the
influence of its former experience, in the same state as if neither testimony
had been given. But this is by no means consonant to fact. When once
testimonies are introduced, former experience is generally of no account in the
reckoning; it is but like the dust of the balance, which has not any sensible
effect upon the scales. The mind hangs in suspense between the two contrary
declarations, and considers it as one to one, or equal improbability, that the
report is true, or that it is false. Afterward a third, and a fourth, and a
fifth, confirm the declaration of the second. I am then quite at ease. Is this
the only effectual way of confuting false testimony? No. I suppose again, that
instead of meeting with any person who can inform me concerning the fact, I get
from some, who are acquainted with the witness information concerning his
character. They tell me, he is notorious for lying; and that his lies are
commonly forged, not with a view to interest, but merely to gratify a malicious
pleasure, which the takes in alarming strangers. This, though not so direct a
refutation as the former, will be sufficient to discredit his report. In the
former, where there is testimony contradicting testimony, the author's metaphor
of a balance may be used with propriety. The things weighed are homogeneal: and
when contradictory evidences are presented to the mind, tending to prove
positions which cannot be both true, the mind must decide on the comparative
strength of the opposite evidences, before it yield to either.

But is this the case in the supposition first made? By no means. The two
thousand instances formerly known, and the single instance attested, as they
relate to different facts, though of a contrary nature, are not contradictory.
There is no inconsistency in believing both. There is no inconsistency in
receiving the last on weaker evidence, (if it be sufficient evidence) not only
than all the former together, but even than any of them singly. Will it be
said, that though the former instances are not themselves contradictory to to the
fact recently attested, they lead to a conclusion that is contradictory? I
answer, It Is true, that the experienced frequency of the conjunction of any two
events, leads the mind to infer a similar conjunction in time to come. But let
it at the same time be remarked, that no man considers this inference, as
having equal evidence with any one of those past events, on which it is
founded, and for the belief of which we have had sufficient testimony. Before
then the method recommended by this author can turn to any account, it will be
necessary for him to compute and determine with precision, how many hundreds,
how many thousands, I might say how many myriads of instances, will confer such
evidence on the conclusion founded on them, as will prove an equipoize for the
testimony of one ocular witness, a man of probity, in a case of which he is
allowed to be a competent judge.

There is in arithmetic a rule called REDUCTION, by which numbers of different
denominations are brought to the same denomination. If this ingenious author
shall invent a rule in logic, analogous to this, for reducing different classes
of evidence to the same class, he will bless the world with a most important
discovery. Then indeed he will have the honor to establish an everlasting
peace in the republic of letters; then we shall have the happiness to see
controversy of every kind, theological, historical, philosophical, receive its
mortal wound: for though, in every question, we could not even then determine
with certainty, on which side the truth lay, we could always determine (and
that is the utmost the nature of the thing admits) with as much accuracy as
geometry and algebra can afford, on which side the probability lay, and in what
degree. But till this metaphysical reduction is discovered, 'twill beimpossible
where the evidences are of different orders, to ascertain by subtraction the
superior evidence. We could not but esteem him a novice in arithmetic, who
being asked, whether seven pounds or eleven pence make the greater sum, and
what is the difference? should, by attending solely to the numbers, and
overlooking the value, conclude that eleven pence were the greater, and that it
exceeded the other by four. Must we not be equal novices in reasoning, if we
follow the same absurd method? Must we not fall into as great blunders? Of as
little significancy do we find the balance. Is the value of things heterogeneal
to be determined merely by weight? Shall silver be weighed against lead, or
copper against iron? If in exchange for a piece of gold, I were offered some
counters of baser metal, is it not obvious, that till I know the comparative
value of the metals, in vain shall I attempt to find what is equivalent, by the
assistance either of scales or arithmetic?

IT IS an excellent observation, and much to the purpose, which the late learned
and pious bishop of Durham, in his admirable performance on the analogy of
religion to the course of nature, has made on this subject. "There is a very
strong presumption," says he, against the most ordinary facts, before the proof
of them, which yet is overcome by almost any proof. There is a presumption of
millions to one against the story of Caesar, or of any other man. For suppose a
number of common facts, so and so circumstanced, of which one had no kind of
proof, should happen to come into one's thoughts every one would, without any
possible doubt, conclude them to be false. The like may be said of a single
common fact Part 2. chap. 2. 3.
. What then, I may subjoin, shall be said of an uncommon fact? And that an
uncommon fact may be proved by testimony, has not yet been made a question.
But in order to illustrate the observation above cited, suppose, first, one at
random mentions, that at such an hour, of such a day, in such a part of the
heavens, a comet will appear; the conclusion from experience would not be as
millions, but as infinite to one, that the proposition is false. Instead of
this, suppose you have the testimony of but one ocular witness, a man of
integrity, and skilled in astronomy, that at such an hour, of such a day, in
such a part of the heavens, a comet did appear; you will not hesitate one
moment to give him credit. Yet all the presumption that was against the truth
of the first supposition, though almost as strong evidence as experience can
afford, was also against the truth of the second, before it was thus attested.

It is necessary to urge further, in support of this doctrine, that as the
water in the canal cannot be made to rise higher than the fountain whence it
flows; so it is impossible, that the evidence of testimony, if it proceeded
from experience, should ever exceed that of experience, which is its source?
Yet that it greatly exceeds this evidence, appears not only from what has been
observed already, but still more, from what I shall have occasion to observe in
the sequel. One may safely affirm, that no conceivable conclusion from
experience, can possess stronger evidence, than that which ascertains us of the
regular succession and duration of day and night. The reason is, the instances
on which this experience is founded, are both without number and without
exception. Yet even this conclusion, the author admits, as we shall see in the
third section, may, in a particular instance, not only be surmounted, but even
annihilated by testimony.

Lastly, let it be observed, that the immediate conclusion from experience is
always general, and runs thus: 'This is the ordinary course of nature.' Such an
event may reasonably be expected, where all the circumstances are entirely
similar. But when we descend to particulars, the conclusion becomes weaker,
being more indirect. For though all the known circumstances be similar, all the
actual circumstances may not be similar: nor is it possible in any case to be
assured (our knowledge of things being at best but superficial,) that all the
actual circumstances are known to us. On the contrary, the direct conclusion
from testimony is always particular, and runs thus; This is the fact in such an
individual instance. The remark now made will serve both to throw light on some
of the preceding observations and to indicate the proper sphere of each species
of evidence. Experience of the past is the only rule whereby we can judge
concerning the future: And as when the son is below the horizon, we must do the
best we can by light of the moon, or even of the stars; so in all cases where
we have no testimony, we are under a necessity of recurring to experience, and
of balancing or numbering contrary observations Wherever such balancing or
numbering can take place, the opposite evidences must be entirely similar. It
will rarely assist us in judging of facts supported by testimony; for even
where contradictory testimonies come to be considered, you will hardly find
that the characters of the witnesses on the opposite sides are so precisely
equal, as that an arithmetical operation will evolve the credibility. In
matters of pure experience it has often place. Hence the computations that
have been made of the value of annuities, insurances, and several other
commercial articles. In calculations concerning chances, the degree of
probability may be determined with mathematical exactness. I shall here take
the liberty, though the matter be not essential to the design of this tract, to
correct an oversight in the essayist, who always supposes, that where contrary
evidences must be balanced, the probability lies in the remainder or surplus,
when the less number is subtracted from the greater. The probability does not
consist in the surplus, but in the ratio, or geometrical proportion, which the
numbers on the opposite sides bear to each other. I explain myself thus. In
favor of one supposed event, there are 100 similar instances, against it 50.
In another case under consideration, the favorable instances are 60, and only
10 unfavourable. Though the difference, or arithmetical proportion, which is
50, be the same in both cases, the probability is by no means equal, as the
author's way of reasoning implies. The probability of the first event is as 100
to 50, or 2 to 1. The probability of the second is as 60 to 10, or 6 to 1.
Consequently on comparing the different examples, though both be probable, the
second is thrice as probable as the first.
. But the evidence resulting hence, even in the clearest cases, is acknowledged
to be so weak, compared with that which results from testimony, that the
strongest conviction built merely on the former, may be overturned by the
slightest proof exhibited by the latter. Accordingly the future has in all
ages and nations, been denominated the province of conjecture and uncertainty.

FROM what has been said, the attentive reader will easily discover, that the
author's argument against miracles, has not the least affinity to the argument
used by Dr Tillotson against transubstantiation, with which Mr Hume has
introduced his subject. Let us hear the argument, as it is related in the
Essay, from the writings of the Archbishop. It Is acknowledged on all hands,
says that learned prelate, that the authority either of the scripture or of
tradition, is founded merely on the testimony of the apostles, who were
eyewitnesses to those miracles of our Savior, by which he proved his divine
mission. Our evidence then for the truth of the Christian religion, is less
than the evidence for the truth of our senses; because even in the first
authors of our religion, it was no greater; and it is evident, it must diminish
in passing from them to their disciples; nor can any one be so certain of the
truth of their testimony, as of the immediate objects of his senses. But a
weaker evidence can never destroy a stronger; and therefore, were the doctrine
of the real presence ever so clearly revealed in scripture, 'twere directly
contrary to the rules of just reasoning to give our assent to it. It
contradicts sense, though both the scripture and tradition, on which it is
supposed to be built, carry not such evidence with them as sense, when they are
considered merely as external evidences, and are not brought home to every
one's breast, by the immediate operation of the Holy Spirit. p. 173, 174.
That the evidence of testimony is less than the evidence of sense, is
undeniable. Sense is the source of that evidence, which is first transferred to
the memory of the individual, as to a general reservoir, and thence transmitted
to others by the channel of testimony. That the original evidence can never
gain any thing, but must lose, by the transmission, is beyond dispute. What
has been rightly perceived, may be misremembered; what is rightly remembered
may, through incapacity, or through ill intention, be misreported; and what is
rightly reported may be misunderstood. In any of these four ways therefore,
either by defect of memory, of elocution, or of veracity in the relater, or by
misapprehension in the hearer, there is a chance, that the truth received by
the information of the senses, may be misrepresented or mistaken; now every
such chance occasions a real diminution of the evidence. That the sacramental
elements are bread and wine, not flesh and blood, our sight and touch, and
taste, and smell concur in testifying. If these senses are not to be credited,
the apostles themselves could not have evidence of the mission of their master.
For the greatest external evidence they had, or could have, of his mission, was
that which their senses gave them, of the reality of his miracles. But whatever
strength there is in this argument with regard to the apostles, the argument
with regard to us, who, for those miracles, have only the evidence, not of our
own senses, but of their testimony, is incomparably stronger. In their case, it
is sense contradicting sense; in ours it is sense contradicting testimony. But
what relation has this to the author's argument? None at all. Testimony, it is
acknowledged, is a weaker evidence than sense. But it has been already
evinced, that its evidence for particular facts is infinitely stronger than
that which the general conclusion from experience can afford us. -- Testimony
holds directly of memory and sense. Whatever is duly attested must be
remembered by the witness; whatever is duly remembered must once have been
perceived. But nothing similar takes place with regard to experience, nor can
testimony, with any appearance of meaning, be said to hold of it.

THUS I have shown, as I proposed, that the author's reasoning proceeds on a
false hypothesis. -- It supposes testimony to derive its evidence solely from
experience, which is false. -- It supposes by consequence, that contrary
observations have a weight in opposing testimony, which the first and most
acknowledged principles of human reason, or, if you like the term better,
common sense, evidently shows that they have not. -- It assigns a rule for
discovering the superiority of contrary evidences, which, in the latitude there
given it, tends to mislead the judgment, and which it is impossible, by any
explication, to render of real use.

SECTION II. Mr Hume charged with some fallacies in his way of managing the
argument.
IN the essay there is frequent mention of the word experience, and much use
made of it. It Is strange that the author has not favored us with the
definition of a term of so much moment to his argument. This defect I shall
endeavor to supply; and the rather, as the word appears to be equivocal, and
to be used by the essayist in two very different senses. The first and most
proper signification of the word, which, for distinction's sake, I shall call
personal experience, is that given in the preced'ing section. 'It is,' as was
observed, founded in memory, and consists solely of the general maxims or
conclusions, that each individual has formed, from the comparison of the
particular facts he has remembered. In the other signification, in which the
word is sometimes taken, and which I shall distinguish by the term derived, it
may be thus defined. It is founded in testimony, and consists not only of all
the experiences of others, which have through that channel been communicated to
us, but of all the general maxims or conclusions we have formed, from the
comparison of particular facts attested.

In proposing his argument, the author would surely be understood to mean only
personal experience; otherwise, his making testimony derive its light from an
experience which derives its light from testimony, would be introducing what
logicians term a circle in causes. It would exhibit the same things
alternately, as causes and effects of each other. Yet nothing can be more
limited, than the sense which is conveyed under the term experience, in the
first acceptance. The merest clown or peasant derives incomparably more
knowledge from testimony, and the communicated experience of others, than in
the longest life he could have amassed out of the treasure of his own memory.
Nay, to such a scanty portion the savage himself is not confined. If that
therefore must be the rule, the only rule, by which every testimony is
ultimately to be judged, our belief in matters of fact must have very narrow
bounds. No testimony ought to have any weight with us, that does not relate an
event, similar at least to some one observation, which we ourselves have had
access to make. For example, that there are such people on the earth as
negroes, could not, on that hypothesis, be rendered credible to one who had
never seen a negro, not even by the most numerous and the most unexceptionable
attestations. Against the admission of such testimony, however strong, the
whole force of the author's argument evidently operates. But that innumerable
absurdities would flow from this principle, I might easily evince, did I not
think the task superfluous.

The author himself is aware of the consequences; and therefore, in whatever
sense he uses the term experience in proposing his argument; in prosecuting it,
he with great dexterity shifts the sense, and ere the reader is apprised,
insinuates another. It Is a miracle, says he, that a dead man should come to
life, because that has never been observed in any age or country. There must
therefore be an uniform experience against every miraculous event, otherwise
the event would not merit that appellation p. 181.
. Here the phrase, an uniform experience against an event, in the latter
clause, is implicitly defined in the former, not what has never been observed
BY US, but (mark his words) what has never been observed IN ANY AGE OR COUNTRY.
-- Now, what has been observed, and what has not been observed, in all ages and
countries, pray how can you, Sir, or I, or any man, come to the knowledge of?
Only I suppose by testimony, oral or written. The personal experience of every
individual is limited to but a part of one age, and commonly to a narrow spot
of one country. If there be any other way of being made acquainted with facts,
it is to me, I own, an impenetrable secret; I have no apprehension of it. If
there be not any, what shall we make of that cardinal point, on which his
argument turns? It Is in plain language, Testimony is not entitled to the least
degree of faith, but as far as it is supported by such an extensive experience,
as if we had not had a previous and independent faith in testimony, we could
never have acquired.

How natural is the transition from one sophism to another! You will soon be
convinced of this, if you attend but a little to the strain of the argument. "A
miracle," says he, is a violation of the laws of nature; and as a firm and
unalterable experience has established these laws, the proof against a miracle
is as entire, as any argument from experience can possibly be imagined p. 180.
. Again, As an uniform experience amounts to a proof, there is here a direct
and full proof, from the nature of the fact, against the existence of any
miracle p. 181.
. I must once more ask the author what is the precise meaning of the words
firm, unalterable, uniform? An experience that admits no exception, is surely
the only experience, which can with propriety be termed uniform, firm,
unalterable. Now since, as was remarked above, the far greater part of this
experience, which compriseth every age and every country, must be derived to us
from testimony; that the experience may be firm, uniform, unalterable there
must be no contrary testimony whatever. Yet by the author's own hypothesis, the
miracles he would thus confute, are supported by testimony At the same time to
give strength to his argument, he is under a necessity of supposing, that there
is no exception from the testimonies against them. Thus he falls into that
paralogism, which is called begging the question. What he gives with one hand,
he takes with the other. He admits, in opening his design, what in his argument
he implicitly denies.

But that this, if possible, may be still more manifest, let us attend a little
to some expressions, which one would imagine he had inadvertently dropped. "So
long," says he, as the world endures, I presume, will the accounts of miracles
and prodigies be found in all profane history p. 174.
. Why does he presume so? A man so much attached to experience, can hardly be
suspected to have any other reason than, because such accounts have hitherto
been found in all the histories, profane as well as sacred, of times past. But
we need not recur to an inference to obtain this acknowledgment. It is often to
be met with in the essay. In one place we learn, that the witnesses for
miracles are an infinite number p: 190:
; in another, that all religious records of whatever kind abound with them p.
191:
. I leave it therefore to the author to explain, with what consistency he can
assert, that the laws of nature are established by an uniform experience,
(which experience is chiefly the result of testimony) and at the same time
allow, that almost all human histories are full of the relations of miracles
and prodigies, which are violations of those laws. Here is, by his own
confession, testimony against testimony, and very ample on both sides. How then
can one side claim a firm, uniform, and unalterable support from testimony?

It will be in vain to object, that the testimony in support of the laws of
nature, greatly exceeds the testimony for the violations of these laws; and
that, if we are to be determined by the greater number of observations, we
shall reject all miracles whatever. I ask, Why are the testimonies much more
numerous in the one case than in the other? The answer is obvious: Natural
occurrences are much more frequent than such as are preternatural. But are all
the accounts we have of the pestilence to be rejected as incredible, because,
in this country, we hear not so often of that disease, as of the fever? Or,
because the number of natural births is infinitely greater than that of
monsters, shall the evidence of the former be regarded as a confutation of all
that can be advanced in proof of the latter? Such an objector needs to be
reminded of what was proved in the foregoing section; that the opposite
testimonies relate to different facts, and are therefore not contradictory;
that the conclusion founded on them, possesses not the evidence of the facts
on which it is founded, but only such a presumptive evidence, as may be
surmounted by the slightest positive proof. A general conclusion from
experience is in comparison but presumptive and indirect; sufficient testimony
for a particular fact is direct and positive evidence.

I SHALL remark one other fallacy in this author's reasoning, before I conclude
this section. The Indian prince, says he, who refused to believe the first
relations concerning the effects of frost, reasoned justly; and it naturally
required very strong testimony to engage his assent to facts, which arose from
a state of nature, with which he was unacquainted, and bore so little analogy
to those events, of which he had had constant and uniform experience. Though they
were not contrary to his experience, they were not conformable to it p. 179.
. Here a distinction is artfully suggested, between what is contrary to
experience, and what is not conformable to it. The one he allows may be proved
by testimony, but not the other. A distinction, for which the author seems to
have so great use, it will not be improper to examine.

If my reader happen to be but little acquainted with Mr Hume's writings, or
even with the piece here examined, I must entreat him, ere he proceed any
farther, to give the essay an attentive perusal; and to take notice
particularly, whether in one single passage, he can find any other sense given
to the terms contrary to experience, but that which has not been experienced.
Without this aid, I should not be surprised, that I found it difficult to
convince the judicious, that a man of so much acuteness, one so much a
philosopher as this author, should, with such formality, make a distinction,
which not only the essay, but the whole tenor of his philosophical writings,
shows evidently to have no meaning. Is that which is contrary to experience a
synonymous phrase for that which implies a contradiction? If this were the
case, there would be no need to recur to experience for a refutation; it would
refute itself. But it is equitable that the author himself be heard, who ought
to be the best interpreter of his own words. "When the fact attested," says he,
is such a one, as has seldom fallen under our observation, here is a contest of
two opposite experiences p. 179.
. In this passage, not the being never experienced, but even the being seldom
experienced constitutes an opposite experience. I can conceive no way but one,
that the author can evade the force of this quotation; and that is, by
obtruding on us, some new distinction between an opposite and a contrary
experience. In order to preclude such an attempt, I shall once more recur to
his own authority. It Is no miracle that a man in seeming good health, should
die of a sudden. Why? Because such a kind of death, though more unusual than any
other, has yet been frequently observed to happen. But it is a miracle that a
dead man should come to life, Why? Not because of any inconsistency in the
thing. That a body should be this hour inanimate, and the next animated, is no
more inconsistent, than the reverse that it should be this hour animated, and
the next inanimate; though the one be common, and not the other. But the author
himself answers the question: Because that has never been observed in any age
or country p. 181.
. All the contrariety then that there is in miracles to experience, does, by
his own concession, consist solely in this, that they have never been observed;
that is, they are not conformable to experience, To his experience personal or
derived, he must certainly mean; to what he has had access to learn of
different ages and countries. To speak beyond the knowledge he has attained,
would be ridiculous. It would be first supposing a miracle, and then inferring
a contrary experience, instead of concluding from experience, that the fact is
miraculous.

Now, I insist, that as far as regards the author's argument, a fact perfectly
unusual, or not conformable to our experience, such a fact as, for aught we
have had access to learn, was never observed in any age or country, is as
incapable of proof from testimony, as miracles are; that, if this writer would
argue consistently, he could never, on his own principles, reject the one and
admit the other. Both ought to be rejected or neither. I would not, by this be
thought to signify, that there is no difference between a miracle and an
extraordinary event: I know that the former implies the interposal of an
invisible agent, which is not implied in the latter. All that I intend to a
sert is, that the anthor's argument equally affects them both. Why does such
interposal appear to him incredible? Not from any incongruity he discerns in
the thing itself. He does not pretend it. But it is not conformable to his
experience. "A miracle," "says he," is a transgression of the law of nature p.
182. in the note.
," But how are the laws of nature known to us? By experience. What is the
criterion, whereby we must judge, whether the laws of nature are transgressed?
Solely the conformity or disconformity of events to our experience. This writer
surely will not pretend, that we can have any knowledge a priori, either of the
law, or of the violation.

Let us then examine by his own principles, whether the King of Siam, of whom
the story he alludes to, is related by Lock Essay on human understanding, book
4. chap. 2. 5.
, could have sufficient evidence from testimony, of a fact so contrary to his
experience as the freezing of water. He could just say as much of this event,
as the author can say of a dead man's being restored to life. Such a thing was
never observed, as far as I could learn, in any age or country. If the things
themselves too are impartially considered and independently of the notions
acquired by us in these northern climates, we should account the first at least
as extraordinary as the second. That so pliant a body as water should become
hard like pavement, so as to bear up an elephant on its surface, is as unlikely
in itself, as that a body inanimate today should be animated tomorrow. Nay,
to the Indian monarch, I must think, that the first would appear more a
miracle, more contrary to experience than the second. If he had been acquainted
with ice or frozen water, and afterward seen it become fluid; but had never
seen nor learned, that after it was melted, it became hard again, the relation
must have appeared mavelous, as the process from fluidity to hardness never
had been experienced, though the reverse often had. But I believe nobody will
question, that on this supposition it would not have appeared quite so strange,
as it did. Yet this supposition makes the instance more parallel to the
restoring of the dead to life. The process from animate to inanimate we are all
acquainted with; and what is such a restoration, but the reversing of this
process? So little reason had the author to insinuate, that the one was only
not conformable, the other contrary to experience. If there be a difference in
this respect, the first to one alike unacquainted with both, must appear the
more contrary of the two.

Does it alter the matter, that he calls the former a fact which arose from a
state of nature, with which the Indian was unacquainted? Was not such a st^^^
quite unconformable, or (which in the author's language I have shown to be the
same) contrary to his experience? Is then a state of nature which is contrary
to experience, more credible than a single fact contrary to experience? I want
the solution of one difficulty: The author, in order to satisfy me, presents me
with a thousand others. Is this suitable to the method he proposes in another
place, of admitting always the less miracle and rejecting the greater p. 182.
? Is it not, on the contrary, admitting without any difficulty the greater
miracle, and thereby removing the difficulty, which he otherwise would have had
in admitting the less? Does he forget, that to exhibit a state of nature
entirely different from what we experience at present, is one of those enormous
prodigies, which, in his account, render the Pentateuch unworthy of credit p.
206.
? "No Indian," says he in the note, it is evident, could have experience that
water did not freeze in cold climates. This is placing nature in a situation
quite unknown to him, and it is impossible for him to tell a priori, what will
result from it. This is precisely, as if, in reply to the author's objection
from experience against the raising of a dead man (suppose Lazarus) to life, I
should retort: Neither you, Sir, nor any who live in this century can have
experience, that a dead man could not be restored to life at the command of one
divinely commissioned to give a revelation to men. This is placing nature in a
situation quite unknown to you, and it is impossible for you to tell a priori
what will result from it. This therefore is not contrary to the course of
nature, in cases where all the circumstances are the same. As you never saw one
vested with such a commission, you are as unexperienced, as ignorant of this
point, as the inhabitants of Sumatra are of the frosts in Muscovy; you cannot
therefore reasonably, any more than they, be positive as to the consequences.
Should he rejoin, as doubtless he would, This is not taking away the
difficulty; but, like the elephant and the tortoise, in the account given by
some barbarians of the manner in which the earth is supported, it only shifts
the difficulty a step further back. My objection still recurs. That any man
should be endowed with such power is contrary to experience, and therefore
incredible: Should he, I say, rejoin in this manner, I could only add. Pray
Sir, revise your own words lately quoted, and consider impartially whether they
be not as glaringly exposed to the like reply. For my part, I can only perceive
one difference that is material between the two cases. You frankly confess,
that with regard to the freezing of water, besides the absolute want of
experience, there would be from analogy a presumption against it, which ought
to weigh with a rational Indian. I think, on the contrary, in the case supposed
by me of one commissioned by Heaven, there is at least no presumption against
the exertion of such a miraculous power. There is rather a presumption in its
favor.

Does the author then say, that no testimony could give the King of Siam
sufficient evidence of the effects of cold on water? No. By implication he says
the contrary: "It required very strong testimony." Will he say, that those most
astonishing effects of electricity lately discovered, so entirely unanalogous
to every thing before experienced, will he say, that such facts no reasonable
man could have sufficient evidence from testimony to believe? No. We may
presume, he will not, from his decision in the former case; and if he should,
the common sense of mankind would reclaim against his extravagance. Yet it is
obvious to every considerate reader, that his argument concludes equally
against those truly mavelous, as against miraculous events; both being alike
unconformable, or alike contrary to former experience I cannot forbear to
observe, that many of the principal terms employed in the essay, are used in a
manner extremely vague and unphilosophical. I have remarked the confusion I
find in the application of the words, experience, contrariety, conformity: I
might remark the same thing of the word, miracle. "A miracle," it is said, p.
182, in the note, may be accurately defined, A TRANSGRESSION of a law of
nature, by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposal of some
invisible agent. The word transgression invariably denotes a criminal
opposition to authority. The author's accuracy in representing God as a
transgressor, I have not the perspicacity to discern. Does he intend, by
throwing something monstrous into the definition, to infuse into the reader a
prejudice against the thing defined? But supposing that through inadvertency, he
had used the term transgression, instead of suspension, which would have been
both intelligible and proper; one would at least expect, that the word miracle
in the essay, always expressed the sense of the definition. But this it evidently
does not. Thus in the instance of the miracle supposed (p. 203, in the note) he
calls it, in the beginning of the paragraph, A violation of the usual course of
nature; but in the end, after telling us that such a miracle, on the evidence
supposed, our present philosophers ought to receive for certain, he subjoins,
(how consistently, let the reader judge) and ought to search for the causes,
whence it might be derived. Thus it is insinuated, that though a fact apparently
miraculous, and perfectly extraordinary, might be admitted by a philosopher,
still the reality of the miracle must be denied. For if the interposal of the
Deity be the proper solution of the phenomenon, why should we recur to natural
causes? Hence a careless reader is insensibly led to think, that there is some
special incredibility in such an interposal, distinct from its uncommonness.
Yet the author's great argument is built on this single circumstance, and
places such an interposition just on the same footing with every event that is
equally uncommon. At one time, he uses the word miracle to denote a bare
improbability, as will appear in the sixth section: at another, absurd and
miraculous are, with him, synonymous terms; so are also the miraculous nature
of an event, and its absolute impossibility. Is this the style and manner of a
reasoner?
.

THUS I think I have shown, that the author is chargeable with some fallacies,
in his way of managing the argument; that he all along avails himself of an
ambiguity in the word experience; -- that his reasoning includes a petitio
principii in the bosom of it; -- and that, in supporting his argument, he must
have recourse to distinctions, where, even himself being judge, there is no
difference.

SECTION III. Mr Hume himself gives up his favorite argument.
'MR Hume himself,' methinks I hear my reader repeating with astonishment,
gives up his favorite argument! To prove this point is indeed a very bold
attempt. Yet that this attempt is not altogether so arduous, as at first
hearing, he will possibly imagine, I hope, if favored a while with his
attention, fully to convince him. If to acknowledge, after all, that there may
be miracles, which admit of proof from human testimony; if to acknowledge, that
such miracles ought to be received, not as probable only, but as absolutely
certain; or, in other words, that the proof from human testimony may be such as
that all the contrary uniform experience, should not only be overbalanced, but,
to use the author's expression, should be annihilated; if such acknowledgments
as these, are subversive of his own principles; if by making them, he abandons
his darling argument; this strange part the essayist evidently acts.

"I own," these are his words, there may possibly be miracles, or violations of
the usual course of nature, of such a kind as to admit a proof from human
testimony, though perhaps (in this he is modest enough, he avers nothing;
perhaps) it will be impossible to find any such in all the records of history.
To this declaration he subjoins the following suppsition: Suppose all authors,
in all languages, agree, that from the 1st of January 1700, there was a total
darkness over the whole earth for eight days; suppose that the tradition of
this extraordinary event, is still strong and lively among the people; that all
travelers, who return from foreign countries, bring us accounts of the same
tradition, without the least variation or contradiction: it is evident, that our
present philosophers, instead of doubting of that fact, ought to receive it for
certain, and ought to search for the causes, whence it might be derived p. 203,
in the note.
.

Could one imagine, that the person who had made the above acknowledgment, a
person too who is justly allowed by all who are acquainted with his writings,
to possess uncommon penetration and philosophical abilities, that this were the
same individual, who had so short while before affirmed, that "a miracle," or a
violation of the usual course of nature, supported by any human testimony, is
more properly a subject of derision than of argument p. 194.
; who had insisted, that it is not requisite, in order to reject the fact, to
be able accurately to disprove the testimony, and to trace its falsehood; that
such an evidence carries falsehood on the very face of it ib.
; that we need but oppose even to acloud of witnesses, the absolute
impossibility, or, which is all one, miraculous nature of the events, which
they relate; that this in the eyes of all reasonable people, will alone be
regarded as a sufficient refutation p. 196, etc.
; and who finally to put an end to all altercation on the subject had
pronounced this oracle. NO TESTIMONY FOR ANY KIND OF MIRACLE CAN EVER POSSIBLY
AMOUNT TO A PROBABILITY, MUCH LESS TO A PROOF p. 202.
. Was there ever a more glaring contradiction!

YET for the event supposed by the essayist, the testimony, in his judgment,
would amount to a probability; nay to more than a probability, to a proof; let
not the reader be astonished, or if he cannot fail to be astonished, let him
not be incredulous, when I add, to more than a proof, more than a full, entire
and direct proof; for even this I hope to make evident from the author's
principles and reasoning. "And even supposing," says he, that is, granting for
argument's sake, that the testimony for a miracle amounted to a proof, 'twould
be opposed by another proof, derived from the very nature of the fact, which it
would endeavor to establish ib.
. Here is then, by his own reasoning, proof against proof, from which there
could result no belief or opinion, unless the one is conceived to be in some
degree superior to the other. "Of which proofs," says he, the strongest must
prevail, but still with a diminution of its force in proportion to that of its
antagonist. p. 180.
Before the author could believe such a miracle as he supposes, he must at
least be satisfied that the proof of it from testimony is stronger than the
proof against it from experience. That we may form an accurate judgment of the
strength he here ascribes to testimony, let us consider what, by his own
account, is the strength of the opposite proof from experience. A miracle is a
violation of the laws of nature; and as a firm and unalterable experience has
established these laws, the proof against a miracle, from the very nature of
the fact, is as entire, as any argument from experience can possibly be
imagined ibid.
. Again, As an uniform experience amounts to a proof, there is here a direct
and full proof, from the nature of the fact, against the existence of any
miracle p. 181.
. The proof then which the essayist admits from testimony, is, by his own
estimate, not only superior to a direct and full proof; but even superior to as
entire a proof, as any argument from experience can possibly be imagined.
Whence, I pray, does testimony acquire such amazing evidence? 'Testimony,' says
the author, has no evidence, but what it derives from experience. These differ
from each other only as the species from the genus. Put then for testimony, the
word experience, which in this case is equivalent, and the conclusion will run
thus: Here is a proof from experience, which is superior to as entire a proof
from experience as can possible be imagined. This deduction from the author's
words, the reader will percieve, is strictly logical. What the meaning of it
is, I leave Mr Hume to explain.

What has been above deduced, how much soever it be accounted, is not all that
is implied in the concession made by the author. He further says, that the
miraculous fact so attested, ought not only to be received, but to be received
for certain. Is it not enough, Sir, that you have shown that your most full,
most direct, most perfect argument may be overcome; will nothing satisfy you
now but its destruction? One would imagine, that you had conjured up this
demon, by whose irresistible arm you proposed to give a mortal blow to
religion, and render skepticism triumphant, (that you had conjured him up, I
say) for no other purpose, but to show with what facility you could lay him. To
be serious, does not this author remember, that he had oftener than once laid
it down as a maxim, That when there is proof against proof, we must incline to
the superior, still with a diminution of assurance, in proportion to the sorce
of its antagonist p. 178. 180.
? But when a fact is received for certain, there can be no sensible diminution
of assurance, such diminution always implying some doubt and uncertainty.
Consequently the general proof from experience, though as entire as any argument
from experience can possibly be imagined, is not only surmounted, but is really
in comparison as nothing, or, in Mr Hume's phrase, undergoes annihilation, when
balanced with the particular proof from testimony. Great indeed, it must be
acknowledged, is the force of truth. This conclusion, on the principles I have
been endeavoring to establish, has nothing in it, but what is conceivable and
just; but on the principles of the essay, which deduce all the force of
testimony from experience, serves only to confound the understanding, and to
involve the subject in midnight darkness.

IT IS therefore manifest, that either this author's principles condemn his own
method of judging, with regard to miraculous facts; or that his method of
judging subverts his principles, and is a tacit desertion of them. Thus that
impregnable fortress, the asylum of infidelity, which he so lately gloried in
having erected, is in a moment abandoned by him, as a place untenable.

SECTION IV. There is no peculiar presumption against such miracles as are said
to have been wrought in support of religion.
IS it then so, that the decisive argument, the essayist flattered himself he
had discovered p. 174.
, which with the wise and learned, was to prove an everlasting check to all
kinds of superstitious delusion, and would consequently be useful, as long as
the world endures; is it so, that this boasted argument has in fact little or
no influence on the discoverer himself! But this author may well be excused. He
cannot be always the metaphysician. He cannot soar incessantly in the clouds.
Such constant elevation suits not the lot of humanity. He must sometimes,
whether he will or not, descend to a level with other people, and fall into the
humble track of common sense. One thing however he is resolved on: If he cannot
by metaphysic spells silence the most arrogant bigotry and superstition; he
will at any rate, though for this purpose he should borrow aid from what he
has no liking to, trite and popular topics; he will at any rate free himself
from their impertinent solicitations.

There are accordingly two principles in human nature, by which he accounts for
all the relations, that have ever been in the world, concerning mi^^cles. These
principles are, the passion for the mavelous, and the religious affection p.
164. 185.
; against either of which singly, the philosopher, he says, ought ever to be on
his guard; but incomparably more so, when both happen to be in strict
confederacy together. For if the spirit of religion join itself to the love of
wonder, there is an end of common sense; and human testimony, in these
circumstances, loses all pretensions to authority. ib.
Notwithstanding this strong affirmation, there is reason to suspect that the
author is not in his heart, so great an enemy to the love of wonder, as he
affects to appear. No man can make a greater concession in favor of the
wonderful, than he has done in the passage quoted in the preceding section. No
man was ever fonder of paradox, and, in theoretical subjects, of every notion
that is remote from sentiments universally received. This love of paradox, he
owns himself, that both his enemies and his friends reproach him with
Dedication to the four dissertations.
. There must surely be some foundation for so universal a censure. If
therefore, in respect of the passion for the mavelous, he differ from other
people, the difference arises from a particular delicacy in this gentleman,
which makes him nauseate even to wonder with the crowd. He is of that singular
turn that where every body is struck with astonishment, he can see nothing
wondrous in the least; at the same time he discovers prodigies, where no soul
but himself ever dreamt that there were any.

We may therefore rest assured of it, that the author might be conciliated to
the love of wonder, provided the spirit of religion be kept at a distance,
against which he has unluckily contracted a mortal antipathy, against which he
has resolved to wage eternal war. When he but touches this subject, he loses
at once his philosophic composure, and speaks with an acrimony unusual to him
on other occasions. Some thing of this kind appears from the citations already
made. But if these should not satisfy, I shall produce one or two more, which
certainly will. There is a second supposition the author makes of a miraculous
event, in a certain manner circumstanced and attested, which he declares, and I
think with particular propriety, that he would not have the least inclination
to believe p. 204. in the note.
. At his want of inclination the reader will not be surprised, when he learns,
that this supposed miracle is concerning a resurrection; an event which bears
too strong a resemblance both to the doctrine and to the miracles of holy writ,
not to alarm a modern Pyrrhonist. To the above declaration he subjoins, But
should this miracle be ascribed to any new system of religion, men in all ages
have been so much imposed on by ridiculous stories of that kind, that this very
circumstance would be a full proof of a cheat, and sufficient with all men of
sense, not only to make them reject the fact, but even reject it without
further examination. Again, a little after, As the violations of truth are more
common in the testimony concerning religious miracles, than in that concerning
any other matter of fact, (a point which the author is positive, though he
neither produces facts nor arguments to support it) this must diminish very
much the authority of the former testimony, and (pray observe his words) make
us form a GENERAL RESOLUTION, never to lend any attention to it, with whatever
specious pretext it may be covered.

Never did the passion of an inflamed orator, or the intemperate zeal of a
religionist, carry him further against his adversary, than this man of
speculation is carried by his prejudice against religion. Demagogues and bigots
have often warned the people against listening to the arguments of an envied
and therefore detested rival, lest by his sophistry they should be seduced into
the most fatal errors. The same part this author, a philosopher, a skeptic, a
dispassionate inquirer after truth, as surely he chooses to be accounted, now
acts in favor of infidelity. He thinks it not safe to give religion even a
hearing. Nay so strange a turn have matters taken of late with the managers of
this controversy, that it is now the FREETHINKER who preaches implicit faith;
it is the INFIDEL, who warns us of the danger of consulting reason. Beware, says
he, I admonish you, of inquiring into the strength of the plea, or of bringing
it to the deceitful test of reason; for those who will be so SILLY as to
examine the affair by that medium, and seek particular flaws in the testimony,
are almost sure to be confounded p. 197. in the note.
. That religion is concerned in the matter, is reckoned by these sages
sufficient evidence of imposture. The proofs she offers in her own defense, we
are told by these candid judges, ought to be rejected, and rejected without
examination. The old way of scrutiny and argument must now be laid aside,
having been at length discovered to be but a bungling, a tedious, and a
dangerous way at best. What then shall we substitute in its place? The essayist
has a most admirable expedient. A shorter and surer method he recommends to
us, the expeditious way of resolution. 'Form,' says he, a GENERAL RESOLUTION,
never to lend any attention to testimonies or facts urgedby religion, with
whatever specious pretext they may be covered.

I had almost congratulated Mr Hume, and our enlightened age, on this happy
invention, before I reflected, that though the application might be new, the
expedient itself, of resolving to be deaf to argument, was very ancient, having
been often with great success employed against atheists and heretics, and
warmly recommended by Bellarmine and Scotus, and most others of that bright
fraternity the schoolmen: Persons, I acknowledge, to whom one could not,
perhaps in any other instance, find a resemblance in my ingenious opponent.

I Am afraid that after such a declaration, I must not presume to consider
myself as arguing with the author, who has, in so peremptory a manner,
resolved to attend to nothing that can be said in opposition to his theory.
'What judgment he has,' to use his own expression, he has renounced by
principle, in these sublime and mysterious subjects p. 185.
, If however it should prove the fate of these papers, the forbidding title of
them notwithstanding, to be at any time honored with the perusal of some
infidel, not indeed so rivetted in unbelief as the essayist, I would earnestly
entreat such reader, in the solemn style of Mr Hume, To lay his hand upon his
heart, and after serious consideration declare p. 185.
, If any of the patrons of religion had acted this part, and warned people not
to try by argument the metaphysical subtleties of the adversaries, affirming,
that they who were MAD enough to examine the affair by that medium, and seek
particular flaws in the reasoning, were almost sure to be confounded; that the
only prudent method was, to form a GENERAL RESOLUTION, never to lend any
attention to what was advanced on the opposite side, however specious; whether
this conduct would not have afforded great matter of triumph to those gentlemen
the deists; whether it would not have been construed by them, and even justly,
into a tacit conviction of the weakness of our cause, which we were afraid of
exposing in the light, and bringing to a fair trial. But we scorn to take
shelter in obscurity, and meanly to decline the combat; confident as we are,
that REASON is our ally and our friend, and glad to find that the enemy at
length so violently suspects her.

As to the first method, by which the author accounts for the fabulous
relations of monsters and prodigies, it is freely acknowledged, that the Creator
has implanted in human nature, as a spur to the improvement of the
understanding, a principle of curiosity, which makes the mind feel a particular
pleasure in every new acquisition of knowledge. It Is acknowledged also, that as
every principle in our nature is liable to abuse, so this principle will often
give the mind a bias to the mavelous, for the more mavelous any thing is,
that is, the more unlike to all that has formerly been known, the more new it
is; and this bias, in many instances, may induce belief on insufficient
evidence.

But the presumption that hence arises against the mavelous is not stronger
in the case of miracles (as will appear from an attentive perusal of the second
section) than in the case of every fact that is perfectly extraordinary. Yet
how easily this obstacle may be overcome by testimony, might be illustrated, if
necessary, in almost every branch of science, in physiology, in geography, in
history. On the contrary, what an immense impediment would this presumption
prove to the progress of philosophy and letters, had it in reality one
fiftieth-part of the strength which the author seems to attribute to it. I
shall not tire my reader or myself by recurring to the philosophic wonders in
electricity, chemistry, magnetism, which, all the world sees, may be fully
proved to us by testimony, before we make the experiments ourselves.

BUT there is, it seems, additional to this, a peculiar presumpti^^ against
religious miracles. The wise, as the author has observed with reason, lend a
very academic faith to every report, which favors the passion of the reporter,
whether it magnifies his country, his family, or himself, or in any other way
strikes in with his natural inclinations and propensities p. 200.
. Now, as no object whatever operates more powerfully on the fancy than
religion does, or works up the passions to a higher fervor; so, in matters
relating to this subject, if in any subject, we have reason to suspect that the
understanding will prove a dupe to the passions. On this point therefore we
ought to be peculiarly cautious, that we be not hasty of belief. In this
sentiment we all agree.

But there is one circumstance, which he has overlooked, and which is
nevertheless of the greatest consequence in the debate. It is this, that the
prejudice resulting from the religious affection, may just as readily obstruct,
as promote our faith in a religious miracle. What things in nature are more
contrary, than one religion is to another religion? They are just as contrary
as light and darkness, truth and error. The affections, with which they are
contemplated by the same person, are just as opposite, as desire and aversion,
love and hatred. The same religious zeal which gives the mind of a Christian, a
propensity to the belief of a miracle in support of Christianity, will inspire
him with an aversion from the belief of a miracle in support of Mahometism. The
same principle, which will make him acquiesce in evidence less than sufficient
in the one case, will make him require evidence more than sufficient in the
other.

Before then the remark of the author can be of any use in directing our
judgment, as to the evidence of miracles attested, we must consider whether the
original tenets of the witnesses would naturally have blassed their m^nds in
favor of the miracles, or in opposition to them. If the former was the case,
the testimony is so much the less to be regarded; if the latter, so much the
more. Will it satisfy on this head to acquaint us, that the prejudices of the
witnesses must have favored the miracles, since they were zealous promoters of
the doctrine, in support of which those miracles are said to have been
performed? To answer thus would be to misunderstand the point. The question is,
Was this doctrine the faith of the witnesses, before they saw, or fancied they
saw the miracles? If it was, I agree with him. Great, very great allowance must
be made for the prejudices of education, for principles, early perhaps,
carefully, and deeply roote^ in their minds, and for the religious affection
founded in these principles; which allowance must always derogate from the
weight of their testimony. But if the faith of the witnesses stood originally
in opposition to the doctrine attested by the miracles; if the only account
that can be given of their conversion, is the conviction which the miracles
produced in them; it must be a preposterous way of arguing, to derive their
conviction from a religious zeal, which would at first obstinately withstand,
and for some time hinder such conviction. On the contrary, that the evidence
arising from miracles performed in proof of a doctrine disbelieved, and
consequently hated before, did in fact surmount that obstacle, and conquer all
the opposition arising thence, is a very strong presumption in favor of that
evidence: just as strong a presumption in its favor, as it would have been
against it, had all their former zeal, and principles, and prejudices,
co-operated with the evidence, whatever it was, in gaining an entire assent.

Hence there is the greatest disparity in this respect, a disparity which
deserves to be particularly attended to, betwixt the evidence of miracles
performed in proof of a religion to be established, and in contradiction to
opinions generally received; and the evidence of miracles performed in support
of a religion already established, and in confirmation of opinions generally
received. Hence also the greatest disparity betwixt the miracles recorded by
the evangelists, and those related by Mariana, Bid, or any monkish historian.

THERE is then no peculiar presumption against religious miracles merely as
such; if in certain circumstances there is a presumption against them; the
presumption arises solely from the circumstances, insomuch that, in the
opposite circumstances, it is as strongly in their favor.

SECTION V. There is a peculiar presumption in favor of such miracles as are
said to have been wrought in support of religion.
IN this section I propose to consider the reverse of the question treated in
the former. In the former I proved that there is no peculiar presumption
against religious miracles; I now inquire whether there be any in their favor.
The question is important, and intimately connected with the subject.

THE boldest infidel will not deny, that the immortality of the soul, a future
and eternal state, and the connection of our happiness or misery in that state,
with our present good or bad conduct, not to mention the doctrines concerning
the divine unity and perfections, are tenets which carry no absurdity in them.
They may be true for aught he knows. He disbelieves them, not because they are
incredible in themselves, but because he has not evidence of their truth. He
pretends not to disprove them, nor does he think the task incumbent on him. He
only pleads, that before he can yield them his assent, they must be proved.

Now, as whatever is possible, may be supposed, let us suppose that the dogmas
above mentioned are all infallible truths; and let the unbeliever say, whether
he can conceive an object worthier of the Divine interposal, than to reveal
these truths to mankind? and to enforce them in such a manner, as may give them
a suitable influence on the heart and life. Of all the inhabitants of the
earth, man is incomparably the noblest. Whatever therefore regards the interest
of the human species, is a grander concern, than what regards either the
inanimate or the brute creation. If man was made, as is doubtless not
impossible, for an after state of immorality; whatever relates to that immortal
state, or may conduce to prepare him for the fruition of it, must be immensely
superior to that which concerns merely the transient enjoyments of the present
life. How sublime then is the object which religion, and religion only,
exhibits as the ground of supernatural interpositions! This object is no other
than the interest of man, a reasonable and moral agent, the only being in this
lower world which bears in his soul the image of his Maker; not the interest of
an individual, but of the kind; not for a limited duration, but for eternity:
an object at least in one respect adequate to the majesty of God.

Does this appear to the essayist too much like arguing a priori, of which I
know he has a detestation? It is just such an argument, as, presupposing the
most rational principles of Deism, results from those maxims concerning
intelligent causes, and their operations, which are founded in general
experience, and which uniformly lead us to expect, that the end will be
proportionate to the means. The Pagans of Rome had notions of their divinities
infinitely inferior to the opinions concerning God, which in Christian
countries are maintained even by those, who, for distinction's sake, are called
DEISTS. Yet such of the former as had any justness of taste, were offended with
those poets, who, exhibited the celestials on slight occasions, and for trivial
purposes, interfering in the affairs of men. Why? Because such an exhibition
shocked all the principles of probability. It had not that verisimilitude which
is absolutely necessary to render fiction agreeable. Accordingly it is a
precept, with relation to the machinery of the drama, given by one who was both
a critic and a poet, That a god must never be introduced, unless to accomplish
some important design which could not be otherwise effectuated Nec deus
intersit, ^isi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit.

HORAT.
. The foundation of this rule, which is that of my argument, is therefore one
of those indisputable principles, which are found every where, among the
earliest results of experience.

THUS it appears, that from the dignity of the end, there arises a peculiar
presumption in favor of such miracles, as are said to have been wrought in
support of religion.

SECTION VI. Inquiry into the meaning and propriety of one of Mr Hume's
favorite maxims.
THERE is a method truly curious, suggested by the author, for extricating the
mind, should the evidence from testimony be so great, that its falsehood might,
as he terms it, be accounted miraculous. In this puzzling case, when a man is
so beset with miracles, that he is under a necessity of admitting one, he must
always take care it be the smallest; for it is an axiom in this writers
DIALECTIC, That the probability of the fact is in the inverse ratio of the
quantity of miracle there is in it. "I weigh," says he, the one miracle against
the other, and according to the superiority which I discover, I pronounce my
decision, and always reject the greater miracle p. 182.
.

Now, of this method, which will no doubt be thought by many to be very
ingenious, and which appears to the essayist both very momentous and very
perspicuous, I own, I am not able to discover either the reasonableness or the
use.

First, I cannot see the reasonableness. 'A miracle,' to adopt his own
definition, implies the transgression, or rather the suspension, of some law of
nature; and that either by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the
interposal of some invisible agent Ib. in the note.
. Now, as I should think, from the principles laid down in the preceding
section, that it would be for no trifling purpose, that the laws of nature
would be suspended, and either the Deity or an invisible agent would interpose;
it is on the same principles, natural to imagine, that the means, or miracle
performed, should bear a proportion in respect of dignity and greatness, to the
end proposed. Were I therefore under such a necessity as is supposed by Mr
Hume, of admitting the truth of a miracle, I acknowledge, that of two
contradictory miracles, where all other circumstances are equal, I should think
it reasonable to believe the greater. I shall borrow an illustration from the
author himself. "A miracle," he says, may either be discoverable by men or not.
This alters not its nature and essence. The raising of a house or ship into the
air is a visible miracle; the raising of a feather, when the wind wants ever so
little of a force requisite for that purpose is as real a miracle, though not so
sensible with regard to us p. 182. in the note.
. Surely if any miracle may be called little, the last mentioned is entitled to
that denomination, not only because it is an undiscoverable and insensible
miracle, but because the quantum of miraculous force requisite, is, by the
hypothesis, ever so little, or the least conceivable. Yet if it were certain,
that God, angel, or spirit, were, for one of those purposes, to interpose in
suspending the laws of nature; I believe most men would join with me in
thinking, that it would be rather for the raising of a house or ship than for
the raising of a feather.

But though the maxim laid down by the author were just, I cannot discover in
what instance, or by what application, it can be rendered of any utility. Why?
Because we have no rule, whereby we can judge of the greatness of miracles. I
allow, that in such a singular instance, as that above quoted from the essay,
we may judge safely enough. But that can be of no practical use. In almost
every case that will occur, I may warrantably aver, that it will be impossible
for the acutest intellect to decide, which of the two is the greater miracle.
As to the author, I cannot find that he has favored us with any light in so
important and so critical a question. Have we not then some reason to dread,
that the task will not be less difficult to furnish us with a measure, by which
we can determine the magnitude of miracles; than to provide us with a balance,
by which we can ascertain the comparative weight of testimonies and experiences?

If leaving the speculations of the essayist, we shall, in order to be assisted
on this subject, recur to his example and decisions: let us consider the
miracle which was recited in the third section, and which he declares, would,
on the evidence of such testimony as he supposes, not only be probable, but
certain. For my part, it is not in my power to conceive a greatter miracle than
that is. The whole universe is affected by it; the earth, the sun, the moon,
the stars. The most invariable laws of nature with which we are acquainted,
even those which regulate the motions of the heavenly bodies, and dispense
darkness and light to worlds, are violated. I appeal to the author himself,
whether it could be called a greater, or even so great a miracle, that all the
writers at that time, or even all mankind, had been seized with a new species
of epidemical delirium, which had given rise to this strange illusion. But in
this the author is remarkably unfortunate, that the principles by which he in
fact regulates his judgment and belief, are often the reverse of those which he
endeavors to establish in his theory.

SHALL I hazard a conjecture? It is, that the word miracle, as thus used by the
author, is used in a vague and improper sense, as a synonymous term for
improbable; and that believing the less, and rejecting the greater miracle,
denote simply believing what is least, and rejecting what is most improbable;
o^ still more explicitly believing what we think most worthy of belief, and
rejecting what we think least worthy. I am aware, on a second perusal of the
author's words, that my talent in guessing may be justly questioned. He has in
effect told us himself what he means. "When any one," says he, tells me, that
he saw a dead man restored to life, I immediately consider with myself, whether
it be more probable, that this person should either deceive or be deceived, or
that the fact he relates, should really have happened. I weigh the one miracle
against the other; and according to the superiority which I discover, I
pronounce my decision, and always reject the greater miracle. If the falsehood
of his testimony would be more miraculous than the event which he relates;
then, and not till then, can he pretend to command my belief or opinion 182.
. At first indeed one is ready to exclaim, What a strange revolution is here!
The belief of miracles then, even by Mr Hume's account, is absolutely
inevitable. Miracles themselves too, so far from being impossible, or even
extraordinary, are the commonest things in nature; so common, that when any
miraculous fact is attested to us, we are equally under a necessity of
believing a miracle, whether we believe the fact, or deny it. The whole
difference between the essayist and us, is at length reduced to this single
point, Whether greater or smaller miracles are entitled to the preference. This
mystery however vanishes on a nearer inspection. The style, we find, is
figurative, and the author is all the while amusing both his readers and
himself with an unusual application of a familiar term. What is called the
weighing of probabilities in one sentence, is the weighing of miracles in the
next. If it were asked, For what reason did not Mr Hume express his sentiment
in ordinary and proper words? I could only answer, I know no reason but one,
and that is, To give the appearance of novelty and depth to one of those very
harmless propositions, which by philosophers are called identical, and which,
to say the truth, need some disguise, to make them pass upon the world with
tolerable decency.

What then shall be said of the conclusion which he gives as the sum and
quintessence of the first part of the essay? The best thing for aught I know,
that can be said, is, that it contains a most certain truth, though at the same
time the least significant, that ever perhaps was ushered into the world with
so much solemnity. In order, therefore, to make plainer English of his plain
consequence, let us only change the word miraculous, as applied to the
falsehood of human testimony, into improbable, which in this passage is
entirely equivalent, and observe the effect produced by this elucidation. The
plain consequence is, and it is a GENERAL MAXIM, worthy of our attention, That
NO TESTIMONY IS SUFFICIENT TO ESTABLISH A MIRACLE; UNLESS THE TESTIMONY BE OF
SUCH A KIND, THAT ITS FALSEHOOD WOULD BE MORE IMPROBABLE, THAN THE FACT WHICH
IT ENDEAVORS TO ESTABLISH p. 182.
. If the reader thinks himself instructed by this discovery, I should be loath
to envy him the pleasure he may derive from it.

A DISSERTATION ON MIRACLES. PART II. The miracles on which the belief of
Christianity is founded, are sufficiently attested.
SECTION I. There is no presumption, arising from human nature, against the
miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity.
FROM what has been evinced in the fourth and fifth sections of the former
part, with regard to religion in general, two corollaries are clearly deducible
in favor of Christianity. One is, That the presumption arising from the
dignity of the end, to say the least of it, can in no religion be pleaded with
greater advantage, than in the Christian. The other is, That the presumption
arising from the religious affection, instead of weakening, corroborates the
evidence of the gospel. The faith of Jesus was promulgated, and gained ground,
not with the assistance, but in defiance, of all the religious zeal and
prejudices of the times.

IN order to invalidate the second corollary, it will possibly be urged, that
proselytes to a new religion, may be gained at first; either by address and
eloquence, or by the appearances of uncommon sanctity, and rapturous fervours
of devotion; that if once people have commenced proselytes, the transition to
enthusiasm is almost unavoidable; and that enthusiasm will fully account for
the utmost pitch both of credulity and falseness.

Admitting that a few converts might be made by the aforesaid arts, it is
subversive of all the laws of probability, to imagine, that the strongest
prepossessions, fortified with that vehement abhorence which contradiction in
religions principles rarely sails to excite, should be so easily vanquished in
multitudes. Besides, the very pretext of supporting the doctrine by miracles,
if a false pretext, would of necessity do unspeakable hurt to the cause. The
pretense of miracles will quickly attract the attention of all to whom the new
doctrine is published. The influence which address and eloquence, appearances
of sanctity and fervours of devotion, would otherwise have had, however great,
will be superseded by the consideration of what is infinitely more striking and
decisive. The miracles will therefore first be canvassed, and canvassed with a
temper of mind the most unfavourable to conviction. It Is not solely on the
testimony of the evangelists that Christians believe the gospel, though that
testimony appears in all respects such as merits the highest regard; but it is
on the success of the gospel; it is on the testimony, as we may justy (...) of
the numberless proselytes that were made to a religon, opposing all the
religious professions then in the world, and appealing, for the satisfaction of
every body, to the visible and miraculous interposition of Heaven in its
favor. The witnesses considered in this light, and in this light they ought to
be considered, will be found more than 'a sufficient number:' and though perhaps
there were few of them, what the author would denominate 'men of education and
learning;' yet, which is more essential, they were generally men of good sense,
and knowledge enough to secure them against all delusion, as to those plain
facts for which they gave their testimony; men who, (in the common acceptance
of the words) neither did, nor could derive to themselves either interest or
honor by their attestations, but did thereby, on the contrary, evidently
abandon all hopes of both.

It deserves also to be remembered, that there is here no contradictory
testimony, notwithstanding that both the founder of our religion, and his
adherents, were from the first surrounded by inveterate enemies, who never
esteemed the matter too inconsiderable to deserve their attention or regard;
and who, as they could not want the means, gave evident proofs that they wanted
not the inclination to detect the fraud, if there had been any fraud to be
detected. They were jealous of their own reputation and authority, and foresaw
but too clearly, that the success of Jesus would give a fatal blow to both. As
to the testimonies themselves, we may permit the author to try them by his own
rules p. 173.
. There is here no opposition of testimony; there is no apparent ground of
suspicion from the character of the witnesses; there is no interest which they
could have in imposing on the world; there is not a small number of witnesses,
they are innumerable. Do the historians of our Lord deliver their testimony
with doubt and hesitation? Do they fall into the opposite extreme of using too
violent asseverations? So far from both, that the most amazing instances of
divine power, and the most interesting events, are related without any censure
or reflection of the writers on persons, parties, actions, or opinions; with
such an unparallelled and unaffected simplicity, as demonstrates, that they
were neither themselves animated by passion like enthusiasts, nor had any
design of working on the passions of their readers. The greatest miracles are
recorded, with as little appearance either of doubt or wonder in the writer,
and with as little suspicion of the reader's incredulity, as the most ordinary
incidents: A manner as unlike that of impostors as of enthusiasts; a manner in
which those writers are altogether singular; and I will add a manner which can
on no supposion be tolerably accounted for, but that of the truth, and not of
the truth only, but of the notoriety, of the events which they related. They
spoke like people, who had themselves been long familiarized to such acts of
omnipotence and grace. They spoke like people, who knew that many of the most
mavelous actions they related, had been so publicly performed, and in the
presence of multitudes alive at the time of their writing, as to be
uncontrovertible, and as in fact not to have been converted, even by their
bitterest foes. They could boldly appeal on this head to their enemies. A man,
say they, spaking of their master Acts ii. 22.
, approved of God among you, by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did
by him in the midst of you, as YE YOURSELVES ALSO KNOW The objections of
Christ's persecutors against his doctrine, those objections also which regard
the nature of his miracles, are, together with his answers, faithfully recorded
by the sacred historians; it is strange, if the occasion had been given, that we
have not the remotest hint of any objections against the reality of his
miracles, and a confutation of those objections.

BUT passing the manner in which the first proselytes may be gained to a new
religion, and supposing some actually gained, no matter how to the faith of
Jesus; can it be easily accounted for, that, even with the help of those early
converts, this religion should have been propagated in the world, on the false
pretense of miracles? Nothing more easily, says the author. Those original
propagators of the gospel have been deceived themselves; for a religionist may
be an enthusiast, and imagine he sees what has no reality p. 185.
.

Were this admitted, it would not in the present case, remove the difficulty.
He must not only himself imagine he sees what has no reality, he must make
every body present, those who are no enthusiasts, nor even friends, nay he must
make enemies also imagine they see the same thing which he imagines he sees;
for the miracles of Jesus were acacknowledged by those who persecuted him.

That an enthusiast is very liable to be imposed on, in whatever favors the
particular species of enthusiasm, with which he is affected, none, who knows
any thing of the human heart, will deny. But still this frailty has its
limits. For my own part, I cannot find examples of any, even among enthusiasts,
(unless to the conviction of every body they were distracted) who did not see
and hear in the same manner as other people. Many of this tribe have mistaken
the reveries of a heated imagination, for the communications of the Divine
Spirit, who never, in one single instance, mistook the operations of their
external senses. Without marking this difference, we should make no distinction
between the enthusiastic character and the frantic, which are in themselves
evidently distinct. How shall we then account from enthusiasm, for the
testimony given by the apostles, concerning the resurrection of their master,
and his ascension into heaven, not to mention innumerable other facts? In these
it was impossible that any, who in the use of their reason were but one remove
from Bedlamites, should have been deceived. Yet, in the present case, the
unbeliever must even say more than this, and, accumulating absurdity upon
absurdity, must affirm, that the apostles were deceived as to the resurrection
and ascension of their master, notwithstanding that they themselves had
concerted the plan of stealing his body, and concealing it.

BUT this is not the only resource of the infidel. If he is driven from this
strong hold, he can take refuge in another. Admit the apostles were not
deceived themselves, they may nevertheless have been, through mere devotion and
benevolence, incited to deceive the rest of mankind. The religionist, rejoins
the author, may know his narration to be false, and yet persevere in it, with
the best intentions in the world, for the sake of promoting so holy a cause p.
185.
.

Our religion, to use its own nervous language, teaches us Job. xiii. 7, 8.
, that we ought not to lie, or speak wickedly, not even for God; that we ought
not to accept his person in judgment, or talk, or act deceitfully for him. But
so very little, it must be owned, has this sentiment been attended to, even in
the Christian world, that one would almost think, it contained a strain of
virtue too sublime for the apprehension of the multitude. It Is therefore a fact
not to be questioned, that little pious frauds, as they are absurdly, not to
say impiously, called, have been often practiced by ignorant zealots in support
of a cause, which they firmly believed to be both true and holy. But in all
such cases the truth and holiness of the cause are wholly independent of those
artifices. A person may be persuaded of the former, who is too clear-sighted to
be deceived by the latter: for even a full conviction of the truth of the cause
is not, in the least, inconsistent with either the consciousness, or the
detection of the frauds used in support of it. In the Romish church, for
example, there are many zealous and orthodox believers, who are nevertheless
incapable of being imposed on by the lying wonders, which some of their clergy
have exhibited. The circumstances of the apostles were widely different from
the circumstances, either of those believers, or of their clergy. Some of the
miraculous events which the apostles attested, were not only the evidences, but
the distinguishing doctrines of the religion which they taught. There is
therefore in their case an absolute inconsistency betwix a conviction of the
truth of the cause, and the consciousness of the frauds used in support of it.
Those frauds themselves, if I may so express my self, constituted the very
essence of the cause. What were the tenets, by which they were distinguished,
in their religious system, particularly from the Pharisees, who owned not only
the unity and perfections of the Godhead, the existence of angels and demons,
but the general resurrection, and future state of rewards and punishments? Were
not these their peculiar tenets, That Jesus, whom the Jews and Romans joined in
crucifying without the gates of Jerusalem, had suffered that ignominious death,
to make atonement for the sins of men Romans v. 6. etc.
? that, in testimony of this, and of the divine acceptance, God has raised him
from the dead? that he had exalted him to his own right hand, to be a prince
and a savior, to give repentance to the people, and the remission of their
sins Acts ii. 32. etc. v. 30. etc. x. 40. etc.
? that he is now our advocate with the father 1 John ii. 1.
? that he will descend from heaven at the last day, to judge the world in
righteousness Acts x. 42. xvii. 31.
, and to receive his faithful disciples into heaven, to be forever with himself
John xiv. 3.
? These fundamental articles of their system, they must have known, deserved no
better appellation than a string of lies, if we suppose them liars in the
testimony they gave of the resurrection and ascension of their master. If,
agreeably to the Jewish hypothesis, they had, in a most wonderful and daring
manner, stole by night the corpse from the sepulcher, that on the false report
of his resurrection, they might found the stupendous fabric they had projected
among themselves, how was it possible they should conceive the cause to be
either true or holy? They must have known, that in those cardinal points, on
which all depends, they were false witnesses concerning God, wilful corrupters
of the religion of their country, and public, though indeed disinterested
incendiaries, whithersoever they went. They could not therefore enjoy even that
poor solace, that the end will sanctify the means: a solace with which the monk
or anchoret silences the remostrances of his conscience, when in defense of a
religion which he regards as certain, he, by some pitiful juggler-trick,
imposes on the credulity of the rabble. On the contrary, the whole scheme of
the apostles must have been, and not only must have been, but must have
appeared to themselves, a most audacious freedom with their Maker, a villainous
imposition on the world, and I will add, a most foolish and ridiculous project
of heaping ruin and disgrace upon themselves, without the prospect of any
compensation in the present life, or reversion in the future.

ONCE more, can we account for so extraordinary a phenomenon, by attributing it
to that most powerful of all motives, as the author thinks it p. 200.
, an ambition to attain so sublime a character, as that of a missionary, a
prophet, an ambassador from heaven?

Not to mention, that such a towering ambition was but ill adapted to the mean
rank, poor education, and habitual circumstances, of such men as the Apostles
mostly had been; a desire of that kind, whatever wonders it may effectuate when
supported by enthusiasm, and faith, and zeal, must soon have been crushed by
the outward, and to human appearance insurmountable difficulties and distresses
they had to encounter; when quite unsupported from within by either faith, or
hope, or the testimony of a good conscience; rather, I should have said, when
they themselves were haunted from within by a consciousness of the blackest
guilt, impiety, and baseness. Strange indeed it must be owned without a
parrallel that in such a cause, and in such circumstances, not only one, but
all, should have the resolution to persevere to the last, in spite of infamy
and torture; and that no one among so many confederates; should be induced to
betray the dreadful secret.

THUS it appears, that no address in the FOUNDER of our religion, that no
enthusiastic credulity, no pious frauds, no ambitious views in the FIRST
CONVERTS, will account for its propagation on the plea of miracles, if false;
and that consequently there is no presumption arising from human nature against
the miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity.

SECTION. II. There is no presumption arising from the history of mankind,
against the miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity.
IN the foregoing section, I reasoned only from the knowledge that experience
affords us of human nature, and of the motives by which men are influenced in
their conduct. I come now to the examination of facts, that I may know whether
the history of mankind will invalidate or corroborate my reasonings.

THE essayist is confident, that all the evidence resulting hence is on his
side. Nay so unquestionable a truth does this appear to him, that he never
attempts to prove it: he always presupposes it, as a point universally
acknowledged. 'Men in all ages,' we learn from a passage already quoted, have
been much imposed on, by ridiculous stories of miracles ascribed to new systems
of religion p. 204. in the note.
. Again he asserts, that the violations of truth are more common in the
testimony concerning miracles, than in that concerning any other religious
matter of fact p. 205 in the note.
. These assertions, however, though used for the same purpose, the attentive
reader will observe, are far from conveying the same sense, or being of equal
weight in the argument. The difference has been marked in the fourth section
of the first part of this tract. The oracular predictions among the ancient
Pagans, and the pretended wonders performed by capuchins and friars, by
itinerant or stationary teachers among the Roman Catholics, the author will
doubtless reckon among religious miracles; but he can with no propriety
denominate them, miracles ascribed to a new system of religion Should the
author insist, that such miracles are nevertheless meant to establish, if not a
new system, at least some new point of religion; that those which are wrought
in Spain, for example, are not intended as proofs of the gospel, but as proofs
of the efficacy of a particular crucifix or relic; which is always a new point,
or at least not universally received: I must beg the reader will consider, what
is the meaning of this expression, a new point of religion. It is not a new
system, it is not even a new doctrine. We know, that one article of faith in the
church of Rome is, that the images and relics of saints ought to be worshipped.
We know also, that in proof of this article, it is one of their principal
arguments, that miracles are wrought by means of such relics and images. We
know further, that that church never attempted to enumerate her relies and
other trumpery, and thus to ascertain the individual objects of the adoration
of her votaries. The producing therefore a new relic, image or crucifix, as an
object of worship, implies not the smallest deviation from the faith
established; at the same time the opinion, that miracles are performed by means
of such relic, ima^e, or crucifix, proves, in the minds of the people, for the
reason assigned, a very strong confirmation of the faith established. All such
mira^les therefore must be considered, as wrought in support of the received
superstition, and accordingly are always favored by the popular prejudices.
. Now, it is with those of the class last mentioned, and with those only, that I
am concerned; for it is only to them that the miracles wrought in proof of
christianity bear any analogy.

I shall then examine impartially this bold assertion, That men in all ages
have been much imposed on, by ridiculous stories of miracles ascribed to new
systems of religion. For my part, I am fully satisfied, that there is not the
shadow of truth in it: and I am utterly at a loss to conceive what could induce
an author so well versed in the annals both of ancient and modern times as Mr
Hume, in such a positive manner to advance it. I believe it will require no
elaborate disquisition to evince, that these two, JUDAISM and CHRISTANITY, are
of all that have subsisted, or now subsist in the world, the only religions,
which claim to have been attended in their first publication with the evidence
of miracles. It deserves also to be remarked, that it is more in conformity to
common language, and incidental distinctions which have arisen, than to strict
propriety, that I call Judaism and Christanity, two religions. It Is true, the
Jewish creed, in the days of our Savior, having been corrupted by rabbinical
traditions, stood in many respects, and at this day stands in direct opposition
to the Gospel. But it is not in this acceptance that I use the word Judaism.
Such a creed, I am sensible, we can no more denominate the doctrine of the Old
Testament, than we can denominate the creed of Pope Pius the doctrine of the
New. And truly the fate which both institutions, that of Moses, and that of
Christ, have met with among men, has been in many respects extremely similar.
But when, on the contrary, we consider the religion of the Jews, not as the
system of faith and practice, which presently obtains, or heretofore has
obtained among that people; but solely as the religion that is revealed in the
law and the prophets, we must acknowledge, that in this institution are
contained the rudiments of the gospel. The same great plan carried on by the
Divine Providence, for the recovery and final happiness of mankind, is the
subject of both dispensations. They are by consequence closely connected. In
the former we are acquainted with the occasion and rise, in the latter more
sully with the progress and completion of this benign scheme. It Is for this
reason that the scriptures of the Old Testament, which alone contain the
authentic religion of the SYNAGOGUE, have ever been acknowledged in the CHURCH,
an essential part of the gospel-revelation. The apostles and evangelists in
every part of their writings, presuppose the truth of the Mosaic economy, and
often found both their doctrine and arguments upon it. It Is therefore, I
affirm, only in proof of this one series of revelations, that the aid of
miracles has with success been pretended to.

CAN the PAGAN religion, can, I should rather say, any of the numberless
religions (for they are totally distinct) known by the common name of Pagan,
produce any claim of this kind that will merit our attention? If the author
knows of any, I wish he had mentioned it; for in all antiquity, as far as my
acquaintance with it reaches, I can recollect no such claim. However, that I
may not, on the one hand, appear to pass the matter too slightly; or, on the
other, lose myself, as Mr Hume expresses it, in too wide a field; I shall
briefly consider, whether the ancient religions of Greece or Rome (which of all
the species of heathenish superstition are on many accounts the most
remarkable) can present a claim of this nature. Will it be said, that that
monstrous heap of fables we find in ancient bards, relating to the genealogy,
productions, amors, and achievements, of the gods, are the miracles on which
Greek and Roman Paganism claims to be founded?

If one should talk in this manner, I must remind him, first, that these are by
no means exhibited as EVIDENCES, but as the THEOLOGY itself; the poets always
using the same affirmative style concerning what passed in heaven, in hell, and
in the ocean, where men could not be spectators, as concerning what passed upon
the earth: secondly, that all those mythological tales are confessedly recorded
many centuries after they are supposed to have happened; no voucher, no
testimony, nothing that can deserve the name of evidence having been produced,
or even alleged, in proof of them; thirdly, that the intention of the writers
seems to be solely the amusement, not the conviction of their readers; that
accordingly no writer scruples to model the mythology to his particular taste,
or rather caprice; but considering this as a province subject to the laws of
Parnassus, all agree in arrogating here the immemorial privilege of poets, to
say and feign, unquestioned, what they please; and fourthly, that at least
several of their narrations are allegorical, and as plainly intended to convey
some physical or moral instruction, as any of the apologues of Aesop. But to
have said even thus much in refutation of so absurd a plea, will perhaps to
many readers appear superfluous.

LEAVING therefore the endless absurdities and incoherent fictions of
idolaters, I shall inquire, in the next place, whether the MOHAMMEDAN worship
(which in its speculative principles appears more rational) pretends to have
been built on the evidence of miracles.

Mahomet, the founder of this profession, openly and frequently, as all the
world knows, disclaimed such evidence. He frankly owned that he had no
commission nor power to work miracles, being sent of God to the people only as
a preacher. Not indeed but that there are things mentioned in the revelation he
pretended to give them, which, if true, would have been miraculous; such are
the nocturnal visits of the angel Gabriel, (not unlike those secret interviews,
which Numa, the institutor of the Roman rites, affirmed that he had with the
goddess Egeria) his getting from time to time parcels of the uncreated book
transmitted to him from heaven, and his most amazing night-journey. But these
miracles could be no evidences of his mission. Why? Because no person was
witness to them. On the contrary, it was because his adherents had previously
and implicitly believed his apostleship, that they admitted things so
incredible, on his bare declaration. There is indeed one miracle, and but one,
which he urges against the infidels, as the main support of his cause; a
miracle, for which even we, in this distant region and period, have not only
the evidence of testimony, but, if we please to use it, all the evidence which
the contemporaries and countrymen of this military apostle ever enjoyed. The
miracle I mean is the manifest divinity, or supernatural excellence, of the
scriptures which he gave them; a miracle, concerning which I shall only say,
that as it falls not under the cognizance of the senses, but of a much more
fallible tribunal, taste in composition, and critical discernment, so a
principle of less efficacy than enthusiasm, even the slightest partiality, may
make a man, in this particular, imagine he perceives what has no reality.
Certain it is, that notwithstanding the many defiances which the prophet gave
his enemies sometimes to produce ten chapters, sometimes one, that could bear
to be compared with an equal portion of the perspipicuous book Alcoran. The
chapter -- of the cow, -- of Jonas, -- of Hud.
, they seem not in the least to have been convinced, that there was any thing
miraculous in the matter. Nay this sublime performance, so highly venerated by
every Mussulman, they were not afraid to blaspheme as contemptible, calling it,
A confused heap of dreams, and the silly fables of "ancient times -- Of cattle,
-- of the spoils, -- of the prophets. That the Alcoran bears a very strong
resemblance to the Talmud is indeed evident; but I hardly think, we can have a
more striking instance of the prejudices of modern infidels, than in their
comparing this motley composition to the writings of the Old and New Testament.
Let the reader but take the trouble to peruse the history of Joseph by Mahomet,
which is the subject of a very long chapter, and to compare it with the account
of that patriarch given by Moses, and if he does not perceive at once the
immense inferiority of the former, I shall never, for my part, undertake by
argument to convince him of it. To me it appears even almost incredible, that
the most beautiful and most affecting passages of holy writ, should be so
wretchedly disfigured by a writer whose intention, we are certain was not to
burlesque them. But that every reader may be qualified to form some notion of
this miracle of a book, I have subjoined a specimen of it, from the chapter of
the (...); where we are informed particularly of the cause of the visit which
the queen of Sheba (there called Saba) made to Solomon, and of the occasion of
her conversion from idolatry. I have not selected this passage on account of
any special futility to be found in it, for the like absurdities may be
observed in every page of the performance; but I have selected it, because it
is short, and because it contains a distinct story which bears some relation to
a passage of scripture. I use Mr Sale's version, which is the latest and the
most approved, omitting only, for the sake of brevity, such supplementary
expressions, as have been without necessity inserted by the translator. Solomon
was David's heir; and he said, O men, we have been taught the speech of birds,
and have had all things bestowed on us; this is manifest excellence. And his
armies were gathered together to Solomon, consisting of genii, and men, and
birds; and they were led in distinct ^ands, till they came to the valley of
ants. An ant said, O ants, enter ye into your habitations, lest Solomon and his
army tread you under foot and perceive it not. He smiled, laughing at her
words, and said, O Lord, excite me, that I may be thankful for thy favor,
wherewith thou have favored me, and my parents; and that I may do that which
is right and well pleasing to thee: and introduce me, through thy mercy among thy
servants the righteous. And he viewed the birds, and said, What is the reason
that I see not the lapwing? Is she absent? Verily I will chastise her with a
severe chastisement, or I will put her to death; unless she bring me a just
excuse. And she tarried not long, and said, I have viewed that which thou have
not viewed; and I come to thee from Saba, with a certain piece of news. I found
a woman to reign over them, who is provided with every thing, and has a
magnificent throne. I sound her and her people to worship the sun, besides God:
and Satan has prepared their works for them, and has turned them aside from
the way, (wherefore they are not directed) lest they should worship God, who
brings to light that which is hidden in heaven and earth, and knows
whatever they conceal, and whatever they discover. God! there is no God but he;
the Lord of the magnificent throne. He said, We shall see whether thou have
spoken the truth or whether thou art a liar. Go with this my letter, and cast
it down to them; then turn aside from them, and wait for their answer. The
queen said, O nobles, verily an honorable letter has been delivered to me; it
is from Solomon, and this is the tenor thereof. In the name of the most
merciful God, rise not up against me: but come, and surrender yourselves to me.
She said, O nobles, advise me in my business: I will not resolve on any thing,
till ye be witness thereof. They answered, We are endued with strength, and
endued with great prowess in war; but the command appertains to thee: see
therefore what thou will command. She said, Verily kings, when they enter a
city, waste the same, and abase the most powerful of the inhabitants thereof:
and so will these do. But I will send gifts to them: and will wait for what
those who shall be sent, shall bring back. And when the ambassador came to
Solomon, that prince said, Will ye present me with riches? Verily that which
God has given me is better than what he has given you: but ye glory in your
gifts. Return to your people. We will surely come to them with forces which
they shall not be able to withstand; and we will drive them out humbled; and
they shall be contemptible. And Solomon said, O nobles, which of you will bring
me her throne, before they come and surrender themselves to me? A terrible
genius answered, I will bring it thee, before thou arise from thy place. And
one with whom was the knowledge of the scripture said, I will bring it to thee,
in the twinkling of an eye. And when Solomon saw it placed before him, he said,
This is a favor of my Lord, that he may make trial of me, whether I will be
grateful, or whether I will be ungrateful: and he who is grateful, is grateful
to his own advantage; but if any shall be ungrateful, verily my Lord is
self-sufficient and munificent. And he said, Alter her throne that she may not
know it, to the end we may see whether she be directed, or whether she be of
those who are not directed. And when she was come, it was said, Is thy throne
like this? She answered, As though it were the same. And we have had knowledge
bestowed on us before this, and have been resigned. But that which she
worshipped besides God, had turned her aside, for she was of an unbelieving
people. It was said to her, Enter the palace. And when she saw it, she imagined
it to be a great water, and she discovered her legs. Solomon said, Verily this
is a palace, evenly floored with glass. She said, O Lord, verily I have dealt
unjustly with my own soul; and I resign myself together with Solomon, to God,
the Lord of all creatures. Thus poverty of sentiment, monstrosity of invention,
which always betokens a distempered not a rich imagination, and in respect of
diction the most turgid verbosity, so apt to be mistaken by persons of a
viciated taste for true sublimity, are the genuine characteristics of the book.
They appear almost in every line. The very titles and epithets assigned to god
not exempt from them. The Lord of the daybreak, the Lord of the magnificent
throne, the King of the day of judgment, etc. They are pompous and
insignificant. If the language of the Alcoran, as the Mahometans pretend, is
indeed the language of God, the thoughts are but too evidently the thoughts of
men. The reverse of this is the character of the Bible. When God speaks to men,
it is reasonable to think that he addresses them in their own language. In the
Bible you will find nothing inflated, nothing affected in the style. The words
are human, but the sentiments are divine. Accordingly there is perhaps no book
in the world, as has been often justly observed, which suffers less by a
literal translation into any other language.
."

Passing therefore this equivocal miracle, if I may call it so, which I imagine
was of very little use in making proselytes, whatever use it might have had, in
confirming and tutoring these already made; it may be worth while to enquire,
what were the reasons, that an engine of such amazing influence was never
employed by one who assumed a character so eminent, as the chief of God's
apostles, and the seal of the prophets? Was it the want of address to manage an
imposition of this nature? None who knows the history of this extraordinary
personage, will suspect that he wanted either the genius to contrive, or the
resolution and dexterity to execute, any practicable expedient for promoting
his grand design; which was no less than that extensive despotism, both
religious and political, he at length acquired. Was it that he had too much
honesty to concert and carry on so gross an artifice? Those who belive him to
have been an impostor in pretending a divine mission, will hardly suspect him
of such delicacy in the methods he would take to accomplish his aim. But in
fact there is no color of reason for such a suggestion. There was no prodigy,
no miraculous interposition, which he hesitated to give out, however
extravagant when he saw it would contribute to his ends. Prodigies of which
they had no other evidence but his own allegation, he knew his adversaries
might deny, but could not disprove. His scruples therefore, we may well
conclude, proceeded not from probity, but from prudence; and were solely
against such miracles, as must be subjected to the scrutiny of other people's
senses. Was it that miracle-working had before that time become so stale a
device, that instead of gaining him the admiration of his countrymen, it would
have exposed him to their laughter and contempt? The most cursory perusal of
the Alcoran, will, to every man of sense, afford an unanswerable confutation of
this hypothesis. It is observable, that Mahomet was very much harassed by the
demands and reasonings of his opposers with regard to miracles. They were so
far from despising this evidence, that they considered the power of working
miracles as a never-failing badge of the prophetical office; and therefore
often assured him, by the most solemn oaths and protestations, that they would
submit implicitly ^o his guidance in religion, if he would once gratify them in
this particular. This artful man, who does not seem to have been of the same
opinion with the essayist, that it was easy for cunning and impudence to
impose, in a matter of this kind, on the credulity of the multitude, even
though an ignorant and barbarous multitude, absolutely refused to subject his
mission to so hazardous a trial. There is no subject he more frequently recurs
to in his Alcoran, being greatly interested to remove the doubts, which were
raised in the minds of many by his disclaiming this power; a power which till
then had ever been looked upon as the prerogative of the prophets. The
following are some of the reasons, with which he endcavours to satisfy the
people on this head. 1st, The sovereignty of God, who is not to be called to
account for what he gives or withholds. 2d, The usefulness of miracles,
because every man is foreordained either to believe, or to remain in unbelief;
and this decree no miracles could alter. 3d. The experienced inefficacy of
miracles in former times. 4th, The mercy of God, who had denied them this
evidence, because the sin of their incredulity, in case he had granted it,
would have been so heinous, that he could not have respited or tolerated them
any longer. 5th, The abuse to which miracles would have been exposed from the
infidels, who would have either charged them with imposture, or imputed them to
magic. See the chapters -- of cattle, -- of thunder, -- of All Hejir, -- of the
night-journey, -- of the spider, -- of the prophets.
Lastly, was it that he lived in an enlightened age, and amongst a civilized
and learned people, who were too quick-sighted to be deceived by tricks, which
among barbarians might have produced the most astonishing effects? Quite the
reverse. He lived in a barbarous age, and amongst an illiterate people, with
whom, if with any, he had reason to believe the grossest deceit would have
proved successful.

What pity was it, that Mahomet had not a counselor so deeply versed in human
nature as the essayist, who could have assured him, that there needed but
effrontery and enterprise; that with these auxiliaries he had reason to hope
the most impudent pretenses would be crowned with success? The too timid
prophet would doubtless have remonstrated against this spirited counsel,
insisting, that it was one thing to satisfy friends, and another thing to
silence or convert enemies; that it was one thing to impose on men's intellects,
and another thing to deceive their senses: that though an attempt of the last
kind should succeed with some, yet if the fraud were detected by any, and he
might expect that his adversaries would exert themselves in order to detect it,
the whole mystery of craft would be divulged, his friends would become
suspicious, and the spectators of such pretended miracles would become daily
more prying and critical; that the consequences would infallibly prove fatal to
the whole design; and that therefore such a cheat was on no account whatever to
be risked. To this methinks I hear the other replying with some earnestness,
Make but the trial, and you will certainly find, that what judgment, nay and
what senses your auditors have, they will renounce by principle in those
sublime and mysterious subjects; they will imagine they see and hear what has
no reality, nay whatever you shall desire that they should see and hear. Their
credulity (forgive a freedom which my zeal inspires) will increase your
impudence, and your impudence will overpower their credulity. The smallest
spark may here kindle into the greatest flame; because the materials are always
prepared for it. The avidum genus auricularum swallow greedily, without
examination, whatever soothes superstition and promotes wonder. Whether the
judicious reader will reckon that the prophet or his counselor would have had
the better in this debate, I shall not take upon me to decide. One perhaps (if
I might be indulged in a conjecture) whose notions are founded in metaphysical
refinements, or whose resolutions are influenced by oratorical declamation,
will incline to the opinion of the latter. One whose sentiments are the result
of a practical knowledge of mankind, will probably subcribe to the judgment of
the former, and will allow, that in this instance the CAPTAIN GENERAL and
PROPHET of Islamism acted the more prudent part.

Shall we then say, that it was a more obscure theater on which JESUS CHRIST
appeared? Were his spectators more ignorant, or less adverse? The contrary of
both is manifest. It may indeed be affirmed with truth, that the religion of
the wild Arabs was more repugnant to the doctrine of Mahomet, than the
religious dogmas of the Jews were to those of Jesus. But we shall err
egregiously, if we conclude thence, that to this repugnancy the repugnancy of
disposition in the professors of these religions must be proportionate. It Is a
fine observation of the most piercing and comprehensive genius, which has
appeared in this age. That though men have a very strong tendency to idolatry,
they are nevertheless but little attached to idolatrous religions; that though
they have no great tendency to spiritual ideas, they are nevertheless strongly
attached to religions which enjoin the adoration of a spiritual being ^e
l'esprit des loix, live. 25. chap. 2
. Hence an attachment in JEWS, CHRISTIANS, and MAHOMETANS to their respective
religions, which was never displayed by POLYTHEISTS of any denomination. But
its spirituality was not the only cause of adherence which the Jews had to
their religion. Every physical, every moral motive concurred in that people to
rivet their attachment, and make them oppose with violence, whatever bore the
face of innovation. Their religion and polity were so blended as scarce to be
distinguishable: this engaged their patriotism. They were selected of God
preferably to other nations: this inflamed their pride How great influence this
motive had, appears from Luke iv. ^5 etc. and from Act. xxii. 21, 22.
. They were all under one spiritual head, the highpriest, and had their solemn
f^stivals celebrated in one temple: this strengthened their union. The
ceremonies of their public worship were magnificent: this flattered their
senses. These ceremonies also were numerous, and occupied a great part of their
time: this, to all the other grounds of attachment, superadded the force of
habit. On the contrary, the s^mplicity of the gospel, as well as the spirit of
humility, and moderation, and charity, and universality, (if I may be allowed
that term) which it breathed, could not fail to alarm a people of such a cast,
and awaken, as in fact it did, the most furious opposition. Accordingly,
Christianity had fifty times more success amongst idolaters, than it had among
the Jews. I am therefore warranted to a^^ert, that if the miracles of our Lord
and his apostles had been an imposture, there could not on the face of the
earth, have been chosen for exhibiting them, a more unfavourable theater than
Judea. On the other hand, had it been any where practicable, by a display of
false wonders, to make converts to a new religion, no where could a project of
this nature have been conducted with greater probability of success than in
Arabia. So much for the contrast there is betwixt the Christian MESSIAH and the
ORPHAN CHARGE of Abu Taleb. So plain it is, that the mosque yields entirely the
plea of miracles to the synagogue and the church.

BUT from HEATHENS and MAH^METANS, let us turn our eyes to the CHRISTIAN world.
The only object here, which merits our attention, as coming under the
denomination of miracles ascribed to a new system, and as what may be thought
to rival in crebibility the miracles of the gospel, are those said to have been
performed in the primitive church, after the times of the apostles, and after
the finishing of the sacred canon. These will probably be ascribed to a new
system, since Christianity, for some centuries, was not (as the phrase is)
established, or (to speak more properly) corrupted by human authority; and
since even after such establishment, there remained long in the empire a
considerable mixture of idolaters. We have the greater reason here to consider
this topic, as it has of late been the subject of very warm dispute, and as
the cause of Christianity itself (which I conceive is totally distinct) seems
to have been strangely confounded with it. From the manner in which the
argument has been conducted, who is there that would not conclude that both
must stand or fall together? Nothing however can be more groundless, nothing
more injurious to the religion of Jesus, than such a conclusion.

The learned writer who has given rise to this controversy, not only
acknowledges, that the falsity of the miracles mentioned by the fathers, is no
evidence of the falsity of the miracles recorded in scripture, but that there
is even a presumption in favor of these, arising from those forgeries, which
he pretends to have detected Dr Middleton's presatory discourse to his letter
from Rome.
. The justness of the remark contained in this acknowledgment, will appear more
clearly from the following observations.

Let it be observed, first, that supposing numbers of people are ascertained of
the truth of some miracles, whether their conviction arise from sense or from
testimony, it will surely be admitted as a consequence, that in all such
persons, the presumption against miracles from uncommonness must be greatly
diminished, in several perhaps totally extinguished.

Let it be observed, secondly, that if true miracles have been employed
successfully in support of certain religious tenets, this success will
naturally suggest to those, who are zealous of propagating favorite opinions
in religion, to recur to the plea of miracles, as the most effectual expedient
for accomplishing their end. This they will be encouraged to do on a double
account: first, they know, that people from recent experience, are made to
expect such a confirmation; secondly, they know, that in consequence of this
experience, the incredibility, which is the principal obstruction to such an
undertaking, is in a manner removed: and there is, on the contrary, as in such
circumstances there certainly would be, a promptness in the generality to
receive them.

Add to these, that if we consult the history of mankind, or even our own
experience, we shall be convinced, that hardly has one wonderful event
actually happened in any country, even where there have not been such visible
temptations to forgery, which has not given rise to false rumors of other
events similar, but still more wonderful. Hardly has any person or people
achieved some exploits truly extraordinary, to whom common report has not
quickly attributed many others, as extraordinary at least, if not impossible.
As fame may, in this respect, be compared to a multiplying glass, reasonable
people almost always conclude in the same way concerning both; we know that
there is not a real object corresponding to every appearance exhibited, at the
same time we know that there must be some objects to give rise to the
appearances.

I should therefore only beg of our adversaries, that, for argument's sake,
they will suppose that the miracles related in the New Testament were really
performed; and then, that they will heartily tell us, what, according to their
notions of human nature, would, in all likelihood, have been the consequences.
They must be very partial to a darling hypothesis, or little acquainted with
the world, who will hesitate to own, that, on this supposition, it is not barely
probable, but certain, that f^ a few endowed with the miraculous power, there
would soon have arisen numbers of pretenders; that from some miracles well
attested, occasion would have been taken to propagate innumerable false
reports. If so, with what color of justice can the detection of many spurious
reports among the primitive Christians be considered as a presumption against
those miracles, the reality of which is the most plausible; nay the only
plausible account that can be given of the origin of such reports? The
presumption is too evidently on the opposite side to need illustration.

It Is not my intention here to patronize either side of the question which the
Doctor's Free inquiry has occasioned. All that concerns my argument is, barely
to evince, and this I imagine has been evinced, that, granting the Doctor's
plea to be well founded, there is no presumption arising hence, which tends in
the lowest degree to discredit the miracles recorded in holy writ; nay, that
there is a contrary presumption. In further confirmation of this truth, let me
ask, Were there ever, in any region of the globe, any similar pretensions to
miraculous powers, before that memorable era, the publication of the gospel?
Let me ask again, Since those pretensions ceased, has it ever been in the
power of the most daring enthusiast, to revive them any where in favor of a
new system? Authentic miracles will, for a time, give a currency to
counterfeits; but as the former become less frequent, the latter become more
suspected, till at length they are treated with general contempt, and
disappear. The danger then is, lest men, ever prone to extremes, become as
extravagently incredulous, as formerly they were credulous. Laziness, the true
source of both, always inclines us to admit or reject in the gross, without
entering on the irk some task of considering things in detail. In the first
instance, knowing some such events to be true, they admit all without
examination; in the second, knowing some to be false, they reject all without
examination. A procedure this, which, however excusable in the unthinking herd,
is altogether unworthy a philosopher.

But it may be thought, that the claim to miracles in the early ages of the
church, continued too long to be supported solely on the credit of those
performed by our Lord and his apostles. In order to account for this, it ought
to be attended to, that in the course of some centuries, the situation of
affairs, with regard to religion, was really inverted. Education, and even
superstition, and bigotry, and popularity, which the miracles of Christ and his
apostles had to encounter; came gradually to be on the side of those wonders,
said to have been performed in after times. If they were potent enemies, and
such as we have reason to believe nothing but the force of truth could
vanquish; they were also potent allies, and may well be supposed able to give a
temporary triumph to falsehood, especially when it had few or no enemies to
combat. But in discoursing on the prodigies said to have been performed in
primitive times, I have been insensibly carried from the point, to which I
proposed in this section to confine myself. From inquiring into miracles
ascribed to new systems I have proceeded to those pleaded in confirmation of
systems previously established and generally received.

LEAVING so remote a period, I propose, lastly, to inquire, whether, since that
time, any heresiarch whatever, any founder of a new sect, or publisher of a new
system, has pretended to miraculous powers. If the essayist had known of any
such pretender, he surely would have mentioned him. But as he has not afforded
us any light on this subject, I shall just recall to the remembrance of my
reader, those persons who, either as innovators or reformers, have made some
figure in the church. They were the persons from whom, if from any, a plea of
this kind might naturally have been expected; especially at a time when Europe
was either plunged in barbarism, or but beginning to emerge out of it,

Was ever then this high prerogative, the power of working miracles, claimed or
exercised by the founders of the sects of the Waldenses and Albigenses? Did
Wickliff in England pretend to it? Did Huss or Jerome in Bohemia? To come nearer
mocern times, Did Luther in Germany, Zuinglius in Switzerland, Calvin in
France, or any other of the reformers, advance this plea? Do such of them as
are authors, mention in their writings any miracles they performed, or appeal
to them as the evidences of their doctrine? Do contemporary historians allege,
that they challenged the says of their auditors, in consequence of such
supernatural powers? I admit, if they did, that their miracles might be
ascribed to a new system. For though they pretended only to re-establish the
Christian institution, in its native purity, expunging those pernicious
interpolations, which a false philosophy had foisted into the doctrinal part,
and Pagan superstition into the moral and the ritual; yet as the religion they
inculcated, greatly differed from the faith and worship of the times, it might,
in this respect, be denominated a new system; and would be encountered by all
the violence and prejudice, which novelties in religion never fail to excite.
Not that the want of real miracles was a presumption against the truth of their
doctrine. The God of nature, who is the God of Christians, does nothing in
vain. No new revelation was pretended to; consequently there was no occasion
for such supernatural support. They appealed to the revelation formerly
bestowed, and by all parties acknowledged, as to the proper rule in this
controversy: they appealed to the reason of mankind as the judge; and the
reason of mankind was a competent judge of the conformity of their doctrine to
this unerring rule.

But how, upon the author's principles, shall we account for this moderation in
the reformers? Were they, in his judgment, calm inquirers into truth? Were they
dispassionate reasoners in defense of it? Far otherwise. He tells us, They may
safely be pronounced to have been universally inflamed with the highest
enthusiasm Hist. of Great Britain, James I. chap. 1.
. And doubtless we cannot expect from this hand a more amiable picture of their
disciples. May not we then, in our turn, safely pronounce, this writer himself
being judge, that for a man to imagine he sees what has no reality, to impose
in this manner not only on his own understanding, but even on his external
senses, is a pitch of delusion higher than the highest enthusiasm can produce,
and is to be imputed only to downright frenzy Perhaps it will be pleaded that
the working of miracles was considered by the leaders in the reformation as a
Popish artifice, and as therefore worthy of being discarded with the other
abuses which Popery had introduced. That this was not the light in which
miracles were viewed by Luther, who justly possesses the first place in the
list of reformers, is evident from the manner in which he argues against
Muncer, the apostle of the Anabaptists. This man, without ordination, had
assumed the office of a Christian pastor. Against this conduct Luther
remoustrates, as being in his judgment, an usurpation of the sacred function.
"Let him be asked," says he, Who made him teacher of religion? If he answers,
God; let him prove it by a visible miracle: for it is by such signs that God
declares himself, when he gives an extraordinary mission. When this argument
was afterward retorted on himself by the Romanists, who desired to know how
his own vocation, originally limited and dependent, had become not only
unlimited, but quite independent of the hierarchy, from which he had received
it; his reply was, That the intrepidity, with which he had been enabled to
brave so many dangers, and the success, with which his enterprse had been
crowned, ought to be regarded as miraculous: And indeed most of his followers
were of this opinion. But whether this opinion was erroneous, or whether the
argument against Muncer was conclusive, it is not my business to enquire. Thus
much is evident from the story: first, That this reformer, far from rejecting
miracles as a Romish trick, acknowledged, that in some religious questions,
they are the only medium of proof; secondly, That notwithstanding this, he
never attempted, by a show of miracles, to impose on the senses of his hearers;
(if they were deceived in thinking that his success and magnanimity were
miraculous, 'twas not their senses, but their understanding that was deceived);
lastly, That the Anabaptists themselves, though perhaps the most outrageous
fanatics that ever existed, did not pretend to the power of working miracles.
-- Sleidan lib. 5. Luth. De votis monast. etc. Epist. ad Frid. Sax. Ducem. ap.
Chytraeum.
?

Since the world began, there has not appeared a more general propension to
the wildest fanaticism, a greater degree of credulity in every claim that was
made to the illapses of the Holy Spirit, or more thorough contempt of all
established modes of worship, than appeared in this island about the middle of
the last century. It Is astonishing, that when the minds of men were intoxicated
with enthusiasm; when every new pretender to divine illuminations was quickly
surrounded by a crowd of followers, and his most incoherent effusions greedily
swallowed as the dictates of the Holy Ghost; that in such a Babel of sectaries,
none are to be found, who advanced a claim to the power of working miracles; a
claim which, in the author's opinion, though false, is easily supported, and
wonderfully successful, especially among enthusiasts. Yet to Mr Hume himself,
who has written the history of that period, and who will not be accused of
neglecting to mark the extravagancies effected by enthusiasm, I appeal whether
this remark be just.

Will it be alleged as an exception that one or two frantic people among the
Quakers, not the leaders of the party, did actually pretend to such a power?
Let it be remembered, that this conduct had no other consequences, but to bring
upon the pretenders such a general contempt, as in that fanatical and gloomy
age, the most unintelligible jargon or glaring nonsense would never have been
able to produce.

Will it be urged by the essayist, that even in the beginning of the present
century, this plea was revived in Britain by the French prophets, a set of poor
visionaries, who, by the barbarity with which they had been treated in their
own country, had been wrought up to madness, before they took refuge in this? I
must beg leave to remind him, that it is manifest, from the history of those
delirious and unhappy creatures, that by no part of their conduct did they so
effectually open the eyes of mankind naturally credulous, discredit their own
inspirations, and ruin their cause, as by this, not less foolish than
presumptuous pretense. Accordingly they are perhaps the only sect, which has
sprung up so lately, made so great a bustle for a while, and which is
nevertheless at this day totally extinct. It deserves also to be remarked
concerning this people, that though they were mad enough to imagine that they
could restore a dead man to life; nay though they proceeded so far, as to
determine and announce beforehand the day and the hour of his resurrection; yet
none of them were so distracted, as to imagine, that they had seen him rise;
not one of them afterward pretended, that their prediction had been fulfilled.
Thus even a frenzy, which had quite disordered their intellects, could not in
this instance overpower their senses.

UPON the whole, therefore, till some contrary example is produced, I may
warrantably conclude, -- that the religion of the BIBLE is the only religion
extant, which claims to have been recommended by the evidence of miracles; --
that though in different ages and countries, numberless enthusiasts have
arisen, extremely few have dared to advance this plea; -- that wherever any
have had the boldness to recur to it, it has proved the bane, and not the
support, of their cause. Thus it has been evinced, as was proposed, that there
is no presumption arising from the history of the world, which can in the least
invalidate the argument from miracles, in defense of Christianity.

SECTION III. No miracles recorded by historians of other religions are
subversive of the evidence arising from the miracles wrought in proof of
Christianity, or can be considered as contrary testimony.
WHY is a miracle regarded as evidence of a religious doctrine? Or, What
connection is there between an act of power admitted to be supernatural, and
the truth of a proposition pronounced by the person who exerts that power?
These are questions, which some of our infidels have exulted in as
unanswerable: and they are questions, which it is proper to examine a little;
not so much for their own sake, as because a satisfactory answer to them may
throw light on the subject of this section.

A man, I suppose, of an unblemished character, advances doctrines in
religion, unknown before, but not in themselves apparently impious or absurd.
We interrogate him about the manner wherein he attained the knowledge of those
doctrines. He affirms, That by no process of reasoning, nor in any other
natural way, did he discover them; but that they were revealed to him by the
Spirit of God. It must be owned, there is a very strong presumption against the
truth of what he says; and it is of consequence to inquire, whence that
presumption arises. It is not primarily from any doubt of the man's integrity.
If the fact he related, were of an ordinary nature, the reputation he has
hitherto maintained would secure him from being suspected of an intended
deceit. It is not from any absurdity or immoral tendency we perceive in the
doctrine itself. It arises principally, if not solely from these two
circumstances, the extreme uncommonness of such a revelation, and the great
facility with which people of strong fancy, may in this particular impose upon
themselves. The man, I supposed, acquaints us further, that God, when he
communicated to him the truths he publishes, communicated also the power of
working miracles; such as, of giving sight to the blind, and hearing to the
deaf, of raising the dead, and making whole the maimed. It Is evident, that we
have precisely the same presumption against his being endued with such a power,
as against his having obtained such a revelation. Two things are asserted:
there is one presumption, and but one, against them; and it equally effects
them both. Whatever proves either assertion, removes the only presumption which
hinders our belief of the other. The man, I suppose, lastly, performs the
miracles before us, which he said he was commissioned to perform. We can no
longer doubt of a supernatural communication. We have now all the evidence
which the integrity of the person could give us, as to an ordinary event
attested by him, that the doctrine he delivers as from God, is from God, and
therefore true.

Nay, we have more evidence than for any common fact, vouched by a person of
undoubted probity. As God is both almighty and all-wise, if he has bestowed on
any so uncommon a privilege, it is highly probable, that it is bestowed for
promoting some end uncommonly important. And what more important end than to
reveal to men that which may be conducive to their present and eternal
happiness? It may be said, That, at most, it can only prove the interposal of
some power superior to human: the being who interposeth is perhaps a bad being,
and intends to deceive us. This it may be allowed, is possible; but the other
is probable. For, first, From the light of nature, we have no positive evidence
of the existence of such intermediate beings, good or bad. Their existence is
therefore only possible. Of the existence and perfections of God, we have the
highest moral assurance. Secondly, If there were such beings, that raising the
dead, and giving sight to the blind, should come within the verge of their
power, is also but possible; that they are within the sphere of omnipotence is
certain. Thirdly, Whatever seems to imply a suspension of any of the
established laws of nature, we may presume, with great appearance of reason,
proceeds from the author of nature, either immediately, or, which amounts, to
the same thing mediately: that is, by the intervention of some agent empowered
by him. To all these there will also accrue presumptions, not only, as was
hinted already, from the character of the preacher, but from the apparent
tendency of the doctrine, and from the effect it produces on those who receive
it. And now the connection between the miracle and the doctrine is obvious. The
miracle removes the improbability of a supernatural communication of which it
is in fact an irrefragable evidence. This improbability, which was the only
obstacle, being removed, the doctrine has, at least, all the evidence of a
common fact, attested by a man of known virtue and good sense.

In order to illustrate this further, I shall recur to the instance I have
already had occasion to consider, of the Dutchman and the King of Siam. I shall
suppose, that, besides the account given by the former of the freezing of water
in Holland, he had informed the prince of the astonishing effects produced by
gunpowder, with which the latter had been entirely unacquainted. Both accounts
appear to him alike incredible, or, if you please, absolutely impossible. Some
time afterward, the Dutchman gets imported into the kingdom a sufficient
quantity of gunpowder, with the necessary artillery. He informs the monarch of
this acquisition; who having permitted him to make experiments on some of his
cattle and buildings, percieves, with inexpressible amazement, that all the
European had told him, of the celerity and violence with which this destructive
powder operates, is strictly conformable to truth. I ask any considerate
person, Would not this be enough to restore the stranger to the Indian's good
opinion, which, I suppose, his former experienced honesty had entitled him to?
Would it not remove the incredibility of the account he had given of the
freezing of water in northern countries? Yet, if abstractly considered, what
connection is there between the effects of gunpowder and the effects of cold?
But the presumption arising from miracles, in favor of the doctrine published
by the performer, as divinely inspired, must be incomparably stronger; since,
from what has been said, it appears to have several peculiar circumstances,
which add weight to it. It Is evident, then, that miracles are a proper proof,
and perhaps the only proper proof, of a revelation from Heaven. But it is also
evident, that miracles may be wrought for other purposes, and may not be
intended as proofs of any doctrine whatsoever.

THUS much being premised, I shall examine another very curious argument of the
essayist: There is no testimony, says he, for any prodigy, that is not opposed
by an infinite number of witnesses; so that not only the miracle destroys the
credit of the testimony, but even the testimony destroys itself p. 190, etc.
. In order to illustrate this strange position, he observes, that, in matters
of religion, whatever is different is contrary; and that it is impossible the
religions of ancient Rome, of Turkey, of Siam, and of China, should all of them
be established on any solid foundation. Every miracle therefore pretended to
have been wrought in any of these religions, (and all of them abound in
miracles) as its direct scope is to establish the particular system to which it
is attributed, so it has the same force, though more indirectly, to overthrow
every other system. In destroying a rival system, it likewise destroys the
credit of those miracles, on which that system was established; so that all the
prodigies of different religions are to be regarded as contrary facts, and the
evidences of these prodigies, whether weak or strong, as opposite to each
other. Never did an author more artfully avail himself of indefinite
expressions. With what admirable sleght does he vary his phrases, so as to make
the inadvertent reader look upon them as synonymous, when in fact their
significations are totally distinct? Thus what, by a most extraordinary idiom,
is called at first, miracles wrought in a religion, we are next to regard, as
'miracles attributed to a particular system,' and lastly, as miracles, the
direct scope of which is to establish that system. Every body, I will venture
to say, in beginning to read the sentence, if he forms any notion of what the
author means by a 'miracle wrought in a religion,' understands it barely as a
miracle wrought among those who profess a particular religion, the words
appearing to be used in the same latitude, as when we call the traditional
tales current among the Jews, though they should have no relation to religion,
Jewish tales; and those in like manner Mohammedan or Pagan tales, which are
current among Mahometans or Pagans. Such a miracle, the reader, ere he is
aware, is brought to consider as a miracle attributed to a particular system;
nay further, as a miracle, the direct scope of which is to establish that
system. Yet nothing can be conceived more different than the meaning of these
expressions, which are here jumbled together as equivalent.

It Is plain, that all the miracles of which there is any record, come under the
first denomination. They are all supposed to have been wrought before men, or
among men; and wherever there are men, there is religion of some kind or other.
Perhaps too all may, in a very improper sense, be attributed to a religious
system. They all imply an interruption of the ordinary course of nature. Such
an interruption, wherever it is observed, will be ascribed to the agency of
those divinities that are adored by the observers, and so may be said to be
attributed by them to their own system. But where are the miracles (those of
holy writ excepted) of which you can say with propriety, it is their direct
scope to establish a particular system? Must we not then be strangely blinded
by the charms of a few ambiguous terms, if we are made to confound things so
widely different? Yet this confusion is the very basis, on which the author
founds his reasoning, and rears this tremendous doctrine; That a miracle of
Mahomet, or any of his successors, and, by parity of reason, a miracle of
Christ, or any of his apostles, is refuted (as if it had been mentioned, and
had in express terms, been contradicted) by the testimony of Titus Livius,
Plutarch, Tacitus, and of all the authors, Chinese, Grecian, and Roman
Catholic, who have related any miracles in their particular religions. Here all
the miracles, that have been related by men of different religions, are
blended, as coming under the common denomination of miracles, the direct scope
of which was to establish those particular religious systems; an insinuation,
in which there is not even the shadow of truth.

That the reader may be satisfied on this point, I must beg his attention to
the following observations concerning the miracles of profane history. First,
Many facts are related as miraculous, where we may admit the fact, without
acknowledging the miracle. Instances of this kind we have in relations
concerning comets, eclipses, meteors, earthquakes, and suchlike. Secondly, The
miracles may be admitted as genuine, and the manner in which historians account
for them, rejected as absurd. The one is a matter of testimony, the other of
conjecture. In this a man is influenced by education, by prejudices, by
received opinions. In every country, as was observed already, men will recur to
the theology of the place, for the solution of every phenomenon supposed
miraculous. But, that it was the scope of the miracle to support the theology,
is one thing; and that fanciful men thought they discovered in the theology the
causes of the miracle, is another. The inhabitants of Lystra accounted, from
the principles of their own religion, for the miracle performed in their city
by Paul and Barnabas Acts xiv. 8. etc
. Was it therefore the scope of that miracle to support the Lycaonian religion?
Thirdly, Many miracles are recorded, as produced directly by Heaven without the
ministration of men: by what construction are these discovered to be proofs of
a particular system? Yet these also, wherever they happen, will be accounted
for by the natives of the country, from the principles of their own
superstition. Had any of the Pagan citizens escaped the ruin in which Sodom was
miraculously involved, they would doubtless have sought for the cause of this
destruction in the established mode of polytheism, and would probably have
imputed it to the vengeance of some of their deities, incurred by the neglect
of some frivolous ceremony. Would it therefore have been the scope of the
miracle to confirm this nonsense? Fourthly, Even miracles said to have been
performed by a man, are no evidences of the truth of that man's opinions; such,
I mean, as he pretends not to have received by revelation, but by the exercise
of reason, by education, or by information from other men; no more than a man's
being endowed with bodily strenth greater than ordinary, would prove him to be
superior to others in his mental saculties. I conclude with declaring, that if
instances shall be produced, of miracles wrought by men of probity, in proof of
doctrines which they affirm to have been revealed to them from Heaven, and
which are repugnant to the doctrine of the Bible, then I shall think it
equitable to admit, that religious miracles contradict one another. Then will
reasonable people be reduced to the dilemma, either of disproving the
allegations on one side, or of acknowledging that miracles can be no evidence
of revelation. No attempt however has as yet been made by any writer to
produce an instance of this kind.

'But will nothing less satisfy?' replies the author. Will not the predictions
of augurs and oracles, and the intimations said to have been given by the gods
or saints in dreams and visions, of things not otherwise knowable by those to
whom they were thus intimated; will not these, and suchlike prodigies, serve in
some degree as evidence? As evidence of what? Shall we say of any religious
principles conveyed at the same time by revelation? No, it is not even
pretended, that there were any such principles so conveyed: but as evidence of
principles which had been long before entertained, and which were originally
imbibed from education, and from education only. That the evidence here,
supposing the truth of the facts, is at best but very indirect, and by no means
on the same footing with that of the miracles recorded in the gospel, might be
easily evinced, if there were occasion. But there is in reality no occasion,
since there is no such evidence of the facts as can justly entitle them to our
notice. Let it be remembered, that, in the fourth section of the first part, it
was shown, that there is the greatest disparity, in respect of evidence,
betwixt miracles performed in proof of a religion to be established, and in
contradiction to opinions generally received; and miracles performed, on the
contrary, in support of a religion already established, and in confirmation of
opinions generally received; that, in the former case, there is the strongest
persumption for the miracles, in the latter against them. Let it also be
remembered, that in the preceding section it was shown, that the religion of
the Bible is the only religion extant, which claims to have been ushered into
the world by miracles; that this prerogative neither the Pagan religion, the
Mohammedan, nor the Roman-Catholic, can, with any appearance of reason,
arrogate; and that, by consequence, there is one of the strongest presumptions
possible for the miracles of the gospel, which is not only wanting in the
miracles of other religions, but which is contrasted by the strongest
presumption possible against these miracles. And though this presumption should
not, in all cases, be accounted absolutely insuperable, we must at least say,
it gives an immense superiority to the proofs of Christianity. 'Twere an
endless and a fruitless task to canvass particularly the evidence of all the
pretended miracles either of Paganism or Popery, (for on this head Mahometism
is much more modest) but as the author has selected some, which he considers
as the best attested, of both religions, these shall be examined severally in
the two subsequent sections. From this examination a tolerable judgment may be
formed concerning the pretensions of these two species of superstition.

But from what has been said, it is evident, that the contrariety which the
author pretends to have discovered in the miracles said to have been wrought,
as he expresses it, in different religions, vanishes entirely on a close
inspection. He is even sensible of this himself; and, as is customary with
orators, the more inconclusive his reasons are, so much the more positive are
his assertions. "This argument," says he, "may appear over subtle and
refined;" indeed so subtle and refined, that it is invisible altogether; but
-- is not in reality different from the reasoning of a judge, who supposes that
the credit of two witnesses maintaining a crime against any one, is destroyed
by the testimony of two others, who affirm him to have been two hundred leagues
distant, at the same instant when the crime is said to have been committed.
After the particle but, with which this clause begins, the reader naturally
expects such an explication of the argument, as will convince him, that though
subtle and refined, it has solidity and strength. Instead of this, he has
only the author's word warranting it to be good to all intents: "But is not in
reality different," etc. The analogy between his example and his argument seems
to be but very distant; I shall therefore, without any comment, leave it with
the reader as I find it.

THUS it appears, that, for aught the author has as yet proved, no miracles
recorded by historians of other religions are subversive of the evidence
arising from the miracles wrought in proof of Christianity, or can justly be
considered as contrary testimony.

SECTION IV. Examination of the PAGAN miracles mentioned by Mr Hume.
SHOULD one read attentively the Essay on Miracles, and consider it solely as a
philosophical disquisition on an abstract question, like most of the other
pieces in the same collection; he could not fail to wonder, what had induced
the author so suddenly to change sides in the debate, and, by doing so, to
contradict himself in terms the most express. Does he not, in the latter part
of that performance, as warmly contend for the reality of some miracles, as he
had pleaded in the former part, for the impossibility of all? It Is true, he
generally concludes concerning those, that they are 'gross and palpable
falsehoods.' But this serves only to render his conduct the more mysterious, as
that conclusion is always preceded by an attempt to evince, that we have the
greatest reason to receive them as 'certain and infallible truths.' Nay, so
entirely does his zeal make him forget even his most positive assertions, (and
what inconsistencies may not be dreaded from an excess of zeal!) that he shows
minutely we have those very evidences for the miracles he is pleased to
patronize, which, he had strenuously argued, were not to be found in support of
any miracles whatever.

"There is not to be found," he affirms p. 183.
, in all history, a miracle attested by a sufficient number of men, of such
unquestioned good sense, education, and learning, as to secure us against all
delusion in themselves; of such undoubted integrity, as to place them beyond
all suspicion of any design to deceive others; of such credit and reputation in
the eyes of mankind, as to have a great deal to lose, in case of being detected
in any falsehood; and at the same time attesting facts performed in such a
public manner, and in so celebrated a part of the world, as to render the
detection unavoidable. We need only turn over a few pages of the Essay, and we
shall find the author taking great pains to convince us, that all these
circumstances concurred in support of certain miracles, which, notwithstanding
his general resolution, he has thought fit to honor with a very particular
attention.

He has not indeed told us how many witnesses, in his way of reckoning, will
constitute 'a sufficient number;' but for some miracles which he relates, he
gives us clouds of witnesses, one cloud succeeding another: for the Molinists,
who tried to discredit them, soon found themselves overwhelmed by a cloud of
new witnesses, one hundred and twenty in number p. 197. in the note.
. As to the character of the witnesses, most of them were persons of credit and
substance in Paris ib
; again, those miracles were attested by witnesses of credit and distinction,
before judges of unquestioned integrity p. 197.
; and, they were proved by witnesses, before the officialty or bishop's court
of Paris, under the eyes of Cardinal Noailles, whose character for integrity
and capacity was never contested even by his enemies p. 196. in the note.
; again, the secular clergy of France, particularly the rectors or cures of
Paris, give testimony to these impostures, than whom no clergy are more
celebrated for strictness of life and manners p. 199. in the note.
. Once more, one principal witness, Monsieur de Montgeron, was counselor or
judge of the parliament of Paris, a man of figure and character p. 197. in the
note.
; another no less a man than the Duc de Chatillon, a Duke and Peer of France,
of the highest rank and family p. 199. in the note.
. It Is strange, if credit, and substance, and distinction, and capacity, are
not sufficient securities to us, that the witnesses were not 'themselves
deluded;' it is strange, if uncontested integrity, and eminent strictness of
life and manners, cannot remove 'all suspicion of any design in them to deceive
others;' it is strange, if one who was counselor of the parliament of Paris, a
man of figure and character, and if another was a Duke and Peer of France, of
the highest rank and family, had not a great deal to lose, in case of being
detected in any falsehood: nay, and if all those witnesses of credit and
distinction, "had not also a great deal to lose;' since the Jesuits, a learned
body, supported by the civil magistrate, were determined enemies to those
opinions, in whose favor the miracles were said to have been wrought p. 195.
; and since Monsieur Herault, the lieutenant de police, of whose great
reputation, all who have been in France about that time, have heard; and whose
vigilance, penetration, activity, and extensive intelligence, have been much
talked of; since this magistrate, who by the nature of his office is almost
absolute, was invested with full powers on purpose to suppress these miracles,
and and frequently seized and examined the witnesses and subjects of them;
though he could never reach any thing satisfactory against them p. 197. in the
note.
. As to the only remaining circumstance, their being performed in a public
manner, and in a celebrated part of the world, this concurred also. They were
performed, we are told, in a learned age, and on the most eminent theater that
is now in the world p. 175.
; besides twenty-two rectors or cures of Paris, with infinite earnestness,
pressed the Archbishop, an enemy to the Jansenists, to examine those miracles,
which they assert to be known to the whole world, and indisputably certain p.
196. in the note.
.

Thus the essayist has laid us under the disagreeable necessity of inferring,
that he is either very rash in his general assertions, or uses very great
amplification in his particular narrations. Perhaps in both inferences, we
shall find, upon inquiry, that there is some truth. In his History of Great
Britain, he gives us notice James I. chap. 2.
, that he addressed himself to a more distant posterity, than will ever be
reached by any local temporary theology. Why did he not likewise, in writing
the Essays, entertain this grand idea? It would have been of use to him. It
would have prevented his falling into those inconsistencies, which his too
great attention and antipathy to what he calls a localtemporary theology, only
could occasion; and which, when that theology, according to his hypothesis,
shall be extinct, and when all our religious controversies shall be forgotten,
must appear unaccountable and ridiculous. People will not then have the means
of discovering, what is so obvious to us his contemporaries, that he only
assumes the appearance of an advocate for some miracles, which are disbelieved
by the generality of Protestants, his countrymen, in order, by the comparison,
to vilify the miracles of sacred writ, which are acknowledged by them.

BUT to descend to particulars, I shall begin with considering those miracles,
for which the author is indebted to the ancient Pagans. First, in order to
convince us, how easy a matter it is for cunning and impudence to impose by
false miracles on the credulity of barbarians, he introduces the story of
Alexander of Pontus p 188. etc.
. The justness of the account he gives of this impostor from Lucian, I shall
not dispute. But that it may appear, how little the Christian religion is
affected by this relation, notwithstanding some insinuations he has intermixed
with it, I shall make the following remarks.

It is of importance to know, what was the profession of this once so famous,
though now forgotten Paphlagonian. Was he a publisher of strange gods? No The
learned and judicious author of the Observations on the conversion and
apostleship of Saint Paal, has inad ^antly said of Alexander, that he
introduced a new god into Pontus. The truth is, he only exhibited a
reproduction of Esculapius, a well known deity in those parts, to whom he gave
indeed the new name GLYCON. In this there was nothing unsuitable to the genius
of the mythology. Accordingly, we do not find, that either the priests, or the
people, were in the least alarmed for the religion of the country, or charged
Alexander as an innovator in religious matters. On the contrary, the greatest
enemies he had to encounter, were not the religionists, but the latitudinarians.
. Was he the founder of a new system in religion? No. What was he then? He was
no other than a professed fortune tellers. What were the arts by which he
carried on this gainful trade? The essayist justly remarks, that it was a wise
policy in him to lay the first scene of his impostures in a country, where the
people were extremely ignorant and stupid, and ready to swallow the grossest
delusion. For, had Alexander fixed his residence at Athens, the philosophers of
that renowned mart of learning, had immediately spread through the whole Roman
empire their sense of the matter; which, being supported by so great authority,
and displayed by all the force of reason and eloquence, had entirely opened the
eyes of mankind. I shall beg leave to remark another instance of good policy in
him. He attemped not to gain the veneration of the multitude by opposing, but
by adopting their religious prejudices. His whole plan of deceit was founded in
the established superstition. The author himself will acknowledge, it would
have been extreme folly in him to have acted otherwise: and all the world, I
believe, will agree in thinking, that, in that case, he could not have had the
smallest probability of success. What were the miracles he wrought? I know of
none, unless we will dignify with that name, some feats of legerdemain,
performed mostly by candle light; which, in many parts of Europe, we may daily
see equalled, nay far exceeded, by those of modern juglers. Add to these some
oracles he pronounced, concerning which, if we may form a judgment from the
account and specimen given us by Lucian, we should conclude, that, like other
Heathen oracles, they were generally unintelligible, equivocal, or false.
Before whom did he exhibit his wonders? Before none, if he could help it, that
were not thorough believers in the popular system. His nocturnal mysteries were
always introduced with an AVAUNT to Atheists, Christians, and Epicurians: and
indeed it was dangerous for any such to be present at them. Mr Hume says, that,
from his ignorant Paphlagonians, he was enabled to proceed to the inlisting of
votaries among the Grecian philosophers. On what authority he advances this, I
have not been able to discover. He adds, and men of the most eminent rank and
distinction in Rome. Lucian mentions one man of rank, Rutilianus, among the
votaries of the prophet; an honest man he calls him, but at the same time the
weakest, the most superstitions that ever lived. As to the military expedition,
which one would imagine from Mr Hume's expression, the Emperor had resolved on,
in consequence of the encouragement which the delusive prophecies of this
impostor gave him, we find, on the contrary, it was undertaken, before those
prophecies were uttered. But further, Did Alexander risk any thing in assuming
the character of the interpreter of ESCULAPIUS? Did he lose, or did he suffer
any thing in defense of it? Quite the reverse. He enriched himself by this most
ingenious occupatoin. I shall say nothing of the picture which Lucian gives of
his morals, of the many artifices which he used, or of the atrocious crimes
which he perpetrated. It must be owned, that the principal scope for calumny
and detraction is what concerns the private life and moral character. Lucian
was an enemy, and, by his own account, had received the highest provocation.
But I avoid every thing, on this topic, that can admit a question.

Where, I would gladly know, lies the resemblance between this impostor and the
first publishers of the gospel? Every one, on the most superficial review, may
discover, that, in all the material circumstances, they are perfect contrasts.
There appears not therefore to be great danger in the poignant remark with
which the author concludes this relation: Though much to be wished, it does not
always happen, that every Alexander meets with a Lucian ready to expose and
detect his impostures. Lest the full import of this emphatical clause should
not be apprehended, the author has been still more explicit in the note: It
may here perhaps be objected, that I proceed rashly, and form my notions of
Alexander, merely from the account given of him by Lucian, a professed enemy.
It were indeed to be wished, that some of the accounts published by his
followers and accomplices had remained. The opposition and contrast betwixt the
character and conduct of the same man, as drawn by a friend or an enemy, is as
strong, even in common life, much more in these religious matters, as that
betwixt any two men in the world, betwixt Alexander and St Paul for instance.
Who can forbear to lament the uncommon distress of an author, obliged every
moment to recur to unavailing wishes? Mr Hume, however, in this calamitous
situation, solaceth himself, as well as he can, by supposing what he cannot
assert. He supposes what would have been the case, if his wishes could have
been gratified; and artfully insinuates, in this manner to his readers; that if
we had the character and conduct of the apostle, delineated by as able an enemy
as Lucian, we should find the portrait as ugly as that of Alexander.

Let us then for once suppose, what the author so ardently wishes, that such an
enemy had undertaken the history of Paul of Tarsus. I can easily conceive what
a different representation we should, in that case, have had, of the mental
endowments and moral disposition, as well as of the inducements and views of
this Christian missionary. I can conceive also, that both his actions and
discourses might have been strangely disfigured. But if the biographer had
maintained any regard, I say not, to truth, but to probability; there are some
things, we may be absolutely certain, he would never have advanced. He would
not surely have said of Paul, that he was by pro^^^sion a cunning man, or
conjurer; one who, for a little money, either told people their fortunes, or
taught them how to recover stolen goods. He would not, I suppose, have
pretended, that wherever the apostle went, he flattered the superstition of
the populace, in order to gain them, and founded all his pretensions on the
popular system. He would not have alleged, that Paul enriched himself, or that
he could ever have the prospect of enriching himself, by his vocation; nay, or
that he risked nothing, or suffered nothing, by it. He could not have said
concerning him, that he declined the audience or scrutiny of men, whose
opinions in religion differed from those on which his mission was founded. He
durst not have imputed to him the wise policy of laying the scene of his
impostures, only where ignorance, barbarism, and stupidity prevailed: as it is
unquestionable, that our apostle traversed great part, not only of Asia Minor,
but of Macedonia, and Achaia; fixed his residence eighteen months at Corinth, a
city not less celebrated for the polite arts, than for its populousness and
riches; preached publicly at Athens before the Stoics and the Epicureans, and
even before the Areopagus, the most venerable judicature in Greece; not afraid
of what the philosophers of that renowned mart of learning, might spread
through the whole Roman empire, concerning him and his doctrine; nay, and
lastly preached at Rome itself, the mistress and metropolis of the world.

The reader will observe, that, in this comparison, I have shunned every thing
that is of a private, and therefore of a dubious nature. The whole is founded
on such actions and events as were notorious; which it is not in the power of
contemporary historians to falsisy; such with regard to Alexander, as a votary
could not have dissembled; such with regard to Paul, as an enemy durst not have
denied. We are truly indebted to the essayist, who intending to exhibit a rival
to the apostle, has produced a character which, we find on making the
comparison, serves only for a foil. Truth never shines with greater luster,
than when confronted with falsehood. The evidence of our religion, how strong
soever, appears not so irresistibly, considered by itself, as when by
comparison we perceive, that none of those artifices and circumstances attended
its propagation, which the whole course of experience shows to be necessary to
render imposture successful.

THE next topic on which the ingenious author has bestowed some flourishes, is
the miracle which Tacitus reports of Vespasian, who cured a blind man in
Alexandria, by means of his spittle, and a lame man by the mere touch of his
foot, in obedience to a vision of the god Serapis, who had enjoined them to
have recourse to the emperor, for these miraculous and extraordinary cures p.
292, etc.
. The story he introduces with informing us, that it is one of the best
attested miracles in all profane history. If so, it will the better serve for a
sample of what may be expected from that quarter. "Every circumstance," he
tells us, seems to add weight to the testimony, and might be displayed at
large, with all the force of argument and eloquence, if any one were now
concerned to enforce the evidence of that exploded and idolatrous superstition.
For my part, were I concerned to enforce the evidence of that exploded and
idolatrous superstition, I should not wish the story were in better hands than
in the author's. He is by no means deficient in eloquence; and if sometimes
there appear a deficiency in argument, that is not imputable to him, but to the
subject, which cannot furnish him with any better: and though I do not suspect
him to be in the least concerned to re-establish Paganism, yet it is well known,
that hatred to his adversary may as strongly animate an advocate to exert
himself, as affection to his client.

But to proceed to the story: First, the author pleads the gravity, solidity,
age, and probity of so great an emperor, who, through the whole course of his
life, conversed in a familiar way with his friends and courtiers, and never
affected those extraordinary airs of divinity assumed by Alexander and
Demetrius. To this character, the justness of which I intend not to controvert,
I shall beg leave to add, what is equally indubitable, and much to the purpose,
that no emperor showed a stronger inclination to corroborate his title by a
sanction of the gods, than the prince of whom he is speaking. This, doubtless,
he thought the more necessary in his case, as he was of an obscure family, and
nowise related to any of his predecessors. How fond he was of p^^ading visions,
and presages, and auguries, in his favor, all the world knows Auctoritas, et
quasi majestas quaedam, ut scilicet inopinate et adhuc novo principi decrat,
haec quoque accessit. SUETON
.

The author adds, The historian, a contemporary writer, noted for can^ and
veracity, and withal the greatest and mo^^ penetrating genius perhaps of all
antiquity, and so ^ree from any tendency to superstition and cred^^^y, that he
even lies under the contrary imputation of atheism and prosaneness. This would
say a great deal, if the character of the historian were of any moment in the
question. Does Tacitus pretend that he was himself a witness of the miracle?
No. Does he mention it as a thing which he believes? No. In either case I a
knowledge, that the reputation of the relater for candor and penetration, must
have added weight to the relation, whether considered as his testimony, or
barely as his opinion. But is it fair to plead the veracity of the writer in
proof of every popular rumor mentioned by him? His veracity is only concerned
to satisfy us, that it was actually reported, as he r^es; or that the attempt
was made, and the miracle pretended; a point which, I presume, nobody would
have disputed, although the authority had been less than that of Tacitus. Indeed
the historian does not say di^ectly, whether he believes the miracle or not;
but by his manner of telling it, he plainly insinuates, that he thought it
ridiculous. In introducing it, he intimates the utility of such reports to the
Emperor's cause. "By which," says he, the favor of heaven, and the appointment
of the gods, might be urged in support of his title Queis coelestis favor, et
quaedam in Vespasianum inclinatio ^nminum ostenderetur.
. When he names the god Serapis, as warning the blind man to recur to
Vespasian, he adds, in evident contempt and derision of his godship, Who is
adored above all others by the Egyptians, a people addicted to superstition
Quem dedita superstitionibus gens ante alios colit.
. Again he speaks of the emperor, as induced to hope for success, by the
persuasive tongues of flatterers Vocibus adulantium in spent induci.
. A serious believer of the miracle would hardly have used such a style in
relating it. But to what purpose did he then relate it? The answer is easy.
Nothing could be more characteristic of the Emperor, or could better show the
arts he had recourse to, and the hold which flattery had of him; nothing could
be more characteristic of the Alexandrians, the people amongst whom the miracle
is said to have been wrought.

"The persons," says the essayist, from whose testimony he related the miracle,
of established character for judgment and veracity, ^s we may well suppose;
eyewitnesses of the fact, and confirming their verdict, after the Flavian
family were despoiled of the empire, and could no longer give any reward as the
price of a lie. Persons of established character for judgment and veracity! Who
told Mr Hume so? 'Twas not Tacitus. He only denominates them in general Qui
interfuere. -- Quae astabat multit^ do.
: "They who were present," and "a crowd of bystanders." The author, conscious
that he advances this without even the shadow of authority, has subjoined, in
order to palliate the matter, as we may well suppose. An admirable expedient
for supplying a weak plea, with those convenient circumstances that can give it
strength! When facts fail, which is not seldom the case, we need b^^ apply to
supposition, whose help is always near. But if this be allowed to take the
place of argument, I see no reason why I may not avail myself of the privilege
of supposing, as well as the author. The witnesses then, I will suppose, were
mostly an ignorant rabble: but I wrong my cause; I have a better foundation
than supposal, having Tacitus himself, and all antiquity on my side, when I add
deeply immersed in superstition, particularly attached to the worship of
Serapis, and keenly engaged in support of Vespasian, ALEXANDRIA having been the
first city of note that publicly declared for him. Was it then matter of
surprise, that a story, which at once soothed the superstition of the populace,
and savoured their political schemes, should gain ground among them? Can we
justly wonder, that the wiser few, who were not deceived should convive at, or
even contribute to promote a deceit, which was highly useful to the cause
wherein themselves were embarked, and at the same time highly grateful to the
many? Lastly, can we be surprised that any, who, so seven and twenty years,
had, from motives of interest, and ambition, and popularity, propagated a
falschood, should not afterward be willing to expose themselves as liars?

The author finishes the story thus: To which if we add the public nature of
the facts related, it will appear, that no evidence can well be supposed
stronger for so gross and so palpable a falsehood. As to the nature of the
facts, we are told by Tacitus, that when Vespasian consulted the physicians,
whether such maladies were curable by human art, they declared Huic non exesam
vim luminis, et redituram, si pellerentur obstantia: illi elapsos in pravum
artus, si salubris vis adhibeatur, posse integrari.
, that in the one the power of sight was not extinct, but would return, were
the obstacles removed; that in the other, the joints had suffered some
dislocation, which by a salutary pressure might be redressed. From this account
we are naturally led to conclude, that the disorders were not so conspicuous,
but that either they might have been feigned, where they were not; or that
cures might have been pretended, where none were performed. I think it is even
a further presumption of the truth of this conclusion, that Suetonius, the only
other Roman historian who mentions the miracle, (I know not how he has been
overlooked by Mr Hume) differs from Tacitus, in the account he gives of the
lameness. The one represents it as being in the hand, the other, as in the leg
Manum aeger. TACITUS. Debili crure. SUETONIUS. Mr Hume, in the last edition of
the Essay mentions Suetonius, but takes no notice of this difference between
his account and that of Tacitus.
.

There are other circumstances regarding this story on which I might make some
remarks; but shall forbear, as it is impossible to enter into a minute
discussion of particulars, that appear but trivial, when considered severally,
without growing tiresome to the bulk of readers. I shall therefore only subjoin
these simple questions. First, What emperor or other potentate was flattered in
his dignity and pretensions by the miracles of our Lord? What eminent personage
found himself interested to support, by his authority and influence, the credit
of these miracles? Again, What popular superstition or general and rooted
prejudices were they calculated to confirm! These two circumstances, were there
no other, make the greatest odds imaginable betwixt the miracles of VESPASIAN
and those of JESUS CHRIST.

So much for the PAGAN miracles mentioned by the author.

SECTION V. Examination of the POPISH miracles mentioned by Mr Hume.
THE author soon descends from ancient to modern times, and leaving Paganism,
recurs to Popery, a much more fruitful source of lying wonders.

THE first of this kind he takes notice of p. 193. etc.
, is a Spanish miracle recorded in the memoirs of Cardinal de Retz. The story,
he says, is very memorable, and may well deserve our consideration. When that
intriguing politician fled into Spain, to avoid the persecution of his enemies,
he passed through Saragossa the capital of Arragon; where he was shown in the
cathedral church, a man, who had served twenty years as a door keeper of the
church, and was well known to every body in town, that had ever paid their
devotions at that cathedral. -- He had been for so long a time wanting a leg;
but recovered that limb, by the rubbing of holy oil upon the stump; and, when
the cardinal examined it, he found it to be a true natural leg, like the other.
Would not any person imagine, from the last words of the sentence, that the
cardinal had ordered the man to put off his shoes and stockings, that, by touch
as well as by sight, he might be satisfied, there was no artifice used, but
that both his legs consisted of genuine flesh and bone? Yet the truth is, his
Eminency did not think it worth while to examine any one circumstance of this
wonderful narration, but contented himself with reporting it precisely as it
had been told him. His words literally translated are, In that church they
showed me a man, whose business it was to light the lamps, of which they have a
prodigious number, telling me, that he had been seen seven years at the gate,
with one leg only. I saw him there with two L'on m'y montra un homme, qui
s^rvoit a allumer les lamps, qui y sont en nombre prodligieux; et I'on me dit,
qu'on l'y avoit vu sept ans a la port de cette eglise, avec une seule jambe.
Je l'y vis avec deux. Live. 4. l'an 1654.
. Not one word of trial or examination, or even so much as a single question
asked on the subject; not a syllable of his finding the leg to be either true
or false, natural or artificial, like the other or unlike. I have a better
opinion both of the candor and of the good sense of Mr Hume, than to imagine,
he would have designedly misrepresented this story, in order to render it
fitter for his purpose. I believe the source of this error has been solely the
trusting to his memory in the relation which he gave, and not taking the
trouble to consult the passage in the memoirs. This conjecture appears the more
probable, as he has made some other alterations, which are nowise conducive to
his design; such as, that the man had been seen in the church twenty years
wanting a leg, and that he was a doorkeeper; whereas the memoir-writer says
only seven years, and that he was one who lighted the lamps Since finishing
this tract, I have seen an edition of Mr Hume's essays, etc. later than that
here resered to. It is printed at London 1760. I must do the author the justice
to observe, that, in this edition, he has corrected the mistake, as to the
cardinal's examining the man's leg, of which he only "says, The cardinal
assures us, that he saw him with two legs." He still calls him a doorkeeper,
and says, that he had served twenty years in this capacity.
.

"This miracle was vouched," says the author, by all the canons of the church;
and the whole company in town were appealed to, for a confirmation of the fact,
whom the Cardinal found, by their zealous devotion, to be thorough believers of
the miracle. It Is true, that the company in town were appealed to, by those
ecclesiastics; but it is also true, that De Retz, by his own account, seems not
to have asked any man a question on the subject. He acknowledges indeed, that
an anniversary festival, instituted in commemoration of the miracle, was
celebrated by a vast concourse of people of all ranks.

"Here," continues the essayist, the relater was also contemporary to the
supposed prodigy, of an incredulous and libertine character, as well as of
great genius. But of what weight, in this affair, is either the genius or the
incredulity of the relater, since, by Mr Hume's confession, he had no faith in
the relation? Strange indeed is the use which the essayist makes of this
circumstance!

"What adds mightily," says he, to the force of the evidence, and may double
our surprise on this occasion, is, that the cardinal himself, who relates the
story, seems not to give any credit to it. It does not in the least surprise
me, that the cardinal gives no credit to this relation; but I am beyond measure
surprised, that Mr Hume should represent this circumstance as adding mightily
to the force of the evidence. Is then a story which is reported by a man of
genius, the more credible that he does not believe it? Or, Is it the more
incredible that he does believe it? What would the author have said, if the
cardinal had told us, that he gave credit to the relation? Might he not, in
that case, have very pertinently pleaded the great genius, and penetration, and
incredulity of the relater, as adding mightily to the force of the evidence? On
that hypothesis, he surely might, for pretty obvious reasons. Uncommon
penetration qualifies a man for detecting fraud; and it requires evidence
greater than ordinary to surmount incredulity. The belief therefore of such a
person as the cardinal, who had not only the means of discovering ^n imposture,
as he was contemporary and on the spot, but the ability to discover it, as he
was a man of genius, and not over-credulous; his belief, I say, would evidently
have been no small presumption of the truth of the miracle. How his disbelief
can be in like manner a presumption of its truth, is to me incomprehensible. Ay
but, rejoins the author, as he seems not to give any credit to it, he cannot be
suspected of any concurrence in the holy fraud. Very well. I am satisfied that
a man's TESTIMONY is the more to be regarded, that he is above being suspected
of concurring in any fraud, call it holy or unholy. But I want to know why, on
the very same account, his OPINION is the less to be regarded? For my part, I
find no difficulty in believing every article of the narration for which the
cardinal gives his testimony: notwithstanding this, I may be of the same
opinion with him; that the account given by the dean and canons, which is their
testimony, not his, was all a fiction. But it is not with the cardinal's
testimony we are here concerned: about that there is no dispute. It is with his
opinion. Are then a man's sentiments about a matter of fact, I must insist on
it, the less worthy of regard, either because he is a man of genius, and not at
all credulous, or because he cannot be suspected of any concurrence in a holy
fraud? Are they the more improbable on these accounts? The essayist, when he
reflects, will be the last man in the world, would assist in establishing a
maxim so unfavorable, not only to candor, but even to genius and skepticism:
and indeed there are few, if any, that would be greater sufferers by it than
himself.

But leaving this, as one of the unfathomable depths of the essay, I proceed to
the other circumstances. "The miracle," says the author, of so singular a
nature, as could scarce admit of a counterfeit. He did well at least to use the
word scarce; for if every visitant was as little desirous of prying into the
secret, as the cardinal, nothing could be more easily counterfeited: And the
witnesses very numerous, and all of them, in a manner, spectators of the fact,
to which they gave their testimony. By the very numerous witnesses, I suppose
he means the whole company in town, who were appealed to. They were all, in a
manner, spectators of the fact. What precise abatement the author intended we
should make, from the sense of the word spectators, on account of the
qualifying phrase, in a manner, I shall not presume to determine; but shall
observe, from the memoirs, that it was not so much as pretended by the canons,
that any of the citizons had seen the miracle performed; 'twas only pretended,
that they had seen the man formerly at the gate of the church, wanting a leg.
Nor is it alleged, that any of them was at more pains in examining the matter,
either before or after the recovery of the leg, than the cardinal was. They
were therefore properly no spectators of the fact. The phrase, in a manner,
ought, I imagine, to have been placed in the end of the sentence, which would
have run thus: to which they, in a manner, give their testimony: for no direct
testimony was either asked of them, or given by them; their belief is inferred
from their devotion.

I have been the more particular in my remarks on the circumstances of this
story, not because there was need of these remarks: for, though to the essayist
the relation appeared very memorable, to me, and, I believe, to most people, it
appears very trifling; but that the reader might have this further specimen of
the author's talents in embellithing, To the abovementioned, and all other such
idle tales, this short and simple answer will, by every man of sense, be
thought sufficient. The country where the miracle is said to have been wrought,
is SPAIN; the people who propagated the faith of it, were THE CLERGY. What
comparison, in point of credibility, can be made between miracles, which, with
no visible support but their own evidence, had at once to encounter, and did in
fact overcome the abhorrence of the priest, and the tyranny of the magistrate,
the insolence of the learned, and the bigotry of the superstitious: what
comparison, I say, can be made between such, and any prodigies said to have
been performed in a country, where all the powers of the nation, secular and
ecclesiastical, the literature of the schools, such as it is, and the
prejudices of the people, conspire in establishing their credit; a country sunk
in the most obdurate superstition that ever disgraced human nature This perhaps
will appear to some to be too severe a censure on a country called Christian,
and may be thought to reflect on Christianity itself. I do not think it fairly
capable of such a construction. That the corruption of the best things produces
the worst, has grown into a proverb; and, on the most impartial inquiry, I do
not imagine it will be sound, that any species of idolatry ever tended so
directly, to extirpate humanity, gratitude, natural affection, equity, mutual
confidence, good faith, and every amiable and generous principle from the human
breast, as that gross perversion of the Christian religion which is established
in Spain. It might casily be shown, that the human sacrifices offered by
Heathens, had not half the tendency to corrupt the heart, and consequently
deserve not to be viewed with half the horror, as those celebrated among the
Spaniards, with so much pomp, and barbarous festivity, at an auto da fe. It
will not surely be affirmed, that our Savior reflected on the Mosaic
institution, or genuine Judaism, when he said, We unto you scribes and
Pharisecs, hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and
when be is made, Y^ MAK^ him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
Yet the words plainly imply, that even Pagans, by being converted to the
Judaism that was then professed, were made children of hell, and consequently
corrupted, instead of being reformed. See Matthew. xxiii 15.
, a country where the awe of the inquisition is so great, that no person,
whatever be his sentiments, dares mutter a syllable against any opinion that
has obtained the patronage of their spiritual guides? But that I may not be
accused of prepossession, or suspected of exaggerating. I shall only give the
sentiments of two eminent foreigners (who were not Protestants, and may
therefore be supposed the more impartial) concerning that nation, and the
influence which the holy tribunal has both on their character and manners.
Voltarire Essai sur l'histoire generale, chap. 118.
, speaking of the inquisition as established in Spain, says, Their form of
proceeding is an infallible way to destroy whomsoever the inquisitors please.
The prisoners are not confronted with the informers; and there is no informer
who is not listened to. A public criminal, an in famous person, a child, a
prostitute, are creditable accusers. Even the son may depose against his
father; the wife against her husband. In fine, the prisoner is compelled to
inform against himself, to divine, and to confess, the crime laid to his
charge; of which often he is ignorant. This procedure, unheard of till the
institution of this court, makes the whole kingdom tremble. Suspicion reigns in
every breast. Friendship and openness are at an end. The brother dreads his
brother, the father his son. Hence taciturnity is become the characteristic of
a nation endued with all the vivacity natural to the inhabitants of a warm and
fruitful climate. To this tribunal we must likewise impute that profound
ignorance of sound philosophy, in which Spain lies buried, whilst Germany,
England, France, and ^even Italy, have discovered so many truths, and enlarged
the sphere of our knowledge. Never is human nature so debased, as when
ignorance is armed with power. -- "'It Is necessary," says Montesquieu De
l'esprit des loix, live. 25. chap. 13.
, in the humble remonstrance to the inquisitors of Spain and Portugal, that we
advertise you of one thing; it is, that if any person, in future times, shall
dare assert, that in the age wherein we live, the Europeans were civilized, YOU
will be quoted to prove that they were barbarians, and the idea people will
form of you, will be such as will dishonor your age, and bring hatred on all
your contemporaries.

I COME now to consider the miracles said to have been performed in the
churchyard of Saint Medard, at the tomb of Abbe Paris. On these the author
has expatiated with great parade, exulting, that he has found in them, as he
imagines, what, in respect of of number, and nature, and evidence, may carry
the miracles of holy writ. Yet should we adn it them to be true, how they can
be considered as proofs of any doctrine, or how they can affect the evidence of
the miracles recorded in scripture, 'twill not perhaps be easy to discover. But
setting that question aside, I propose to examine their evidence; and that, not
by entering into a particular inquiry concerning each separate fact mentioned
in Montgeron's collection, as such an inquiry would appear, to every judicious
reader, both tedious and impertinent; but by making a few general observations,
founded in unquestionable fact, and mostly supported even by the authority of
Montgeron, that doughty champion of the Jansenist saint The character of his
book is very justly and very briefly expressed in Le (...) de Louis XIV. in
these words: Since livre subsistait un jour, et que le^autres suffent persus,
la posterite croirait que notre siecle a (...) un tems de (...). chap. ^^.
.

First, Let it be remarked, that it was often objected by the enemies of the
saint, and scarce contradicted, never confuted, by his friends, that the
prostrations at his sepulcher produced more diseases, than they cured. The
ingenious author lately quoted, in the account he gives of the affairs of the
church in the ninth century, taking occasion incidentally to mention the
miracles of the Able, speaks of this circumstance, as a thing universally
known, and unundeniable Essai far l'histoire generale, chap 21.
. "I should not take notice," says he, of an epidemical folly with which the
people of Dijon were seized in 844, occasioned by one Saint Benignus, who threw
those into convulsions who prayed on his tomb; I should not, I say, mention
this popular superstition, had it not been furiously revived in our days, in
parallel circumstances. It seems, as if the same follies were destined to make
their appearance, from time to time, on the theater of the world: but good
sense is also the same at all times; and nothing so judicious has been said,
concerning the modern miracles wrought on the tomb of I know not what deacon at
Paris, as what a bishop of Lions said, concerning those of Dijon. A strange
saint indeed, that maims those who pay their devoirs to him. I should think,
miracles ought to be performed for the curing, and not for the inflicting of
maladies.

The second observation is, That the instances of persons cured are extremely
few, compared with the multitudes of people in distress, who night and day
attended the sepulcher, imploring in vain the intercession of the saint. The
crowds of sick and infirm, who flocked to the tomb for relief, were, by all
accounts, innumerable: whereas all the cures which the zealous and
indefatigable Montgeron could procure vouchers of, amounted only to NINE It
must be owned that the author of the Recueil after-mentioned, has presented us
with a much greater number; but let is be remarked, that that author does not
confine himself to the cures performed openly at the tomb of the deacon; he
gives us also those that were wrought in the private chambers of the sick, by
virtue of his relies, by images of him, or by earth brought from under his
monument. Nor is the collection restricted only to the cur^^ effected by the
fairt; it includes also the judgments inflicted by him.
. The author therefore must be understood, as speaking with great latitude,
when he says, There surely never was so great a number of miracles ascribed to
one person, as those which were lately said to have been wrought in France,
upon the tomb of Abbe Paris, the famous Jansenist, with whose sanctity the
people were so long deluded p. 195.
. If thousands of diseased persons had applied for medicine to some ignorant
quack, in the assurance of his extraordinary abilities; would it be matter of
surprise to a reasonable man, that, of so many, eight or nine should be sound,
whose distempers had taken a favorable turn, whilst they were using his
specifics, and had there by given countenance to the delusion? I think it would
be matter of surprise that there were so few.

I shall observe, thirdly, That imposture was actually detected, and proved in
several instances. That the reader may be satisfied of this, I must entreat him
to have recourse to the Archishop of Sens' Pastoral instructions; a book which
Mr Hume could not, with propriety, take any notice of, having positively assert
that the enemies to those opinions, in whose favor the miracles were said to
have been wrought, were never able distinctly to refute or detect them ib.
. This prelate, on the contrary, has not only given a distinct refutation of
some of these pretended miracles, but has clearly detected the deceit and
little artifices by which their credit was supported. I intend not to descend
to particulars, and shall therefore only refer the reader to the book itself,
and beg that he will peruse what relates to the cases of Jacques Laurent
Menedricuz, Jean Nivet, Sieur le Doulx, Laleu, Anne Coulon, the widow de Lorme,
as well as Mademoiselle le Franc, of whom the essayist has made mention in a
note. In this perusal, the reader will observe the shameful prevarications of
some Jansenist witnesses, for whom Mr Hume would fain apologize, by telling us
pleasantly, they were tamperd with. p. 197. in the note,
. I shall only add on this head, that the detection of fraud in some instances,
justly brings suspicion on all the other instances. A man whom I know to have
lied to me, on several occasions, I shall suspect, on every occasion, where I
have not access to discover, whether what he affirms be true or false. It is in
the same way we judge of the spirit and conduct of parties, as of individuals.

I observe, fourthly, That all the cures recorded by Montgeron, as duly
attested, were such as might have been effected by natural means. There are two
kinds of miracles, to which Mr Hume has alluded in a note, though he does not
directly make the distinction. One is, when the event, considered by itself, is
evidently preternatural. Of this kind are, raising the dead, walking on water,
making whole the maimed; for by no natural causes can these effects be
produced. The other kind is, when the event, considered by itself, is natural,
that is, may be produced by natural causes, but is denominated miraculous, on
account of the manner. That a sick person should be restored to health, is not,
when considered singly, preternatural; but that health should be restored by
the command of a man, undoubtedly is. Let us hear the author on this point:
Sometimes an event may not, in itself, seem to be contrary to the laws of
nature, and yet, if it were real, it might, by reason of some circumstances, be
denominated a miracle; because, in fact, it is contrary to these laws. Thus, if
a person claiming a divine authority, should command a sick person to be well,
a healthful man to fall down dead, the clouds to pour rain, the winds to blow,
in short, should order many natural events, which immediately follow upon his
command; these might justly be esteemed miracles, because they are really, in
this case, contrary to the laws of nature. For if any suspicion remain, that
the event and command concurred by accident, there is no miracle, and no
transgression of the laws of nature. If this suspicion be removed, there is
evidently a miracle, and a transgression of these laws; because nothing can be
more contrary to nature, than that the voice or command of a man, should have
such an influence p. 181. in the note.
. From what has been said, it appears, that these two kinds of miracles must
differ considerably in respect of evidence, since the latter naturally gives
room for a suspicion, which is absolutely excluded from the former. In the
former, when the fact or event is proved, the miracle is unquestionable. In the
latter, the fact may be proved and yet the miracle may be justly questioned. It
therefore merits our attention, that all the miracles recorded in Montgeron's
collection, were of the second kind. One of the most considerable of those
cures, was that of Don Alphonso de Palacios, who had lost one eye, and was
distressed with an inflammation in the other. The inflamed eye was cured, but
the lost eye was not restored. Had there been a reproduction of the member
which had perished, a sufficient proof of the fact, would have been a
sufficient proof of the miracle. But as the case was otherwise, the fact
vouched may be admitted, without admitting any miracle. The cures said to have
been performed on those patients who were afflicted with paralytic or dropsical
disorders, or that performed on Louisa Coirin, who had a tumor on her breast,
will not appear to be entitled to a rank in the first class. As little can the
cure of Peter Gautier claim that honor. One of his eyes had been pricked with
an awl; in consequence of which the aqueous humor dropped out, and he became
blind of that eye. His sight was restored, whilst he paid his addresses to the
Abbe. But that a puncture in the cornea of the eye will often heal of itself,
and that the aqueous humor, after it has been quite lost, will be recruited,
and consequently, that the faculty of vision will, in such a case, be
recovered, is what every oculist can assure us of. The loss of the watery
humor, is the constant effect of a very common operation in surgery, couching
the cataract. Hence we may learn, how we ought to understand these words of the
author The curing of the sick, giving hearing to the deaf, and sight to the
blind, were every where talked of as the usual effects of that holy sepulcher
p. 195.
. As therefore the alleged miracles were all of the second class, it is only
from the attendant circumstances we can judge, whether the facts, though
acknowledged, were miraculous or not.

In order to enlighten us on this point, I observe, fifthly, That none of the
cures were instantaneous. We have not indeed the same hold of the deceased
Abbe, as of a living prophet, who pretends to work miracles. Those who attend
the latter, can know exactly, to whom he grants the benefit of his miraculous
aid. They can judge also, whether the supplicant's recovery be coincident, with
the prophet's volition or command. In the former case, we have not access to
judge of either; and consequently, there is much greater scope for fancy and
credulity to operate. No voice was ever said to have proceeded from the tomb of
the blessed deacon, as his votaries styled him. They obtained no audible answer
to their prayers. There are however some circumstances, by which a probable
conjecture may be made concerning the efficiency of the saint in the cures
ascribed to him. One is, if the cure instantaneously followed the first
devotions at the tomb. Supernatural cures differ, in this particular, as much
as in any other, from those which are effected by natural means, that they are
not gradually, but instantly, perfected. Now of which kind were the cures of St
Medard? From the accounts that are given, it is evident, that they were gradual.
That some of them were sudden, is alleged; but that any of them were
instantaneous, or immediately followed the first application, is not even
pretended. All the worshippers at the tomb, persisted for days, several of them
for weeks, and some for months successively, daily imploring the intercession
of the Abbe, before they received relief from their complaints; and the relief
which was received, is, in most cases, acknowledged to have been gradual.

I observe, sixthly, That most of the devotees either had been using medicines
before, and continued to use them, during their applications to the saint; or,
that their distempers had abated, before they determined to solicit his help.
That the Spanish youth had been using, all the while a medicine prescribed by
an eminent oculist, was proved by the depositions of witnesses; that Gautier
had begun to recover his sight, before he had recourse to the sepulcher, was
attested, not only by his uncle, but even by himself, when, as the Archbishop
of Sens informs us, he signed a recantation of what he had formerly advanced.
With regard to the rest, it appears at least probable, from the circumstances
of the proof, that they were using the prescriptions of the physicians, whom
they had consulted before applying to the deacon, and who were afterward
required to give their testimony, concerning the nature and malignancy of the
different diseases.

The seventh observation is, That some of the cures attested were incomplete.
Th^^ was manifestly the case of the Spaniard, who (...) only from the most
inconsiderable part (...) complaint. Even the cure of Mademoisell^ (...), which
was as great a subject of exultation to the partisans of the Abbe as any other,
was not complete. Not only was she confined to her bed, for many days, after
the decrease of her dropsy; but the still remained incapable of moving two of
her singers. Silva, physician to the Duke of Orleans, attested this; adding
expressly, that he could not look on her as being cured.

The eighth and last observation I shall make on this subject is, That the
relief granted some of them was but temporary. This was clearly proved to be
the case of the Spanish gentleman. That soon after his return home, he relapsed
into his former malady, the prelate I have often quoted, has, by the
certificates and letters which he procured from Madrid, put beyond controversy.
Among these, there are letters from a Spanish grandee, Don Francis Xavier, and
from the patient's uncle, besides a certificate signed by himself.

After the above observations, I believe, there will be no occasion for saying
much on this subject. The author has, in a note, artfully enough pointed out
his aim, that it might not be overlooked by the careless reader p. 196.
. "There is another book," says he, in three volumes, (called Recueil des
miracles de l' Abbe Paris,) giving an account of many of these miracles, and
accompanied with prefatory discourses, which are very well wrote I am surprised
that Mr Hume has taken no notice of the profound erudition displayed in the
Recueil, as I imagine its author is much more eminent for this, than for his
talent in writing. Besides, his learning deserves our regard the more, that it
is of a kind rarely to be met with in the present century. Where shall we find
in these dregs of the ages, to adopt his own emphatical expression, such an
extensive knowledge, as he has exhibited, of all the monkish and legendary
writings of the darkest and most barbarous, or, according to him, the most
devout ages of the church? Or whence else, but from those productons, could he
have selected such admirable materials for his work? The lives and writings of
the saints are an inexhaustible treasure for a performance of this kind. It Is
true, St Matthew, St Mark, St Luke, and St John, have said little to his
purpose, and he makes as little use of them. But is not this want richly
supplied in St Cudbert, St Edildride, St Willibrord, St Baudri, and five
hundred others of equal note? One thing however I would gladly be informed of,
being utterly at a loss to account for it. What entitled this author, who seems
not to be deficient in a veneration truly catholic for ignorance, superstition,
and barbarism, to speak contemptibly of Capgravius, Colganus, and Jacobus de
Voragine author of The golden legend? To be plain with him, this is a freedom
which does not at all become him: for of the sew readers in this age, who
happen to be acquainted with the authorities quoted in the Recueil, most, if
not all, will, I Am afraid, be of opinion, that the writers last mentioned are
fully as credible, not less famous, and much more ingenious, than many of those
to whom he is so greatly indebted for his most extraordinary narrative. Was it
for him then to scandalize these few? It Is pity that a writer of such uncommon
reading and application should act so inconsistently, and undermine his own
cause. But passing his literature, which is unquestionable, I shall give the
reader a specimen of his talent in disputation. To the objection that had been
made, that the miracles of the deacon were gradual, he replies, "So was the
creation, the first of miracles, which employed no less than six days." As all
that was done in that time, is comprehended under one name, THE CREATION, he
concludes very sagely, that it ought to be denominated one miracle. A writer of
this stamp would no doubt despise the answer which an ordinary reader might
make him, -- first, That every single production was a perfect miracle, --
secondly, That nothing could be more instantaneous than those productions, God
said, let there be light, and there was light, etc. -- and lastly, That the
world was not created by the ministration of man, nor in the presence of men,
nor in order to serve as evidence of any doctrine. I must be forgiven to
remark, that in the whole of this author's reply, he has unfortunately
mistaken the meaning of the objectors, who intend not to say, that God may not
perform a miracle gradually, but that what is so performed, has not the same
evidence of its being miraculous, as what is done in an instant, and therefore
cannot so well serve as evidence of any doctrine. Now that the miracles of
Monsieur de Paris were intended as evidence of his doctrine, and consequently
of that of the appellants from the bull Unigenitus, he every where vehemently
maintains. Another specimen of this author's acuteness and ingenuity I shall
give in a literal translation from his own words. But, it will be said, in the
earliest times of the church, miraculous cures were commonly perfected in an
instant. True; and it is this which confirms my doctrine. As it was ordinary
then, to convert great sinners all of a sudden. But such wonders in both kinds
are for the commencement of the church, or for the renovation promised her. In
these days, which the French clergy have justly styled the dregs of the ages,
it is much that God convert many sinners, and cure many sick, by slow degrees,
at the same time that he shows by some more shining examples that his arm is
not shortened.
. He adds, There runs however, through the whole of these a a ridiculous
comparison betwixt the miracles of our Savior and those of the Abbe; wherein
it is asserted, that the evidence for the latter is equal to that for the former
I am sorry to be again so soon laid under the necessity of observing, that the
essayist, by confiding too much in his memory, often injures the writers whom
he quot^^. It is but doing justice to the author of the Recueil, to observe,
that he has, in no part of his performance, asserted that the evidence for the
miracles of Monsieur de Paris is equal to that for the miracles of Jesus
Christ. Perhaps my reader will be surprised when I tell him, for I own I was
exceedingly surprised when I discovered, that he has not only in the plainest
terms asserted, but strenuously maintained, the contrary. And for this purpose
he has employed no less than twelve pages of his work. He introduces the
subject (Discourse 2. part 1.) with observing, that he and the rest of his
party had been traduced by their adversaries, as equalling the miracles of the
deacon to those of our Savior. The impiety of such a comparison he mentions
with horror, and treats the charge as an absolute calumny. Hence he takes
occasion to enuinerate those peculiar circumstances in the miracles of our
Lord, which gave them an eminent superiority, not only over those of his saint,
but over those of every other saint, or prophet whatsoever. To this enumeration
he subjoins, Tous ^^ux qui recourent a Monsieur de Paris n^ sont pas gueris,
nous dit-on; plusi^urs ne le sont qu'en party, ou d'une maniere l^nte, et
moins eclatante; il n'a point ressuscite de morts. Que s'ensuit il de-la, sinon
que les miracles que Dieu a operes par lui sont infericurs a c^ux que n^tre
Seign^ur a operes par lui meme? Nous l'avouons, nous inculquons cette verite.
All those, we are told, who recur to Monsieur de Paris are not cured; several
are cured but in part, or in a slow and less striking manner; he has raised no
dead. What follows, unless that the miracles which God wrought by him, are
inferior to those which our Lord wrought by himself? We acknowledge, we
inculcate this truth. Afterward, speaking of evidence, he owns also, that the
miracles of the deacon are not equally certain with those of Jesus Christ. The
latter, he says, are more certain in many respects. He specifies the natural
notoriety of some of the facts, the public and instantaneous manner in which
most of them were offected, the number, the quality, the constancy of the
witnesses, and the serced acknowledgement of his most spiteful enemies. He
concludes this subject in these memorable terms. Au rest ce que je viens
d'exposer sur la superiorite des merveilles operes par le Sauveur, je l'avois
reconnu avec plaisir dans le premier discourse. J'y ai dit en propres terms,
qu'il y avoit une difference in nie enter les miracles de Jesus Christ et ceux
de Monsieur de Paris. J'ai promis de ne jamais oubl^er cette difference, et
j'ai tenu parole. J'ai remarque, dans le lieu ou il convenoit de le fair, que
cette difference infine regardoit l'evidence des prodiges aussi bien que leur
grandeur; et que les incredules pouvoient nous dire, que ceux que nous
produisions n'ont point le meme eclat qu'ont cu ceux de notre Seigneur. Finally
what I have just now evinced on the superiority of the wonders performed by our
Lord, I had acknowledged with pleasure in the first discourse. I said there in
express terms, that there was an infinite disserence between the miracles of
Jesus Christ and those of Monsieur de Paris. I promised never to forget this
difference, and I have kept my promise. I remarked in its proper place, that
this infinite difference regarded the evidence as well as the greatness of the
prodigies; and that the incredulous might object, that those which we produce,
have not the same luster with those of our Savior. I have been the more
particular on this point, not so much to vindicate the author of the Re^^cil,
as to show the sense which the most bigoted partisans of the holy deacon had of
the difference between the miracles ascribed to him, and those performed by our
Lord. I cannot avoid remarking also another difference, I mean that which
appears between the sentiments of this author as expressed by himself, and his
sentiments as reported by the essayist. It Is indeed, Mr Hume, a judicious
observation you have given us; that we ought to lend a very academic says to
every report which savours the passion of the reporter; in whatever way it
strikes in with his natural inclinations and propensities. p. 2^0.
. At first reading, one is apt, with surprise, to imagine, that the author is
going to make some atonement for the tenets of the essay, by turning advocate
for the miracles of Jesus Christ; and by ^howing, that these are not affected
by his doctrine. But on this point we are not long held in suspense. He
subjoins, As, if the testimony of men could ever be put in the balance with
that of God himself, who conducted the pen of the inspired writers. An
ingenious piece of raillery without question. Is it possible, in a politer
manner, or in more obliging terms, to tell the Christian world, They are fools;
and that all who are silly enough to believe the miracles recorded in
scripture, are not entitled to be argued with as men? How? They are so absurd
as to believe the scriptures to be the word of God, on the evidence of the
miracles wrought by our Lord and his apostles; and that these miracles were
wrought, they could not believe on any testimony, less than that of God,
reporting them in the scriptures: and thus, by making inspiration and miracles
reciprocally foundations to each other, they, in effect, admit both without any
foundation at all. After this handsome compliment to the friends of holy writ,
he thinks himself at liberty to be very explicit on the comparative evidence of
the miracles of the Abbe, and those of Jesus: If these writers indeed were to
be considered merely as human testimony, the French author is very moderate in
his comparison; since he might, with some appearance of reason, pretend, that
the Jansenist miracles much surpass the other, in evidence and authority. Was
ever so rough an assault, preceded by so smooth, but so insidious a preamble?
Is it then still the fate of Jesus to be betrayed with a kiss? But
notwithstanding this author's declaration, no Christian will have reason to
dread the issue of the comparison. Mr Hume has not entered on particulars,
neither shall I enter on them. I should not incline to tire my reader with
repetitions, which, in a minute inquiry, would be inevitable. I shall therefore
only desire him, if he think it needful, to peruse a second time the eight
foregoing observations. Let him try the miracles of our Lord by this touch
stone; and I persuade myself, he will be satisfied, that there is no appearance
of reason to pretend, that the Jansenist miracles much surpass the other, or
even equal them, in evidence and authority.

The author triumphs not a little in the observation, that the reports of the
prodigies performed by the deacon, were violently opposed by the civil
magistrate, and by the Jesuits, the most learned society in the kingdom. He
could see the importance of this circumstance in the the case of Abbe Paris,
though not in the case of Jesus Christ. But that the difference of the cases as
well as their resemblance, may better appear; it ought likewise to be observed,
that Jansenism, though not the ruling faction, was at that time the popular
faction; that this popularity was not the effect of the miracles of the Abbe,
but antecedent to those miracles; that, on the contrary, the Jesuits were
extremely unpopular; and that many, who had no more faith in the miracles of
Saint Medard than Mr Hume has, were well pleased to connive at a delusion,
which at once plagued and mortified a body of men, that were become almost
universally odious.

I shall only add, that nothing could more effectually expose the folly of
those pretensions, than the expedient by which they were made to cease: In
consequence of an order from the King, the sepulcher was enclosed with a wall,
and the votaries were debarred barred from approaching the tomb. The author
says, in relation to this p. 198. in the note.
, No Jansenist was ever embarrassed to account for the cessation of the
miracles, when the churchyard was shut up by the Kings edict. Certain it is,
that God is master of his own graces and works. But it is equally certain, that
neither reason nor the gospel leads us to think, that any human expedient will
prove successful, which is calculated to frustrate the decrees of Heaven. Both,
on the contrary, teach us, that men never more directly promote the designs of
their Maker than when they intend directly to oppose them. It was not thus,
that either Pharisees or Sadducees, Jews or Gentiles, succeeded in their
opposition to the miracles of Jesus and his apostles. The opinion of Gamaliel
Actsv 38.39.
was undoubtedly judicious: If this counsel or this work be of men, it will
come to naught; but if it be of God, ye CANNOT overthrow it; beware therefore,
lest ye be found fighting even against God. To conclude; Did the Jansenist
cause derive any advantage from those pretended miracles? None at all. It even
suffered by them. It is justly remarked by Voltaire Siccle de Louis XIV. chap.
33.
, that the tomb of the deacon Paris, proved in effect, in the minds of all
people of sense, the tomb of Jansenism: How unlike in all respects the miracles
recorded by the Evangelists!

THUS I have briefly inquired into the nature and evidence, first of the Pagan,
and next of the P^pish miracles, mentioned by Mr Hume; and have, I hope,
sufficiently evinced, that the miracles of the New Testament can suffer nothing
by the comparison; that, on the contrary, as, in painting, the shades serve to
heighten the glow of the colors; and, in music, the discords to set off the
sweetness of the harmony; so the value of these genuine miracles is enhanced by
the contrast of those paltry counterseits.

SECTION VI. Abstracting from the evidence for particular facts, we have
irrefragable evidence, that there have been miracles in former times; or such
events as, when compared with the present constitution of the world, would by
Mr Hume be denominated miraculous.
I READILY concur with Mr Hume in maintaining, that when, merely by the force
of REASON, we attempt to investigate the origin of worlds Essay 12. Of the
academical or skeptical philosophy, part 3.
, we get beyond our sphere, and must infallibly bewilder ourselves in
hypothesis and conjecture. REASON indeed (which vainly boasts her
all sufficiency) has sometimes pretended to carry men to this amazing height.
But there is ground to suspect, that, in such instances, the ascent of reason,
as the author elegantly expresses it Essay 11. Of a particular providence and
future state.
, has been aided by the wings of imagination. If we will not be indebted to
REVELATION, for our knowledge of this article, we must, for aught I can
percieve, be satisfied to live in ignorance. There is, however, one question
distinct from the former, though akin to it, which, even from the principles of
reason, we may with great probability determine. The question I mean is,
Whether the world had an origin or not?

That there has been an infinite, eternal, and independent series of finite,
successive, and dependent beings, such as men, and consequently that the world
had no beginning, appears, from the bare consideration of the thing, extremely
incredible, if not altogether absurd. The abstract argument used on this head,
might appear too metaphysical and refined: I shall not therefore introduce it;
but shall recur to topics which are more familiar, and which, though they do not
demonstrate, that it is absolutely impossible that the world has existed from
eternity, clearly evince that is highly improbable, or rather, certainly false.
These topics I shall only mention, as they are pretty obvious, and have been
often urged with great energy by the learned, both ancient and modern. Such
are, the late invention of letters, and of all the sciences and arts by which
human life is civilized; the known origin of most nations, states and kingdoms;
and the first peopling of many countries. It Is in our power at present to trace
the history of every people, backwards to times of the greatest barbarity and
ignorance. Europe, though not the largest of the four parts into which the earth
is divided, is, on many accounts, the most considerable. But what a different
face does Europe wear at present, from what it wore three thousand years ago?
How immense the odds in knowledge, in arts, in policy, in every thing? How easy
is the intercourse, and how extensive the acquaintance, which men can now enjoy
with all, even the remotest regions of the globe, compared with what was, or
could have been enjoyed, in that time of darkness and simplicity? A man differs
not more from a child, than the human race now differs from the human race
then. Three thousand years ago, appear indeed to mark a very distant epoch; and
yet it is but as yesterday, compared with eternity. This, when duly weighed,
every thinking person will acknowledge to be as strong moral evidence, as the
subject can admit, (and that I imagine is very strong) that the world had a
beginning.

I shall make a supposition, which will perhaps appear whimsical, but which
will tend to elucidate the argument I am enforcing. In antediluvian times, when
the longevity of man was such as to include some centuries, I shall suppose,
that a few boys had been imported to a desert island, and there left together,
just old enough to make shift to sustain themselves, as those in the golden age
are fabled to have done, on acorns, and other spontaneous productions of the
soil. I shall suppose, that they had lived there for some hundreds of years,
had remembered nothing of their coming into the island, nor of any other person
whatsoever; and that thus they had never had access to know, or hear, of either
birth or death. I shall suppose them to enter into a serious disquisition
concerning their own duration, the question having been started, Whether they
had existed from eternity, or had once begun to be? They recur to memory, but
memory can furnish them nothing certain or dec^sive. If it must be allowed that
it contains no trace of beginning of existence, it must also be allowed, that
it reaches not beyond a few centuries at most. They observe besides, concerning
this faculty, that the further back it goes, it becomes the more indistinct,
terminating at last in confusion and darkness. Some things however they
distinctly recollect, and are assured of. They remember, they were once of much
lower stature, and of smaller size; they had less bodily strength; and all
their mental faculties were weaker. They know, that, in the powers both of body
and of mind, they have advanced, by imperceptible degrees, to the pitch they
are now arrived at. These considerations, especially when fortified by some
analogous observations they might have made on the growth of herbs and trees,
would have shown the probability to be entirely on the side of those who
asserted, that their existence had a beginning: And though, on account of the
narrow sphere of their knowledge and experience, the argument could not have
appeared to them in all its strength, we, from our long acquaintance with
nature, even abstracting from our knowledge of man in particular, must be
satisfied, that it would have been strictly analogical and just. Exactly
similar, the very same, I should rather say, is the argument I have been urging
for the origination of the species. Make but a few alterations in phraseology:
for memory, substitute history and tradition; for hundreds of years, say
thousands; for the powers of body and mind, put the arts and sciences; and,
with these, and perhaps one or two more such variations, you will find the
argument as applicable in the one case, as in the other. Now, if it be granted,
that the human species must have had a beginning, it will hardly be questioned,
that every other animal species, or even that the universe, must have had a
beginning.

BUT in order to prove the proposition laid down in the title of this section,
it is not necessary to suppose, that the world had a beginning. Admit it had
not, and observe the consequence. Thus much must be admitted also, that not
barely for a long continued, but for an ETERNAL, succession of generations,
mankind were in a state little superior to the beasts; that of a sudden, there
came a most astonishing change upon the species; that they exerted talents and
capacities, of which there appeared not the smallest vestige, during the
eternity preceding; that they acquired such knowledge as procured them a kind
of empire, not only over the vegetable and animal worlds, but even, in some
respect, over the elements, and all the unwieldy powers of matter; that, in
consequence of this, they were quickly raised, much more above the state they
had been formerly and eternally in, than such their former and eternal state
was above that of the brute creation. If such a revolution in nature, such a
thorough, general, and sudden change as this, would not be denominated
miraculous, it is not in my power to conceive what would. I could not esteem it
a greater miracle, hardly so great, that any species of beasts, which have
hitherto been doomed to tread the earth, should now get wings, and float about
in the air.

Nor will this plea be subverted by that trite objection, That mankind may have
been as much enlightened, perhaps myriads of years ago, as they are at present;
but that by some universal calamity, such as deluge or conflagration, which,
after the rotation of many centuries, the earth possibly becomes liable to, all
traces of crudition and of science, all traces both of the elegant and of the
useful arts, may have been effaced, and the human race, springing from a few
who had escaped the common ruin, may have emerged anew, out of barbarity and
ignorance. This hypothesis does but substitute one miracle in the place of
another. Such general disorder is entirely unconformable to our experience of
the course of nature. Accordingly the destruction of the world by a deluge, the
author has numbered among those prodigies, or miracles, which render the
Pentate^ch perfectly incredible.

IF, on the contrary, we admit, that the world had a beginning, (and will not
every thinking person acknowledge, that this position is much more probable
than the contrary?) the production of the world must be ascribed either to
chance, or to intelligence.

Shall we derive all things, spiritual and corporeal, from a principle so
insignificant as blind chance? Shall we say, with Epicurus, that the fortuitous
course of rambling atoms has reared this beautiful and stupendous fabric? In
that case, perhaps, we should give an account of the origin of things, which,
most people will think, could not properly be styled miraculous. But is it,
because the formation of a grand and regular system in this way, is conformable
to the experienced order of nature? Quite the reverse. Nothing can be more
repugnant to universal experience, than that the least organic body, not to
mention the glorious frame of nature, should be produced by such a casual
jumble. It has therefore, in the highest degree possible, that particular
quality of miracles, from which, according to the author's theory, their
incredibility results, and may doubtless, in this loose acceptance of the
word, be termed miraculous. But should we affirm, that, to account thus for the
origin of the universe, is to account for it by miracle; we should be thought,
I Am afraid, to speak both weakly and improperly. There is something here, if I
may so express myself, which is far beyond the miraculous; something, for which
I know not whether any language can afford a proper appellation, unless it be
the general appellations of absurdity and nonsense.

Shall we then at last recur to the common doctrine, that the world was
produced by an intelligent cause? On this supposition also, though incomparably
the most rational, it is evident, that in the creation, formation, or first
production of things, call it by what name you please, a power must have been
exerted, which, in respect of the present course of nature, may be styled
miraculous. I intend not to dispute about a word, nor to inquire, whether that
term can, in strict propriety, be used of any exertions before the
establishment of the laws of nature. I use the word in the same latitude, in
which the author commonly uses it in his reasoning, for every event that is
not conformable to that course of nature with which we are acquainted by
experience.

WHETHER, therefore, the world had, or had not, a beginning; whether, on the
first supposition, the production of things be ascribed to chance, or to
design; whether, on the second, in order to solve the numberless objections
that arise, we do, or do not, recur to universal catastrophes; there is no
possibility of accounting for the phenomena that presently come under our
notice, without having at last recourse to MIRACLES; that is, to events
altogether unconsormable, or, if you will, contrary to the present course of
nature known to us by experience. I cannot conceive an hypothesis, which is not
reducible to one or other of those abovementioned. Whoever imagines, that
another might be framed, which is not comprehended in any of those, and which
has not as yet been devised by any system-builder; let him make the
experiment, and I will venture to prognosticate, that he will still find
himself clogged with the same difficulty. The conclusion therefore above
deduced, may be justly deemed, till the contrary is shown, to be not only the
result of one, but alike of every hypothesis, of which the subject is
susceptible.

THUS it has been evinced, as was proposed, that abstracting from the evidence
for particular facts, we have irrefragable evidence, that there have been, that
there must have been, miracles in former times, or such events, as when,
compared with the present constitution of the world, would by Mr Hume be
denominated miraculous.

SECTION VII. Revisal of Mr Hume's examination of the Pentateuch.
ALLOWING to the conclusion deduced in the foregoing section its proper weight,
I shall also take into consideration the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses; or
rather, I shall endeavor impartially to revise the examination which those
books have already undergone by the essayist p. 205.
. It is, in this case, of the greatest importance to know, whether the evidence
on both sides has been fairly stated.

"HERE then we are first to consider a book," which is acknowledged, on all
hands, to be the most ancient record in the world, "presented to us," we admit,
"by a barbarous and ignorant people The author adds, wrote in an age, when they
were still more barbarous. These words I have omited in the revisal, because
they appear to me unintelligible. The age in which the Pentateuch was written,
is indirectly compared to another age, he says not what: and all we can make of
it is, that this people were more barbarous at that time, than at some other
time, nobody knows when.
," at the same time exhibiting a system of Theism, or natural religion, which
is both rational and sublime; with which nothing that was ever compiled or
produced, on this subject, in the most enlightened ages, by the most learned
and polished nations, who were unacquainted with that book, will bear to be
compared.

Mr Hume himself must allow, that this remark deserves attention, since his
reasoning in another performance, which he calls, The natural history of
religion, would lead us to expect the contrary. He there maintains, that
Polytheism and Idolatry are, and must be, the religion of rude and barbarous,
and consequently of ancient ages; that the true principles of Theism, or the
belief of one almighty and wise Being, the creator, the preserver, and the
ruler of heaven and earth, results from the greatest improvements of the
understanding in philosophy and science. To suppose the contrary, says he, is
supposing, that while men were ignorant and barbarous, they discovered truth;
but fell into error, as soon as they acquired learning and politeness (...)
history of religion. I.
. This reasoning is just, wherever religion is to be considered as the result
of human reflections. What account then will the author give of this wonderful
exception? That the reverse is here the case, it is impossible for him to
dissemble. The people he himself calls ignorant and barbarous; yet they are not
idolaters or polytheists. At the time when the book, which he examines, was
composed, he seems to think, they even exceeded themselves in barbarity; yet
the sentiments of these barbarians on the subject of religion, the sentiments
which that very book presents to us, may well put to silence the wisdom of the
politest nations on earth. Need I remind Mr Hume of his express declaration,
that if a ^aveller were transported into any unknown region, and found the
inhabitants ignorant and barbarous, he might before hand declare them
idolaters, and there is scarce a POSSIBILITY of his being mistaken Natural
history of religion. I.
? I know no satisfactory account that can be given of this exception, on the
principles of the essayist. Nevertheless, nothing is more easy, than to give a
satisfactory account of it, on the Christian principles. This account is that
which is given by the book itself. It is, that the religious tenets of that
nation were not the result of their reasonings, but proceeded from divine
revelation. The contrast we discern betwixt the ISRAELITES, and the ancient
GREEKS and ROMANS, is remarkable. The GRFEKS and ROMANS, on all the subjects of
human erudition, on all the liberal and the useful arts, reasoned like men; on
the subject of religion, they prated like children. The ISRAELITES, on the
contrary, in all the sciences and arts, were children; but, in their notions of
religion, they were men; in the doctrines, for example, of the unity, the
eternity, the omnipotence, the omniscience, the omnipresence, the wisdom, and
the goodness of God; in their opinions concerning providence, and creation, the
preservation and government of the world; opinions so exalted and
comprehensive, as, even by the author's acknowledgment, could never enter into
the thoughts of barbarians.

But to proceed in the revisal: We have here a book, says the essayist, "wrote
in all probability long after the facts it relates." That this book was written
long after some of the facts it relates, is not indeed denied: that it was
written long after all, or even most of those facts, I see no reason to
believe. If Mr Hume meant to signify, by the expression quoted, that this was
in all probability the case, why did he not produce the grounds on which the
probability is founded? Shall a bold assertion pass for argument? or can it be
expected, that any one should consider reasons, which are only in general
supposed, but not specified?

He adds, corroborated by no concurring testimony; as little, say I,
invalidated by any contradicting testimony; and both, for this plain reason,
because there is no human composition, that can be compared with this, in
respect of antiquity. But though this book is not corroborated by the concurrent
testimony of any coeval histories, because, if there ever were such histories,
they are not now extant; it is not therefore destitute of all collateral
evidence. The following examples of this kind of evidence deserve some notice.
The division of time into weeks, which has obtained in many countries, for
instance among the Egyptians, Chinese, Indians, and northern barbarians;
nations whereof some had little or no intercourse with others, and were not
even known by name to the Hebrews The judicious reader will observe, that there
is a great difference between the concurrence of nations, in the division of
time into weeks, and their concurrence in the other periodical divisions, into
years, months, days. These divisions arise from such natural causes, as are
every where obvious; the annual and diurnal revolutions of the sun, and the
revolution of the moon. The division into weeks, on the contrary, seems
perfectly arbitrary: consequently its prevailing in distant conutries, among
nations which had no communication with one another, afford a strong
presumption, that it must have been derived from some tradition (as that of the
creation) which has been older than the dispersion of mankind into different
regions. It Is easy to conceive, that the practice, in rude and barbarous ages,
might remain, through habit, when the tradition, on which it was founded, was
entirely lost; it is easy to conceive, that afterward, people addicted to
idolatry, or who, like the Egyptians, had become pro^icients in astronomy,
should assign to the different days of the week, the names of their deities, or
of the planets.
: the tradition which in several places prevailed concerning the primeval chaos
from which the world arose, the production of all living creatures out of water
and earth, by the efficiency of a supreme mind This in particular merits our
attention the more, that it cannot, by any explication, be made to agree with
the doctrine which obtained among the Pagans, commonly called the Mythology.
Ovid is so sensible of this that, when he mentions a deity as the efficient
cause of the creation, he leaves him, as it were, detached from those of the
popular system, which it was his business as a poet to deliver, being at a loss
what name to give him, or what place in nature to assign him. Quisquis fuit
ille deorum. Whichever of the gods it was. He well knew that, in all the
catalogue of their divinities, the god who made the world was not to be found,
that these divinities themselves were, on the contary, produced out of the
chaos, as well as men and beasts. Mr Hume in his Natural history of religion,
IV. remarks this conduct in Ovid, and ascribes it to his having lived in a
learned age, and having been instructed by philosophers in the principle of a
divine formation of the world. For my part, I very much question, whether any
nation was ever yet indebted, for this principle, to the disquisitions of
philosophers. Had this opinion never been heard of, till the Augustan age, it
might indeed have been suspected, that it was the daughter of philosophy and
science, but so far is this from being the case, that some vestiges of it may
be traced even in the earliest, and most ignorant times. Thales the Mil^sian,
who lived many centuries before Ovid, had, as Cicero, in his first book De
natura deorum, informs us, attributed the origin of all things to God.
Ana^agoras had also denominated the forming principle, which severed the
elements, created the world, and brought order out of confusion, intelligence
or mind It is therefore much more probable that these ancients owed this
doctrine to a tradition handed down from the earliest ages, which even all the
absurdities of the theology they had embraced had not been able totally to
erase, though these absurdities could never be made to coalesce with this
doctrine. At the same time I acknowledge, that there is something so noble and
so rational in the principle, That the world was produced by an intelligent
cause, that sound philosophy will ever be ready to adopt it, when once it is
proposed. But that this opinion is not the offspring of philosophy, may be
reasonably deduced from this consideration also, that they were not the most
enlightened or philosophic nations, amongst whom it was maintained in greatest
purity. I speak not of the Hebrews. Even the Parthians, Medes and Persians,
whom the Greeks considered as barbarians, were genuine theists, and
notwithstanding many superstitious practices which prevailed among them, they
held the belief of one eternal God the creator and the lord of the universe. If
this principle is to be derived from the utmost improvement of the mind in
ratiocination and science, which is Mr Hume's hypothesis, the phenomenon just
now observed is unaccountable. If, on the contrary, it is to be derived
originally from revelation, preserved by tradition, through successive
genrations, nothing can more casily be accounted for. Traditions are always
longest retained, and most purely transmitted, in or near the place where they
were first received, and amongst a people who possess a strong attachment to
their ancient laws and customs. Migrations into distant countries, mixture of
different nations, revolutions in government and manners, yea and ingenuity
itself, all contribute to corrupt tradition, and do sometimes wholly efface it.
This I take to be the only admissible account, why so rational and so
philosophical a principle prevailed most in ages and countries in which reason
and philosophy seemed to be but in their infancy. The notion, that the Greeks
borrowed their opinions on this subject from the books of Moses, a notion for
which some Jewish writers, some Christian fathers, and even some moderns have
warmly contended, appears void of all foundation. These opinions in Greece, as
has been observed, were of a very early date; whereas that there existed such
a people as the Jews, seems scarce to have been known there till about the time
of the Macedonian conquests. No sooner were they known than they were hated,
and their laws and customs universally despised. Nor is there the shadow of
reason to think, that the Greeks knew any thing of the sacred writings till a
considerable time afterward, when that version of them was made into their
language which is called He translation of the S^ve^ty.
, the formation of man last of all, in the image of God, and his being vested
with dominion over the other animals, the primitive state of innocence and
happiness: the subsequent degeneracy of mankind: their destruction by a flood:
and the preservation of one family in a vessel. Nay, which is still stronger, I
might plead the vestiges of some such catastrophe as the deluge, which the
shells and other marine bodies, that are daily dug out of the bowels of the
earth, in places remote from the sea, do clearly exhibit to us: I might urge
the traces, which still remain in ancient histories, of the migration of people
and of science from Asia (which has not improperly been styled the cradle of
the arts) into many parts both of Africa and Europe: I might plead the
coincidence of those migrations, and of the origin of states and kingdoms, with
the time of the dispersion of the posterity of Noah.

But to return: The author subjoins, resembling those fabulous accounts, which
every nation gives of its origin. It Is unluckily the fate of holy writ with
this author that both its resemblance, and its want of resemblance, to the
accounts of other authors, are alike presumptions against it. He has not
indeed told us, wherein it resembles fabulous accounts: and, for my part, though
the charge were just I should imagine, little or nothing to the disadvantage of
the Pentateuch, could be deduced from it. It is universally agreed among the
learned, that even the most absurd fables of idolaters, derive their origin
from facts, which having been, in barbarous ages, transmitted only by oral
tradition, have come at length to be grossly corrupted and disfigured. It Is
nevertheless probable, that such fictions would still retain some stricking
features of those truths, from which they sprung. And if the books of Moses
resemble, in any thing, the fabulous accounts of other nations, it would not
perhaps be difficult to prove, that they resemble only whatever is least
fabulous in these accounts. That this will be found to be the case, we may
reasonably presume, even from what has been observed already; and if so, the
resemblance, so far from being an argument against those books, is evidently an
argument in their favor. In order to remove any doubt that may remain on this
head, it ought to be attended to, that, in a number of concurrent testimonies,
(where there could have been no previous concert) there is a probability
independent of that which results from our faith in the witnesses: nay, should
the witnesses be of such a character as to merit no faith at all. This
probability arises from the concurrence itself. That such a concurrence should
spring from chance, is as one to infinite, in other words, morally impossible:
if therefore concert be excluded, there remains no other cause but the reality
of the fact.

It Is true, that upon reading this book, we find it full of prodigies and
miracles: but it is also true, that many of those miracles are such, as the
subject it treats of, must unavoidably make us expect. For a proof of this
position, I need but refer the reader to the principles established in the
preceding section. No book in the world do we find written in a more simple
style; no where does there appear in it, the least affectation of ornament; yet
nowhere else is the Almighty represented, as either acting or speaking in a
manner so becoming the eternal ruler of the world. Compare the account of the
CREATION which is given by Moses, with the ravings of Sanchoniatho the
Phenician philosopher, which he had dignified with the title of COSMOGONY: or
compare it with the childish extravagancies of the Greek and Latin poets, so
justly likened by the author to a sick man's dreams Natural history of
religion. XV.
; and then say, whether any person of candor and discernment will not be
disposed to exclaim in the word, of the prophet, What is the CHAFF to the WHEAT
Jer. xxiii. 28.
! The account is what we should call in reference to experience, miraculous.
But was it possible it should be otherwise? I believe the greatest infidel will
not deny, that it is at least as plausible an opinion that the world had a
beginning, as that it had not. If it had, can it be imagined by any man in his
senses, that that particular quality should be an objection to the narrative,
which he previously knows it must have? Must not the first production of
things, the original formation of animals and vegetables, require exertions of
power, which, in preservation and propagation, can never be exemplified?

It will perhaps be objected, That if the miracles continued no longer, and
extended no further, than the necessity of creation required, this reasoning
would be just; but that in fact they both continued much longer, and extended
much further. The answer is obvious: it is impossible for us to judge, how far
the necessity of the case required. Immediately after the creation, things must
have been in a state very different from that which they are in at present. How
long that state might continue, we have not the means of discovering: but as,
in human infancy, it is necessary that the feeble creature should, for some
time, be carried in the nurse's arms, and afterward, by the help of leading
strings, be kept from falling, before he acquire, strength to walk; it is not
unlikely, that in the infancy of the world, such interpositions should be more
frequent and requisite, till nature attainining a certain maturity, those laws
and that constitution should be established, which we now experience. It will
greatly strengthen this conclusion, to reflect, that in every species of
natural productions, with which we are acquainted, we invariably observe a
similar feebleness in the individuals on their first appearance, and a similar
gradation toward a state of greater perfection and stability. Besides, if we
acknowledge the necessity of the exertion of a power, which only in reference
to our experience is called miraculous, the question, as is well observed by
the judicious prelate formerly quoted Analogy of religion, etc. part 2. chap.
2. sect. 2.
, whether this power stopped immediately, after it had made man, or went on and
exerted itself farther, is a question of the same kind, as whether an ordinary
power exerted itself in such a particular degree and manner, or not. It cannot
therefore, if we think reasonably on this subject, greatly astonish us, that
such a book should give an account of a state of the world, and of human
nature, entirely different from the present; of our fall from that state; of
the age of man extended to near a thousand years; and of the destruction of the
world by a deluge.

Finally, if, in such a book, mingled with the excellencies I have remarked,
there should appear some difficulties, some things for which we are not able to
account; for instance, the arbitrary choice of one people, as the favorites of
Heaven; and their deliverance from bondage by prodigies the most astonishing
imaginable; is there any thing more extraordinary here, than, in a composition
of this nature, we might have previously expected to find? We must be
immoderately conceited of our own understandings, if we imagine otherwise.
Those favorites of Heaven, it must be likewise owned, are the countrymen of
the writer; but of such a writer, as of all historians or annalists, ancient or
modern, shows the least disposition to flatter his countrymen. Where, I pray,
do we find him, either celebrating their virtues, or palliating their vices;
either extolling their genius, or magnifying their exploits? Add to all these,
that, in every thing which is not expressly ascribed to the interposal of
Heaven, the relation is in itself plausible, the incidents are natural, the
characters and manners such as are admirably adapted to those early ages of the
world. In these particulars, there is no affectation of the mavelous; there
are no descriptions of sea and land monsters; no relations of wonderful
adventures, strange men, and uncouth manners P. 185.
.

WHEN all these things are seriously attended to, I persuade myself, that no
unprejudiced person will think, that the Pentateuch bears falsehood on the face
of it, and deserves to be rejected without examination. On the contrary, every
unprejudiced person will find (I say not, that its falsehood would be more
miraculous, then all the miracles it relates; this is a language which I do not
understand, and which only serves to darken a plain question; but I say, he
will find) very many and very strong indications of authenticity and truth; and
will conclude, that all the evidences, both intrinsic and extrinsic, by which
it is supported, ought to be impartially canvassed. Abundant evidences there
are of both kinds; some hints of them have been given in this section; but to
consider them fully, falls not within the limits of my present purpose.

CONCLUSION.
WHAT is the sum of all that has been now discussed? It is briefly this: That
the author's favorite argument, of which he boasts the discovery, is founded
in error Part 1. sect. 1.
, is managed with sophistry Sect. 2.
, and is at last abandoned by its inventor Sect. 3.
, as fit only for show, not for use; that he is not more successful in the
collateral arguments he employs; particularly, that there is no peculiar
presumption against religious miracles Sect. 4.
; that, on the contrary, there is a peculiar presumption in their favor Sect 5.
; that the general maxim, whereby he would enable us to decide betwixt opposite
miracles, when it is stripped of the pompous diction, that serves it at once for
decoration, and for disguise, is discovered to be no other than an identical
proposition, which, as it conveys no knowledge, can be of no service to the
cause of truth Sect. 6.
; that there is no presumption, arising either from human nature Part 2. sect.
1.
, or from the history of mankind Sect. 2.
, against the miracles said to have been wrought in proof of Christianity; that
the evidence of these is not subverted by those miracles, which historians of
other religions have recorded Part 2. sect. 3.
; that neither the Pagan Sect. 5.
, nor the Popish Sect. 6.
miracles, on which he has expatiated, will bear to be compared with these of
holy writ; that, abstracting from the evidence for particular facts, we have
irrefragable evidence, that there have been miracles in former times Sect. ^.
; and lastly, that his examination of the Pentateuch is both partial and
imperfect, and consequently stands in need of a revisal Sect. 7.
.

"OUR most holy religion," says the author in the conclusion of his essay, is
founded on faith, not on reason; and it is a sure method of exposing it, to put
it to such a trial, as it is by no means fitted to endure. If, by our most holy
religion, we are to understand the fundamental articles of the Christian
system, these have their foundation in the nature and decrees of God; and, as
they are antecedent to our faith or reasonings, they must be also independent
of both. If they are true, our disbelief can never make them false; if they are
false, the belief of all the world will never make them true. But as the only
question between Mr Hume and the defenders of the gospel, is, Whether there is
reason to believe those articles? he can only mean by our most holy religion,
our belief of the Christian doctrine: and concerning this belief we are told,
that it is founded on faith, not on reason; that is, our faith is founded on
our faith; in other words, it has no foundation, it is a mere chimera, the
creature of a distempered brain. I say not on the contrary, that our most holy
religion is founded on reason, because this expression, in my opinion, is both
ambiguous and inaccurate; but I say that we have sufficient reason for the
belief of our religion; or, to express myself in the words of an apostle, that
the Christian, if it is not his own fault, may be ready always to give an
answer to every man, that asks him a REASON of his hope,

So far therefore am I from being afraid of exposing Christianity by submitting
it to the test of reason; so far am I from judging this a trial, which it is by
no means fitted to endure, that I think, on the contrary, the most violent
attacks that have been made upon the faith of Jesus, have been of service to
it. Yes: I do not hesitate to affirm, that our religion has been indebted to
the attempts, though not to the intentions, of its bitterest enemies. They have
tried its strength indeed, and, by trying, they have displayed its strength;
and that in so clear a light, as we could never have hoped, without such a
trial, to have viewed it in. Let them therefore write, let them argue, and,
when arguments fail, even let them cavil against religion as much as they
please: I should be heartily sorry, that ever in this island, the asylum of
liberty, where the spirit of Christianity is better understood (however
defective the inhabitants are in the observance of its precepts) than in any
other part of the Christian world; I should, I say, be sorry, that in this
island, so great a disservice were done to religion, as to check its
adversaries, in any other way, than by returning a candid answer to their
objections. I must at the same time acknowledge, that I am both ashamed and
grieved, when I observe any friends of religion, betray so great a diffidence
in the goodness of their cause (for to this diffidence it can only be imputed)
as to show an inclination for recurring to more forcible methods. The assaults
of infidels, I may venture to prophesy, will never overturn our religion. They
will prove not more hurtful to the Christian system, if it is allowed to compare
small things with great, than the boisterous winds are said to prove to the
sturdy oak. They shake it impetuously for a time, and loudly threaten its
subversion; whilst, in effect, they only serve to make it strike its roots the
deeper, and stand the firmer ever after.

ONE word more with the essayist, and I have done. "Upon the whole," says he,
we may conclude, that the Christian religion, not only was at first attended
with miracles, but even, at this day, cannot be believed by any reasonable
person without one. More reason is insufficient to convince us of its veracity;
and whoever is moved by faith to assent to it; that is, whoever by his belief
is induced to believe it, is conscious of a continued miracle in his own
person, which subverts all the principles of his understanding, and gives him a
determination to believe, what is most contrary to custom and experience. An
author is never so sure of writing unanswerably, as when he writes altogether
unintelligibly. It Is impossible that you should fight your enemy before you
find him; and if he has screened himself in darkness, it is next to impossible
that you should find him. Indeed, if any meaning can be gathered from that
strange assemblage of words just now quoted, it seems to be one or other of
th^se which follow: either, That there are not any in the world, who believe
the gospel; or, That there is no want of miracles in our own time. How either
of these remarks, if just, can contribute to the author's purpose, it will not,
I suspect, be easy to discover. If the second remark is true, if there is no
want of miracles at present, surely experience cannot be pleaded against the
belief of miracles said to have been performed in time past. Again, if the
first remark is true, if there are not any in the world who believe the gospel,
because, as Mr Hume supposes, a miracle cannot be believed without a new
miracle, why all this ado to refute opinions which nobody entertains?
Certainly, to use his own words, The knights-errant, who wandered about to
clear the world of dragons and giants, never entertained the the least doubt
concerning the existence of these monsters See the first paragraph of Essay 12.
Of the academical or skeptical philosophy.
.

Might I presume faintly to copy but the manner of so inimitable an original,
as the author has exhibited in his concluding words, I should also conclude
upon the whole, That miracles are capable of proof from testimony, and there is
a full proof of this kind, for those said to have been wrought in support of
Christianity; that whoever is moved, by M^ Hume's ingenious argument, to
assert, that no testimony can give sufficient evidence of miracles, admits for
reason, though perhaps unconscious, a mere subtilty, which subverts the evidence
of testimony, of history, and even of experience itself, giving him a
determination to deny, what the common sense of mankind, founded in the primary
principles of the understanding, would lead him to believe.

THE END
PROPOSALS, By THOMAS DOBSON, For PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION, THE FOUR GOSPELS;
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK. WITH PRELIMINARY DISSERTATIONS, AND NOTES, Critical
and Explanatory.

BY GEORGE CAMPBELL, D.D. F.R.S. Edinburgh; PRINCIPAL OF MARISCHAL COLLEGE,
ABERDEEN.

CONDITIONS.
I. The Work will be printed on a superfine paper, and with a good type, in two
large octavo volumes II. It will be delivered to subscribers at ONE DOLLAR and
TWO THIRDS for each volume, sewed in boards; -- ONE DOLLAR whereof to be paid
at the time of subscribing, ONE DOLLAR and ONE HALF on the delivery of the
first volume, and the remainder on delivery of the second. -- The price to
nonsubscribers will be Two DOLLARS per volume. III. The Work will be put to
press as soon as six hundred copies are subscribed for.
CONDITIONS On which the AMERICAN EDITION of the ENCYCLOPAEDIA is furnished to
subscribers.
I. The work is printed on a superfine paper, and new types (cast for the
purpose by Baine and Co Philadelphia) which will be occasionally renewed before
they contract a worn appearance. II. It is published in weekly numbers, at ONE
QUARTER OF A DOLLAR each; and the publication will be continued with all
possible regularity. No book to be delivered, on any consideration, unless the
money be paid at the same time. III. Each number contains forty pages of
letter-press, closely printed; and from a view of the materials as now
arranged, it is supposed the whole may extend to three hundred numbers, or
fifteen volumes in quarto; but whether, or how far, these limits may be
eventually exceeded, must depend upon the number and value of the literary
productions and scientific discoveries that shall occur, or the hints and
communications that may be received, during the progress of the work. IV. Those
who do not choose to take the work in numbers, may have it in volumes, or half
volumes, as published: the volumes being delivered in parts, at TWENTY
SHILLINGS (Pensylvania corrency) each in boards, or FIVE DOLLARS for the volume
complete. Of those who take the work in volumes or half-volumes, no money is
required until the first volume is furnished, when payment of the first and
second volumes is to be made; and the payment of each succeeding volume to be
made on the delivery of the volume preceding it. V. In the course of the
publication will be delivered nearly FOUR HUNDRED COPPERPLATES, elegantly
engraved; -- which by far exceed in number these given in any other Scientific
dictionary. VI. At the close of the publication will be delivered, an elegant
Frontispiece, the Dedication, Preface, and proper Title pages for the different
volumes.
The first volume is ready for delivery. -- Subscriptions are still received by
THOMAS DOBSON, and by all others entrusted with Proposals.

BOOKS PRINTED for, and SOLD by THOMAS DOBSON, At the STONE-HOUSE, in
Second-street, between Market and Chesnut-street, Philadelphia.
SMITH's Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations Price, 22
s6. Nicholson's Introduction to Natural Philosophy (illustrated with 25
copperplates). 22 s6. Paley's Moral and Political Philosophy. 15 s. Watts's
Logic. 6 s. Fordyce's Sermons to Young Women. 6 s. Price's Sermons. 5 s.
Percival's Moral Tales. 3 s9 -- Fine paper, 5 s. Collin's, and Hammond's,
poetical Works. 3 s9 The Shipwreck; a poem. 2 s. (sewed) Present for an
Apprentice. 1 s6. Alphonso and Dalinda; a moral Tale, from the French of Madame
Genlis. 5 s. Adventures of Alphonso. 1 s6 Crawford on Animal Heat. 3 s9. Rigby
on Uterine Hemorrhage. 3 s9. Beatie's Evidences of Christianity. 3 s. Fine, 4
s. More's Sacred Drama, for young persons: the subjects taken from the Bible. 5
s. Moore's Fables for the Ladics, with Langhorne's Fables of Flora. 3 s9.
Charlotte Smith's Elegiac Sonnets. 1 s. Pope's Essay on Man. 1 s6. Goldsmith's
Deserted Village 1 s. Young's Poem on the Last Day. 1 s Search after Happiness.
1 s6. Armstrong's Art of preserving Health; a poem. 2 s. George Buchanan's
Jests and Exploits. 1 s. Man of real sensibility; or, the History of Sir George
Ellison. 1 s6. Thoughts on the Importance of the Manners of the Great to
General Society. 1 s.

