A SUPPLEMENT TO THE ESSAY ON MONEYS, COINS, etc. PROPOSED FOR THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY DANIEL HUMPHREYS, FRONT-STREET, NEAR THE DRAWBRIDGE.
M.DCC.XC.

A SUPPLEMENT TO THE ESSAY ON MONEYS, etc.
IT is not pretended that the foreign coins are accurately rated in the
Pamphlet on Moneys. Precision in this case is of but little consequence in a
publication, by a private person, which holds out intimation rather than
instruction; and it remains with government to ascertain precisely the
valuation of foreign coins.

What would be the tendency of rating foreign coins at more or less, in cents,
than their exact current value abroad? I wish you to pause on this question, --
weigh the probable consequences. To me it seems that more of cents would induce
an importation of coin in lieu of goods. -- Goods, which, if imported, would be
used luxuriously: but they would pay customs to the public, which the coins
would not. The money imported would, however, invigorate commerce and
enterprise. In proportion, as money abounds in the country it will diminish in
its importation from foreign parts: and goods, imported, will increase in the
like proportion, in return for our exports. What will the politician think of
the consequences of a great influx of luxuries in this case? Those luxuries are
not to be prohibited; but an increase of impost, on them, and a proper drawback
on a re-exportation may be a wholesome measure. The less frugal Planter says --
"I am for underrating foreign coins, as an encouragement to the bringing in
more goods." This gay countryman speaks not from motives of national good: he
would have an abundant influx of goods that he may buy them cheap, however
ruinous to the merchant, and that then, beyond the supply of necessaries and
comforts, he may riot in luxuries. There are those, of other classes of people,
who would over-rate the foreign coins from the like motive, a little of
self-gratification, -- all are but men. The merchant, also for himself, wishes
to see foreign coins valued, in cents, precisely according to their current
value abroad; -- because, when there is no overbearing influence applied for
biassing the rates of money the one way or the other, it will assist commerce
to seek, with itself, its own level, as does water, until they settle, in
unison, into an equal and unabating stream of employment and wealth to the
nation. It is somewhere well said, that -- "The riches of a nation depend on
the number of its inhabitants WELL EMPLOYED." "Riches" may here be understood
to imply the means of national health, vigor, and happiness. -- What are
nations, -- what is man, without employment! Employment, by the will of God,
drowns evil thoughts -- gives health and peace of mind -- the comforts of life,
and orderly manners and affections.
It is not meant but that the great representative may and ought, and therefore
will interfere when necessary for curbing enormities which oppose fair trade,
or the interests of the nation or of commerce in general: but, a free
government will be cautious not to disturb the natural current of moneys and
trade, lest they be driven to countries unused to check their better
inclination.

The Writer of the Essay on Moneys submitted the name, "Dollar," against his
own judgment. It was not an essential, and the Congress in 1785 had adopted it.
He conceived, that denomination was not so proper as some definite or original
term would be. There are dollars of various countries and values: and it
threatens to be an inconveniency, that within the United States there should be
moneys of Spain, worth 108 cents, of a 50 d. dollar, and at the same time
moneys of the country, of the same denomination, worth but 100 cents, (at most
105 cents) from whence may arise some uncertainty in dealings and in
conversations, when "dollars," indefinitely, are expressed. A hasty bargain is
made for 100 "dollars." What, before a jury, are these dollars? Before judges
of the superior courts, they are declared to be dollars of the United States:
before judges in by-places, there may, in practice, be some little latitude
taken for declaring them to be the one or the other: -- Inclination, sometimes,
has a powerful influence over judgment. If we say, "Fleece dollar" -- or
"Congress" -- or "Federal dollar," in either case it is a compound and prolix
term. If called a "Fleece" -- so of an "Eagle," the term is indefinite.
"Dollar," however, is familiar to the people: Are the variety of dollars and
their respective values also familiar to them? -- A contract is made to pay
1000 dollars: the hand writing of the defendant is well proven; but there is no
proof of the place where the contract was made, or for what dollars: in fact,
it was made at the Havana, and pieces of eight rials, of Spanish money, were
meant; yet judgment is rendered, in our courts, for dollars of the United
States, of the value of 100 cents, whereas the plaintiff ought to have been
paid dollars of 108 cents: so that he loses 80 dollars of his just due.

In valuing Spanish pieces of eight, it may be noted that nearly all, now in
circulation, are of CHARLES III, and that these dollars are inferior to dollars
of the former Kings of Spain, both in weight and fineness: -- the old, more
perfect dollars of Spain, are for ever gone. The medium weight of 13 Mexican
pieces of eight of CHAPTER III, was 416 grains. Harrison's London prices current,
for May 1784, make all the pieces of eight sell at 5 s. 2 d. an ounce; except
the new dollars of Spain, which were at 5 s. 1 d. so that the pieces of eight
of CHAPTER III, are worth but 53 d. 15/100, or 106 cents, 3 mills, of a 50 d.
dollar; when the old dollars are worth 54 d. nearly, or 108 cents. The
proportions of fine silver and of alloy in the pieces of eight of CHAPTER III, may
be discovered by calculation on the value of them at market. They there sell
lower than other Spanish pieces of eight as 61 to 62 in the ounce. It may be
presumed, the acute dealers, in bullion, procured that new money to be nicely
assayed at the mints, for ascertaining its purity, before the price was set at
market. Gros. Alloy. Fine. Sterling. Pence. Cents, of a 50 d. doll. Old Mex. pil.
pieces of 8 417 31.275 385.725 53.87 108 More exactly -- 107.7.
New ditto of CHAPTER III, 416.3 36.725 379.575 53.15 106 -- 106.3.
Congress dollars of 1786, 409.8 34.15 375.64 52.46 105 -- 104.9.
Fleece dollar proposed, 386 29 357 49.85 100 -- 99.7.


Portugal money of account is in rees and mill rees: -- 1000 rees are a mill
ree. They are separated by dotting off three figures from the right or unit
side: so that 2000 and 4000 are 2.000 M. R. and 4.000 M. R. The coins of that
nation have their value expressed on them in figures; and there are coins
impressed with 20000, meaning so many rees or 20 mill rees. Fifty-four pence
sterling are of the value of 800 rees. Likewise the Spaniards impress on their
pieces of eight the figure 8, meaning thereby eight rials; from whence the name
"piece of eight." -- Will American coins be marked in figures with their value
in cents?

Although Congress divided moneys of account into dollars, dimes, cents, and
mills, which is a very excellent division, and the principle will be retained,
yet it probably will happen in practice, that accounts will be kept in dollars
and cents, with the fractions of cents called mills; Do. 368 C. M. 98.9. that
is 368 dollars, 98 cents, 9 mills; or Do. 368. C. M. 98.9. in one column: or,
it may be, according to the Portugal method, 368.989, which are so many dollars
and mills; for, 1000 mills are one dollar, as 1000 rees are one mill ree. There
is, I believe, no money of account so manageable, by the accountant, as those
of the United States of America, and Portugal: -- To me the method of dollars
and mills appears the best: 234 Do. 906 M., or 234,,906. -- If I am to settle
accounts with people who use all the different methods, it is quite as easy to
me as if we all were in one and the same method: my 234.906 are by dots at once
shifted into 234 Do. 9 Di. 06 M. -- 234 Do. 90 C. 6 M., or into 23 E. 4 Do. 90
C. 6 M.; yet those people cannot quite so easily throw theirs into my
denominations. But until the denominations of moneys of account and coins are
confirmed or altered, it may be well to keep our accounts in cents alone, as
there is the least probability of a change in this name.

It may be considered, whether the declaring that "French and British coins
shall pass current in payment of all debts and contracts for money," will not
be improper; as they are generally so worn as to fall greatly short of their
weights and value. French crowns, of the commercial standard, ought to weigh
464 grains, to be worth 5 s. sterling, or 120 cents: yet, what are in
circulation, average only about 447 grains, equal to 4 s. 9 d. or 115 C. 5 M.
-- English crowns are scarcely an object -- there are none in circulation --
English shillings are as trash -- 20 of them, taken at random, averaged but 8
d. sterling. or 17 cents. The laws of those countries make it penal to send
their national cash abroad. Amongst the commercial nations, perhaps, the motive
for this prohibition, -- exclusive of the consideration of heavy charges to
their nation, on expensive coinages often repeated, is not with the desire of
locking it up from circulating in other countries; because, the more free and
extensive it circulates the better are its purposes answered. A system of
commerce, which carries out money, will bring bullion home. -- Countries the
richest in commodities, nevertheless, require bullion in many branches of their
commerce: and as the moneys of all other nations are, to them, but bullion,
whilst they have an influx of it sufficient for their purpose, the quantity of
their national money needs not be so great as otherwise would be requisite; and
then expensive coinages are lessened. Britain seems to have greatly declined in
coining silver, from this principle, -- nor do I know that she has coined any
silver for many years past, of any consideration.

Gold may be preferred to silver, for our national money, at least for awhile,
as the coinage of it is considerably cheaper than of silver. Spanish silver
coins, together with the gold of Spain and Portugal, may be tendered in
payments: at the same time, a moderate sum of national silver ought to be
always in circulation, together with our gold coin to a larger amount, as
bullion gold shall happen to come into the mint. It would, respecting the
public, be improper to give currency to foreign coins by a perpetual or long
continued law: moreover our citizens would be subject, by such laws, to great
imposition from a depraved coinage, which could be produced at the will of the
foreign sovereign, -- and it might injure our commerce and the commonwealth in
general. If the foreign nations should be displeased with such a public act as
might seem to give encouragement to the drawing away their moneys from them,
which at great expense were coined for their own use within their own
dominions, and not for the purposes of strangers, -- commerce, in despite of
opposition, will counteract the views of such complaints, and perhaps defeat
all the means that government could reasonably apply for answering the
expectation of the complainants: for if in such case the foreign coins are left
to their own bias, to follow in the train of commerce, they will become, or
continue current by common consent; and there will presently be a sufficiency
of national money for the purposes of formal tenders in controverted cases:
under which circumstances, the municipal laws which gave currency and force to
those coins, may be repealed, or not, as shall then appear advisable. If
nothing forbids, silver carried to the mint to be exchanged for national coin,
may be paid for in gold, free of all expense, loss, or delay. The cost on the
coinage of the gold will be about 3 per cent. to the States: Those who carry
bullion gold to the mint, will, it is supposed, also receive its value in
national gold or silver coin, clear of expense or loss.

Whilst money of the Banks, whether it be in paper or bullion, and Spanish
coins are current as is the national money, by consent through the influence of
commerce, although they be not money known to the municipal law, and therefore
not a subject of tender, all the purposes of a foreign commerce are answered by
them, and also most of the inland demands; so that formal tenders, which must
be in national money; being very few, a less quantity of the national coin
suffices. Spanish money is not liable to the objections made above, respecting
the English and French crowns: -- it is but little wore. The portion of it
which passes through our hands, is soon dispersed over Europe or sunk in India:
-- the absence whereof is yearly renewed, from the mines of new Spain, with a
coin that is fresh and perfect: so that, if the States should think it proper,
until trade is more favorable to us, and we can afford to coin more largely,
the act may be, that until such a time (the year 1800) Spanish milled and
coined moneys, and Portugal gold, shall pass current in payments within the
United States of America.

If the devices on the American coins, shall generally be of subjects of great
national concern, the Printing Press is a candidate for a place among them --
Vehicle of Science -- Prop of Liberty!

However mistaken may be the principles of this Piece, it perhaps will promote
one good -- Thought, with investigation, on a subject particularly interesting
at this time.


