SKETCHES OF THE LIFE OF Joseph Mountain, A NEGRO, Who was executed at
New Haven, on the 20th Day (...) October, 1790, For a Rape, Committed on the
26th Day of May last.

[The writer of this history has directed that the money arising from the sales
thereof, after deducting the expense of printing, etc. be given to the unhappy
girl; whose life is rendered wretched by the crime of the malefactor.]

NEW HAVEN: Printed and Sold by T. and S. GREEN.

I JOSEPH MOUNTAIN, was born on the 7th day of July, A. D. 1758, in the house
of Samuel Mifflin, Esquire. of Philadelphia, father of the present Governor of
Pennsylvania. My father, Fling Mountain, is a Molatto, and now lives at
Philadelphia. My mother is a Negro and was a slave till she was twenty-one
years of age. -- She now lives at Reading, in Pennsylvania.

The first seventeen years of my life were spent in Mr. Mifflin's family. -- As
a servant in the house I acquired the reputation of unusual sprightiness and
activity. My master was industrious to instruct me in the Presbyterian religion
which he professed, teach me to read and write, and impress my mind with
sentiments of virtue. How grossly these opportunities (...) been neglected, the
following story will too (...) ^^^^ce.

In the 17th year of ^^^^ge, on the 17th of March 1775, with my master's
consent, I ^^tered on board the ^^ip Chalkley, commanded by Joseph Spain, and
owned by Messi'rs James and Drinker of Philadelphia, and on the 20th of May
following we arrived in the Downs. I soon quitted the vessel, and in four days
was strolling the streets of London in quest of amusements. In this ^^^^ation,
the public will easily conceive, I could not (...) remain an idle spectator. It
will not be surprising to find me speedily initiated in practices disgraceful
to human nature, and destructive of every moral virtue. Unfortunately for me, a
scene began to open which will close only in the shadow of death.

One day, at an alehouse in London, I accidentally became acquainted with one
Francis Hyde, originally from Middlesex, and one Thomas Wilson, of
Staffordshire in England. They were traveling the country, with a hand organ
and various other musical instruments, pretending to great art in numerous
performance, and really possesing surprising knowledge in every species of
^^ggling. This was their employment in the day time, for the purpose of
executing more effectually the principal business of their lives, viz. The
reader will note, that when we use the term foot-pad, we mean ^i^^ who (...) on
foot only; highway-man intends one who robs on horse back.
highway robbery. They (...) found me susceptible of almost any impressions,
and neither incapable of, nor averse to, becoming a companion in their
iniquity. We all sat but from London about ^ o'clock in the evening after I had
joined them, each armed with a hanger and a Brace of pistols. We had also
suitable dresses and a dark lanthorn. Our landlord, who kept tavern at the sign
of the black horse, at Charing Cross, furnished us with every requisite for the
expedition. His name was William Humphrys. The p^^n this evening was to attack
the mail-coach, which would start at 12 o'clock at night, from the ship tavern,
between Woolwich and Graves-end, about 9 miles from London.

We were on the spot at the hour agreed upon, and disguised ourselves for the
adventure. Hyde and Wilson were dressed in white (...) and boots, with their
^aces painted yellow (...) Molattoes. Mountain was dressed in the same manner,
with the addition of a (...) tail wig^, white gloves and (...) black mask over
his face. When the state arrived, I ^^^^^ed, and caught the leading hors^^ by
(...) bridles, while Hyde and Wilson each presented a brace of pistols in at
the coach window, (...) demanded of the passengers their money. There were four
gentlemen and one lady in the coach. They denied having any money. Wilson said,
"Deliver, or death." They then gave us a bank note of 50I. one other of 20l.
and about 60 guineas in cash. We (...) retired to an unfrequented place,
shifted our dresses, and prepared to prosecute our journey to Chatham in the
county of Kent.

In the day time, Hyde and Wilson commonly played upon their instruments, and
performed various seats of slight of hand, as though that was their sole
occupation. We were also very particular in making observations upon all
travelers, to learn if they might be touched; (for that was our word for
robbed.)

In four days after the former robbery, we met a Capt. Hill at the foot of
Rochester bridge near Chatham -- He was a captain of the marines, and we had
seen him in the day time at Brumpton barracks, about half a mile from the
bridge. We walked directly before his horse. Wilson asked him the time of
night. He made no reply. Hyde then caught the bridle. I, his left hand, and
Wilson presented a pistol to his breast, and said, "Deliver, or death." He
assured us that he had no money worth taking. Wilson said, "then give us your
watch," which he did. The watch was gold, and valued at 50 guineas. We then
walked off about 300 rods toward Graves-end, immediately tacked for Rochester,
where we lodged at the mariner's inn. There was a great hue and cry for us; but
the pursuers, supposing from Capt. Hill's information, we had gone for
Graves-end, entirely mistook our rout. The next morning we took post-chaise for
London, where we arrived about 6 o'clock in the evening (...) Char b^^^dy was
delivered to a broker whom we (...) employed. He was a Jew, and lived in (...).
Katherine's Row, near Town Hill, and his name was William Moses. There were
also other brokers in different parts of England, with whom we had constant
communication, and who were perfectly acquainted with our modes of acquiring
property. After such a jaunt we thought it advisable to recruit ourselves by
rioting on our spoils.

In a few days, it was concluded that I should go alone, and attempt to "touch"
some gentlemen who frequented the plays at Covent Garden; this, considering my
age and inexperience, was thought rather a bold stroke. Being villain enough to
attempt any thing, I did not hesitate; but posted myself agreeably to
direction. My efforts, however, were wholly unsuccesful, and I returned empty.
The next night I was placed at London bridge, while Hyde stood at Black-fryars,
and Wilson at Westminister. At half past 11 o'clock I met a Captain Duffield,
and asked him the time of night. He told me. I said, "You know my profession;
deliver or death." He stepped back to strike me with his cane; I cocked my
pistol, and told him to deliver instantly, or death ^^^^ld be his portion. He
then threw me his purse, which contained about 10 guineas, and a silver watch,
^^^ch was valued by our broker at 6I. Hyde, the same (...), obtained about 40
guineas of Sir John Griffing. Wilson about 30 of a Mr. Burke; and each a watch,
one (...), the other pinchbeck. The next day we saw advertisements, describing
the robberies, and offering re^^^^ for the perpetrators.

The next night, with little difficulty, I robbed Hugh ^^^^sly of 16 guineas,
and a gold ring. Hyde, on the (...) evening, took from Lord John Cavendish
about 20 guineas, and Wilson robbed William Burke of 11 guineas.

We now concluded to remain in London for a while, gentlemen of pleasure. --
The repeated robberies had fur^^ed us with cash in abundance, and we indulged
in ^^y species of debauchery. We gambled very deeply (...), cards and
billiards. Hyde and Wilson were (...) expert at this business, and would almost
invariably ^^dle a stranger out his money.

In March 1776, we went to the city of York, about (...) miles from London.
Here we continued several weeks, waiting some favorable opportunities to rob
at (...) plays; but none presented. We went from York (...) New Market, to
attend the famous races which took place about the first of June. There we
found Lord (...) of Richmond, and Lord Tufton of Sheffield in Yorkshire: We
were much perplexed to invent the most advantageous made of "touching" them. It
was at length concluded to attack them at their lodgings, which were (...) an
inn very large and greatly frequented by various ^^^es of people. About 7
o'clock in the evening, while (...) attendants of those gentlemen were in the
kitchens (...) stables, we entered the front door, and having bribed the porter
with a few guineas, were immediately let into the room. Lords Gore and Tufton
were sitting over a table at a dish of coffee, and reading newspapers. We
instantly presented our pistols, and demanded their money, Lord Tufton
delivered us one bank note of 100l. and three others of 50l. each. Lord Gore
delivered us about 100 guineas, and two gold mourning rings. We quitted
New Market next morning, and went in the stage to York, where Wilson presented
his bills for payment. Unfortunately for us, Lord Tufton, immediately after the
robbery, dispatched his servant to the bank, with orders to stop those bills,
if offered. The bills were accordingly stopped, and Wilson arrested, and sent
(...) New Market to be examined before a justice of the peace. Upon his
examination he procured Hyde to swear that he was riding from New Market to
York with Wilson and that he saw him pick up a pocket book containing those
bills. The coachman, having been previously bribed, swore to the same fact.
Upon this testimony Wilson was acquitted. I was not sent for as a witness at
this examination, as I understood Lord Robert M^^ers was then in New Market and
would probably ^^tend the trial. The reason why I did not wish to (...) his
Lordship's eye, was, that on the night before we (...) London, I made a most
daring attack upon him. (...) was walking unarmed, near Hounslow Heath,
att^^^^^ by his footman. I met him, presented my pistol, (...) he gave me 75
guineas, two gold watches, and two (...) rings. -- Hyde and Wilson were near at
hand; but (...) did not discover themselves, leaving me "to play the (...)
alone."

In the latter end of June we again met at the old ^^^dezvous in London and
divided our plunder. The property which I then had on hand enabled me to live
(...) freely for some months. My time was spent in (...) round of dissipation
which was the necessary (...) upon so vicious a character, and which was
tolerabl^ (...) supported by the stock of cash in my own possession* (...) that
of my broker.

It now resolved to quit this course of life which I had ^^^^rto pursued with
so much success. Accordingly I ^^^ed on board the brig Sally, as Cook, and made
two ^^^es in her to Lisbon. Upon my return, after expecting my pay, I made
another voyage, in the Fanny, ^t. Sinclair, to Kingston, in Jamaica; which
being ^ed in nine months, I again visited London, and included to relinquish
the seafaring business for the ^Sent. At the old place of resort I became
acquainted (...) one Haynes and Jones, both of Yorkshire. They are partially
initiated in the science of foot-pads. They (...) proposed that I should resume
my profession, and (...) them. My former mode of life, though singularly vi^^^
yet possessed many charms in my view. I therefore ^^piled with their request;
at the same time doubting, they were possessed of sufficient courage and skill
for companions to one who had served under experienced others, and who
considered himself at the head of the possession. Our first object was to
assail the Newcastle ^^^e, which would be in Tottenham-Court road at 8 o'clock
in the evening. We were on the spot in season, (...) Mountain addressed them
thus: "My lads, it is ^^dous attempt -- for God's sake make a bold stroke." on
the arrival of the coach at half past 7 o'clock, four is from London, I seized
the bridles of the two ^ore^^ horses. Jones and Haynes went to the coach (...),
and said, "Deliver or death." Lord Garnick and ^^^eral others were passengers:
His Lordship said, "Yes, I Will deliver," and instantly discharged a pistol at
^^ts, the contents of which entered his left shoulder: in which he and Haynes
made their escape. The ^^^man was then directed to "drive on" -- He replied,
there is a man who yet holds the leading horses." -- (...) Garnick then fired
at me, but without damage; in which I discharged my pistol at the coach, but
with effect. Jones was so badly wounded, that Haynes I were obliged to carry
him into London upon our ^^ders. We were soon overtaken by two highway men, who
had assaulted Lord Garnick about 15 minutes before our engagement, one of whom
was badly wounded. The next day we saw an advertisement offering a reward of 60
guineas for the detection of the robbers, and informing, that it was supposed
three were killed. This specimen of the enterprise of my new associates
convinced me, that they were not adepts in their occupation, and induced me to
quit their society.

The business which now seemed most alluring to me, was that of highway-men.
Considering myself at the head of foot-pads, I aspired for a more honorable
employment and therefore determined to join myself to the gang of highway men,
whose rendezvous were at Broad St. Giles's, up Holborne, at the sign of the
Hampshire hog, and kept by a William Harrison, a native of the Isle of Man,
Harrison was the support, the protector and the landlord of this whole company.
The horses and accoutrements were kept and furnished by him, and occasionally
supplied to adventurers. He enquired my name, and finding that I was Mountain
who was consederate with Hyde and Wilson, he readily admitted me to the
fraternity. He asked if I dared take a jaunt alone; and (...) willing for any
thing, he quickly furnished me with equipments proper for the expedition.
Mounted on a very fleet horse, and prepared with proper changes of dress, I sat
out for Coventry, about 90 miles from London. I made great dispatch in
traveling, and about 10 o'clock the night after my departure, I met Richard
Watts coming out of a lane about two miles from Coventry. I rode up to him, and
enquired if he was not afraid of highway-men? He replied, "No, I have no
property of value about me." I then told him that I was a man of the
profession, and that he must deliver or abide the consequences. Upon this he
gave me his gold watch: I insisted on his money, and cocked my pistol,
threatening him with instant death. He perceived that resistance and persuasion
were equally unavailing, and threw me his purse containing 13 half guineas and
some pocket-pieces. The gold watch was valued at 40 guines. I then ordered him
back down the lane, accomplished him thither, and sled with the greatest haste
into adjacent wood: Here I shifted my own and horse's (...), leaving them in a
bye place, rode directly to a neighboring town, and there put up for the night.
Thence I took my course for Newcastle in Devonshire, about 276 miles north of
London, and thence to Warrington in Lanstershire. Here about 7 o'clock in the
evening I met with a gentleman who appeared an object of plunder. I ^^ed him
the time of night; he drew his watch, and (...) me the hour. I observed "You
have a very fine watch." He answered, "Fine enough." "Sir, it is too is for you
-- you know my profession -- deliver." He (...) back; I caught his bridle with
one hand, presented pistol with the other, and said, "Deliver, or I Will cool
your porridge:" He handed me a purse of 8 guineas, and a gold watch valued at
30l. sterling. To complete the iniquity, and exhibit the extent of my villainy,
I then took a prayer book from my pocket, and ordered him to (...) upon the
solemnity of God's word, that he would (...) no discovery in twelve hours: He
took the oath equitted him, and heard nothing of the matter till the next
morning about 10 o'clock, when I saw a particular ^^ail of the transaction in
the newspapers.

Liverpool was my next stage. Here I tarried two (...) making observations for
evening adventures. On (...) night of the second day I robbed Thomas Reevs of
guineas, and a gold watch worth about 30l. sterling. To insult him in his
distress, after committing the fact, I pulled off my hat, made a low bow,
wished him good night, and sat out for Lancaster in company with the sage. It
occurred to me, that riding as a guard to the sage would secure me against
suspicion. Accordingly I accompanied it to Lancaster, and there put up at the
^^wan and two necks." Here I continued three days, waiting a favorable
opportunity to exercise my profession. On the third evening at 8 o'clock, I
stopped a Col. Pritchard, took from him a gold watch valued at 44 guineas, a
purse of 30 guineas, 3 gold rings, and a pair of gold knee-buckles worth about
6l. The knee-buckles appeared so tempting, I told Pritchard, I could not avoid
taking them. At 11 o'clock I left Lancaster, and having rode about one mile
from town, I stopped, pulled off my hat, and bid them "good-bye."

My course was now for Manchester, where I put up for about 24 hours at the
"bull's-head." The evening following, about 11 miles from Manchester, I
"touched" a Quaker. It was nearly 9 o'clock when I met him. I enquired if he
was not afraid to ride alone. He answered, No. I asked him his religion; he
replied "I am a Friend." I observed, "You are the very man I was looking for --
you must deliver your money." He seemed very unwilling, and said, "Thou art
very hard with me." I replied, "You must not thou me." He then gave me his
plain gold watch, 6 guineas, and four bank notes of 20l. each. I then presented
a prayer book, and demanded an oath that he would make no discovery in 8 hours:
He refused an oath, alleging that it was contrary to his religion, but gave
his word that my request should be complied with. I then dismissed him,
returning the bank notes, and took a circuitous rout for London. The guineas
which I had obtained in this jaunt, I concealed and carried in the soles of my
boots, which were calculated for that purpose, and effetually answered it. The
mare which I rode was trained for the business: she would put her head in at a
coach window with the utmost ease, and stand like a stock against any thing.
She would travel also with surprising speed. Upon my arrival at Harrison's,
(having been gone eleven days) I gave a faithful narrative of my transactions,
and produced the plunder as undeniable proof. I never shall forget with what
joy I was received. The house rang with the praises of Mountain. An elegant
supper was provided, and he placed at the head of the table. Notwithstanding
the darkness of his complexion, he was complimented is the first of his
profession, and qualified for the most daring enterprises.

Fatigued with such a jaunt, and fearing left too frequent adventures might
expose me, I determined on tarrying a while at home. My horse was given to
another, ^^d he directed to seek for prey. After one month's absence he
returned with only 16 guineas, and was treated accordingly by the gang. He was
inadequate to the business, and was therefore ordered to tarry at home, just to
visit the play houses, and sharp it among people who might easily be choused of
their property. Each took his tour of duty in course; some succeeded; others,
from misfortune or want of spirit, were disgraced. One young fellow of the
party was about this time detected at Guilford ^^urry, tried, condemned and
executed. He made no discovery, though we all trembled. A plan was now in
agitation to dispatch two or three of the gang to Portsmouth, to attack some of
the navy officers: It was finally adopted, and one Billy Coats, a Londoner, and
Mountain are selected as the most suitable for the expedition. We ^^nted our
horses on the next morning, and reached Portsmouth that day, a distance of more
than 70 miles. We took lodgings at an inn kept by a rich old miser. We were
soon convinced that he had cash in plenty, and ^^t it "was our duty to get it;"
but the difficulty was that plan should be concerted. At length, by a strata^^m
which was deeply laid and faithfully executed, we ^^^dered the old man's house
of about 300 guineas, and ^^. sterling in shillings and six-pences. There was a
very geat clamor raised the next morning. The house was surrounded with the
populace. The old fellow was ^^^ing at a great rate for his loss of money. I
was a spectator of this collection, and now perfectly remember ^e chagrin of
the old man and his wife. We remained a Portsmouth two days, and then returned
to London richly laden, and received the applause of our companions. The three
following months I spent in frequenting ale^^^es, defrauding and cheating with
false dice, and practicing every species of imposition which ingenuity could
invent, or the most depraved heart execute.

In the beginning of June 1780, I joined the mob headed by Lord George Gordon.
This mob was the result of a dispute between the Papists and Protestants. It
was a matter of the most sovereign indifference to me whether the rebellion was
just or unjust: I eagerly joined the sport, I rejoicing that an opportunity
presented whereby I might obtain considerable plunder in the general confusion.
-- Lord Gordon represented to us in a speech of some length, the open attempts
upon the Protestant religion, and the manner in which the petitions of the
injured had been treated by parliament. He exhorted us all to follow him to the
house of commons, and protect him while he should present, with his own hand,
the parchment roll, containing the names of those who had signed the petition,
to the amount of about 120,000 protestants. His speech was answered with loud
huzzas, and repeated assurances of our zeal to support him and his cause. The
whole body of us, in number about 50,000, left St. George's fields, and marched
directly for the parliament house: We were in four separate divisions. A most
tremendous shout was heard from all quarters, upon our arrival before both
houses. Lord Gordon moved that he might introduce the petition; but the house
would not consent that it should be then taken up. The mob became greatly
inflamed: they insulted several members of the house of lords, who narrowly
escaped with their lives. Several gentlemen of parliament reprobated the
conduct of Lord George in the severest terms; and Col. Gordon, a relation of
his Lordship, threatened him with instant death the moment any of the rioters
should enter the house. At length, when the question was put in the house of
commons, in defiance of the menaces of the mob, only six out of two hundred
voted for the petition. The rioters now dispersed themselves into various parts
of the city, destroying and burning the chapels of Roman Catholics and their
houses. The five succeeding days were employed in demolishing the houses of Sir
George Saville, in burning Newgate, and relieving about 300 persons confined in
it, (some under sentence of death) in setting ^ire to King's bench and
Fleet-prisons, and in innumerable other acts of violence and outrage toward
those who were in the opposition. The bank was twice assailed but was too well
guarded for our attempts. On the ^th day we were overpowered by superior
force, and obliged to disperse. During this confusion, I provided for myself,
by plundering, at various times, about 500l. sterling.

After leading (...) such dissipation for five or six (...), an incident
occurred which caused me, for some time, to abandon my former pursuit, and
settle down in tolerable regularity. I became acquainted with a Miss Nancy
Allingame, a white girl of about 18 years of age. She was possessed of about
500l. in personal property and a house at Islington. The reader will please to
recollect, that Negroes are considered in a different point of light in
England, from what they are in America: The blacks have far (...) connection
with the whites, owing to the idea which prevails in that country, that there
are no slaves.
It may appear singular to many, that a woman of this description should be in
the least interested in my favor; yet such was the fact, that she not only
endured my society, but actually married me in about six months after our first
acquintance. Her other and friends remonstrated against this connection; but she
quitted them all, and united herself to me. My whole residence with her was
about three years; during which time I exhausted all the property which came
into my possession by the marriage. We then separated, and she was received by
her father.

In June 1782 a, having joined Hyde and Wilson, we determined to quit England,
and see if the French gentlemen could bear "touching." We accordingly crossed
Dover, and at Dunkirk about 7 o'clock in the evening robbed a gentleman of
about 200 French crowns. We then proceeded to Paris by the way of Breast. On the
second evening after our arrival in this city, we robbed Count Dillon, on his
return from the plays, of a gold watch and 12 French guineas. The next day,
about I o'clock in the afternoon, we attacked Governor Du Boyer, at his country
seat about four miles from Paris, and took from him about 200l. in bank bills.
Hyde and Wilson performed this, while I lay about 250 yards distant.

Dispatch ia traveling, after such bold adventures, became very necessary. We
immediately quitted Paris, and rode all night for Havre-de-Grace, where we
arrived the evening of the next day. Here we found an advertisement, which
prevented our changing the notes, and induced us to burn them.

Bayonne was the next object of our pursuit. At this place Hyde robbed two
gentlemen in one night; Wilson one, and Mountain one -- the whole of that
evening's plunder amounted to about 500l, sterling. France now became
dangerous, and therefore we pushed with all pos-sible expedition for Spain, and
arrived at Madrid, the capital, in a few days. The regulations of this city
were such, that we were obliged to quit the object of our pursuit. The city was
strongly walled in, and most scurpulously guarded. The gates were shut every
evening at 8 o'clock, and every man compelled to be in his own habitation.
After spending several months in rioting on our booty, we went to Gibraltar. We
bribed the Spanish sentinel, and entered the British lines. We appeared before
the English commander, General Elliott, and informed him we were Englishmen,
and mechanics by profession. The fleet commanded by Lord How, arrived there on
the fourth day after us. Genesis Elliott consented that we should enter on board
the fleet as seamen. Accordingly I joined myself to the Magnificent of 74 guns,
commanded by Capt. John Elverston; Hyde entered the Victory, Lord How; and
Wilson a 74 gun ship, whose name I do not recollect. This was in the fall of
the year 1782. I never saw Hyde and Wilson again till since the peace took
place between England and the United States. I tarried on board the Magnificent
about three months, during which time we had an engagement with the French and
Spanish fleets. We drove them out of the Straits, sunk their junk ships with
hot shot, and captured the St. Michael, a Spanish ship of 74 guns. The
Magnificent sailed with the fleet for Spithead, where, direcly after my
arrival, I made my escape from her by bribing the sentinel with 5 guineas, and
swimming three quarters of a mile to the Isle of Wight. From this place I went
to London by the way of Plymouth. The landlord at the old place of resort
received me very cordially.

The business of robbing again solicited by attention, and in the fall of the
year 1783, as I was walking in Wapping, in quest of plunder, I accidentally
fell in company with my old companions, Hyde and Wilson. They had remained in
the sea service ever since we left Gibraltar. We concluded it advisable to
join ourselves to the gang at Harrison's, and resume our occupations. Holland
now appeared an object worth attention. In November 1783, we went to Ostend,
and thence to Amsterdam, On the road through Holland, we knocked an old Dutchman
down, and took from him 1100 guilders. The next day about 4 o'clock in the
morning, Hyde attacked a merchant, and obtained about 100 guilders; and the
evening following, we robbed four gentlemen of about 150l. sterling, and three
silver watches of small value, we continued living very freely at Amsterdam 4
weeks, without effecting any thing: during which period we were preparing to
assail a bank. At length, by the help of various instruments, we entered it
about I o'clock at night. We found an iron chest which we could not open. We
brought away two bags of gold, containing about 1100l. sterling. We buried them
about 2 miles distant, and suffered them to remain there two months. The noise,
relative to the robbery having by this time subsided, we took our money,
entered on board a vessel bound for England, and were safely back in London in
the spring of the year 1784. To invest our cash, etc. in real property, and
quit a course of life attended with so much fatigue and hazard, was thought the
most eligible plan. In pursuance of this idea, Hyde bought him an house and lot
about 4 miles from London. My share was joined with Hyde's. Wilson purchased
him a ^^^ation at Cherry-garden-stairs. Each kept an house ^^ the reception of
gamblers, swindlers and foot-pads.

The rioters who were concerned in Lord Gordon's rebellion were now daily
arrested, tried and executed. Knowing myself deeply concerned in this mob, and
supposing it probable that Mountain's turn might come next. I quitted London,
went on board an European vessel, and made a voyage to Grenada. From this
period till August 1789, I was employed as a sailor; during which time I made
two voyages to the Coast of Guinea, and brought cargoes of Negroes to Jamaica;
one voyage to Greenland; one to Leghorn and Venice; three to Philadelphia, and
one to St. Kitts. Upon my return from voyages, I frequently went from Liverpool
to London, and put up at Hyde's or Wilson's. In October 1786, we committed a
burglary upon the house of General Arnold, who then resided in London. We
catered his house about 2 o'clock at night, with a dark ^^^horn, and, from a
bureau in the room where the General and lady were asleep, we stole about 150l.
sterling in cash, and a pair of stone shoe buckles.

In the month of August 1789, I left New York in the Briton, with a cargo of
bread and flour owned by Mr. John Murray, jun. of New York, and went to Bilboa
in Spain. The vessel proved leaky, and was sold. Being discharged, I entered on
board the brig Aunt, commanded by Capt. Thomas Moseley, and owned by William
Gray, of Boston, failed from Bilboa the 7th day of March, and arrived in Boston
the 2d of May last. On the 14th of the same month I quitted Boston on foot for
New York. On my journey, at East-Hartford, I stole five dollars from the cabin
of a sloop lying in Connecticut river. I was immediately apprehended, carried
before George Pitkin; Esquire. and adjusted to be whipped ten stripes. The sentence
was executed forthwith, and I dismissed. This was the first time I was e^^^
arraigned before any court. No event in my ^^^cedent life produced such
mortification as this; (...) a highway-man of the first eminence, who had
^^^bed in most of the capital cities in Europe, who (...) attacked gentlemen of
the first distinction with ^^^cess; who had escaped King's Bench prison and
^^^-Bailey, that he should be punished for such a ^^^ty offense, in such an
obscure part of the country, (...) truly humiliating. On the Saturday evening
following I arrived at New Haven. The Wednesday following, being the 26th of
May, about two o'clock in the afternoon, I sat out for New York: at the At the
distance of one mile, I me^ the unhappy girl whom I have so wantonly injured.
She was in com^^^y with an elder sister, and going into New Haven. ^egan a
conversation with them, and attempted, ^^ersuasion, to effect my purpose. They
were ^^^ified at my conduct, and endeavored to avoid (...). Upon this I seized
the eldest girl; she, however, struggled from me. I then caught the young^^,
and threw her on the ground. I have uniformly ^^ought that the witnesses were
mistaken in swearing to the commission of a Rape: That I abused her (...) most
brutal and savage manner -- that her tender ^^^s and pitiable shricks were
unavailing -- and that (...) exertion was wanting to ruin her, I frankly
con^^^. However I may attempt to palliate this trans^^ion, there can be no
excuse given for me, unless ^^oxication may be plead in mitigation of an
offense. (...) was a most cruel attack upon an innocent girl, those years,
whose entreaties must have softened an ^^^rt not callous to every tender
feeling. When her cries had brought to her assistance some neighboring people,
I still continued my barbarity, by insulting her in her distress, boasting of
the fact, and glorying in my iniquity. Upon reflection, I am often surprised
that I did not attempt my escape; opportunity to effect it frequently presented
before I was apprehended. Yet, by some unaccountable fatality, I loitered
unconcerned, as though my conduct would bear the strictest scrutiny. The counsel
of heaven determined that such a prodigy in vice should no longer infest
society. At four o'clock I was brought before Mr. Justice Daggett for
examination. The testimony was so pointed, that I was ordered into immediate
confinement, to await the approaching session of the Superior Court.

On the 5th of August last, I was arraigned before the Bar of the Superior
Court. My trial was far more favorable than I expected. There was every
indulgence granted me which I could have wished; and the court, jurors and
spectators appeared very differently from those I have seen at Old-Bailey. The
jury had little hesitation; indeed the most compassionate hearer of this cause
could have only pronounced me Guilty. I beheld with astonishment the lenity of
the Court, and am sure that in a country where such a sacred regard is had to
the liberty of the subject, no man's life can be unjustly taken from him. On
the Tuesday following, the Chief Justice pronounced Sentence of Death against
me. I thought myself less moved with this pathetic address than either of the
court, or any spectator; and yet, I confess, I was more affected by it, than by
any thing which had previously happened in my life. On the next Sabbath I
attended meeting. The address of the Rev. Dr. Dana on that day and the
subsequent advice and admonitions which I have received from the Clergy of this
and other places, were calculated to awaken every feeling of my heart. Much
gratitude is due from me to those gentlemen who have exhibited such a tender
concern for my immortal interest.

It now remains that I die a death justly merited by my crimes. "The cries of
injured innocence have entered the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, and called for
vengeance." If the reader of this story can acquiesce in my fate and view me
"stumbling on the dark mountains of the shadow of death," with composure, he
will yet compassionate a soul stained with the foulest crimes, just about to
appear unimbodied before a God of infinite purity.

Joseph Mountain.

THE writer of the foregoing narrative assures the public, that the facts
related were taken from the mouth of the culprit. In no instance has any fact
been substantially altered, or in the least exaggerated.

On the 28th of September the writer applied to Joseph, to learn if he
persisted in affirming the truth of the foregoing story. By the direction of
the criminal his name was then set to this history, and he declared, in
presence of the subscribing witnesses, that it contained nothing but the truth.

JOSEPH PECK. SAMUEL PUNDERSON.



