A PLAN FOR A SCHOOL On an Establishment similar to that at ACKWORTH, in
Yorkshire, Great Britain, varied to suit the Circumstances of the Youth within
the Limits of the YEARLY MEETING For Pennsylvania and New Jersey: introduced
with the Sense of Friends in New England, on the Subject of Education; AND An
Account of some Schools in Great Britain: TO WHICH IS ADDED, OBSERVATIONS AND
REMARKS, Intended for the Consideration of Friends.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK. M DCC XC.

A PLAN FOR A SCHOOL.
SECTION I.
THAT there has been a considerable degree of attention given to the subject of
education, and a number of useful schools established, nearly agreeable to the
recommendation of the Yearly Meeting, under religious-minded tutors; also a
growing concern in the minds of many friends, to provide for the due
instruction of the rising youth, has been observed with satisfaction.

Yet when the state of the young people within the extensive limits of this
Yearly Meeting, is taken into consideration, with the care manifested by
Friends in Great Britain, in the establishment of schools for the benefit of
their young people not in affluent circumstances, as well as others, and
attending to the weighty reasons which have been urged on various occasions in
favor of a more guarded course of instruction than is customary, it has been
apprehended, that a use might arise from having an abstract of what relates to
those schools in Great Britain, mentioned in a publication made by Dr. John
Fothergill deceased, on the institution at Ackworth, brought more generally
into the view of society at large, with the sense of Friends in Great Britain
and America, on the subject of boarding schools, and the necessity for a
greater care in the education of their young people: for which purpose I have
collected such materials as would enable me to answer the expectation of
Friends, who may be desirous of information on this interesting subject. And as
the Meeting for Sufferings, in New England, has given the sense of their Yearly
Meeting on this head, so early as the year 1690, with some judicious
observations, calculated to recommend a greater attention to the education of
their youth, I shall, therefore, introduce the subject with a quotation from
their epistle dated the 11th of the 11th month, 1782, signed Moses Brown, Note,
This Epistle contains an account of the recommendation of then Yearly Meeting
to form an establishment or establishments nearly similar to that at ACKWORTH,
anno 178O.
as follows, viz.

Their Yearly Meeting recommend to Friends every where, as far as they are able
or capable, to provide schoolmasters and mistresses who are faithful Friends,
to teach and instruct their children, and not to send them to such schools
where they are taught the corrupt ways, manners, fashions, and language of the
world, etc. To which the Meeting for Sufferings add, The (...) of attention to
which advice has occasioned the well-concerned amongst us, for the happiness of
the rising generation, and prosperity of truth, to mourn for the hurt thereby
sustained in our society -- Our principles lead to a separation from the world,
its customs, habits, language, and manners; how, then, can we hope for faithful
successors in our posterity, or that they will come up in principles and
practice agreeable thereto, if we continue so far to neglect the early care of
our offspring, as to send them to schools, where principles and practices so
repugnant are taught. -- It is essential to the continuance of every society
upon the foundation of its rise and establishment, that its first principles be
often recurred to. The principles of light and truth, which first separated our
ancients from the world, early led George Fox into a sight of the necessity of
a separation from the world in the education of succeeding generations.

Which advice, if attended to in some instances, has never been so fully
regarded as its importance requires; owing to various circumstances which
cannot but be obvious to the well-informed, and which likewise appears to have
been the case in Great Britain, from what has been observed by Doctor
Fothergill, respecting the schools amongst them; and as an account of these
schools may prove satisfactory to many, and show the necessity for a greater
care in the education of our youth, I have been large in my quotations
respecting them, more especially as the inconveniences which have attended most
of them, led to the foundation of that noble institution at Ackworth, and
appear to be the same which we have experienced in America, with other
circumstances which are mentioned.

In the account of these schools we are informed of one at Gildersome in
Yorkshire, which was set on foot by the activity of Friends, who have the
immediate care of it, and from whom it has received a generous support; yet as
it is only provided for by the liberality of friends within the limits of the
neighborhood, or of the Monthly Meeting of Brighouse, by whose generosity it
was set on foot, it was thought the plan was too confined to admit of that
usefulness, which that at Ackworth promised: especially as the price of
education was necessarily greater, as was found on experience; although by the
activity of Friends, who had the care of it, Gildersome school has proved
beneficial to many children, and occasioned many to be brought from a great
distance.

Besides this, there is another house for the education of Friends' children,
which has been founded in London, and supported almost solely by Friends of the
Quarterly Meeting of London, that is, Friends' school-house and workhouse at
Clerkenwell; the following circumstances are mentioned respecting it: many
well-disposed persons, on considering the state of the poor in LONDON,
apprehended that many of the aged, as well as the children of diverse, might be
better supported and more suitably educated, were they collected together in
one place, where every thing necessary for their well-being might be provided,
more to their comfort than at their own habitations. Accordingly about the year
1700, this business was undertaken and liberally proceeded in, and was so
prudently conducted, that it drew many persons of note of other persuasions, to
visit it; which was the means of deriving credit to the society, and of
exciting a degree of the like attention to such useful undertakings.

A committee of eighteen Friends, chosen from the several Monthly Meetings,
meet for the most part once a month to transact the business of the house;
besides weekly visitors who inspect at uncertain seasons the conduct of the
family.

Under such management it cannot be wondered at, that the establishment should
become considerable. The fund is about L. 20,000; arising from the generosity
and bequests of individuals among Friends in that metropolis, a very few
instances excepted; in which sum is included a legacy left by our deceased
friend, Devereaux Bowley of London, of THREE THOUSAND POUNDS.

But it appears from a local circumstance that the benefits derived from this
institution have not been in every respect equal to the hopes of Friends; too
few of the youth educated, the number considered, having turned out useful or
reputable members of society.

Two causes are assigned for this disappointment; one is, the scholars were
permitted too frequently to be in the streets, also had liberty at times to
visit their friends and relations, not always the most exemplary in their
conduct; by which means they contracted ill manners and worse practices, and
returned to the house in every respect worse than when they left it." Another
cause assigned is, "that a considerable number of ancient poor are maintained
under the same roof* some of whom have been brought to this situation by their
misconduct, and consequently, not the most likely persons to set the children a
commendable example. At this house the poor of the society of London are
employed and provided for.


One other school is mentioned which shows the pernicious influence of bad
example, which is worthy of notice; A school-house was built, an able and
well-qualified master procured, and three thousand pounds generously subscribed
by Friends, for a day-school: but such was the ill effects of the children
mixing with others, so much were they hurt by bad examples and bad company,
that those who had engaged in the generous design, found it necessary to
abandon it, merely, as it appeared, from this circumstance.

The school at Clerkenwell has lately had diverse bequests made to it for the
purpose of increasing apprentice-fees, and further encouragement to such
children of both sexes as may deserve it after a certain age, and some
regulations have been made to prevent the youth mixing with others; with a view
to preserve them from the influence of bad example.

How far Friends' care in this respect may be attended with the desired
benefits in that large metropolis, we are yet to learn in the conduct of the
youth who may be brought up at that school: that considerable endeavors were
not used previous to the publication of these remarks, cannot be urged as an
objection to a more select and guarded education, as will appear by the
following short account of Friends' labor to preserve them in so exposed a
situation. "There is not," proceeds the said Friend, an institution existing,
upon which more labor and disinterested endeavors, that every thing might be
managed with order, economy, reputation, and general benefit, have been
employed, than in this house (Clerkenwell:) such is the necessity of preserving
youth from the influence of bad example, if we hope to preserve them in
innocence and simplicity.

The importance of a right education is such, that it is no occasion of
surprise when we consider the failure of those institutions already mentioned,
of answering all the salutary purposes expected from them, with the concern of
friends, as mentioned in the following extract from the Minutes of the Yearly
Meeting of Great Britain in 1777, that they should be induced to turn their
attention to this subject on an enlarged plan, so as to obviate the
inconveniences which they had so discouragingly experienced. The extract is as
follows, viz.

It is the renewed concern of this Meeting to recommend a care for the
offspring of such parents, whose earnings or incomes are so small as to render
them incapable of giving their children a suitable and guarded education, and
that especially from home, by which they may be prevented from mixing with
others who are not of our religious persuasion, which so often leads into
hurtful habits, from which they are not afterward easily reclaimed: and as
some of our members may incautiously permit their offspring to suffer this
great loss, rather than apply for assistance from their Monthly Meetings; it is
recommended to Friends in every Monthly Meeting, to seek out such of their
members as may be thus straitened, and administer to their help, and it is
desired that such will receive the salutary aid with a willing mind, and
thankfulness to the great Author of all good. And it being the judgment of this
meeting that encouragement for boarding schools, suitable for the education of
children whose parents are not in affluence, will be advantageous, the
consideration of a plan for that purpose is referred to the Meeting for
Sufferings, to be laid before this Meeting next year; to which Friends in the
country are also desired to join their attention and assistance.

These circumstances gave occasion to the purchase of a large and commodious
building which had been erected at a place called ACKWORTH, in Yorkshire, for a
Foundling HOSPITAL, but through mismanagement had been left unsupported.

This building with the premises was offered for sale for L. 7000, a purchaser
having appeared who offered L. 6800 for it: in consequence of which the matter
was laid before the Meeting for Sufferings. This Meeting, upon deliberation,
were desirous to refer the subject to the consideration of the ensuing Yearly
Meeting; but this was necessarily prevented by the unexpected appearance of the
other purchaser: this induced a number of Friends to step forward with an offer
to bear the Meeting for Sufferings harmless, should the Yearly Meeting decline
the purchase: this being accepted, a contract for the buildings, etc. was made,
and the matter reserved for the determination of the Yearly Meeting in 1778,
when it was agreed to, and became a society concern.

I shall be more particular in what relates to this school, as it furnishes us
with an instance of great liberality in Friends of Great Britain, and the
regulations intended to be (and which afterward were) introduced into that
school are proper for imitation, and may be considered as part of the Plan of
education now proposed for the young people in these parts: for which reasons I
hope it will neither prove unacceptable nor useless. I shall therefore proceed.

Previous to the Yearly Meeting coming to a determination, a committee of one
Friend out of every county, together with the Meeting for Sufferings, with any
others who chose to attend, was early appointed to take this weighty subject
into consideration, after various meetings of their committee, a report was
agreed to, recommending, besides the purchase of the buildings, etc. a
subscription to be set on foot during the sitting of the Meeting, by donations,
by annuities on two lives, at 5 per cent. each, The person who chooses to make
his subscription in this way, names any two persons, and fixes a sum, on which
he agrees to pay 5 per cent. per annum during the continuance of their two
lives, be they longer or shorter.
and by bills of admission at eight guineas each: It is apprehended, the person
who subscribes in this way is entitled, for every eight guineas he subscribes,
to a ticket, which will give admittance to any person into the school for one
year to whom he pleases to present it, provided they are approved of by the
committee nominated for that purpose.
after deliberate consideration, the report was received by the Yearly Meeting,
and the proposed subscription was begun, and strongly recommended to the
counties.

Upon which proceedings our friend John Fothergill observes; The great
unanimity that prevailed in the several sittings of the committee, apparently
proceeding from a just sense of the want of some such institution; the cordial,
though not hasty, concurrence of the Yearly Meeting with the report of the
committee; and the generous exertions of many Friends in consequence of this
concurrence, afforded such an indication of the propriety of the concern, that
FOUR THOUSAND POUNDS was subscribed in three or four days, and dispelled all
the doubts he had entertained about it.

ACKWORTH is situate in Yorkshire, about 180 miles from London; the building
appears by a front view given of it, in the account from which these extracts
were made, nearly to resemble the state-house in Philadelphia, and equally
extensive, besides having two wings, which, with the center buildings, form a
hollow square: the whole being in good repair, large, commodious, and
judiciously contrived; every convenience in the arrangement of the apartments
seems to have been attended to, and no kind of office or out-house omitted,
which might be necessary for the accommodation of a large family; hence it
appears to have been a circumstance peculiarly favorable to Friends' views,
that this building with the appurtenances was to be had at this time.

By a ground-plot it appears, that there was about 85 acres of land belonging
to the premises, and purchased with them, containing a garden and other
enclosures: since then there has been added about 40 acres more, which they
were enabled to purchase by legacies left for that particular purpose. In
future it is intended that all donations or bequests of L. 50. or upwards, be
placed out so as to form a fund, and the principal not to be applied toward
the current expenses of the institution.


The center building contains the following rooms, viz.
The boys' dining room 70 by 23 feet. The girls' ditto 70 by 23 ditto. Court
ditto 40 by 26 ditto. Passage Apothecary's shop and Clerk's office 30 by 20
ditto. Store-room Masters' apartments Housekeeper's room 20 by 20 ditto.
Servants' Hall Pastry room Kitchen and back-kitchen 40 by 20 ditto. Laundry
The two wings contain
Four rooms chiefly made use of by the boys for carding, spinning, and other
business. Three rooms for mantua-makers and school-mistresses. Five rooms,
where the girls are employed in knitting, spinning, sewing, reading, etc. With
two apartments particularly intended for the use of the tailors and shoemakers.
And there are on the premises,

A slaughterhouse, cow-house, barn, bake-house, five pig cotes, two stables,
and two other cow-houses, two necessaries, two coal-yards, and two farm-yards
and stack-yards.

The management of this institution was originally committed to the Meeting for
Sufferings, but is since under the direction of a large committee united with
them, composed of representatives from the Quarterly Meetings, of the agents of
the institution for the several counties and places, the treasurer of the same,
with the members of the London and county committees, who meet annually at
Ackworth on the last fourth day of the seventh month in every year, for the
purpose of making regulations, etc.

The fund and provision made by Friends have been sufficient to enable them to
pay for the estate, educate, victual, clothe, and accommodate upwards of 300
children, girls and boys, annually, for a number of years, besides making a
proper compensation to the necessary masters, mistresses, and other persons
employed, at what they consider a small expense to the children's parents or
friends; and by reports made of the proceedings in this very laudable and
beneficent work, there appear grounds to hope that it will prove an useful
establishment, and not unworthy the labor and patronage of Friends.

As this school was more particularly designed for the children of Friends not
in affluent circumstances, it is intended to direct their education
accordingly, and to have them not only maintained and clothed, but instructed
in reading, writing, and accounts, as fully as the time allowed them will
permit; some useful employment may be provided for the boys, according to their
age, strength, talents, or as their condition may require. The girls will also
be instructed in knitting, spinning, useful needle work, and in such domestic
occupations as are suitable to their sex and stations.

Our Friend before mentioned observes, that as many Friends were not able to
make the necessary provision for their offspring in such a way as would
preserve them from the ill effects of mixing with corrupt company; and being
apprized of this as well as many other circumstances," it is supposed "he was
led to consider the subject of education," in its fullest extent, "with a warm
desire to promote it; in consequence of which he has left some profitable
instructions, which those who are entrusted with the care of youth, would do
well to attend to, and for their benefit I have subjoined some of the most
necessary to be known, viz.

He says, that it is the wish of those concerned, as he believes, by
gentleness, kind and affectionate treatment, holding out encouragement and
approbation to the deserving, exerting the influence of the fear of shame,
Whether this may operate to the children's advantage, will altogether depend
upon the qualification of the teacher.
and by prompting them to acts of kindness and beneficence one toward another,
to bring forward into the society and its service, a number of youth who may
have been made acquainted under such tuition, in degree, with the discipline of
wisdom.

Many children amongst us (proceeds the said Friend) sustain a grievous loss by
not being early and properly made acquainted with the principles we profess.
For want of this instruction, they become too easy a prey to the customs of the
world and its habitudes; and that which would be as a kind of hedge about them,
and preserve from many temptations, is laid waste, and all the allurements of
vice and folly suffered to seduce their affections to their ruin. For when they
cease to be distinguished from others by their garb and deportment, they too
often cease to be distinguished from the world by their morals, and the
rectitude of their conduct.

It is therefore intended to make the children of both sexes acquainted with
the history of the rise and progress of Friends, their sufferings, and the
indulgences granted them by the legislature, as well as the general doctrines
of religion and morality," and to train them up in the knowledge of the sacred
writings; on which there is this remark: "Too few are the parents who can
honestly say, that they train up their children in a godly conversation; in
plainness of speech, behavior, and apparel; and the frequent reading of the
Holy Scriptures. Here (at Ackworth) care will be taken both of their principles
and conduct: besides, it is hoped that suitable opportunities will be embraced
of cherishing in their tender minds, obedience to the inward principle of light
and truth.

And as it is of great importance to habituate children from their infancy to
silence and attention, not only as a preparative to their advancement in a
religious life, but as the groundwork of a well cultivated understanding, it
will be particularly regarded. To watch over the human heart is a circumstance
of greater importance than mankind in general seem to understand.
We are almost the only professors of Christianity, who acknowledge the use of
this absolutely necessary introduction to Christian knowledge and Christian
practice. To have the active minds of children early put under this kind of
restraint, to be accustomed to turn their attention from external objects, and
habituated to a degree of abstracted quiet, is a matter of great consequence,
and may be of lasting benefit to them. To this they are inured in our
assemblies, and to sit in silence with decency and composure. Though it cannot be
supposed their young and active minds are always engaged as they ought to be,
yet to be accustomed thus to stillness, and brought to curb and restrain the
sallies of their youthful dispositions, is no small point gained toward fixing
a habit of patient recollection, and a regard to decorum, which seldom forsakes
those who have been accustomed to it, and have been properly instructed in this
entrance to the school of wisdom, during the residue of their days.

If it was needful it might not be difficult to show, from abundant authority
and reason itself, the vast aid afforded to the improvement of the human mind,
by early habits of silent attention. The most ancient schools of philosophy
taught and practiced it; and the Scriptures are so full of precepts on this
head, as ought to remove every objection to this necessary duty. It has been
thought that a use would arise from a care in the masters and mistresses, to
have their schools adjourned with greater decorum than is generally the
practice; and that a short pause previous thereto would afford them an
opportunity, when necessary, to extend suitable reproof or encouragement, as
well as to dismiss their scholars more in the quiet.


To which he subjoins, as a further motive for engaging in the undertaking, And
as there are many children, who, by the remoteness of their parents' situation
from meetings, are destitute of such opportunities, it is another call to the
society, to prevent as much as possible the loss arising from such a
circumstance. To this consideration it will not be improper to add another
which is connected with it, and that is, the want of opportunities of sending
their children to Friends' schools; by which means, if they have any learning
at all afforded them, it is under the tuition of such as are mostly strangers
to our principles, and the practices derived from them, plainness of speech,
simplicity of manners, and that beginning of wisdom which is inspired by the
fear of the Lord. On the contrary, they are liable to associate with such
children as are unacquainted with all these things, taught to deride those who
practice them, and live at large to appetite and custom: and how often does it
happen that the children of Friends in such situations, bred up with
unprincipled, licentious youth, form connexions with them, to their own great
hurt, the distress of their parents, and the loss of many valuable members to
society.

It is proposed, when the school is opened, a meeting for worship shall be held
in the house Which is accordingly done.
every first day morning and afternoon: likewise a meeting on the fourth day of
the week, these times being judged most convenient.

As an instance of the care which was intended to be taken with the youth in
that school, the following quotation may not be unacceptable, viz.

Perhaps (says our Friend) there is nothing in the course of public education
in the world, that so unfits men for that humble attention to the divine
monitor within, renders them such perfect strangers to the spirit of
Christianity and all its happy effects, as the cultivation of a bold, unfeeling
disposition, under a notion of promoting manliness and courage: it too often
sets aside that great defense and ornament of youth, a modest, ingenuous
temper, accustoms them to throw off all the restraints of duty and affection,
and at length to bid defiance to entreaty, admonition, and reproof. At
Ackworth, endeavors will be used to form in the children a temper widely
different, equally remote from a culpable fear and servility, and an audacity
that knows no respect for order or authority.

With respect to the dress of the children at that school, it is remarked, The
children at Ackworth are to wear the same kind of garments; regard being had to
the dress of the different sexes;" he says, "for various reasons the proposal
is a good one. The children there ought to value themselves on no other
superiority than that of behaving themselves better than others, both in
respect to learning and conduct. They are all to consider themselves, and be
considered, as the children of one family, under the care of that body, which
deeply interests itself in the welfare of them all. The riches, the poverty,
the good or bad conduct of their connexions, must have no other regard paid to
them, than such as may proceed from the necessity of guarding them from the
influence of any circumstances prevailing to their future disadvantage.

To conclude what relates to the subject of the children's education, I shall
add the following judicious observation; Though the children's improvement in
learning, their health, and other suitable accommodations, are matters of great
moment in such an institution as this, yet there is one of a superior nature,
to promote a tender, teachable disposition, inuring them to bear that yoke in
their youth, which will moderate their desires, and make way for the softening
influence of divine good will in their hearts, fitting them for the faithful
discharge of every duty in life, yielding content in affliction, moderation in
prosperity, becoming at once the safeguard and ornament of every stage in life,
from youth to ripe old age.

This should be the constant, uniform endeavor of those who may be engaged in
the immediate care and service of the family, in whatever station they may be
placed: for the encouragement, of those who may be thus engaged, he adds, "it
is hoped they will bear some little difficulties, should they occur, as
endeavors will be used to prevent them, so that the good of the youth
committed to their care shall be built as little as possible on the sufferings
of any individual.

As these observations will convey some idea of the education which is desired
for our young people, and the nature of the institution which is now proposed,
I hope it will be needless to apologize for their length, and it may be
sufficient to add, that school has been conducted nearly agreeable to these
principles, much to the satisfaction of Friends, as far as we learn, and there
is a pleasing prospect of its continuing extensively useful to society, and
beneficial to the youth who may be educated therein.

SECTION II.
TO ripen this concern, and to prepare it for the consideration of Friends in a
collective capacity, it was supposed that a PLAN more particularly accommodated
to our circumstances would be useful. With this view the following outlines of
one are suggested. If it should not meet with general approbation in all its
parts, it is to be hoped that it will not prove a discouragement to the
undertaking; as it cannot be doubted, that a solid committee of the Yearly
Meeting would be enabled to improve upon any hints that might be offered for
consideration by an individual, and that such parts as may appear
exceptionable, would be either explained or expunged, and such others added, as
would bring it into a state to meet with general acceptance.

The PLAN is as follows:

I. It has been thought advisable that a standing committee be appointed by the
Yearly Meeting, vested with all the necessary powers The epistle on this
subject from the Meeting for Sufferings, in New England, particularizes what is
meant by these powers, and may be referred to, should information be wanting.
to transact the business relating to this concern in its fullest extent; their
proceedings and conduct to be subject to the direction and revision of the said
Meeting, as it may think proper.

II. That a tract of good land of 1000 acres be purchased in a healthy
situation, not too remote from the seat of the Yearly Meeting, where suitable
buildings be provided or erected, according to the views of Friends, so as to
accommodate the scholars and all others concerned on the premises, and the land
occupied in such way as will best contribute to afford supplies to the
scholars, and promote the institution.

III. That it be recommended to Friends in the subordinate Meetings to
encourage a free, voluntary, and liberal contribution for this purpose, which
should be continued from time to time until a permanent and adequate provision
be obtained.

Note, I have proposed a much larger tract of land for the use of the
institution amongst us than they have at Ackworth, for these reasons: land of
equal quality is to be had at a much lower price here, where it would suit for
such a purpose, than in Great Britain; and the product of land properly
occupied would afford a better return for money than could be had in any other
way, for the supply of the family with necessary food, fuel, timber, etc. and
after having overcome the difficulty of a first purchase, would become a
permanent and improving estate; and a foundation might be laid for a settlement
where artificers and husbandmen would be collected to instruct many youth in
various branches of business, free from the corrupt examples which a mixture of
different people might occasion, as well as other advantages that would
probably attend it, which need not be mentioned.

IV. That regular minutes be kept of all proceedings and expenditures, with the
sums subscribed, or the estates granted, and which may be received, or remain
in reversion; with all other matters relative to, and for the support of, this
establishment; so as to afford a clear view of the state of the institution and
fund belonging to it; in order that proper endeavors may be used, and suitable
advice extended from year to year, for the encouragement and support of the
undertaking.

V. Besides useful learning, the boys and girls are to be instructed in such
manual business and domestic employments of every kind, as may be consistent
with Friends' prospects of usefulness and improvement, or redound to the
benefit and reputation of the institution.

VI. In providing of buildings regard is to be had to such as may be necessary
for tradesmen and others, whose assistance may be required, either for labor or
the instruction and accommodation of the youth, according to the extent of the
fund, as well as for the accommodation of those who may have occasion to resort
to, or be resident at, the place; and it is to be observed, that none be
permitted to be resident there, but such as are of sober, exemplary conduct,
and pious conversation; that the youth may be instructed in such way that there
may be a rational prospect of their being preserved in innocence.

VII. That a steward and clerk, with a man and woman Friend to act as
superintendants, be appointed; the two latter continually or occasionally to
inspect into the state of the schools, the places of accommodation and
maintenance of the youth, and report to the committee of the Yearly Meeting,
the state of things from time to time, extend the advice of the said committee
with their rules and orders to all concerned, and see to the due execution of
the same.

Besides these general heads of a plan, some other rules will be necessary for
the government of the schools, and accommodation of the families; the
discipline to be observed by the youth, and order to be established where they
are boarded; as well as for the improvement to be made on the premises, and
management of the farms, with a view to provide for the support of the family,
tend to the improvement of the young people, and add a reputation to the
school; likewise to preserve order and establish a necessary system of
economy, so as to afford a proper supply without profusion or waste: all which
should be attended to by the general committee of the Yearly Meeting, as there
may be occasion, with such other matters as may be needful.

Those very pertinent remarks made by our valued friend John Fothergill
deceased, with a view to promote the moral and religious improvement of the
youth, will no doubt claim the attention of those entrusted with the management
of this institution, as objects of superior consequence; or any hints for that
purpose which may be suggested by Friends of experience.

To enter into every minute circumstance which will be proper for their
attention, cannot be necessary on this occasion: yet, as a few leading rules
for the government of those concerned, may be of future use, and afford to
others a more satisfactory view of the design, as well as prove an
encouragement to some to unite in their endeavors to promote it, or induce
them to entrust the care of their tender offspring at such a place, the
following are subjoined by way of information, viz.

I. The houses for the accommodation of the youth are proposed to be of a
moderate size, and at proper distances from each other, with necessary
apartments, etc. so as to afford comfortable accommodations to the children,
who ought not to be crowded in too great numbers together, that they may have
the benefit of a private residence and a public education at the same time.

II. That each family consist of not more than the man and woman Friend who are
to board the scholars, with their children, and the necessary domestics, and
The number is left for future consideration.
pupils, whereby they may with more ease extend the necessary care and
attention to the conduct of the youth; apply suitable advice, admonition, or
reproof, or occasionally, by kind and gentle treatment, encourage those who may
require it; besides, the health of the young people would be more likely to be
preserved, when not too numerous in one family; their accommodations made more
agreeable, as well as more suitable to their age, so that in case of
indisposition they might be better attended, and their wants more suitably
relieved: nor would it be less conducive to their general improvement; as the
girls might, by rotation, as they became able, be assisting in domestic
employments, so as to qualify them in turn to fill up those stations in society
which may fall to their allotment, with propriety: the boys likewise may find a
share, and not unprofitably, in those duties, added to the care of the gardens,
etc. whereby they would find employment for their leisure hours, be taught to
fill up a painful vacancy by some profitable labor, derive instruction from the
observation of the works of Providence, be benefited by moderate exercise, and
probably enjoy a healthy mind with a healthy body: and might have afforded to
many young people who have been brought up in cities or large towns, advantages
which cannot be obtained in such places.

III. It is supposed that the school-houses for the boys should be situate at a
convenient distance from those for the girls, to prevent any improper
familiarities: likewise that they be boarded in different houses; yet not so
far separated but that an innocent and cheerful intercourse may be allowed and
encouraged under suitable inspection at proper seasons:

IV. And that each one employed be generally confined to their respective
duties. The youth had better not be boarded with their tutors; as it might draw
their attention from their schooling, and occasion a greater burden than ought
to be the share of any individual, besides other inconveniences which might
attend it; it is therefore proposed, that the persons who board the youth
should confine themselves to the care of their wards, and see that they give
proper attendance at school, and also watch over their general conduct and
attention to religious duties.

V. Care should likewise be taken to prevent rambling in the scholars, as well
as unprofitable collections of neighboring people at leisure seasons, in such
a manner as might disturb the order and quiet of the family.

Having taken into consideration such circumstances as opened in my view, as
most likely to promote the accommodation of the youth, and tend to their
preservation in innocence, what relates to their instruction is so well known
and so judiciously encouraged by Friends, that at this time it only remains for
me to add, with respect to the intention of this institution, that it is
designed to provide for any who may need the benefit of such a school; the
wealthy and those who are not in affluent circumstances are intended to be
alike the objects of Friends' care, with this distinction only, that those who
can afford it, may be accommodated, schooled, and supported on such reasonable
terms as shall be assessed by the committee of the Yearly Meeting; but those
not in affluence shall receive the same advantages either free of cost, or at
such moderate charge as may be suited to their circumstances.

A plan so large and calculated to be so extensively useful, may startle some
who have been accustomed to view things on a more contracted scale, appear to
be difficult in the execution, and be supposed to exceed the abilities of the
society: with respect to these points, the prospects of some may differ until
the experiment be made; it may be remembered that there is nothing new in the
design, nor in the execution; The extraordinary instance of the school at
Glaucha, near Hall in Saxony, is worthy of notice on this occasion. Augustus
Herman Franck, a German minister at that place, undertook, from motives of
humanity, to school and provide support for poor children, whose ignorance had
excited his compassion; for which purpose he fixed up a charity-box in his
place of residence, with an inscription on it intimating his design: upon which
some person was moved, in about a quarter of a year afterward, to put into his
box to the value of 18 s6 sterling at one time; which so encouraged this pious
person, that he resolved to lay the foundation of a charity-school, without any
other provision than what he might be furnished with from time to time from the
benevolence of well-disposed persons, and without having any united with him in
this concern, but such as were ememployed in the service of the school; which
experienced such a series of providential support, that he was enabled to carry
on his generous design through many difficulties and great distress without
obstruction, until he had laid the foundation of considerable buildings, which
he at length accomplished; and in the course of a few years, it is related,
that this school, which was begun with so slender a capital as 18 s6 sterling,
had upwards of 200 poor scholars clothed, fed, and accommodated with good
dwelling-places, besides receiving the necessary school-learning, etc. free of
cost: and this charity was continued, as he remarks, without any settled
provision, and without any regard to human support, but reliance on Providence,
and he did not scruple to make daily additions to the number of their children;
and thus the first foundation of the school was laid: and he observes, that he
was led to engage in this design without having premeditated such a project,
but thinks it was by a secret guidance of the Lord, that he was carried to the
performance of such things as tended to an end he had not as yet conceived; and
that the experience for such a work grew up with the work itself. The many
instances of unexpected relief which he met with in the prosecution of this
laudable undertaking, as related in the account published respecting this
school, were accompanied with such circumstances as will scarcely be received
as credible in an age of skepticism and unbelief: otherwise the recital of a
few of those passages might afford encouragement to those who are engaged in
similar designs, and be a stronger confirmation of the sacred pages in what
relates to a providential support, than some who are hedged (...) with large
possessions are willing to believe.
which might be made appear from numerous examples; great benefits can never be
obtained but with suitable exertions, nor the calls of duty answered, in favor
of this or any other interesting subject, if obstacles are suffered to be
magnified through the medium of ill-founded apprehensions, so as to discourage us
from devoting a portion of our time and substance to a purpose so deserving of
the approbation of a religious mind.

Friends might be called upon by various motives to favor such an undertaking,
as the sufferings of their ancestors, and the sacrifices they had to make of a
large portion of their property by spoiling, etc. in obedience to Christ,
whereby we have been favored to experience an exemption from many grievous
burdens yet imposed on the professors of other religious denominations, through
their attachment to expensive forms and ceremonies introduced amongst them in
times of greater ignorance; not to mention the various instances of
extravagance and dissipation which too many freely indulge themselves in, with
the very expensive education which they give their children: and yet we have
been shown in this institution at Glaucha near Hall, as well as in other
instances, what might be done with proper exertions and a reliance on divine
Providence; which encourages a hope we shall be enabled to establish, provide
for, and support, in a reputable, useful manner, the institution now proposed,
which seeems to be, at this time of outward care, both our interest and duty.

SECTION III.
AS there are some whose engagements will not permit them to enter minutely
into an inquiry of this nature, so as to form an adequate idea of the
undertaking without some assistance; for the advantage of these, and that they
may be encouraged to unite in promoting such a plan, the following examination
into the propriety thereof is added, especially as it may afford some useful
information, and point out the necessity of attention to this very weighty
subject.

When we consider that the youth amongst us need the same care that they do in
Great Britain, and that the same measures are necessary to be pursued to
promote their welfare here as there, and as we have the benefit of their
experience to assist us in the prosecution of our endeavors, it is an
encouragement to the undertaking.

And notwithstanding there may be an apparent languor in some minds with
respect to this momentous concern, yet when the case of our young people is
brought into view, and found to claim our sympathy, as well as call for some
relief, no doubt that it will be considered as a powerful motive to engage in
so beneficent a design.

And when we consider how many there are who are favored with abundant
opportunities of instruction beyond what others have, and how small a part of
the redundancy of that property which many are possessed of, if brought
together into one sum, would afford a fund which, under the management of a
judicious and well qualified committee of the Yearly Meeting, would lay the
foundation of a school which might have all the advantages of that at Ackworth,
with such others as the peculiar circumstances of the youth in this highly
favored country might make necessary, we cannot but suppose that Friends might
be brought to unite with, and support, a plan for so valuable a purpose. And it
should be remembered, as was observed on the like occasion by John Fothergill,
that it is not intended to burden any, for large contributions are not to be
expected where there is but little to be spared, nor would it add a reputation
to those who have abundance, should they withhold the necessary assistance.

Many advantages are expected to result from this undertaking, that are not so
apparent on a superficial view as they would be found on a closer inquiry, both
with respect to what relates to the temporal concerns of the young people, as
well as their future well-being: besides as all things here below are in a
state of mutability, we know not but that, whilst we are providing for others,
some of our particular descendants may be benefited by such an institution, and
that we may be laying the foundation of a retreat for them, in a healthy part
of the country, under the care of sober, well qualified friends, where they may
be instructed and supported, free from the corrupt examples, which cities and
too many schools afford, whilst they are in a state of incapacity to form a
proper judgment or take suitable care for themselves.

These, with other important considerations which might be mentioned, show that
it is both seasonable and proper for this concern to rest with weight upon
Friends' minds; and it is hoped that what has been said will be sufficient to
prepare them for the investigation of this subject free from those biasses,
which habits, with local or partial attachments, might create; neither
regarding the objects of this benevolence, as they may be rich or poor, remote
from us in their residence, or near; otherwise than as it may tend to their
individual advantage and the benefit of society in general: and after having
the situation of many of our young people brought into their view, with other
circumstances, it is expected they would be enabled to form a clear judgment
how far they might extend their prospects, so as not to exceed the abilities of
society, nor yet forget the extensive benefits which such an institution would
afford.

For which purpose the following state of the youth who are descendants of
Friends, and for whose benefit this institution is more particularly intended,
with the observations and remarks which are subjoined, are offered to their
perusal, with a belief that when they are convinced of the following
particulars, they will cheerfully concur with, and unite their endeavors to
promote it, viz.

1st, That there is occasion for such an institution as is now proposed:

2nd, And that there has been a concern resting on some minds for a
considerable time past, to promote something of this kind.

3d, That there is ability in the society for such an undertaking.

4th, And lastly, that it will be attended with advantages that cannot be
obtained in any other way.

A STATE OF THE YOUTH, etc.
I. On an examination into the situation of the young people within the compass
of this Yearly Meeting, it must be acknowledged that many would be found, who,
at an early period of their days, have been deprived of one or both their
parents; perhaps left under the care of strangers, or entrusted to guardians
not in all respects qualified to sympathize with them in their afflictive
situations, nor disposed to extend that kind attention to their cases, which
might in some degree compensate for the loss of parental care and affection:
and perhaps some of this number might not be suitably provided for, as well as
others who have parents, who, through various circumstances, have been deprived
of the means of providing a decent support for their tender offspring, and much
less of ability to school and educate them properly. These with many other
circumstances open a field continually for the exercise of Christian sympathy
and benevolence.

Besides, there are many in affluent situations who are earnestly desirous that
their children might have the benefit of a select and guarded education, at
such an institution, under well qualified tutors, remote from the corrupt
examples which are too prevalent in cities and common schools; these would
freely contribute of their substance, and they ought to be encouraged in the
commendable disposition, agreeable to the pious recommendation of Friends
already expressed, and to the soundest maxims of prudence and wisdom.

There are likewise other cases that would occur, where the disposition of
children of the same family, as well as other causes which might make it
necessary or useful to separate them for awhile one from another; sometimes to
dissolve unprofitable acquaintances or unpromising connexions, which otherwise
might terminate to their disadvantage, if not eventually to their ruin. That a
large number of young people of both sexes would come under these descriptions,
in one or more instances, must be allowed; as also others, who, from
inclination, would prefer the opportunity which such an institution would
afford, of being instructed under a well regulated system with sober Friends.

And yet it is with satisfaction to be acknowledged, that many of our young
people are so peculiarly favored as to have every accommodation necessary to
render their situations easy and agreeable; and some who have the additional
advantage of well informed friends and relations, whose pious conversation and
exemplary conduct are the sources of continual instruction and improvement;
independent of the advantages which schooling may afford: but as this is not
the case generally, and there are others so situated as to need the care of
Friends, it therefore behooves us, as members of one religious community, to
afford that relief which their several cases may require, which cannot be so
effectually done in any other way. These circumstances, without bringing into
view others which might be mentioned, which arise from weakness in parents and
sorrowful declension in too many children, which cannot but be obvious, show
the propriety of an attention to this weighty subject, and that such an
institution as is now proposed, is wanting.

II. That there has been a growing concern within the limits of this Yearly
Meeting may be inferred from what has appeared for some years back, when a
number of persons of our profession have been engaged to promote something of
this kind; When this was wrote it was intended to give some account of the
school at Nottingham, in Chester county, with some other matters, in an
appendix; but the length of this essay has occasioned their being laid aside
for the present.
and some still continue to be so disposed, notwithstanding they have been
unprovided with a regular plan, so fully matured as to obtain the concurrence
of the Yearly Meeting, to direct their proceedings by. Yet, under these
disadvantages, considerable bequests have been made, and some donations added;
as well as offers to a more considerable amount, apparently proceeding (as our
friend John Fothergill observed with respect to Ackworth school) from a just
sense of the want of some such establishment, on an enlarged and liberal plan,
subject to the directions of a committee of that Meeting.

And it is likewise hoped, that this concern will have more place, and be found
to have increasing weight, on Friends' minds, when the nature of it is more
clearly understood, and that so beneficent an undertaking will be remembered by
many, not only when they are making a final arrangement of their temporal
affairs, but likewise at other seasons, when they find that there is a
probability that their charitable intentions will be fulfilled, and any
donations or bequests appropriated agreeable to their benevolent designs and
Christian duty, under the direction of such a committee. It has been thought
proper to recommend this concern to the attention of our women Friends, as it
has been apprehended that they might not consider themselves as equally bound
with the men to promote it; but as it is intended for the benefit of both
sexes, and they are favored with a portion of providential bounty, with
suitable qualifications to be useful, it is hoped they will attend to it, and,
when called upon, afford that assistance, which, in the wisdom of truth, may be
pointed out.


III. With respect to the third proposition, that there is an ability in
society for such an undertaking, it may be observed:

To effect any thing that will be extensively useful in this way, that will
attract the attention of society at large, or add a reputation to it, it is
necessary we should have a plan of considerable magnitude in view; which cannot
be attended with any inconveniences, if it is concluded afterward to conduct
it and carry it into execution on a smaller scale, as it is much easier to
retrench a large one than it might be to enlarge a small one; and as it is not
the intention of those who have this subject most at heart, to exceed the
abilities of society, there can no disadvantage arise from their having an
extensive plan in view, but rather otherwise, as we are sometimes encouraged to
engage in smaller difficulties by having large ones made familiar: and it may
be remembered, that the plan of a small institution, expressed in all its parts
in writing, will have the appearance of something greater than it is intended
to be; so that I hope none will be harmed with suspicions that any thing
burdensome is intended, or what is inconsistent with the essential interest and
good of the rising generation.

If too small a plan was proposed, it might tend to limit the views of some
well-informed Friends, who may be favored with discernment to perceive what the
abilities of the society could perform, and the benevolence of wealthy
individuals disposed to accomplish, when united with others less able; and
might by this means prevent its becoming so extensively useful as it otherwise
would; as well as discourage those who may come after us, with more experience,
and perhaps with more ability, from improving upon our labors to advantage: for
which reasons I have thought it best not to be too contracted in my prospects,
lest we might lose the benefits arising from a proper education, for want of
suitable exertions.

When we are considered but as instruments in the Divine Hand, and that he can
dispose the hearts of men, beyond what human reason might suggest, to favor
such an undertaking, and with so much liberality as rather to excite our
admiration than disappoint our wishes, it has raised some degree of confidence
that this undertaking will not be left unaccomplished, nor fail to answer the
valuable purposes expected from it; and I have been strengthened in this
persuasion, when I have remembered the manner in which the schools under the
direction of Friends in this city originated, and how their funds have
increased.

These schools were first set on foot by a single Monthly Meeting, and were
liberally provided for when our numbers were comparatively few to what they are
at this time, nor were they near so wealthy, besides having difficulties to
contend with, in the early periods of this settlement, which we are strangers
to at this day.

Afterward they were principally endowed and provided for by a few persons who
had the subject weightily on their minds, who left property sufficient to form
a fund, which has been adequate to the support of schools for the poor of the
Monthly Meeting, besides many others, the offspring of persons belonging to
other religious societies. The overseers of these schools have been able to
allow salaries, and grant encouragement, in diverse ways, to well-qualified
tutors; and at this time their fund is quite sufficient to answer all the
necessary purposes of keeping them up, and fully equal to what is necessary to
begin an establishment, such as is now proposed for the whole society to
undertake.

And this can only be considered as a private fund, accumulated within the
limits of one Monthly Meeting, Since divided into three.
and the result of a benevolent disposition in only a few individuals,
principally effected above half a century ago: so that the present generation
has had no share in forming it; but have derived considerable benefits from
this fund: hence there seems to be an obligation on the present generation of
Friends to make the like provision for those who are to succeed them, Many
young people, who are in a way to have increasing families, are apt to be
inattentive to concerns of this nature, and to the important consequences which
result from a right education; I have wished that they might remember, that
unless suitable schools are begun to be established before they want them,
their offspring cannot be benefited by them when they do; and it has been my
desire that they may not neglect an early attention to the right education of
their offspring, nor be indifferent with respect to the making provision for
suitable schools, according to their circumstances, lest they should experience
the necessity for them when too late to be remedied, and have to lament their
inattention, in consequence of the depravity or ill conduct of their children;
which has been the sorrowful experience of many.
as well as for the present: indeed such is the nature of institutions of this
kind, that they not only serve those who may be living at the time of their
establishment, but likewise have a more remote effect; and by an attention to
such useful undertakings, we may confer a benefit upon many generations, who
are to succeed us, which is a very encouraging circumstance to those who may be
engaged to promote them.

There is another instance in a school under the care of Friends of this city,
for the instruction of the blacks: where unexpected provision has been made, by
unforeseen ways, of a sufficient fund to support it, in the course of a few
years, and those who had the first burden, were exonerated sooner than was
looked for. At present they have an annual income of about L. 200, arising from
ground-rents, etc. so consolidated that there is a pleasing prospect that it
will afford a permanent establishment to this generous undertaking; which, it
is said, originated with the women of our religious society in this city.

If such institutions as these have been begun and supported within the limits,
and by the benevolence of Friends mostly within, this city, what may we not
hope from the united endeavors of the whole society? to infer an inability in
them to make a considerable establishment, and provide for the schooling,
accommodation, and support of a number of those who need it, and have a
religious claim upon them for assistance, would be contrary to the prospect of
such Friends as have considered the subject in a solid, weighty manner; and if
the number of families which constitute this Yearly Meeting, was known, it
could be made appear: but as this is uncertain, any calculations founded on our
numbers must be vague; some have supposed, that if the expense was liquidated,
it would not take more than a bushel of wheat for each family to effect
something reputable and extensively useful in this way. Of this I do not
consider myself as a competent judge, neither have I built altogether on our
numbers* as it is hoped a spirit of liberality will be excited in those who are
abundantly able.


And as we may reasonably conclude that a considerable sum would be generously
given for this purpose by wealthy individuals, we might hope that a fund would
be gradually formed so as to relieve the apprehensions of its being attended
with any considerable expense; and that donations and bequests would be made,
unsolicited, at times, to enable Friends to erect many of the most expensive
and necessary buildings: so that when we compare the benefits which may be
expected from such an institution with the expense likely to attend it; and
consider the foundation there is to believe that many wealthy individuals, as
well as others, will be disposed to favor so useful a design; and reflect upon
what has been done by a part of the society; Within the limits of Philadelphia
Monthly Meetings.
we need not hesitate to conclude that there is sufficient ABILITY for such an
undertaking.

IV. And that it would be attended with many advantages not to be had in any
other way, may be deduced from the following considerations, viz.

Amongst other circumstances which might be mentioned, the excellent
regulations introduced into the school at ACKWORTH, and the manner in which
that institution has been conducted, with the experience which has been since
had of the beneficial effects of those regulations on the manners and
deportment of the youth brought up at that place, affords a pleasing prospect
that a system of economy and management is practicable at a large institution,
which may be productive of many advantages not to be obtained at smaller
schools, particularly so as to reduce the cost of board and schooling, which
are circumstances worthy of regard in the establishment of schools.

Nor is it unlikely, as was observed respecting Ackworth school, that one on a
large plan would fix the attention, and excite the bounty, of Friends, whilst
those upon a smaller scale would be overlooked, and soon disappear, as was
found to be the case in Great Britain; besides, it might be expected that this
institution would draw forth from a state of less activity, men and women, who
may have been raised up and suitably qualified for every station which so large
an undertaking would require, however arduous, who might be willing to engage
in any line of duty to which they might be called, from an enlarged prospect of
usefulness, and a desire that their labors may be blessed to the benefit of the
young and rising generation; as has been the case at that valuable institution
at Ackworth: nor is there any doubt in my mind, but such are now amongst us,
unnoticed and in a state of greater obscurity.

Another evident advantage which must arise from such an establishment is, that
a number of young people of both sexes would be forming from time to time,
under the excellent regulations which are expected to be introduced at such an
institution, who Would be likely to come forward with all the advantages which
could be obtained from a well regulated course of instruction, to engage as
masters and mistresses at those schools which are recommended to be established
throughout the society by the Yearly Meeting, and thereby advance what that
Meeting have had in view, As expressed in the extracts from their minutes
lately spread through the society under the direction of our Meeting for
Sufferings.
by removing a principal discouragement to the establishment of such schools,
that is, the want of suitable persons for teachers.

There are other circumstances which might render such an institution useful
above any other which could be established on a more contracted scale, viz. it
might be laying the foundation for greater improvement in the system of
instruction to be pursued for the benefit of the youth at such a place;
likewise in the manner of bringing them up, that there might be a greater
conformity to what has been invariably recommended by Friends from the first
rise of the society, as the only probable means, of deriving to our offspring
those substantial benefits which have been uniformly experienced to flow from
an attention to their advice, in addition to those useful qualifications which
would arise from so judicious a course of school-learning, and it is likely
that the example afforded at this school would be followed by others; hence,
its influence on the manners and conduct of the youth might extend to remote
seminaries: whereby Friends would be instrumental in promoting the happiness
and improvement of many young people, who might otherwise remain in a less
cultivated and less happy state; nor could such an institution, properly
conducted, fail of adding a reputation to the society, and perhaps have a
tendency to diffuse the principles of LIGHT and TRUTH which we profess; by
awakening a spirit of inquiry after them, amongst other people.

Another advantage which would result from this undertaking, and seems worthy
of notice is, that by engaging in this laudable design, it might excite a
greater disposition to attend to the religious instruction of the young people,
in some who have been too inattentive to this important concern; who might be
brought, by giving up to it, to become more zealously engaged to encourage
other schools, agreeable to what has been recommended by Friends: for it has
been considered as an approved maxim, the more any person gives toward
charitable institutions, Although this institution is not intended for the use
of those young people only who are not in affluent circumstances, nevertheless
it may, according to the nicest construction of the intention, be considered as
a charitable design; for there is no way in which we can so effectually relieve
difficulties, as by suitable endeavors to prevent them: nor can a better
system of economy be adopted by a society in extending alms, than by providing
for the proper education and instruction of the young people who may have
occasion for such assistance. How great have been the difficulties which some
have been involved in for want of this care? what irretrievable evils do many
unguardedly plunge into for want of early instruction? and what misfortunes
have ensued, so as to produce a series of fatal consequences which have excited
a painful recollection? merely through the neglect of an early care for that
purpose, and perhaps I might not improperly add, for want of more liberality
and necessary attention to such useful schools.
the more willing he becomes to give toward the encouragement of others,
especially when it is for the like benevolent purposes; we might therefore
conclude that it would have a tendency to promote a greater degree of
liberality with a better disposition to support lesser schools on the system,
and for the valuable purposes recommended by the Yearly Meeting.

All these circumstances ought to afford us grounds to believe, that such an
institution will be attended with advantages which cannot be had in any other
way.

Being confirmed in this opinion, and that such a school, somewhere in the
country, in a healthy situation, free from the objections which have been
mentioned, and on a large establishment, will have many advantages which cannot
be obtained either in town or country. I have, therefore, engaged in this
essay, with an expectation that Friends will be favored to judge of the
propriety of the concern, and that in due season it will claim their solid
attention, obtain suitable encouragement, and be the means, under Divine
Providence, of many of our young people, who may be left in an unprovided
condition, as well as others, being suitably taken care of, instructed, and
prepared to enter upon the duties of life, with every advantage which a well
directed education can afford: which is the desire of their friend and
well-wisher in the truth,

OWEN BIDDLE.
Philadelphia, 6th Month. 19th, 1790.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The more effectually to ripen the forementioned concern* to mature the PLAN
so as have it brought forward for the consideration of some future Yearly
Meeting; and to afford an opportunity to any Friends of manifesting their
benevolent intentions, who may be disposed to encourage it; as well as to
afford an opportunity to those who may have any useful hints to offer for the
improvement of what has been proposed; or to satisfy others who may have
different prospects; it is designed that a few Friends, who have had this
subject weightily on their minds for some time past, have occasional meetings:
when letters on these subjects, directed and forwarded to John Field, James
Cresson, Arthur Howell, or Samuel Clark, will be laid before the said Friends
and duly noticed, and any information communicated in answer which may be
necessary to the occasion.


